Use of Emerging Mobile Technologies in Portfolio Development 
 
Ejaz Ahmed, Rupert Ward 
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield, UK 
{e.ahmed, r.r.ward}@hud.ac.uk
Stephen White 
School of Human and Health Sciences 
University of Huddersfield, UK 
stephen.white@hud.ac.uk  
Abdul Jabbar 
The Business School 
University of Huddersfield, UK 
a.jabbar@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract - In the UK, implementing personal development 
planning (PDP) is an obligatory requirement across all Higher 
Education awards. This has led to a number of institutions 
requiring students to produce electronic portfolios to meet this 
requirement. However, far too little attention has been paid to 
utilising the powerful functionalities and high levels of 
connectivity of emerging mobile technology. This social study 
seeks to discover a potential role of emerging mobile 
technology in portfolio development and its effects on students’ 
reflective capacity and engagement with PDP. To raise 
students’ engagement with PDP, a mobile application (HUD 
iPDP) for Apple mobile devices was developed with fifty-one 
undergraduate students participating in this study. The data 
collected was both qualitative and quantitative. Results 
revealed a high level of interest among students and the 
potential for mobile technology to enhance the process of PDP. 
Keywords - Reflection; PDP; e-Portfolio; Mobile learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the rapid development of mobile technology, its 
suitability to learning activities is growing.  It is providing 
students with access to truly mobile computers that fit in 
their hands and can go in their pockets. Mobile devices today 
are more powerful in functionality and connectivity than the 
desktop computers we used to have in the late 1990s. 
Students are attracted to new mobile phones because they are 
small, interactive and provide connectivity. Their ubiquity 
provides a valuable opportunity for educators to embed 
learning more effectively by enabling students to reflect at 
any point on their studies and development.  
Personal Development Planning (PDP) is considered a 
significant pedagogical tool in higher education. It enhances 
the capacity for learners to reflect, plan and take 
responsibility for the primary objectives of PDP [1]. The 
traditional paper-based portfolio format has existed in HE in 
the past; however, the recent trend has been towards 
electronic e-Portfolio. The terms ‘e-Portfolio’, ‘Progress 
File’ and ‘PDP’ are often mentioned interchangeably in the 
literature [2]. JISC projects discovered that there have been 
tangible benefits in the use of e-Portfolios in relation to 
efficiency and enhancement in quality of PDP [3]. Most e-
Portfolios are dynamic web applications using databases 
which enhance the quality of evidence, reflection, skills 
development and students’ motivation. Emerging mobile 
technologies are equipped with hardware and software 
powerful enough to provide functionality and a high level of 
connectivity to easily augment existing e-Portfolios. As we 
use mobile devices in portfolio development, this can be 
described as m-portfolio (mobile Portfolio). 
The aim of this paper is to discuss the outcome of a 
social study conducted to investigate the potential use of 
mobile technology in portfolio development. The paper 
evaluates the students’ experience with PDP using 
smartphones, and with a bespoke mobile application to 
support PDP, which was developed and tested. The paper 
consists of four parts. First, it reviews the existing literature 
relevant to PDP, e-portfolio and role of mobile technology 
within this. Following this, the research method and 
procedures used in the study are presented. Next, results are 
discussed and summarised. Finally the paper concludes with 
a discussion on the implications, limitations and directions 
for further research. 
II. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
The current policy on Personal Development Planning 
(PDP) emerged from the Dearing Report [4] which 
recommended that UK Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) 
should formulate a progress file, PDP, to enable students to 
‘monitor, build and reflect on their personal development’ 
[4]. The Dearing Report advocated HEIs provide a 
mechanism for PDP but left the actual implementation to the 
discretion of individual institutions. The Quality Assurance 
Agency for Higher Education [5], who oversee its use, define 
PDP as ‘a structured and supported process undertaken by an 
individual to reflect upon their own learning, performance 
and / or achievement and to plan for their personal, 
educational and career development’ [5]. The concept of 
personal development itself had existed in many institutions 
[6] long before Dearing’s recommendations, with the idea of 
a ‘reflective practitioner’ [7] already popular in nursing and 
teaching professions for example. 
Reflection is a key element of the process of PDP and 
acts as a vehicle for turning ‘experience into learning’ [8] by 
combining different thoughts and ideas together. This 
personal experience in combination with formal learning 
results in ‘deep’ learning [9]. The QAA guidelines for PDP 
state that reflection is ‘a process that involves self-reflection, 
the creation of personal records, planning and monitoring 
progress towards the achievement of personal objectives [5]. 
Boyd & Fales [10] define reflection as ‘a process of 
internally examining and exploring and issue of concern 
triggered by an experience, which creates and clarifies 
meaning in terms of self and results in a changed conceptual 
perspective’. It has been suggested that reflection process 
based on personal experience at regular instances enables 
81
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

students to clarify for themselves the process of 
development. 
A considerable amount of literature has been published 
suggesting benefits from implementing e-portfolios [9, 11, 
12]. Using a paper-based portfolio (PBPs) has been an 
approach practiced by some disciplines in HE such as 
nursing, teacher training, art and finance. However, 
electronic portfolios are becoming more commonplace as 
technology advances. Electronic portfolios or web-based-
portfolios (WBPs) are preferred over paper-based portfolios 
(PBPs) because they enhance students’ motivation and are 
more user-friendly [13]. Madden [14] described an e-
portfolio as ‘an archive of material, relating to an individual, 
held in a digital format’. Many projects funded by JISC [3] 
discovered that e-Portfolios enhance the quality of evidence, 
reflection and the skills development process. An electronic 
portfolio saves time in information retrieval, supports 
reflection, raises presentation and improves students’ 
motivation for PDP. It gives students an opportunity to 
customise the PDP and increase their ability to share and 
transfer information more conveniently. Research shows that 
time spent on PDP increases significantly with the use of 
web-based portfolios as compared to paper-based portfolios 
[13].  
Advances in mobile technology are changing the 
pedagogical possibilities of ‘Mobile Learning’. Research 
suggests mobile technology can enhance various features of 
teaching and learning such as reducing the time for tedious 
work, engaging students in learning activities, facilitating 
group collaborative learning, empowering the teacher to 
monitor students’ learning progress and recording teaching 
and learning processes as portfolios [15]. The positive 
implications of e-Portfolios and pedagogical possibilities of 
new mobile technologies can be used to enhance the process 
of PDP by using it in portfolio development. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The target population for this study consisted of first year 
undergraduate students in the School of Computing and 
Engineering at the University of Huddersfield. A sample of 
74 randomly chosen students was divided into three groups; 
group A comprised 27 students with Apple mobile devices 
(iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad), group B consisted of 27 
students with non-Apple smartphones; whilst group C 
contained a control group of 20 students. The control group 
was not introduced to the study until their views were 
collected in the form of questionnaires, interviews and a 
focus group session. From each group, eight participating 
students were randomly chosen for interviews and eight for 
focus group sessions. This selection was made from the 
students who completed the online survey. The length of this 
study was approximately eight weeks, which started from the 
first week of the students’ academic year in university.  
   In order to evaluate the students’ perception of using 
mobile technology to enhance PDP, a mobile application for 
Apple mobile devices (iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad) was 
developed (Figure 1). The selection of Apple mobile devices 
for this study was made due to their high level of 
functionality, reliability, usability and design. They also were 
more popular amongst the student population at the time of 
the app development. The aim of the development was to 
develop an attractive tool that would enrich teaching and 
learning by providing students with an engaging means of 
creating, adding and accessing PDP contents on a mobile 
device. The application was introduced to the users of the 
Apple mobile devices during the first week of their academic 
year. No training was given to the HUD iPDP users; 
however, a user guide was made available to them via the 
Blackboard VLE, used at the University of Huddersfield.  
A questionnaire was generated and pre-tested using a 
convenience sample of 10 second year IT students using the 
method described by Cooper and Schindler [16] called 
collaborative participant pretesting. Data for the main study 
was collected using an online controlled questionnaire during 
week 8 of the students’ academic year. Incentives in the form 
of books were provided to participants in acknowledgement 
of participation in this study and to compensate for the time 
taken, but they were not promised such incentives before the 
experiment. One week after the initial call for completion of 
the controlled online survey, a reminder email was sent to 
the participants who had not completed the survey. 
Interviews and focus group sessions were arranged during 
week 8 and 9. 
In the questionnaire, 29 multiple choice questions 
including demographic questions were set. Most open ended 
questions from the online questionnaire were also included 
in the list of discussion topics for the focus group sessions. A 
few questions were also further explored during the one to 
one interviews. The following four key questions were asked 
in this study: 
 
• 
Which method would you prefer to complete your 
PDP?  
• 
Do you think the mobile devices can raise your 
motivation by providing access to your PDP 
anywhere and at any time? 
• 
Regardless of the mobile device you are using at 
present, what features would you like to have and 
what services would you like to access via a mobile 
device? 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  HUD iPDP application 
 
82
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

• 
What are your major concerns about using mobile 
devices in portfolio development? 
 
All responses to the questionnaire, received from three 
groups, were classified separately to analyse the differences. 
Students in group A (users of Apple mobile devices) were 
also asked the following additional questions related to the 
HUD iPDP application: 
 
• 
Do you think the HUD iPDP app has helped you in 
updating the contents of your PDP? 
• 
Was it easy to collect the contents in the form of 
text, audio, image and video for your portfolio? 
• 
Which features of the HUD iPDP did you find 
useful? 
• 
Which features of the HUD iPDP did you not like? 
• 
Please provide any further suggestions to improve 
the app 
 
The last three questions were open questions to collect 
qualitative information about the developed application.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DATA ANALYSIS 
The response rate from the online questionnaire, 
interviews and focus group sessions was good. Fifty one 
students responded to the questionnaire representing 
approximately 20% of the entire cohort and 69% of the 
sample group of 74 students. The majority (88%) of the 
respondents were between the ages of 18 and 25. Table I 
shows cross-tabulation between groups and their response 
rates in detail.  
The results of the questionnaire show that most students 
are eager to use an online portfolio system. Those with 
smartphones had the greatest tendency towards the use of 
mobiles in the PDP process, perhaps because of their 
exposure to the app. A multiple choice question was asked 
from all participants to know their preferred method to 
complete PDP. Overall, a large majority chose an online 
portfolio system (67%) followed by an offline electronic 
portfolio system (53%). However, on analysing the 
individual results from each group it revealed that the 
preferred method to work with PDP for the students in group 
A was online using a PC or laptop (83%) followed by using 
mobile devices (50%). Table II provides us more detail on 
students’ preferred method to complete the PDP and a visual 
representation can be seen in Figure 2. 
The results summarised in Table II were further explored 
in interviews and focus group sessions, which revealed that 
low scores for using mobile devices to organise PDP were 
TABLE I.  
RESPONSE RATES 
 
Survey 
Interview 
Focus Group 
APPLE 
18 (67%) 
8 (100%) 
7 (88%) 
NON-APPLE 
17 (63%) 
6 (75%) 
5 (63%) 
CONTROL 
GROUP 
16 (80%) 
8 (100%) 
8 (100%) 
 
51 (69%) 
22 (92%) 
20 (83%) 
TABLE II.  
PREFERRED METHOD TO COMPLETE PDP 
 
Paper-
based 
On a 
PC/laptop 
offline 
Online 
using a 
PC/laptop 
On an 
internet 
enabled 
mobile 
device 
APPLE 
6% 
33% 
83% 
50% 
NON-
APPLE 
6% 
47% 
71% 
35% 
CONTROL 
GROUP 
13% 
81% 
44% 
25% 
TOTAL 
8% 
53% 
67% 
37% 
 
as a result of a lack of synchronisation functionality in the 
HUD iPDP for the group A, and because of the lack of 
availability of any suitable application for the students in 
group B, who were using other mobile devices. Group A 
was using the HUD iPDP application, which was only 
helping students in data collection. No online platform was 
available to students to sync data automatically. 
Applications were not able to communicate with the 
Blackboard portfolio system due to a number of security 
issues. Moreover, it was not compulsory for the students to 
use Blackboard but they were allowed to create their own 
online portfolio or use any open source portfolio system 
available online.  
All the students who participated in the focus group 
sessions and attended interviews suggested that they would 
have 
used 
the 
HUD 
iPDP 
application 
if 
more 
synchronisation functionality had been made available to 
them. Although two students in group B indicated that they 
used their mobiles in portfolio development, the large 
majority expressed disappointment with the unavailability 
of an appropriate application. Low tendency for using 
mobile devices in portfolio development among group C 
was because the idea of using a mobile portfolio was new 
to them. By comparing the results, it can be seen quite 
clearly that the students in group A are in favour of using 
mobiles in portfolio development compared to groups B 
and C (Figure 2) which is positive indication given the 
above mentioned grounds. 
 
Figure 2. Preferred Method to Complete PDP 
0	  
2	  
4	  
6	  
8	  
10	  
12	  
14	  
16	  
Paper-­‐based	   On	  a	  PC/laptop	  
using	  a	  word	  
processor	  
applica=on	  
Online	  using	  a	  
PC/laptop	  
On	  an	  internet	  
enabled	  mobile	  
device	  
APPLE	  
NON-­‐APPLE	  
CONTROL	  GROUP	  
83
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

The second key question asked was about students’ 
views on the potential of mobile devices in raising 
motivation for PDP. Four possible answers were given to 
choose from. Table III shows cross-tabulation survey results 
from each group, also shown graphically in Figure 3. It is 
quite clear from the Figure 3 that students are enthusiastic 
about the use of mobile technology and support its use for 
portfolio organisers. 
The next key question was about the desired feature 
students would like to have in a mobile application. The data 
collected suggests that students were keen to see a number of 
other features to support their studies such as access to 
Blackboard, 
learning 
resources, 
lecture 
notes, 
class 
timetable, assignment deadlines, feedback on assignments, 
library catalogue and many more.  The overwhelming 
emphasis, in students’ feedback, was that they valued the 
affordances of mobile technology and were enthusiastic 
about using it in their university experience.   
The last key question asked was about the major 
concerns on using mobile devices in portfolio development. 
Syncing data, interactivity, content quality, speed, reliability 
and security were the options, which were rated (on a scale 
of 1-5, 1 is lowest and 5 is highest). Students in all groups 
considered them equally important.  
Additional questions were asked from group A (users of 
the HUD iPDP app). Eighteen survey responses were 
gathered of which 15 (83%) participants still had the HUD 
iPDP installed on their mobile devices. Out of 15 students, 
14 (93%) used the HUD iPDP application to collect the 
content for their PDP. Most students found the various 
features easy to use and were satisfied with the application in 
general. However, a few students also pointed out in the 
focus group session and interviews that lack of training in 
PDP and unavailability of an online version of application 
with data sync functionality caused low level of engagement 
with the application. Out of 14 students, 8 (57%) believed 
that HUD iPDP app helped them in content collection, 
however, 6 students (43%) did not find it useful. Open 
questions in the survey, interviews and focus group session 
revealed that the primary reason for less interest among the 
students was the data transfer issue from mobile devices to e-
portfolio.  
A number of issues were identified from the interviews 
and focus group session with all three groups. This study 
clearly discovered a demand from students for a coherent 
multi-functional 
application 
with 
synchronicity 
and 
availability of an appropriate application to support the PDP 
process in different devices. Students were enthusiastic about 
TABLE III.  
VIEWS ON POTENTIAL OF MOBILE DEVICES TO RAISE 
MOTIVATION FOR PDP
 
Figure 3.  Views on potential of mobile devices to raise motivation 
for PDP 
availability of learning resources on their mobile devices. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The research objective was to uncover the potential of 
mobile technology in portfolio development. A mobile 
application was developed for PDP to provide an interface 
for Apple mobile devices and tested to analyse its potential 
impact on portfolio development. It has been revealed from 
the students’ responses that there is huge interest in the use 
of mobile technology in this domain. Using mobile devices 
enhances student motivation, quality of e-portfolio and can 
improve ease of reflection. However, research on m-
portfolios is still in its infancy and needs extensive 
pedagogical research. More research is required for example 
to discover if support of m-portfolio for e-portfolio makes a 
difference in students’ engagements with their studies across 
a range of portfolio approaches. As mobile technology is 
becoming ever more accessible to students, the knowledge 
base in this domain needs expanding to understand its true 
value. Future work would aim to develop guidelines for the 
use of m-portfolio applications. 
A new phase, an m-portfolio project, has started. In 
addition to making changes in the HUD iPDP application, a 
bespoke web application will be developed for e-portfolio. 
This will assist in resolving the synchronicity issue faced 
with Blackboard e-portfolio system. Another pilot study will 
be carried out during the next academic year in order to 
conduct thorough functionality, usability as well as 
pedagogical evaluations. Feedback via questionnaires, focus 
groups and interviews will be collected and analysed. One of 
the main aspects of research will focus on whether using 
mobile devices in portfolio development raises students’ 
engagement with PDP and enhances its content quality. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Barbu, D. Popescu, L. Zadeh, J. Kacprozyk, N. Mastorakis, 
A. Kuri-Morales, P. Borne, and L. Kazovsky, "Personal 
0	  
2	  
4	  
6	  
8	  
10	  
12	  
Yes	  
Probably	  Yes	  
Probably	  No	  
No	  
APPLE	  
NON-­‐APPLE	  
CONTROL	  GROUP	  
 
Yes 
Probably 
Yes 
Probably 
No 
No 
APPLE 
56% 
44% 
0% 
0% 
NON-
APPLE 
18% 
59% 
24% 
0% 
CONTROL 
GROUP 
25% 
69% 
0% 
6% 
TOTAL 
33% 
57% 
8% 
2% 
84
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

development - connecting element between human resource 
and career development," Recent Advances in Business 
Administration, 4th WSEAS International Conference on 
Business Administration (ICBA '10), pp. 228-232, 2010. 
[2] 
J. Rowe, "Evaluating a new e-PDP tool and its relationship 
with personal tutoring," Journal of Learning Development in 
Higher Education, Special Edition: November 2010, pp. 1-
18, 2010. 
[3] 
JISC infoNet, (2009). Why Use e-Portfolios. Retrieved from:        
<http://www.jiscinfonet.ac.uk/infokits/e-portfolios/why-use> 
on 12 October 2011 
[4] 
NCIHE, "Higher Education in the Learning Society (Dearing 
Report): Report of the National Committee of Inquiry into 
Higher Education Academy," HMSO, London, 1997. 
[5] 
Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education, (2001). 
Guidelines for HE Progress Files. Retrieved from: 
<http://www.qaa.ac.uk/Publications/InformationAndGuidanc
e/Documents/progfile2001.pdf> on 12 October 2011 
[6] 
A. 
Slight 
and 
S. 
Bloxham, 
"Embedding 
personal 
development planning into the social sciences," LATISS: 
Learning and Teaching in the Social Sciences, vol. 2, pp. 
191-206, 2005. 
[7] 
D. A. Schön, Educating the reflective practitioner: Jossey-
Bass, San Francisco, 1987. 
[8] 
D. Boud, Reflection: Turning experience into learning: 
Routledge, 1985. 
[9] 
N. J. Entwistle and P. Ramsden, Understanding Student 
Learning: Croom Helm, London, 1983. 
[10] E. M. Boyd and A. W. Fales, "Reflective learning: Key to 
learning 
from 
experience," 
Journal 
of 
Humanistic 
Psychology, vol. 23, pp. 99-117, 1983. 
[11] G. Roberts, W. Aalderink, J. Cook, M. Feijen, J. Harvey, S. 
Lee, and V. Wade, "Reflective learning, future thinking: 
digital repositories, e-portfolios, informal learning and 
ubiquitous 
computing," 
ALT/SURF/ILTA1 
Spring 
Conference Research Seminar, Trinity College, Dublin, pp. 
1-13, 2005. 
[12] P. Butler, "A review of the literature on portfolios and 
electronic portfolios," Technical report, eCDF ePortfolio 
Project, 2006. 
[13] E. W. Driessen, A. M. M. Muijtjens, J. Van Tartwijk, and C. 
P. M. Van Der Vleuten, "Web or paper based portfolios: is 
there a difference?," Medical education, vol. 41, pp. 1067-
1073, 2007. 
[14] T. Madden, Supporting Student e-Portfolios: Higher 
Education Academy Physical Sciences Centre. Retrieved 
from:<http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/ps/documents/pra
ctice_guides/eportfolios_JISC.pdf> on 12 October 2011 
[15] J. C. Yang and Y. L. Lin, "Development and Evaluation of 
an Interactive Mobile Learning Environment with Shared 
Display Groupware," Educational Technology and Society, 
vol. 13(1) pp. 195-207, 2010. 
[16] D. R. Cooper, P. S. Schindler, Business research methods. 
New Delhi, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
 
 
85
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

