A Mobile Application for Supporting Surgical Workflow 
 
Jae Kwan Kim, Myon Woong Park 
Center for Bionics 
Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Seoul, Korea 
email: kimjk@kist.re.kr 
Hyun-Tae Hwang, Soo-Hong Lee 
School of Mechanical Engineering 
Yonsei University 
Seoul, Korea 
email: shlee@yonsei.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a mobile application to enhance 
safety and efficiency in the operating room. The application 
plays a crucial role in preparing the surgical personnel and 
gaining useful help as needed in real time. Seamless integration 
of information is implemented to support surgical workflow 
beyond spatial constraints. 
Keywords-mobile application; surgical workflow; operating 
room; information integration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is reported that about 40% of the medical accidents 
occur in the operating rooms (ORs) and around 20% of them 
can be prevented in advance [1][2]. Since the OR is the most 
cost-intensive sector in the hospital, the optimization of 
workflow processes is of particular concern for health care 
providers, managers, and administrators [3]. In order to 
enhance safety and efficiency in the OR, a prototype system 
named Surgical Workflow Manager (SWORM) has been 
implemented as a surgery management platform capable of 
planning, recording, and adapting the surgical processes in 
regular sequence [4]. 
Timely communication between team members is crucial 
in such a complex and hectic environment as the OR. The 
SWORM is basically devised to run inside the OR, but all 
personnel needed do not always stay in the room. For 
instance, a circulating nurse may engage in more than one 
surgery at once, and other doctor who takes outpatients may 
be asked to give the surgical team advice on a certain 
situation. However, they face difficulty in grasping the 
current situation in the hallway or elsewhere. A mobile 
application is thus proposed in this paper to meet the 
demands of understanding and intervening in surgical 
workflow even outside the OR. This paper does not focus on 
the SWORM but its mobile application. The application 
makes the SWORM feasible around the OR by seamless 
integration of information. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the service architecture and main functions of the 
mobile application briefly. Section III describes development 
environment and discusses the results of a case study. 
Section IV concludes this paper. 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE AND FUNCTIONS 
The surgical workflow should be summarized concisely 
and represented intuitively at the mobile application. The 
SWORM transmits the surgical processes and their selected 
information to the application in real time, and obtains 
feedback from the designated mobile users who are away 
from the OR during the intra-operative period. The 
application currently consists of three consecutive pages: 
surgery list, process list, and detail process information. The 
overall architecture is depicted in Figure 1.  
The Surgery List page provides a brief summary of 
scheduled surgeries as shown in Figure 2(a). After browsing 
the list including surgery names, assigned ORs, and 
scheduled dates, the user can select a specific surgery to 
identify its patient, disease, surgeon, and scheduled time. The 
Surgical Process button leads the user into the Process List 
page. The EMR, Staff, and Resource buttons are intended to 
access the corresponding legacy systems, but not activated 
yet.  
The Process List page shows planned surgical procedures 
with highlight on the ongoing one. If a profession is called or 
asked for feedback on any procedure, a message button 
labeled by profession appears beside the procedure to unfold 
the messages (e.g., S, N, and T for surgeon, nurse, and 
technician each). Each button is also distinguished by color: 
green means the message completed, red at hand, and yellow 
coming up. In Figure 2(b), for instance, a supervising 
surgeon outside the OR may skim through the list trying to 
make sure whether every procedure is performed without 
loophole. After finding the request on the Test Stimulation 
procedure, he/she can move into the Detail Process 
Information page to make a useful response. 
The Detail Process Information page provides the overall 
status of a selected procedure as shown in Figure 2(c). The 
page not only displays formal indicators such as duration and 
parameters of the procedure, but also contains intra-operative 
records such as patient’s state, operative photos, and 
compliance with the checklist. The user can give the team in 
the OR helpful advice and information by writing comments 
or uploading photos relevant to the given situation. 
III. 
APPLICATION 
The mobile application has been constructed in a hybrid 
app development environment. This app is written with web 
technologies (HTML 5, CSS, and JavaScript) and currently 
runs on Android only. At the server side, the SWORM uses 
HTTP and Ajax for I/O interfaces, and MySQL as a database. 
The data created by the SWORM and mobile application are 
stored in and retrieved from the database directly. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The application is applied to a real Deep Brain 
Stimulation (DBS) surgery for trial use, and evaluated by its 
developers and users. All of the functions are performed well 
as intended. While a supervising neurosurgeon and an 
anesthetist stayed outside the OR, they could intervene 
effectively in the surgery by monitoring its workflow, 
capturing the messages, and sending some advice. An X-ray 
(C-arm) technician received a call before needed, and she 
moved into the OR with the equipment on time. Even though 
limited, interviews from the users show that the mobile 
application would increase convenience, and consequently 
be useful in enhancing safety and efficiency in the OR.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper proposed a mobile application for surgical 
decision support. Exchanging information between inside 
and outside the OR has been made by the phone calls mostly. 
Instead, this service enables a user outside the OR to monitor 
surgical workflow and intervene in the ongoing surgeries as 
needed. Usefulness of the service was evaluated restrictedly 
in the perspective of surgical safety and efficiency. 
The usability test is expected to improve user interfaces 
and details of each function in the near future. For instance, 
when someone is needed, the application will send the 
selected user an alarm to notify the event, and then lead the 
user into the related page. The test results should be analyzed 
and evaluated quantitatively to ensure the performance of the 
application as well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was sponsored by a Korea Institute of Science 
and Technology grant (no. 2E25250).  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Allen, “How Many Die From Medical Mistakes in U.S. 
Hospitals?,” Patient Safety: Exploring Quality of Care in the U.S. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.propublica.org/article/how-
many-die-from-medical-mistakes-in-us-hospitals 
[retrieved: 
May, 
2015]  
[2] 
L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson, To Err is Human: 
Building a Safer Health System, Institute of Medicine, Washington 
DC: National Academy Press, 2000. 
[3] 
K. Cleary, H. Y. Chung, and S. K. Mun, “OR2020 Workshop 
Overview: Operating Room of the Future,” International Congress 
Series, vol. 1268, 2004, pp. 847-852, doi:10.1016/j.ics.2004.03.287.  
[4] 
M. W. Park et al., “SWORM (Surgical WORkflow Manager): A Data 
Acquisition Platform for Context Aware Surgical Environment,” 
International Biomedical Engineering Conference 2014, Nov. 2014, p. 
362.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Overall architecture of a surgical mobile service. 
             (a)                                                        (b)                                                                                   (c) 
Figure 2.  Snapshots of the mobile application: (a) Surgery List page, (b) Process List page, and (c) Detail Process Information page. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

