Socio-technical Study of Teleworking: 
From the analysis of employees’uses to the design of a virtualized and unified platform 
 
Valérie Fernandez 
Department of Human Sciences 
Paris Institute of Technology – Telecom ParisTech 
Paris, France 
Valerie.fernandez@telecom-paristech.fr 
Laurie Marrauld 
Department of Human Sciences 
Paris Institute of Technology – Telecom ParisTech 
Paris, France 
Laurie.marrauld@telecom-paristech.fr
 
 
Abstract— In this working paper, we present the project 
"WITE 2.0". This project is at the crossroads of various issues 
related to mobility (mobility turn) and use of Information and 
Communication Technologies. Wite 2.0 is a part of the 
designing process of a collaborative communication tool: “a 
virtualized and unified platform”. We define scenarios of 
teleworking practices, “equipped” by ICTs, and use these 
scenarios to better specify the platform. The project started at 
the end of 2010 for a period of 18 months. The analysis is based 
on several complementary methodologies: a qualitative study 
(47 semi-structured interviews), a quantitative survey (553 
respondents), and an experimentation of the platform. In this 
paper, we present the main results of the interview survey 
through the following themes: remote management, skills, 
articulation of private and professional spheres, and the 
maturity of technologies. We also describe how these elements 
help to understand the workers’ practices evolutions. 
Keywords: 
teleworking; 
ICT; 
management; 
socialization; 
competences. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The project WITE 2.0 (Work IT Easy) [10] is a research 
and innovation program supported by public funds. It is a 
multi-partner project (academic and industrial actors).   
The aim of this project is to create a virtualized platform. 
This platform represents a unified work environment, based 
on virtualization, instant communication and interoperability 
of systems, and it allows the individuals to work anywhere 
(and possibly anytime). 
The platform is a software solution that centralizes the 
access to a set of functionalities, originally offered by several 
applications: it’s the principle of unified communications. 
Unified communications (UC) is the integration of real-time 
communication services such as instant messaging (chat), 
presence information, telephony (including IP telephony), 
video conferencing, data sharing (including web connected 
electronic whiteboards aka IWB's or Interactive White 
Boards), call control and speech recognition with non-real-
time communication services such as unified messaging 
(integrated voicemail, e-mail, SMS and fax).  
This platform is accessible from any connected terminal, 
either fixed or mobile (desktop, laptop, tablet, Smartphone, 
etc.). The WITE 2.0 platform will provide a wide range of 
communication tools that can be activated on demand in 
different situations, and depending on users’ needs (VoIP, 
discussion groups, instant messaging, email, etc.). 
The project has four main stages, divided into several 
subsections each. It is supported by a socio-technical 
analysis. Telecom ParisTech has assumed leadership in the 
scientific study of the needs and uses by administrating semi-
structured interviews with individuals regularly working 
"remotely". We wanted to better characterize these work 
situations: at home, on the premises of the employer but in 
geographically dispersed locations; in telecentres / co-
working spaces / business center, with geo-distributed teams 
working.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the 
Section II, we describe the different stages of WITE 2.0 
project; we specify the notion of virtualization. In Section 
III, we expose the socio-technical study with the chosen 
methodology and the main results. We conclude by giving 
some research prospectives.  
 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF WITE 2.0. PROJECT 
A. The project issues 
Mobility at work is spreading in the context of the 
mobility paradigm’s evolution [9]. The project WITE 2.0 
intends to address the urgent need for solutions in the field of 
remote collaborative work. These needs include ways to 
collaborate, communicate and socialize, but also to access 
these features regardless of the location, and from any 
workstation. It will provide a unified interface integrating all 
the features, and having a wide range of communication 
tools selectable on demand. 
B. The project stages 
The project WITE2.0 is divided into four major phases. 
The first one concerns the study of employees’ needs and 
uses, for remote collaborative work. In order to capture the 
needs and uses, we conducted two surveys: first, a 
qualitative study based on 47 semi-structured interviews and 
second, an online quantitative survey with 553 individuals. 
The object of this phase is to highlight the kinds of remote 
collaboration in order to make recommendations related to 
the design of the platform. The results are published in the 
report "Work, socialize and collaborate remotely" [5]. The 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

main preliminary results of this report focus on how to 
socialize in a context of teleworking, the question of remote 
management, and of the technical skills needed for the use 
of ICT. The recommendations focus on the access to digital 
resources, the business information systems, and on issues 
related to security.  
The second phase of the project focuses on the 
technology. It is divided into two parts. The first part 
consists of the writing of functional and technical 
specifications of the platform WITE2.0. This document 
contains descriptions of service needs, and a comparison of 
various existing virtualization solutions. We notice that, 
since the launching of the project WITE 2.0, some other 
virtualization solutions have appeared on the market (Citrix, 
etc.) [10]. Through the comparison of different solutions, we 
highlight the distinguishing features and the technological 
services of the platform WITE 2.0. The second part of the 
phase 2 includes the implementation of all the technical 
elements necessary for the platform WITE2.0. These 
technical 
elements 
include 
the 
virtualization, 
the 
development of a socialization software solution, the 
services integration, the development of a unified software, 
and a beta testing of the platform.  
In the third phase, the project partners have introduced 
new technological elements for the components and voice 
applications, the mobile profiles, and the SIP recorder. 
C. The virtualized workstation 
The major technical element of this platform is based on 
the virtualization of information systems (IS). The 
workstation virtualization solution that we are interested in 
is also called the "PC on demand."  
The virtual workstation displays a virtual image on the 
user workstation that is executed on a remote server (not 
virtualized). This technology has several advantages (the list 
is not exhaustive): 
- Centralizing logical components i.e. the operating system 
(Windows or Macintosh) but also applications (such as 
Word, PowerPoint, Skype); 
- Checking the lifecycle of workstation: One can decide to 
create or delete virtual PC on demand); 
- Managing storage resources: as the main storage element 
is no longer the physical position of the hard drive on which 
the employee works; 
- Access to a virtual portal: to recreate a selection of 
applications (i.e. a library of applications) each time the PC 
is created, and customized for each company; 
- Access to an individual virtual PC guaranteeing better 
mobility management of the employee (the employee 
creates and destroys the PC to the demand for mobility). 
 
Virtual workstations will address a number of challenges 
compared to “ordinary” workstations (especially at the 
administrative, security and deployment of machines 
levels). Virtual machines, for example, can decrease 
functional costs (maintenance, etc.), and technical problems 
such as obsolescence of the workstation. With VDI 
architecture, the ISD has no longer constraints related to 
maintenance and administration of its fleet of workstations. 
The user is no longer dependent on a single physical 
computer and can connect to his "own PC" from different 
physical devices, even from terminals like thin clients.  
Hence, virtualization is an already existing technology. 
The value of the WITE 2.0 platform is to combine this 
exiting technology with a collaborative tool (unified 
communication). The aim is actually double: in one hand, to 
reduce (or eliminate) the problems due to data security, and  
on the other hand, to improve the level of collaboration 
between employees.  
 
III. 
A SOCIO-TECHNICAL STUDY 
A. What about “ remote collaborative work” ? 
In a context of managerial culture based on “face to 
face”, the new paradigm of mobile work does not seem to 
establish in French companies. Some forms of work 
organization are deeply rooted. Some managers and IT 
system directors still reluctant to introduce new developed 
technologies because of the security of the data circulation. 
Our bias is to say that the paradigm shift can take place now 
if we take into account the issues of teleworking in 
"sociological" and "technical" terms: hence, the importance 
of analyzing the practices of work organization and use of 
ICT, and also the experimentation of the virtual platform. 
B. What is teleworking ? 
In our analysis, we are interested in a key notion: the 
concept of "teleworking" that we have considered in its most 
classic form (the homework), but also in the most diverse 
realities that it could be today: either, all forms of "remote 
working", i.e., forms of organization and / or performing 
work outside the classical unity of time and place. Indeed, 
many studies emphasize that the unity of time and place that 
characterized the traditional organization of work, would 
tend to disappear [2][3][4][6]. 
Thus, the definition of teleworking that we have selected 
is based on:  
- The fixed place of work or alternating between several 
workplaces, provided they are removed from the hierarchy 
and/or colleagues;  
- The relationship to the employer and colleagues, 
remotely and by electronic links, thus justifying the name of 
teleworking [8]. 
C. Methodology  
The first results presented in this paper are based on a 
qualitative analysis approach. We have particularly studied 
the practices of coordination and cooperation in various 
configurations of remote work, more specifically in 
management practices supported by different communication 
technologies (fixed or mobile). We believe this kind of 
qualitative study is the most relevant because we make a 
statement about teleworkers’ practices. As the virtualized 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

and unified platform technology is designing, we have 
realized that we actually had little knowledge about the 
current technologies’ practices’ realities. The classic 
typology of the four kinds of teleworkers – homeworkers, 
mobile workers, telecenter worker, virtual team worker [1] - 
should really be evolved. We have decided to question the 
realities of the teleworkers’practices to understand the 
evolution of the work organization et to link the technology 
to specific uses (or link uses to specific technology). Hence, 
we have thought that the most equipped teleworker will be 
the most graduated (with the most responsabilities). We have 
discovered that the uses of mobile ICTs evolved in a very 
paradoxal way. 
During the operational phase of the study, from May to 
July 2011, 47 interviews were conducted face to face with 
workers performing work remotely. Our sample of 
interviewees was compiled from relays (managers and 
human ressources services of companies). 
These interviews, lasting an average of 1:30 each, were 
the subject of subsequent detailed accounts.  
The sample is constituted with different profiles of 
employees. In our analysis, we specially separated three 
kinds of profiles, regarding the level of the management’s 
activity:  
 
The entrepreneurs: they are supposed to be very 
autonomous in their work, self-managed, and often 
have their own company. 
 
The 
executives 
and 
intellectual 
professions: 
Graduated employees (engineers, etc.), they always 
have employees to manage. Relatively autonomous, 
they sometimes have to report their activity. 
 
The 
associate 
professionals 
and 
employees: 
Executives manage them. They have technical 
activities.  
Spreadsheet 1: Sample 
 
Homework 
Alternating 
homework 
Mobile 
worker 
Entrepreneurs 
2 
2 
2 
Executives and 
intellectual 
professions 
1 
17 
14 
Associate 
professionals - 
Employees 
2 
4 
3 
Total 
5 
23 
19 
Women 
3 
8 
4 
Men 
2 
15 
15 
 
D. First results of the analysis 
The first results of the analysis cover various aspects of 
remote working of the surveyed employees: 
 
The articulation of private and professional life. 
Moreover, a phenomenon seems banal, the activity overflow 
telecommuting 
seem 
becoming 
more 
and 
more 
important.This form of teleworking involves a regular work 
done outside of the official working hours, most often at 
home. These activities are mostly related to checking and 
reply to emails. People build tactics to separate private and 
professional spheres. They are based, for example, on partial 
reachability over the mobile phone. People choose to 
disconnect and not to check their telephones after a defined 
period. This strategy is the most intuitive. But, some people 
choose to disconnect their mobile phone to work at home 
without being disturbed every time. Some of the interviewed 
said that it is difficult to concentrate on doing a task when: 
- they are at the office (colleagues interrupt them all the 
time, or there is lot of noise, etc),  
- they are at home when the mobile phone is switched on 
(or even when just the Internet is connected).  
 
Forms of remote "socialization": social networking tools 
seem to be effective. This proximity can develop 
communicative relationships of trust, explaining in part the 
stability of the worker community [7]. For example, the 
unified communication and the social media, that employees 
use, seem to be very convenient. They use to talk to each 
other through the chatrooms without ever see each other in 
real life. They become friends in other social media 
(Facebook, etc.) and they develop a real relationship of 
complicity and friendship. It’s difficult to say if this relation 
is also based on trust. 
 
New forms of remote management: ICT are, for certain 
categories of workers, as a digital control infrastructure, 
replacing the physical presence of the manager (control 
connection time, obligation of permanent reachability via the 
mail or instant messaging). The current technology controls 
very well the activity of the employees. The managers can 
hear the phone calls between employees and clients without 
the employee’s knowledge. In this case, the statut of 
presence and the activity on the chat are essential to proove 
that the employee is working.  
In other cases, some managers construct tactics of 
"motivation" by using ICTs as a lever of the collective 
dynamics (Chat between collegues). 
 
Skills development: It appears that many people working 
remotely learn to use ICT more or less on a mode “self-
taught”, “on the job”. Some of them practice forms of 
“tinkering” computer, as the diversion of scripts use of some 
business applications, etc. 
 
Analysis of current technology: current technology does 
not allow to maintain conditions comparable to those offered 
in the premises of the employer. Sometimes, these conditions 
are not reproducible. In this case, the employee is forced to 
fragment his work activity. He will assign, for example, 
specific tasks to places where he works according to the 
possibilities offered by his work environment. Furthermore, 
this segmentation may come from the desire to choose a 
specific work environment, quieter and less disruptive than 
in the enterprise to perform tasks requiring more 
concentration. 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Based on the results of the qualitative study, we suggest 
some recommandations for the WITE 2.0 platform: 
- Firstly, the WITE 2.0 platform must be integrated in the 
IS of the companies: a lot of interviewed workers pratice 
some “tinkering” because of the restrictions of the IS of their 
company. Workers want to access to the tools that they need, 
without having problems with the technical services.  
- Secondly, we suggest adding some filters to specify the 
time of reachbility and the time of disponibility. A lot of 
workers are often disturbed by their colleagues during their 
activity; because the colleagues do not check if they are busy 
or not (at the office and, also, at home by ICT). These filters 
could be used for teleworking and for presentiel working (“I 
check if my college is available before disturbing him in his 
office”). 
- Finally, we suggest to labeling the information flows 
received everyday. We propose to label these flows in 
function of the emergency of the data, the nature of the data, 
the working group which is concerned, and the person who 
send the data, etc. For example, email box could be 
integrated to the social media as a secondary function and 
people could juggle with different media (chat, email, 
timeline, etc) subject to their needs. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
There were several configurations of "remote working" 
that we observed that changed our usual representations of 
the "teleworker." We propose here three “stereotype” 
representations. 
First, the figure of the teleworker, exclusively at home, 
whose teleoperator is an ideal-typical figure. He uses a desk 
in a corner of the room or the bedroom, not in a room 
dedicated solely for homework. However, the boundaries 
between private and professional life are maintained due to 
strong control of his activity by the ICT. In fact, ICT is, for 
him, a "control infrastructure". Despite of the physical 
distance, hierarchy is near: hours are controllable via the use 
of ICT, including instant messaging to verify that the 
teleoperator is well behind his computer. The remote control 
via ICT is like a substitute of direct managerial control. 
Second, the figure of the mobile worker who sometimes 
works at home. ICTs provide a permanent reachability that 
does 
not 
always 
correspond 
to 
their 
availability. 
Technologies act as strong regulators of space-time job. On 
the contrary, the executives act more like disrupting their 
working space in confusing the virtual presence status 
(reachable / available). Sometimes, the mobile worker can be 
considered as a “techie” worker, clamped in his uses of ICT.  
Third, the figure of the worker in a co-working space or 
in a telecenter: with a high degree of autonomy in organizing 
his work, the worker uses this structure to "frame" his 
activity (immerse himself in a group is a way to put 
boundaries between private and professional spheres), but 
also to densify his socioprofessional network IRL (In Real 
Life). The worker in a co-working space will tend to regulate 
his working hours, helping to build boundaries between 
private and professional spheres. He can also use the 
dynamic shared places to gain in competence, although it is 
usually relatively independent with technology (although this 
may evolve with the growing phenomenon of collaborative 
workspaces). 
The precise definition of teleworkers is difficult to 
establish, as the profiles are varied and the situations are 
diverse (new working configurations including practices of 
re-sedentarization activity). The characteristics of these new 
positions (the nature of risks, for instance) question both at 
the managerial level (the hierarchy acceptance) and technical 
level (the ISD acceptance). They also question the 
employees themselves who sometimes try to make self-
regulation. Embedded in a double paradigm (technological 
and organizational), teleworkers seem to evolve in 
unexpected ways, even paradoxical. In order to understand 
the realities of working remotely, one is asked to investigate 
the tools for teleworking in their collective aspect of 
interaction management, the security of sharing data and the 
practices of professional social tools. The technical 
characteristics of these tools are revealed only through the 
"remote" collective dynamics and vice versa. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Breton, (1996) “ Le télétravail en France : Situation 
actuelle, 
perspectives 
de 
développement 
et 
aspects 
juridiques ”, Rapport au Ministre d’Etat, Ministre de 
l’Intérieur et de l’Aménagement du Territoire et au Ministre 
des Entreprises et du Développement Economiques, La 
documentation 
française, 
Paris. 
English 
translation 
“Teleworking in France: Current Situation, development 
perspectives and juridic aspects” Report to the prime minister. 
[2] L. Chen, and R. Nath, “Nomadic culture: cultural support for 
working 
anytime, 
anywhere”, 
Information 
Systems 
Management, Fall, pp. 56-64, 2005. 
[3] F. Cocula, and A. Fredy-Planchot, “Pratiquer le management 
à distance ”, Gestion 2000, n° 1, pp. 43-63, 2003. 
[4] G.B. Davis, “Anytime/anyplace computing and the future of 
knowledge work”, Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, n° 
12, pp. 67-73, 2002. 
[5] V. Fernandez, C. Guillot et L. Marrauld “Travailler, se 
sociabiliser et collaborer à distance”, rapport de recherche 
Wite 2.0, English translation “Work, socialize and collaborate 
remotely”, research report, 2011. 
[6] M.L. Gribbins, J. Gebbauer, and M.J. Shaw, “Wireless B2B 
mobile commerce: a study on the usability, acceptance, and 
process fit”, Ninth Americas Conference on Information 
Systems, Tampa Florida USA, August 4-6, 2003. 
[7] J. Rosanvallon, “Travail à distance et représentations du 
collectif de travail ”, Revue Interventions économiques, 
34 | 2006, posted online 07/01/2006, Accessed on 09/17/2012. 
URL : http://interventionseconomiques.revues.org/706. 
[8] L. Thomsin, Télétravail et mobilités, Les Editions de 
l’Université de Liège, Collection « Synopsis », 2002. 
[9] J. Urry, Mobilities, Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2007. 
[10] J., Wang, L., Yang, M., Yu, S., Wang, “Application of Server 
Virtualization Technology Based on Citrix XenServer in the 
Information Center of the Public Security Bureau and Fire 
Service Department”, International Symposium on Computer 
Science and Society, IEEE conference publications, pp. 200-
202, Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, 16-17 July, 2011. 
[11] Web Site WITE 2.0 project : http://www.wite2-0.fr/ Accessed 
on 09/17/2012. 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

