Performance of Novel Target Detection in Radar Network Systems
with a 3D Vehicle Model
Hiroyuki Hatano
Department of Advanced Interdisciplinary
Graduate School of Engineering,
Utsunomiya University
Tochigi, Japan
e-mail: hatano@is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp
Masahiro Fujii, Atsushi Ito, Yu Watanabe
Department of Information Sciences
Graduate School of Engineering,
Utsunomiya University
Tochigi, Japan
e-mail: {fujii, at.ito, yu}@is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp
Yusuke Yoshida, Takayoshi Nakai
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Graduate School of Engineering,
Shizuoka University
Shizuoka, Japan
e-mail:yoshida@hatanolab.eng.shizuoka.ac.jp
e-mail:tdtnaka@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Abstract—We focus on forward-looking systems with auto-
motive radar network systems. By using multiple radars, the
radar network systems will achieve reliable detection and wide
observation area. The forward-looking systems by cameras
are famous, but not all-around system. In order to realize
more reliable safety, the cameras had better be used with
other sensing devices such as the radar network. In the radar
network, processing of the data derived from the multiple
receivers is important because the processing decides the
detection performance. In this paper, we will introduce our data
processing and detection algorithm. Finally, the performance
will be evaluated via a 3D target model. From results of
computer simulations, we can conﬁrm that our proposal can
achieve stable detection even if the target positions differ.
Keywords-Radar Network; forward-looking radar; multiple
radars; Wide detection
I. INTRODUCTION
By applying intelligent devices, more safety and comfort-
able driving is desired. Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS) is considered to solve some transportation problems
such as an accident, a trafﬁc jam and an environmental
pollution. The forward-looking alert or braking system is
one of the elemental technologies for the realization of
ITS world as described by Rasshofer and Gresser [1]. For
the forward-looking, various devices are now researched
and some systems are realized. Examples are shown in
the researches by Meinecke et al. [2] and Sakamoto [3].
Especially, image processing technologies with cameras are
famous. Sensing by the image processing can detect targets
in wide area. Such system can alert sudden pedestrians from
blind spots. In such case, the wide detection for wide are is
needed.
However, the image processing has fatal weaknesses. The
poplar cameras cannot achieve the adequate performance
under optical disturbances, such as bad weather. In order
to realize more reliable safety, the cameras had better be
used with other sensing devices. In this paper, we focus on
radar sensors as other devices.
For achievement of wide and reliable detection, we focus
on radar network systems which have multiple receivers.
Fig. 1 shows the example structure of the radar network.
By using multiple distributed radars, wide observation area
and detection will be realized. So, these systems have been
researched as the forward-looking systems in automotive
usages. The similar structures of the radar network are also
researched by Klotz et al. [4] and Folster et al. [5].
In the radar network systems, it is important to process the
data derived the from multiple receivers because the process
decides the detection performance. In the articles [6] [7],
we have proposed some algorithm for position estimation in
the forward-looking radar network systems for automotive.
In order to estimate target positions precisely, our methods
regard the distances to the targets as stochastic variables.
Then, the target positions are derived from the calculated
probability, which means “target existence”.
As our past works, we have discussed our novel esti-
mation algorithm, Existence Probability Estimation Method
(EPEM) and Existence Probability Estimation Method using
Reﬂected Signals (EPEMR) in our articles [6] [7]. However,
the evaluation is simple simulator as the target is single
point. In this paper, we will evaluate the detection perfor-
mance by 3D target models.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we intro-
duce the position estimation algorithm brieﬂy. In Section III,
we present the simulation settings for the evaluation. Espe-
cially, the simulation tools, data processing, simulated cases
and results are described. Finally, Section IV summarizes
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Figure 1.
Example of radar network structure
the paper.
II. POSITION ESTIMATE ALGORITHM
A. System model
In this section, we will present our system model. The
radar network is constructed with a transmitter and multiple
receivers (Fig. 2). We assume four receivers. The transmitter
is set up at a origin of x-axis. The four receivers are set
up in equal interval. The center of the receivers is also the
origin of x-axis (see Fig. 2). x-position of the receivers are
φ1, φ2, φ3, φ4 [m] respectively. The position of a target is
(x, y). The kth receiver outputs measured ranges. We obtain
measured range lists ˜Rk = {˜rk1, ˜rk2, ..., ˜rkNk} from the kth
receiver. The variable Nk refers to the number of measured
ranges in the measured range list of the kth receiver’s. The
variable ˜rkn refers to the distance of wave propagation, that
is, the sum of the distances from the transmitter to the nth
reﬂection point and from the reﬂection point to the kth
receiver. The Nk reﬂection points include, of course the
target and other objects such as walls.
The measured range ˜rkn has the measurement error. The
error is modeled as follows.
˜rkn = rkn + ϵk
(1)
The variable rkn means the real distance between the nth
reﬂection points, the transmitter and the kth receiver. The
variable ϵk means the measurement error which is modeled
as a random variable with variance σ2. Also, the notation
“˜” means measured values. The position of the target has
to be estimated by the above measured range lists ˜Rk of all
receivers.
B. EPEM
EPEM is used as the position estimation method. Our
ﬁnal estimation method EPEMR is based on EPEM. In
this section, we will introduce EPEM brieﬂy. The detailed
algorithm of EPEM is introduced in our past article [6].
EPEM estimates the target position by calculating the
existence probability of the targets, which is explained in
this section. In this method, the measured ranges, that is
˜rkn, is regard as the random variables.
Figure 2.
System model of radars and target
In order to estimate the target position, EPEM calculates
the following conditional probability.
P(ˆx, ˆy | ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4).
(2)
The above probability means that the target exists on
the coordinate (x, y) when the measured range lists
˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4 are obtained. The notation “ˆ” means es-
timated values.
By using Bayes’theorem and assumptions, (2) can be
transformed. The following equation has the same distri-
bution shape of (2).
4

k=1
Nk

n=1
P(˜rkn | ˆx, ˆy)
(3)
=
4

k=1
Nk

n=1
P(˜rkn | ˆrk)
(4)
where is ˆrk =

(ˆx − φk)2 + ˆy2 + √ˆx + ˆy. The probability
P(˜rkn | ˆrk) means the probability of getting the measured
range ˜rkn when the target exists in the range ˆrk. This means
the measurement characteristic which each radar has. The
measurement characteristic means the error ϵk in (1).
From the measured range lists and (4), we can calculate
the distribution of the probability which means the target ex-
ists on the coordinate (x, y). The distribution of (4) is called
as “existence probability distribution”. The high probability
in the above distribution indicates the target position. An
example of the existence probability distribution is shown
in Fig. 3.
C. EPEMR
EPEM does not have enough accuracy. EPEM tends to
generate large error in the same direction to the receiver
layout. In order to improve estimation accuracy, we also
construct novel estimation algorithm “EPEMR”. EPEMR
uses not only direct path from the target but also indirect
path which is reﬂected other objects (see Fig. 2). By using
indirect paths, EPEMR can observe the target as the target
is surrounded by both the real and virtual receivers. EPEMR
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Figure 3.
Example of existence probability distribution
Figure 4.
Ellipse image (focuses, target, receiver)
is expanded from the above mentioned EPEM. From now,
we will introduce EPEMR brieﬂy. The detailed procedure is
introduced in our past work [7].
We estimate according to the following procedure.
Step(a) Estimating the position of the target by EPEM
EPEMR is based on EPEM. First, we estimate the
positions of the target by using EPEM as described
in Sec. II-B. EPEM can estimate the rough positions
under multipath environment.
Step(b) Estimating the reﬂected points
Next, we estimate reﬂecting points on other ob-
jects except the target. In order to estimate reﬂecting
points, we focus on the properties of a ellipse.
The distance of direct path is presented as the
distance from the target to each receiver (Fig.4).
The indirect path means the path which is reached
by reﬂecting at a kind of objects, such as walls. We
can derive the distance (length) of the direct path
from the estimated position of the target at Step(a).
By comparing the distance value of the direct path,
we eliminate the close value in the measured range
lists. After eliminating, only the measured distances
of indirect path remain in the lists.
By using the derived distances of the indirect
paths, we construct a virtual ellipse. From now, we
prepare the ellipse which is illustrated in Fig. 4. The
ellipse, which we will prepare, has two focuses at
the positions of both the target and each receiver.
Generally, an elliptical equation is expressed as
follows.
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1
(a < b)
(5)
The sum of the distance from a arbitrary point to 2
focus points, that is α+β in Fig. 4, is constant. This
distance is equal to the measured value ˜rkn of the
indirect path. As mentioned before, the distance of
the indirect path can be gotten from the measured
range lists after removing the direct distance. Then,
the relation among the ellipse parameters and the
distance ˜rkn is:
2b = ˜rkn
(6)
a2 = b2 − c2
(7)
where the parameters a, b are coordinates of the
intercept of long/short axis on the ellipse. The
focal distance of the ellipse is denoted as c. These
parameters are also illustrated in Fig. 4.
To ﬁt the ellipse in the geometric relation between
the receiver and the target, we rotate and move the
above ellipse. The rotation angle θ and the amount
of the movement are decided as the two focal points
of the ellipse are placed at the receiver and the
estimated target respectively. The detailed procedure
is explained in our past work [7].
The wall’s positions are known. Then, by using
both the derived ellipse equation and the wall’s
position, we can compute the candidate positions
of the reﬂections on the wall.
Step(c) Set up virtual receivers
We set the virtual receivers at the reﬂection
points. We also calculate the distance α, β from the
reﬂection points. Then, we prepare new measured
range lists R′
k. These new lists means the range lists
of the virtual receivers. The distance in the lists R′
k
is α. We have prepared the virtual receivers which
has own virtual measured range list. We estimate
the target position by EPEM with the all measured
range list, that is both the virtual receivers and the
real receivers again.
III. ESTIMATION PERFORMANCE BY SIMULATIONS WITH
3D VEHICLE MODEL
A. 3D vehicle model
We introduce the characteristic of our estimation algo-
rithm by computation simulations. In our past works, we
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

(a) Front view
(b) Rear view
Figure 5.
Target model
Figure 6.
Example of the propagation path
considered and evaluated the position estimation algorithm
using the target which is modeled as a single point. The
single point model is important to evaluate a performance,
in term of comparing the estimated position to the true one.
However, it is also important to evaluate the estimation per-
formance of using the 3D modeled object. So, we consider a
3D simulation model and re-construct data processing. From
the new evaluations, we can grasp the performance in case
of the surface which the real target has, not a single point.
We prepare the realistic 3D vehicle model as the target.
We download the 3D vehicle model via Trimble 3D gallery
(Fig. 5). In Trimble 3D gallery, we can download modeled
ﬁles which can be imported to our simulation software, the
ﬁle type is .skp. Size of the vehicle model is 3.6 meters
long, 1.4 meters wide and 1.2 meters height. For calculating
the measured ranges, we use software “Raplab” which is an
analysis tool of radio propagation by 3D ray tracing. This
tool can simulate the propagation path like Fig. 6. In Fig. 6,
the receiver is denoted as a triangle mark and the transmitter
as a rectangular mark. We set the target position (x, y) as
the center of the vehicle like Fig. 6. By using this 3D model,
the measured ranges at each receiver become more reality
than before.
Figure 7.
Data ﬂow
B. Data processing
Fig. 7 shows data ﬂow. In our algorithm, we use the
propagation distance calculated by the above-mentioned tool
as the true value of the measured range. The measured range
lists of each receiver have many measured ranges because
there are about 100 propagation paths. Some of them are
unnecessary information such as multipath. Moreover, some
of the reﬂection points of these paths are not on the same
plane which expends at the same ground level to the radar
network. In the position estimation, we should get the direct
path which propagates via the way of the transmitter - the
target - the each receiver. That is the shortest path. For
applying to EPEM, we sort the measured ranges of the
lists ˜Rk in ascending order, and pick up s ranges from the
smallest. The variable s means the number of the selected
ranges. In this paper, we set the variable s = 5, this is
not optimal but experimental. The parameter s affects the
calculation time and the detection performance. The shorter
time is desired. Moreover, in case of selecting larger s,
we sense unnecessary part of the body such as the side
of the target. This results in confusing detection. The most
important part is the nearest part of the target. So, we pick up
the shorter s = 5 ranges. Although the situation of multiple
targets is not scope of this paper, the parameter s may be
set larger value if there are multiple targets which we want
to detect.
We derive the existence probability distribution of the
target by EPEM with the measured range lists, the receiver
position and the error characteristic of each of receivers.
Finally, we get the result of the position estimation by
choosing the high probability in the existence probability
distribution.
C. Simulated cases and results
We simulate the following cases. In these cases, there is
one target of the vehicle. We note that the coordinate (x, y)
of the target position is denoted as the center of the vehicle;
see Fig. 6. The important detected part is the rear of the
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

(a) Case I-(i), Same lane, Near
(b) Case I-(ii), Same lane, Far
(c) Case II, Opposite lane, Far
Figure 8.
Simulated Cases (Target Layout)
vehicle. In the simulation, we assume two cases in different
layout of the vehicle; see Fig. 8.
1) Case I: the target is arranged at the same lane in the
front of own car.
(i) Set on the target at near area
(x, y) = (−1.5, 5)m.
(ii) Set on the target at far area
(x, y) = (−1.5, 10)m.
2) Case II: the target is arranged at opposite lane and far
area (x, y) = (1.5, 10)m.
For comparison, we also simulate the conventional EPEM
algorithm.
In 3D ray tracing, we set the maximum times of reﬂection
and diffraction as 1, respectively. Simulation parameters are
summarized in Table I. The measured ranges are modeled
as (1). The distribution of the error ϵk in (1) is assumed
as Gaussian distribution with standard deviation σ. The
standard deviation is decided by the error range of the
measured range at each receiver. The error range of the direct
path is set as 0.3m. The amount 4σ means including more
than 90 % in Gaussian distribution. So, we set 4σ = 0.3
[m].
As a result, we summarize the existence probability distri-
bution in Figs. 9, 10, and 11. The presented ﬁgures indicate
the existence probability at x − y plane. Each ﬁgure has the
color bar which distributes from red color to white color.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Number of radars: k
4
Position of receivers: φk
-2.4,-1.8,-1.2,-0.6 [m]
x-coordinate of wall: ω
-4,4 [m]
Distribution of error ϵk [m]:
Gaussian
Measurement error of the radar [m]
0.3 (4σ = 0.3)
Resolution of x-y plane
x = 0.05, y = 0.05 [m]
Height of receivers and transmitter
0.3 [m]
The red color means high probability. So, the place of the
red color has possibility of the target existence. Figures 9
and 10 show the results of Case I-(i) and -(ii), respectively.
Figure 11 shows the results of Case II. We note that the
coordinate of the each target is the center of the car. So,
the detected areas of Figs. 9, 10 and 11 are the nearest part
of the car, that is outside of the body. From Figs. 9, 10
and 11, it results that the proposed EPEMR can reduce the
error compared to EPEM. Especially, in EPEM, the farther
the distance between the target and the radar is, the larger
the error in the x-direction is. This is the typical problem of
multiple sensing system such as radar network. The multiple
sensing from the same side generates large error in the same
direction of the sensor arrangement. For example, from Figs.
10 and 11, the high probability in EPEM can be found along
about 2.31m in x-direction. It results that the target exists
over the width of the car. On the other hand, EPEMR can
suppress the error and the detected area becomes within the
car width. This improvement can be conﬁrmed in all cases.
IV. CONCLUSION
In the realization of ITS world, we research the forward-
looking radar network. Especially, we focused on the combi-
nation between the imaging detection and the radar network
detection. In order to be more accurate radar sensing, we
regarded the measured ranges to targets as the random
variables. We have proposed and evaluated some position
estimation algorithms. In this paper, we introduced our
proposals EPEMR, the data processing and the estimation
performance with new 3D target model. EPEMR estimates
the reﬂection points on the surrounding structures with the
results by the imaging devices. EPEMR sets the virtual
receivers on the estimated reﬂection points. By adding the
virtual receivers, the target can be observed from various
directions. From the computer simulations with 3D target
model, we conﬁrmed that the EPEMR can reduce the
positioning error. We also conﬁrmed the advantage and
robustness of the proposal by different situations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The part of this work is supported by Grant-in-Aid for
Young Scientists (B), Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS). We are also particularly grateful for the 3D
model made by username:brecht on Trimble 3D gallery.
REFERENCES
[1] R. H. Rasshofer and K. Gresser, “Automotive radar and lidar
systems for next generation driver assistance functions,” Ad-
vances in Radio Science, vol.3, May 2005, pp. 205–209.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

(a) EPEM
(b) EPEMR
Figure 9.
Target existence probability(Case I-(i), 5m, EPEM vs EPEMR)
(a) EPEM
(b) EPEMR
Figure 10.
Target existence probability(Case I-(ii), 10m, EPEM vs EPEMR)
(a) EPEM
(b) EPEMR
Figure 11.
Target existence probability(Case II, Oncoming, 10m, EPEM vs EPEMR)
[2] M. M. Meinecke et al., “Approach for protection of vulnerable
road users using sensor fusion techniques,” International Radar
Symposium, Sept. 2003, pp. 125-130.
[3] T. Sakamoto, “A fast algorithm for 3-dimensional imaging
with UWB pulse radar systems,” IEICE Trans. on Commun.,
vol.E90-B, no.3, Mar. 2007, pp. 636–644.
[4] M. Klotz and H. Rohling, “24 GHz radar sensors for auto-
motive applications,” International Conference on Microwaves,
Radar and Wireless Communications, May 2000. pp. 359–362.
[5] F. Folster, H. Rohling, and U. Lubbert, “An automotive radar
network based on 77 GHz FMCW sensors,” IEEE International
Radar Conference, May 2005, pp. 871–876.
[6] H. Hatano, T. Mizutani, K. Sugiyama, and Y. Kuwahara,
“Target position estimation algorithm under corrupted mea-
surement data for radar network systems,” IEICE Trans. on
Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer
Sciences, vol.E95-A, no.1, Jan. 2012, pp. 317–323.
[7] Y. Yoshida, H. Hatano, and K.Sugiyama, “An evaluation of er-
ror reduction by indirect path in forward-looking radar network
systems,” 12th International Conference on ITS Telecommuni-
cations, Nov. 2012, pp. 269–274.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

