Real-time Cognitive-Capacity-Sensitive Multimodal  
Information Exchange for the Cockpit Environment 
 
 
Atta Badii, Ali Khan 
Intelligent Systems Research Laboratory,  
School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading, 
Reading RG6 6AY United Kingdom 
atta.badii@reading.ac.uk, a.a.khan@reading.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract – Deployment of multimodal interfaces in an 
environment 
of 
high 
cognitive-load, 
e.g., 
the 
cockpit 
environment of a police helicopter or motorcyclist in-pursuit, 
using audio communication with the need to frequently change 
radio channel or mode/focus of attention under time-
constraints, whilst multi-tasking, can impose an extra load on 
the driver in addition to that due to the complexity of vehicle 
manoeuvring.  This can raise concerns regarding driver safety. 
There is a need for a multi-sensor, multimodal information 
exchange interface that is minimally distracting by design, with 
consideration for the cognitive capacity of the driver at any 
given point in time. This paper presents the MoveON Jacket 
prototype with a Cognitive Capacity Respecting Multimodal 
Information Exchange framework that offers a minimal-
distraction interface to motorcyclists enabling access to 
information online in real-time while supporting enhanced 
compliance with road safety constraints.  This project has 
delivered the first validated implementation of an architecture 
for: a) minimal-distraction, b) cognitive capacity awareness, 
c)  multimodal communication and control, d) graceful in-line 
man-in-the-loop cognitive control integration, e) performance 
improvement context caching to support an off-line learning 
capability for incrementally optimised man-machine mixed-
initiative 
taking, 
f) 
performance 
enhancement 
and 
personalised ambient driver’s pal adaptation.  
Keywords – multimodal command and control; cognitive-
load; minimal distraction; cognitive control; mixed initiative 
taking; man-in-the-loop; machine learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
While the level of sophistication of systems on-board 
vehicles has steadily progressed in recent years, provision of 
similar functions has not relatively matured for motorcycles 
and other two-wheeled vehicles.  The main reason 
underlying this lack in provision can be related to safety 
concerns, as the manoeuvre context of a motorcycle is more 
complex than that of four-wheeled vehicle. Safety of an 
individual moving on the road on a two-wheeled vehicle is 
of paramount importance.  This manoeuvre complexity is 
further increased in the context of on-board features usage, 
and communication with entities external to the immediate 
environment of the individual, e.g., a central command and 
control station as in the case of police motorcyclists.  
Therefore, any provision of added-value system features on-
board two-wheel vehicles needs to consider potential 
compromises on safety.  Thus, a major requirement of any 
such development is a minimally distracting unobtrusive 
interface that is sensitive to, and keeps track of the cognitive 
load of the user at any given point in time.  A multimodal, 
multi-sensor, minimally distracting interaction system is 
required for motorcyclists as at any arbitrary point of time 
they may not able to interact readily and safely through a 
visual or tactile interface.  For such a system to be sensibly 
deployed it must be capable of gracefully receiving training 
on the job (in-line) without this imposing too high a 
cognitive load on the trainer (the user, the driver/rider in the 
vehicular control environment).  Such an ambient 
Communications Command and Control assistant (C3 Pal) 
will have to take experientially -based best-estimate control 
actions on the driver’s behalf and be ready to stand corrected 
by the driver if mistaken and learn from the experience to get 
it right next time.  Such man-machine mixed initiative 
systems require situated context caching at man-machine 
control handover points so as to support offline learning for 
enhanced adaptation to the user’s requirements during man-
machine team-working real-time.  
In the following sections, background domain knowledge 
is presented in Section II.  Section III details the MoveON 
project, whereas Section IV focuses on the cognitive 
capacity 
sensitive 
multimodal 
information 
exchange 
framework. In Section V, evaluation of the prototype is 
discussed, and Section VI concludes this paper. 
II. 
MINIMISING DISTRACTION 
Cognitive load is defined as the total of ongoing mental 
activity, at any given point in time, in the working memory – 
a major contributor to which is the number of attention 
seeking factors [10]. Cognitive load theory [11][12] states 
that the quality of the design of instruction is accentuated if 
the limitations of working memory are given careful 
consideration. Long term memory stores knowledge and 
skills while working memory performs computational tasks 
170
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 1.  MoveON Jacket Interface 
associated with consciousness.  Information is first processed 
by working memory, which is very limited in terms of 
capacity and duration, and then may be stored in long term 
memory. Cognitive load theory is employed in the 
development of learning structures or instructional strategies 
to circumvent any learning impedance imposed by the 
limitations of working memory in conventional strategies 
[10].  Of the three components of the cognitive load, intrinsic 
load represents the inherent difficulty of the content; 
extraneous load may be introduced by the designer of the 
instructional materials; germane load represents the effort 
involved in the processing of content and is often associated 
with motivation and interest.  In the context of minimising 
distraction for motorcyclists, cognitive load theory can 
inform the design of the communication interface for audio-
visual and tactile information that may be relayed to the rider 
in real-time on the road. 
Research in the measurement of cognitive load presents 
several constructs; for instance, the relative condition 
efficiency [13].  Availability of usable cognitive load 
measures is crucial for providing support for minimal 
distraction interfaces.  Relatively simple subjective measures 
are in most frequent use; however more sophisticated 
methods also exist for multimodal environments to gauge the  
relative complexity of cognitive tasks, such as empirical 
approaches to cognitive load measurement, which can be 
divided into i) direct object measures, e.g., eye tracking 
techniques, brain activity measures, dual-task methodology; 
ii) 
indirect 
objective 
measures, 
e.g., 
physiological 
correlations (cardiovascular, EEG etc.); iii) direct subjective 
measures, e.g., self-reporting of stress level; iv) indirect 
subjective measures, e.g., self-reporting of perceived mental 
effort [6]. 
Niculescu et al. [1] studied the impact of stress and 
cognitive load on the perceived quality of interaction in the 
context of a multimodal dialogue system for crisis 
management, using physiological sensors and subjective 
measures including an evaluation questionnaire regarding the 
quality of system interaction, an interview, and video 
recordings of trials to perform behaviour analysis. Niculescu 
et al. report that both stress and cognitive load impact the 
subjects’ perception of the quality of interaction with the 
system. 
A. MoveON Project 
The MoveON project [3] has developed an innovative 
multimodal multi-sensor system to support a distraction 
minimising communication control architecture using 
multiple modalities (tactile visual and auditory) in full 
duplex 
mode. 
The 
MoveON 
system 
can 
provide 
motorcyclists  access to services and information online in 
real-time while attempting to protect the driver from 
experiencing excessive levels of cognitive load and 
therefore, unsafe levels of distraction arising from the 
perceptual-cognitive 
task 
environment 
including 
the 
manoeuvring of the motorcycle plus handling multiple 
communication channels; some in full duplex. MoveON 
employs a multimodal interface with the capacity for 
presentation of visual information via a sleeve touch screen, 
text-to-vibration functionality and speech recognition. 
Information gathered by multiple sensors is used to train 
the Cognitive Capacity Management component that 
continuously assesses the user's level of distraction so as to 
channel information in a maximally safe and timely manner. 
Usability of the demonstrated prototype has been evaluated 
by applying a socio-technical Usability Relationship 
Evaluation Methodology [8].  
A specialised user group of UK police motorcyclists 
participated in a user-centred system co-design and 
evaluation to assess user's distraction while interacting with 
the prototype system, and, identifying driving conditions in 
which the motorcyclist's attention is disrupted, thus, causing 
unsafe levels of distraction and endangering safety. 
1) The MoveON Jacket 
The MoveON system is fully wearable with all its 
components on a body area network and not on the bike. The 
MoveON environment comprises of a jacket interface, 
helmet interface and the motorcycle.  The jacket is a classic 
motorcycle, jacket augmented with assistive electronic 
components. These include a microprocessor (VIA Pico-ITX 
housed in a Travla AnkerPC casing) affixed to the left 
posterior side of the jacket.  A GPS device resides on the 
inside of the jacket near the right arm side-deltoid. This 
device connects to GPS satellite to obtain the geo-position of 
the motorcyclist.  
2) Sleeve Screen 
The sleeve screen (LCD touch screen) is one of the major 
input and output modalities of the MoveON system. Situated 
on the left forearm, it provides an interface between the 
system and the motorcyclist to call the various commands of 
the system or to acknowledge receipt of information from a 
command and control station.  
The sleeve screen GUI is designed with a touch-screen 
smart phone / PDA interface in mind, where the user is able 
to interact with the system without a keypad / keyboard, 
using gestures (with either a stylus or finger).  The buttons 
on the GUI are designed so that the officer can use the 
interface whilst wearing motorcycle gloves. The menu, as 
shown in Figure 2, presents various options to the user at any 
given time.  The list of options is scrollable with either a 
171
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 2.  MoveON Sleeve Screen Interface 
flick gesture, whereby the list scrolls automatically with a 
velocity calculated from the flick gesture, or a press-down 
hold-and-drag gesture whereby the scrolling is controlled by 
the user.  At any point during a flick scroll, the user may 
touch the screen to stop scrolling at a particular point to 
highlight and select an option by just tapping on it once. 
The GUI is a generic container with the functionality to 
add/remove various listed options.  This functionality is used 
by the Olympus dialog management system [9] to present 
options to the user depending on what has been selected by 
the user.  A menu-driven command mode takes the user 
through three steps for device selection (e.g., radio), 
command selection (e.g., change channel to …) followed by 
parameter selection (e.g., 9).  
The touch driver circuit and the main LCD display have 
been integrated so as to make one single module.  The VGA 
and power supply board are fitted at the back of the jacket 
but housed inside the lining of the jacket so as to preserve the 
normal way that the jacket is worn.  The main battery powers 
the sleeve screen as well as the CPU.  The power supply 
cable comes from the main battery through the left arm / 
sleeve (inside the lining).  An additional screen (dot-matrix) 
functions purely as a debugging facility hidden inside the 
jacket, attached to a micro-controller that supports the 
functionality of the vibration motor array.   
3) Vibration Motor Array 
The vibration feedback motors are asymmetric load 
rotary motors that give a powerful vibration output.  The 
choice of vibration sensors was improved after the first user 
evaluation process whereupon it was highlighted that the 
vibration from the motorcycle engine muffled the vibration 
output from Precision 10mm shaft-less sensors i.e., 
submerging their vibration and making it difficult to be 
sensed by the rider.  Two motors were attached to the 
driver’s shoulders and the third just above the right elbow on 
the sleeve of the jacket. These motors provide for the 
MoveON text-to-vibration (ttv) functionality, controlled by 
an Olympus agent that supports four simple commands for 
the motorcyclist in a policing scenario.  These commands 
correspond to a simple tactile vocabulary requiring only 
minor user-training.  For this, initially, seven motors were 
strapped to the right arm of the motorcyclist, but user 
evaluation highlighted two salient issues: a) tactile 
vocabulary was too large, requiring a wider  pattern of 
vibrations to be comfortably and reliably recognised by the 
motorcyclist rider under various conditions, b) reliable 
sensing of the orchestrated vibration pattern for each word 
was made difficult by ambient conditions such as swamping 
of the messaging vibration by continuous high amplitude 
motorcycle vibration that was also transmitted to the rider’s 
arms through the handle bar, and other ambient detractors  
such as noise, wind and rain.. 
User evaluation informed optimisation of the physical 
design, vocabulary size limits, and vibration frequency for 
maximum user comfort. 
The motors were powered by a 9V battery that was 
placed within the inside pocket of the jacket.  A voltage 
regulator IC maintained the 5V required by each rotary 
motor.  Owing to the level of power consumption of the 
motors, a decision to use a separate power supply for the 
batteries was taken.  The main battery powered the CPU and 
other devices on the jacket. To further ensure circumvention 
of a single-point-of-failure, a back-up energy source was also 
installed in the jacket. 
The jacket was connected to the helmet with a single 
cable that incorporated the required connection points for all 
devices such as a helmet camera (USB), helmet LEDs array 
(USB), microphones and headphones.  The energy source 
was in the jacket so the electronic devices in the helmet were 
powered by the wired connection between the jacket and the 
helmet. 
III. 
COGNITIVE CAPACITY SENSITIVE MULTIMODAL 
INFORMATION EXCHANGE 
It is proposed that the user’s vulnerability to stress, in a 
given context of stress load, affects their perceived stress 
levels. These, in turn, affect the perceived cognitive load and 
thus, the available safely ‘grab-able’ cognitive headroom that 
could be deployed to minimally (i.e., safely) distract but 
maximally inform an individual (just-in-time) whilst engaged 
on the move.  The motorcyclist’s operational context is one 
of the most significant determinants of the relevant situation 
assessment as to the relative significance and timing of 
various messages that the rider may have to be updated on 
with mission-critical timing.  Typically, the police 
motorcyclist’s residual stress level, at any instant, during a 
shift is expected, mainly, to have six correlations: i) update 
value of rider’s baseline stress; ii) stress index of events 
already experienced during the shift; iii) time elapsed since 
the start of the shift; iv) the stress levels induced by 
instantaneous ambient conditions experienced by the rider 
(e.g., current task, traffic conditions, weather, road surface, 
communications messaging intensity and noise); v) stress 
due to unknown risks that may be waiting for the police 
motorcyclist en-route to an incident to which he is called 
(unknown risk anticipation stress); vi) the rider’s stress 
vulnerability profile in the context of i–v above; i.e., the 
individual’s stress management capability, which is their 
learned or genetic endowed ability to cope with stress.  Such 
a context-specific stress vulnerability profile of the 
172
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 3. Attention and available cognitive headroom 
individual is in turn influenced by the interplay of a spectrum 
of associated factors, e.g., idiosyncratic, and other 
deterministic 
influences 
relating 
to 
the 
Life-Course 
Perspective [4] and a whole host of psycho-physiological, 
experiential and operational factors (historical, static, 
dynamic and current) spanning over time from birth to the 
present point in the spectral context (i.e.,  now, which are the 
day, time, place, space and point-of-decision/execution in the 
individual’s task flow).   The safely distracting informative 
and timely messaging of the rider has to be optimised to 
allow for the uncertainty in assessment of the instantaneous 
residual stress level and thus, the instantaneously disposable 
level of cognitive capacity headroom that the rider can, 
safely, be expected to make available for the next messaging 
input/output as may be optimally allowed to occur as decided  
by the multimodal interaction controller. The available 
cognitive headroom is inversely proportional to the 
perceived cognitive load, which is directly influenced by the 
perceived 
(residual) 
stress 
level 
as 
instantaneously 
experienced by the individual; which, in turn, is influenced 
by the individual’s stress vulnerability profile. Minimising 
distraction can be viewed as maximising safe distraction, in 
an approach whereby multimodality control is based on 
seeking safe distraction or opportunities for grabbing safely 
available disposable cognitive capacity i.e., grabbing the 
attention of the driver for passing messages that wait in the 
queue to be conveyed to the driver.  Paradigmatically this 
depends on the level of available and disposable cognitive 
capacity (stress levels), and requires the following 
constraining factors to be resolved and satisfied as part of the 
cognitive load resolution and optimisation. 
A. Operational Context 
In the context of the MoveON application domain, i.e., in 
the given practice context, stress level is a temporary psycho-
physiological variant that can be assessed by combining the 
effects of  
• 
the attention required for driving the motorcycle 
• 
road / traffic conditions, level of activity in 
surroundings, GPS information indicating the 
present location of the driver and thus, the traffic 
context, e.g., approaching or passing through a 
junction, joining a motorway or leaving it etc.  
• 
pre-existing communication level of the user with 
the MoveON system (thus, indicating the cognitive 
load arising from the user communication channels 
that are currently active).   
• 
elapsed time on current shift (and indirectly 
cognitive load attendant with the Shift Envelope 
described as the range of experiences, from extreme 
to mild incidents, typically encountered on a given 
shift, up-to-the-decision-moment, as a variable mix 
of stress drivers).     
• 
time of the day (Morning, Afternoon, Evening, 
Night). 
• 
experience level and age of the driver.  
• 
motion dynamics of the motorcycle driver (indirectly 
related to the motorcycle), as an indicator of the 
user-motorcycle neuro-motor interaction load.  
In MoveON, the operational context includes, notably, 
the pattern of traffic conditions experienced within the 
particular officer’s shift envelope up-to-the-moment, and 
critically, the present traffic conditions, and, the responsive 
coping capacity of the rider, their attendant stress/cognitive-
headroom cost and thus, their remaining currently disposable 
cognitive headroom.  This is because context-sensitivity in 
stress assessment implies consideration of the stress inducers 
in the task flow context. Therefore, as context-specifically 
identified stress inducers are the most relevant determinants 
of the remaining cognitive headroom, for traffic police as in 
the MoveON application domain, the most important stress 
inducers arise from the operational environment parameters; 
chiefly the traffic conditions.  However, the cumulative 
amount of residual stress incurred by the driver and thus, the 
respective depletion of the available cognitive headroom has 
a highly personal pattern; itself dependent on a number of 
correlations of stress whose cumulative influence on the 
individual would be modulated by the individual’s personal 
coping capability, which is their stress vulnerability profile.  
The correlations of stress include relatively static as well as 
other relatively dynamic personal and operational profile 
patterns.  These mainly involve the psycho-physiological 
correlations of stress such as life-course, coping-style, 
cognitive-style, work/life-style as well as the operationally 
significant influences such as the historical and current Shift 
Envelope (the range of variable operational stress inducers 
experienced as a mix of incidents that can typically occur 
within a shift as time elapses. For example, Saturday night to 
Sunday morning as a shift having its stressors considered 
cumulatively up to the present instantaneous context of task 
challenges having to be coped with instantaneously by the 
rider at their current position (both geographical and task 
flow-specifically). 
173
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

B. Cognitive Load vs. Available Headroom 
The visual, auditory, tactile and neuro-motor channels 
can be deployed, as illustrated in Figure 3.  The deployed 
cognitive space is denoted by CL* where CL is Cognitive 
Load and * denotes the channel {Auditory, Visual, Tactile, 
Neuro-motor (bio)feedback} while the complementary area 
is denoted by ACH i.e., Available Channel Headroom.  The 
available cognitive headroom perceived for a channel by an 
individual can be variably influenced not only by the actual 
cognitive load on that channel but also by cross-channel 
loading effects that exist in certain contexts of co-occurring 
neuro-motor and perceptual tasks to be discharged by the 
brain and such cross-channel loading effects have an 
irreducible person-invariant baseline plus a person-specific 
variation depending on a person’s gender/genetic context and 
the task context.  Essentially there are genetically variable 
influences as well as universally applicable influences and 
environmentally/ emotionally amplifying overlay influences 
that are associated with the extent of perceived sensory 
(cross)-channel loading in humans.     
Within our minimal distraction C3 paradigm, we model 
the above-named four sensory modality channels under the 
assumption of bounded cognitive headroom whereby the 
Available Cognitive Headroom (ACH) ranges from 0% to 
100%.  Incoming events from different input channels during 
the runtime of MoveON, affect the ACH differently for each 
modality in respect of a given context (e.g., the person-
specific and all other relevant profiles etc as discussed 
previously). 
As explained above, for calculating the variability of 
ACH per channel, we also have to take into account all 
possible cross-channel effects, i.e., increased levels of 
cognitive load when two incoming events require the 
simultaneous use of the same output channel or co-occurring 
channels and neuro-motor/bio-feedback activity as normally 
occurs in riding/driving; for example particularly when 
taking corners as a motor-cycle rider has to do in wet 
weather and/or poor visibility conditions when this requires 
more exacting orchestration of bio-feedback control 
mediated through coordinative structures output by the brain 
based on the sensory-perceptual-cognitive input. 
C. Traffic Analytics 
As for the rider’s geographical position, the respective 
GPS sub-system provides information regarding the location 
of the officer at all times in terms of Latitude, Longitude, 
speed and direction with time-stamps.  This information is 
used by the traffic analytics module in conjunction with the 
traffic congestion information relevant to the officer’s 
current location as well as their stress-response profile.  Such 
analytics are carried out to provide the requisite salient 
pattern discovery to help inform of the rider’s currently 
disposable cognitive headroom level based on the de facto 
cumulative cognitive-load/stress-effects resulting from the 
interplay of a mix of idiosyncratic and deterministic 
influences.  The analytics serve to precompile these into 
principal indicators of disposable cognitive headroom in so 
far as this is modulated by the traffic context as the main 
stress inducer.  Thus, the rider’s response to such stress 
inducers is influenced by the precompiled idiosyncratic 
personally-specific underlying factors that are thus taken into 
account by the analytics to inform the context-aware 
minimal distraction information interaction process. 
This constitutes a knowledge basis that underpins the 
data intelligence pattern discovery for our multimodal 
communication dynamic optimisation architecture, including 
analytics, to enable the necessary predictive modelling 
process that can support the modality control decision engine 
in the context of the current situation assessment. This is to 
help the MoveON modality controller ultimately to derive, 
based on the situation assessment, the values of the currently 
ACH for each of the mutually cross-loading channels 
(auditory, visual, tactile) and hence, to decide on the channel 
to be the next selected in attempting to safely grab some of 
the user’s attention within a target time window (e.g., now).  
This amounts effectively to deciding on the highest priority 
data to be transmitted, the transmission modality (the 
specific user’s sensory channel to be the next selected 
conduit for conveying information), timing, place, surface 
and space in which to convey the data so as to safely grab 
some of the attention of the user.  This would require the 
expectation values of the current perceived stress load to be 
estimated for the particular officer at a particular spatio-
temporal point in the shift-envelope to help decide the 
optimal control of multimodal information input/output to 
best support the user in the execution of their task. 
D. Predictive Learning 
A Predictive Learning Model of the road traffic 
conditions was deployed to inform the modality control 
system with the congestion profile update regarding a road 
segment.  This constituted one of the inputs to the controller 
to help deduce the associated stress levels to be estimated in 
respect of a particular rider/driver.  Thus, the Predictive 
Traffic Learning Model exploits the static information 
coming from the officers’ tacit knowledge as well as the 
historical 
and 
current 
dynamically 
evolving 
traffic 
information, e.g., from Rich Site Summary (RSS) feeds.  
Long-term patterns reflect the average traffic conditions 
within a certain area over a long time period and thus, the 
congestion expectation levels for a given spatio-temporal 
envelope.  Short-term patterns contain the current traffic 
conditions, which are expected to point to a more accurate 
assessment of congestion expectation at a given time and 
place on the road.  In cases, where short-term patterns have a 
traffic record for the requested position, this will take 
precedence over long-term patterns.  
E. Biological Data 
Instantaneously 
monitored 
psycho-physiological 
parametrics (voice pitch, heart rate, blood pressure, breathing 
rate, perspiration) compared to normal baselines are used as 
supplementary metrics, to enable the effective measurement 
of the overall instantaneous stress level as being proportional 
to the safely available disposable cognitive load or attention. 
A stress vulnerability model component exists as part of 
the Cognitive Capacity Management in our architecture that 
handles measurement and evaluation of a user’s biological 
174
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

context.  After evaluation of general measurable biological 
data and consultation with medical personnel, a pool of 
biological data can be selected to adequately serve as 
supplementary optional knowledge to be captured to support 
the MoveON application domain.  This includes heart rate, 
respiration rate, skin temperature, and blood pressure. An 
evaluation process has shown that each of the above 
parameters represents a well-established indicator for higher 
body activity and that all are as such directly related to 
psycho-physiological stress, the concomitant stress and 
cognition load and thus, the ACH.  Heart rate, respiration 
rate, and blood pressure are for example likely to rise under a 
heavier physical load and psychological stress that manifests 
itself in the individual physical condition.  
The evaluation process had to account for additional 
hardware requirements in terms of garments that can 
measure the identified biological data.  Such garments must 
not disrupt or degrade a task force member’s ability to 
perform his tasks, but must seamlessly integrate with his task 
performance style in strict accordance with the overall 
purpose of this system, which is to support officers on duty.  
While the vast number of suitable garments can measure 
heart and respiration rate, those garments able to measure 
skin temperature and blood pressure had to be rejected for 
reasons of impracticality in the context of an officer’s daily 
routine.  For this reason, skin temperature and blood pressure 
were discarded from the data acquisition agenda.  Heart rate 
and respiration rate were used to estimate the measure of 
stress vulnerability. The fact that heart rate and respiration 
rate baseline patterns are highly person-specific was taken 
into consideration by using moving averages on available 
individual biological data to derive a reasonable rest-state 
heart rate (i.e., a personal cardiovascular baseline as an 
operational reference datum) and by using fuzzy parameters 
estimated stress factors in a given situation. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
A prototypical user-group of UK police motorcyclists 
comprising a number of officers of a range of ages and ranks 
participated in our user-centred system co-design and 
evaluation process to assess the user's distraction whilst 
interacting with the prototype system, and identifying driving 
conditions in which the motorcyclist's attention is disrupted 
thus, potentially exposing the driver to safety risks.  
Additional feedback from an expert user group including 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) experts as lifelong avid 
motorcyclists themselves shaped the research, design and 
development 
of 
the 
minimal 
distraction 
real-time 
information exchange 
system. 
 
Biometric data on 
physiological factors and visual recordings collected by the 
officers, on-the-road in real scenarios, was used to help the 
quantitative and qualitative evaluation to inform our 
evolutionary interactive design and development of the 
system. Questionnaires and in-depth interviews were 
conducted with the user group regarding the usage of the 
system i) in a laboratory, ii) while on a parked motorcycle, 
and iii) whilst riding the motorcycle “in-pursuit mode” on 
the road. Although, ideally, further extensive tests would be 
needed to assess the scalability of the system fully; it is 
possible to confidently expect that this architecture is 
scalable within a range accommodating the aforementioned 
six variables in the context high level classification of 
ambient condition variations to the extent that the size of the 
controller optimisation search space remains below 300 
nodes (decisional state space) consistent with real-time 
performance and controller in-line responsive mode. For 
offline learning mode, there will be no such limitation to 
scalability as long as the context caching parametric space is 
adjusted to include any additional variables of interest. 
However such scalability boundary condition as might be 
considered are in any case significantly mitigated by this 
architecture through a) a more conservative incremental 
approach to disposable cognitive load recruitment, b) risk-
minimising instantaneous and graceful handover of control 
to the rider through rider simply signalling an “over-ride” 
command, c) hardware acceleration, d) context-caching all 
decision instances for offline training, thus, enhancing the 
learning case base of the system so as to continuously evolve 
a more efficient and reliable and safe multimodal C3 
assistance capability for all mobile task forces and their field 
commanders and the Central Taskforce Command.           
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has set out the relevant state-of-the-art and 
thus motivated, as well as described, the architecture of the 
system 
arising 
from 
our 
user-centred 
design 
and 
development of a real-time multimodal communications 
controller interface system for (hostile) high cognitive-load 
environments as exemplified by our police motorcyclist test-
case. The resulting system has been evaluated and shown to 
support the key objective of maximising real-time and time-
critical mission information exchange between each 
taskforce member and other command and control units 
whilst minimising driver distraction that may become unsafe. 
The overall architecture of the MoveON Jacket prototype has 
been described.  This has been shown, under real-road traffic 
conditions, to enable motorcyclists to carry out various 
technologically assisted functions.  A detailed description of 
the minimal distraction design concepts has been presented 
with reference to cognitive-load and perceived stress levels 
considering physiological factors, manoeuvre-context of the 
vehicle, and the interaction between the user and the system 
on the road. This architecture as powerfully supported by the 
Cognitive Capacity Management paradigm represents a 
pioneering dynamic taskforce stress load management 
architecture 
that 
has 
delivered 
the 
first 
validated 
implementation of a mobile taskforce multimodal C3 
optimisation architecture Ambient Assistive Partner capable 
of graceful in-line man-in-the-loop cognitive control 
supported by man-machine mixed-initiative taking and 
messaging prioritisation focused on timing critical mission 
situation assessment updates in full duplex. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research and development as reported in this paper 
was undertaken as part of the MoveON project (EC-funded 
IST FP6). The authors would like to acknowledge ex-
colleagues Patrick Seidler and Chaoxin Wu for their 
175
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

contribution to the final stages of module coding and 
integration of the system, and, the MoveON Consortium 
Partners, in particular A&E Solutions and officers from the 
West Midlands Police, UK as users, for helping with system 
evaluation and/or acting as our user group to support our 
test-cases for real-life performance evaluation of the system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Niculescu, A.I., van Dijk, E.M.A.G., Cao, Y., and Nijholt, A. 
“Measuring stress and cognitive load effects on the perceived 
quality of a multimodal dialogue system”. Proc. 7th Int 
Conference on Methods and Techniques in Behavioral 
Research: Measuring Behavior 2010, 24-27 August 2010, 
Eindhoven. pp. 453-455. ISBN 978-90-74821-86-5. Noldus 
Information Technology. 2010. 
[2] Kun, A. L., Miller, W.T., and Lenharth, W.H. “Evaluating the 
user interfaces of an integrated system of in-car electronic 
devices”. Proc. IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems 
Conference, Vienna, Austria, September 13-16. pp. 953-958. 
2005. 
[3] MoveOn. 
[online]. 
Available 
on 
the 
WWW: 
<http://showcase.m0ve0n.net/> [Accessed 14 October 2011]. 
2009. 
[4] Elder, G.H., Pavalko, E.K., and Clipp, E.C. “Working with 
archival data: studying lives”. Sage University Paper Series 
on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, No. 07-
088. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications 1993. 
[5] Schmorrow, D.D., and Reeves, L.M. (Eds.): Augmented 
Cognition, HCII 2007, LNAI 4565, pp. 147–156, 2007. 
[6] Brünken, R., Plass, J.L., and Leutner, D. “Direct measurement 
of cognitive load in multimedia learning”. Educational 
Psychologist, 38, pp. 53-61. 2003. 
[7] Haapalainen, E., Kim, S., Forlizzi, J.F., and Dey, A.K. 
“Psycho-physiological measures for assessing cognitive 
load”. Proc. 12th ACM Int conference on Ubiquitous 
computing (Ubicomp '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 
301-310. 2010. 
[8] Badii A, “User-intimate requirements hierarchy resolution 
framework (UI-REF): methodology for capturing ambient 
assisted living needs”, Proc. Int. Ambient Intelligence 
Systems Conference (AmI’08), Nuremberg, Germany. pp. 91. 
2008. 
[9] Antoine, R. and Eskenazi, M. "A Multi-Layer Architecture 
for Semi-Synchronous Event-Driven Dialogue Management", 
IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding 
Workshop, ASRU2007. Kyoto, Japan. pp. 514-519. 2007. 
[10] Cooper, G. “Research into cognitive load theory and 
instructional design at UNSW”. [online] School of Education 
Studies, University of New South Wales, Australia. Available 
on WWW: < http://dwb.unl.edu/Diss/Cooper/UNSW.htm> 
[Accessed 14 October 2011]. 1998.  
[11] Sweller, J. “Cognitive load during problem solving: effects on 
learning”. Cognitive Science, 12, pp. 257-285. 1988. 
[12] Sweller, J. “Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty and 
instructional design”. Learning and Instruction, 4, pp. 295-
312. 1994. 
[13] Paas, F.G.W.C., and van Merriënboer, J.J.G. “The efficiency 
of instructional conditions: An approach to combine mental-
effort and performance measures”. Human Factors 35 (4): pp. 
737–743. 1993. 
 
176
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

