An Empirical Research on InfoSec Risk
Management in IoT-based eHealth
Waqas Aman, Einar Snekkenes
Norwegian Information Security Lab (NISLab)
Gjøvik University College
Gjøvik, Norway
{waqas.aman, einar.snekkenes}@hig.no
Abstract—Enabling the healthcare infrastructure with In-
ternet of Things (IoT) will signiﬁcantly improve quality of
service, reduce the costs and efﬁciently manage remote and
mobile patients. To be efﬁcacious, IoT and eHealth infrastruc-
ture essentials as well as their associated security and privacy
issues should be thoroughly recognized to effectively manage the
InfoSec risks involved. Unfortunately, there has been a potential
lack of research comprehensively addressing these issues jointly
while InfoSec risk management solutions are devised for IoT-
based eHealth. In this paper, we have highlighted the necessary
knowledge while approaching InfoSec risk management in IoT-
eHealth as per a standard process, assessed it against standard
and proposed requirements and identiﬁed the current trends and
gaps to set directions for future research.
Keywords—Internet of Things (IoT); Remote Patient Monitor-
ing; Risk Management; Security & Privacy; eHealth.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Internet of Things (IoT) is a global internet architecture
connecting various wired and wireless technologies designed
to meet speciﬁc objectives [1]. Beside its anticipated beneﬁts in
various private and business domains, enabling IoT in welfare
spheres, such as healthcare, will greatly facilitate the society
as a whole. A patient can now be monitored remotely in
a continuous fashion thus making the health services more
mobile, extendable and effective. Though offering a great deal
of beneﬁts, IoT is still facing a number of critical challenges
such as networking, security and privacy, QoS, standardization,
etc., which needs to be sorted out and yet remain open [2].
Among these challenges, the most threatening are the security
and privacy concerns. Connecting diverse technologies may
lead to new threats with much grander risk of security. These
threats become more drastic when considered in the context
of a continuous service, such as healthcare, where the concern
is not limited to a patient’s privacy but, there is a threat to the
breach of trust, leading to the exploitation of a welfare service.
Standards, guidelines and good practices concerning In-
foSec Risk Management (ISRM), such as ISO 27005, NIST,
CRAMM, ISACA RiskIT, etc., recommend to approach ISRM
in a methodological fashion, i.e., understand the target business
function, service or system, identify the security and privacy
(S&P) concerns and threats, analyze the risk faced, and manage
the risk to reduce it to an acceptable level. To qualify this pro-
cess, IoT-driven eHealth as a continuous real-time service will
need an intelligent security system that can dynamically predict
and estimate the risk faced and mitigating it autonomously to
be more resilient and adaptable in the face of changing security
threats [3]. A number of architectural designs, security issues,
risk management (RM) models and surveys are presented
concerning eHealth [1], [2], [4]–[7]. However, such studies
are either focused on the mentioned individual topics, target
a speciﬁc technology or presents abstract modeling. Hence,
there is a lack of literature that provides a holistic study of
the related topics as per the standard RM process to approach
ISRM in IoT-based eHealth.
In this paper, we will highlight IoT-eHealth infrastructure
essentials, the associated S&P issues and will explore various
ISRM approaches to establish an understanding of how ISRM
can be modeled in IoT driven eHealth. Existing literature
is evaluated against standard and projected requirements and
current trends and gaps are identiﬁed. We identiﬁed that the
current system and S&P modeling are focused only on the
primitive requirements and is done in an empirical manner.
Whereas vital operations, key system components and neces-
sary S&P services are overlooked. Suitability of various ISRM
models and methods is explored and it was concluded that
most of them have a subjective inﬂuence which makes them
difﬁcult to be adopted in a dynamic-real-time environments
and lacks intelligent risk analysis and management capabilities,
such as context awareness and self-adaptation, which are
deemed to be essential for IoT driven eHealth [3]. We strongly
believe that this contribution will provide a reference point
for future researchers and will enable them to understand
the requirements, challenges, options, methods and techniques
necessary to consider while approaching ISRM in IoT driven
eHealth.
The rest of the paper is organized as follow: In Section II,
an overview of the related work will be highlighted. Section III
will elaborate the current literature highlighting architectural
designs, S&P services, issues and threats and modeling secu-
rity risks in the perspective of IoT-based eHealth. In Section
IV, evaluation of the current literature will be highlighted by
aligning them with a set of standard and proposed require-
ments. In Section V, current trends and gaps will be identiﬁed
by discussing the evaluated knowledge. Finally, concluding
remarks and future research endeavors will be underlined in
Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
A summary of related efforts concerning IoT, remote
eHealth, associated security challenges and ISRM modeling
are highlighted in this section. The goal is to identify and
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

converse the reviews which are aligned with the theme of
ISRM and related topics in IoT-based eHealth.
A detailed description of networking and architectural
characteristics of ubiquitous computing used for remote patient
monitoring (RPM) is presented in [8]. Sunil et al. discuss the
use of mobile networks and the utilization of their mobility
features in RPM. 3G and 4G networks characteristics were
compared and it was showed that 4G can provide magniﬁed
advantages in terms of QoS. QoS requirements concerning
wireless networks were highlighted and respective suggestions
were discussed to overcome some of the current shortcomings.
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) play a vital role in
remote eHealth setup. They enable the notion of a continuous
monitoring in remote patient monitoring systems (RPMS).
Murad et al. [9] stressed that preventive security measures
are not sufﬁcient for WSNs due to the presence of an in-
ternal attacker. They provided a comprehensive survey of
different intrusion detection systems (IDS) categorizing rule,
data mining, statistical and game theoretic based techniques
as detective measures to comprehend internal and network
attacks dynamically thus enabling a second layer of defense to
preventive measures. Similar work is also done in [10] [11].
Latr´e et al. [12] discussed the importance of Wireless
Body Area Network (WBAN) and its applications in remote
monitoring of various diseases. Positioning of the WBAN in a
RPMS setup is detailed and it is argued that most of the current
research is focused on the extra-WBAN communication. Avail-
able MAC and Network layer protocols were highlighted and it
was suggested that new MAC layer protocols need to be design
to accommodate patient mobility. Latr´e et al. reasoned the
current issues like QoS, usability and security are more studied
in the WSN and should also be examined in WBAN being
a more healthcare focused technology as compared to WSN.
The survey however was more emphasized on the networking
protocols.
A systematic literature review on S&P issues in an Elec-
tronic Health Record (EHR) system is presented in [13].
Literature appraisal was based on the requirements deﬁned
in ISO 27799 standard related to achieving security goals
through cryptographic techniques, HR security measures, such
as training and awareness, and its alignment with compliance
and regulatory requirements. Luis et al. concluded that though
most of the studies do explicate security controls but are not
really implemented in health sectors.
A detail survey on IoT is given in [2]. Atzori et al. explain
IoT from three different perspectives: Things, Internet and
Semantics and converse its overlapping and diverse nature.
Different technologies, such as Middleware, WSN, RFID, etc.,
are recognized to review their possibilities in enabling effective
IoT. Extended opportunities of IoT in different application ar-
eas are explored and their beneﬁts are traversed. Furthermore,
a list of open issues, such as, security, privacy, networking,
standardization, QoS and data integrity was highlighted and
suggested to be researched to make IoT a more mature and
promising technology.
To perform effective risk analysis, it is a difﬁcult task to
select the appropriate Risk Analysis (RA) methodology [14].
Vorster and Labuschagne presented a framework of evaluating
RM methodologies to assist the business managers in selecting
an appropriate method to conduct RA within an organization.
A ﬁve-point common criterion was used for the comparison. A
similar approach is also taken by [15] where RA methodolo-
gies were classiﬁed based on the involvement of risk analysts
or stakeholders and the execution nature of the steps used in
the RA process. RA methodologies can also be classiﬁed into
two groups based on the approach adopted–Traditional: where
a methodology have a subjective inﬂuence of the stakeholder
involved and risk is analyzed by the appraisers; Contemporary:
where risk is estimated based on the target system behavior by
inspecting the events it creates, testing it and validating it with
formal methods [16].
III.
APPROACHES, CONCEPTS & ISSUES
This section presents an overview of the current literature
in accordance with the standard ISRM process. The selected
literature encompasses systems overview, S&P services and
threats and ISRM modeling approaches which are necessary to
be understood while impending ISRM in IoT driven eHealth. A
depiction of the literature organization in line with the standard
ISRM guideline is shown in Table I.
TABLE I.
LITERATURE ORGANIZATION & STANDARD ISRM PROCESS
Standard ISRM Process
Literature Organization
Scope Identiﬁcation
IoT-eHealth Infrastructure
– System Overview & Functions
– Key Assets
– Comm. Medium
S&P Services/Threats
S&P Modeling
– Threats & Security Services Modeling
Analyzing & Managing Risks
Modeling InfoSec Risks
– Methods, Models & Frameworks for han-
dling IoT-eHealth Risks
A. IoT-eHealth Infrastructure
IoT-based eHealth can be referred to as the global internet
of wired and wireless technologies placed to monitor remote
and mobile patients. Besides monitoring, patients can also
be supervised over the internet and response to emergency
situations can be made in a timely manner with the required
aid. The infrastructure includes wearable sensors which collect
various physiological sensed data from the patient as biosig-
nals, forwards it to a smart device, such as a smartphone or
tablet. Biosignals are ﬁltered and are sent to a remote hospital
site via mobile network or internet where the medical staff
further investigate them and prescribe the patient accordingly.
This concept is also portrayed in [17] in which Otto et
al.explained a heart patient scenario while presenting their
RMPS. A similar model is also described in [18] in which
the proposed system, Tele Health Care, is used to monitor
blood pressure and heart rate of a remote patient. In abnormal
situations the patient is alerted with an alarm and a SMS is sent
to the corresponding doctor for instant response. Ambulatory
and emergency situations are also discussed. However, Rajan
et al. did not discuss the notion of false alerts which may cause
panic on both the patient and doctor sides.
Suh et al. proposed a RPMS, WANDA, for monitoring
congestive heart failure patients [19]. The system is composed
of three tiers: sensors, web and back end databases. Mobility is
provided through the use of a smartphone carried by a patient.
Via Bluetooth the biosignals are transmitted to a smartphone
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

from the sensors and are sent to the second tier through
GSM, 3G and/or Internet for further investigations. Health
status can be accessed either by using the smartphone or the
web services. The database tier is used only for backup and
recovery procedures assisted with ofﬂine backup schedulers.
Based on the fact that a TV is still the most convenient way
of interaction among the older adults, Santos et al. presented a
TV based solution, CareBox, for RPM [20]. CareBox processes
the vital signs only locally. Sensor data is sent to the monitor-
ing unit attached to a TV where the patient can have a look
at to his health status displayed on TV. The communication
layer of the system is designed to support various protocols
and technologies. A VoIP client is used where a patient can
connect to a doctor for a video meeting. A survey form is
programmed into the TV, which asks health related questions
from the patient and can be sent upon submission to the doctor
site via an internet connection.
Scacht et al. proposed Fontane [21]. In Fontane, medical
data sensed by various sensors are transmitted to a home broker
via Bluetooth. The home broker, implemented in a smartphone,
sends the processed data to a tele-medicine center (TMC) using
GSM or UMTS. The live medical data received in the TMC is
recorded as the patient’s EHR. A J2EE–based SaPiMa module
is used at the TMC to ensure EHR interoperability. Medical
professionals can access the EHRs via the internet to review
health status. Based on speciﬁc prioritization rules set by a
doctor, the system can review orders for the patients.
Sneha et al. [22] provided a comprehensive set of re-
quirements for RPMS and suggested a three-step framework
for RMPS: Sensing the vital signs, Analyzing them and if
an anomaly is found, the analysis report is transmitted to
the concerned site. A PDA equipped with different agents
responsible for various tasks such as location update, collection
and processing of vital signs, alarm generation, updating EHR
and storage of personal data are utilized. These agents use
ontology based on Descriptive Logic (DL) and implements
various alerts and alarms as per the patient history. Sneha et
al. however, did not discuss the patient-doctor communication
within their model.
Wu et al. [23] presented an RIFD based Mobile Patient
Monitoring System (MPMS) which they claimed to be the
ﬁrst of RFID driven RPMS. The sensor part of the network
is composed of wearable ring-type pulse monitoring tags. The
sensed data from the tags are sent to a reader where it is
delivered to a smartphone via Bluetooth. The smartphone has
the ability to process and analyze the data and anomalies are
shared with a remote medical station. The smartphone is also
equipped with a GPS, which sends out the patient location
to the medical station in case of out-door emergencies. RFID
is also used in [24] for an out-patient registration. Though,
the title reﬂects a MPMS but is in-fact a model to facilitate
the patient’s check-in procedure in the hospital. A patient is
registered into the system and an RFID bracelet is given to him.
The doctor’s PDA connects to the RFID server and retrieves
the patient information. After the personal information is read,
the corresponding patient history is extracted from the health
system and advising is done accordingly.
Van et al. proposed MobiHealth system experimented in
a number of countries [25]. In MobiHealth, the health infor-
mation was transferred through the next generation wireless
networks. Van et al. argued that beside wearable sensors,
devices such as actuators and other wearable devices can also
be integrated into the system. MobiHealth, however, was prone
to major issues of data loss and low bandwidth drawn from
the experiments conducted.
Kargl et al. presented a pervasive eHealth monitoring
system, ReMoteCare [26]. ReMoteCare consists of a local
processing and data collection units, which process and collect
local data through sensor motes. The data is then forwarded to
a remote or local analysis unit over a communication network
through a gateway. A PC is used for local analysis from where
analyzed data can be sent to a remote processing and collection
unit via SNMP for further investigation.
B. Security & Privacy Modeling
eHealth involves critical information exchange and requires
a number of security services to make this information reliable,
conﬁdential, available and trustworthy. The objective of this
section is to understand the threat landscape, S&P issues and
how various security services are modeled in remote/mobile
patient monitoring.
RPMSs will no doubt greatly improve the quality of health-
care. However, it still have to face a number of challenges
concerning S&P. Meingast et al. [5] discussed the issues
concerning data access and storage such as authorization, data
retention and the type of data to be stored to meet privacy
objectives. Regulatory requirements and conﬂicts among regu-
lations are also highlighted. They stressed that existing controls
such as Role Based Access Control (RBAC), Encryption
and Authentication mechanisms should be implemented to
overcome these issues.
Extending the notion of threats posed in a MPMS, Leister
et al. produced a threat assessment report stating the critical
threats faced in an MPM environment using various scenarios
[27]. Though, the main focus of the assessment is on the
WSNs, they have also considered the long range wireless
communication infrastructure and the corresponding threats.
They also suggested a few countermeasures and security
recommendations which can be considered to circumvent these
threats.
A comprehensive analysis of threat faced by the WSNs
is presented in [4]. The attacks and threats listed by Kalita
and Kar are not speciﬁc to eHealth but as WSN plays a vital
role in RPMS, these threats should be seriously considered
when a secure design or risk analysis of RPMS are intended.
The attacks identiﬁed are categorized in accordance with the
TCP/IP network model so that appropriate measure can be
taken at the speciﬁed layer. Countermeasures are suggested to
avoid some of the common attacks.
Lin et al. presented a privacy protection scheme depicting
how patient’s privacy can be preserved in an MPMS setup
[28]. Lin et al. demonstrated how the privacy of the patient
medical information is protected from a global adversary trying
to eavesdrop on the messages transferred between the patient
and the doctor. Furthermore, they explained the preservation
of patient’s contextual privacy using the proposed scheme
showing that an adversary cannot link a patient to a speciﬁc
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

doctor by linking their sources and destinations. They also
performed a thorough performance analysis of the proposed
scheme demonstrating its efﬁciency in terms of transmission
delays. Ramli et al. [29] provided an insight on four serious
privacy issues in pervasive health monitoring systems; eaves-
dropping, prescription leakages, social implication and abuse
of medical information. They argued that these concerns not
only affect the health system but also greatly inﬂuence patient’s
life.
Frank et al. described different types of attacks that can be
experienced by various network components in RPM as well
as the threats corresponding to the information shared between
them [26]. They suggested a number of security measures that
can be used to prevent internal and external attackers from
compromising the conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability of
the network components and information. However, privacy
and legal issues are just mentioned and are not well elaborated.
Apaporn et al. [30] presented a security framework for
eHealth services using two mechanisms: Data and Channel
security. Channel security is provided using the SSL on the
HTTP layer and data security is provided on the SOAP layer
constructed above the HTTP. Apaporn et al. emphasized that
RBAC should be used along with multi-factor authentication to
ensure proper authorization and authentication. Based on the
roles of stakeholders and data sensitivity, communication is
divided into different layers where various authentication and
encryption settings can be adapted. The framework however
dealt only with the web based eHealth services. Multi-factor
authentication is also utilized in [31] where Sriram et al. used
ECG and accelerometer features from the sensor to perform
an activity based biometric authentication.
Elkhodar et al. proposed a Ubiquitous Health Trust Pro-
tocol (UHTP) in combination with TLS to authenticate a
mobile doctor visiting patients at home [32]. Authentication
is performed using three factors based on personal, device
and environmental (location) information. During a request
to a patient EHR, the doctor uses his smart phone to access
the EHR system using his username and password. Beside
these personal credentials, the SIM details, IMEI and GPS
locations from doctor’s phone are validated and access is
granted accordingly. The rest of the communication security is
ensured as per the TLS negotiated parameters. UHTP, however,
doesn’t have any application in a continuous RPM orientation.
Simple and secure RPMS is demonstrated in [33]. A
mobile set is used as a pulse oximeter where pulse rates
are transmitted to a smartphone. The smartphone is equipped
with a symmetric cipher and a hashing algorithm to achieve
conﬁdentiality and integrity. Shortcomings of this model are
ignoring the distribution concerns of the keys and the abstract
knowledge of the model, which needs to be detailed.
Timestamps can provide valuable and fresh data for au-
thentication and requires no active involvement of the user
[34]. Elmufti et al. used packet timestamps to authenticate
a patient/doctor (users) in RPMS. Users are assigned tokens
based on timestamps signed by an authenticating server. These
stamps are transmitted with individual messages and are
compared with a sliding window maintained at the receiving
end. User authentication itself is done with digital signature.
Elmufti et al. although included sensors in their architecture
but did not explore the proposed protocol applications in them.
QoS and event reporting are important requirements in
information system. In eHealth, real-time delivery is a must
and health status has to be monitored continuously [35].
Rikitake et al. presented an NGN/IMS based ubiquitous health
monitoring system in which they addressed the issues of
event notiﬁcation, real-time transfer and data accumulation.
Sensor’s data is sent to an IMS Client from where it is sent
to the observer’s site using Realtime Transfer Protocol (RTP).
For event notiﬁcation a SIP base Subscribe/Notify module is
utilized that records incidents in an event server connected to
the hospital application server. An XML database management
system (XDMS) is used that extracts the events from the event
server and stores it in an XML format.
Malhotra et al. used Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) to
secure the exchange of medical data using mobile devices [36].
Basic ECC methods are used where encryption is done at the
user level with a public-private key pair. User is authenticated
through a username/password terminal and access to the data
is granted based on the user (patient/doctor) role. ECC based
digital signature to ensure non-repudiation while message
integrity is provided through a cryptographic hash.
C. Modeling the InfoSec Risk
To detect and prevent accidental events regarding a pa-
tient’s health, an activity based risk analysis framework is
proposed in [6]. Collected vital signs events are matched with
the patient’s history already stored as EHR and the current
situation of the patient is predicted. Based on the prediction,
risk is calculated and an alert is generated to cope up with
the situation. The proposed architecture, although only address
the patient health, can be extended to the information security
domain as a reference when modeling InfoSec risk analysis is
desired.
There are several studies on general S&P issues in eHealth
comprising ubiquitous systems. However, it is quite hard to
understand and systematically listing down these key issues
and design a risk mitigation strategy for them. Oladimeji et
al. [37] proposed a framework to model security and privacy
objectives, identifying threats and risks and approaching their
mitigation strategies. They also discussed how information
sensitivity can be characterized as well as how different
administrative policies can be reﬁned to protect the patient’s
privacy.
The attributes that are used to design IT solutions speciﬁ-
cally in eHealth are usually complex and interdependent thus
needed to be analyzed and prioritize to produce a reliable and
trustworthy solution. In [38], it is discussed how these critical
attributes and their inter-dependencies can be assessed to
reduce the risk after the solution has been deployed. The study
can be used for formulating the requirements of designing an
automated or real-time risk analysis model as it discuss both
the quality and security issues at the requirement engineering
level.
Bønes et al. proposed ModIMob, a model which can
be used to discover the availability of the health experts
where their presence is required for an expert opinion [39].
The Australian and New Zealand standard for RM (AS/NZS
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

4360:1999) is used to discover the risks associated with the use
of IM and mobile services used in a healthcare. Though, the
scope of their risk evaluation is limited to a speciﬁc domain
of instant messaging but it can provide an understanding of
conducting a RA process in a RPMS.
Abie and Ilangko proposed a risk based adaptive framework
for IoT-based eHealth [3]. They argued that based on the real
time data collected from the sensors and recent information
history, a risk will be calculated, which will further be used in
the decision making process of system adaptation. They also
provide a detailed literature on various issue concerning system
adaptation and risk management and it is deemed that using
context awareness and Game Theory techniques, the faced risk
can be effectively estimated and predicted.
To provide an appropriate level of privacy all the assets as
well as the stakeholders involved in the target system must
be considered [7]. A Privacy Risk Model is demonstrated
speciﬁcally targeting the Ubicomp systems where risks con-
cerning privacy are identiﬁed and analyzed by a series of
questions. RM is performed by categorizing the risks analyzed
and designing architectural strategies for them.
Maglogiannis et al. presented a detail risk analysis of
RPMS. RA is performed through the CCTA Risk Analysis and
Management Methodology (CRAMM) by considering a case
study highlighting the associated key risks [40]. The results of
the RA are used in developing a graph using Bayesian Network
technique showing the interaction of various critical events that
can cause system failure.
Beside the risk posture of the sensitive information pro-
cessed by the health information systems, the devices used
in healthcare have their own inherited risks. With the intro-
duction of pervasive computing and IoTs this risk has grown
rapidly. Zhao and Bai described how Failure Mode and Effect
Analysis (FMEA) can help in analyzing and managing the
risks associated with these devices to circumvent any potential
hazards [41]. They showed that Risk Priority Number (RPN)
can be used in the context of FEMA to reduce such potential
casualties associated with medical devices.
ENISA, using EBIOS tool, performed a detailed RM pro-
cess of a diabetes case study basing a RPMS [42]. EBIOS is a
tool that incorporates the 5-steps RM process developed by the
Central Information Systems Security Division of France. The
report described a detailed step-by-step procedure of assessing
and managing risks indicating the intended audience how to
approach the overall process of risk management in MPMSs.
IoT comprises of a complex architecture composed of a
variety of technologies due to which the overall threat faced
becomes more drastic. There is a need for a sophisticated risk
analysis method to assess the risk faced. Lui et al. proposed a
mathematical dynamic risk assessment model, DRAMIA, to
cope with the threat situation confronted in the IoT space
[43]. Enthused by the Artiﬁcial Immune System (AIS) their
proposed method consist of two components: a Detection
Agent that sense and detect the attack environment and evolve
accordingly; and a Dynamic Risk Assessment subsystem that
computes the risk associated with the attack detected.
IV.
EVALUATION
In this section, an evaluation of discussed literature is
depicted. Evaluation is performed by mapping the reviewed
articles onto a set of standard and proposed requirements.
A. System Models Evaluation
System models discussed in section III-A are evaluated
against a set of functional requirements proposed in [44].
We believe that these are complete set of requirements which
should be included in any RPMS and MPMS. However, we
have added an important requirement of mobility as it is the
only component that makes the health service mobile and assist
in out-doors ambulatory and activity monitoring needs [22].
Functional requirements are described below whereas system
models evaluation against the requirements is shown in Table
II. (√) mark indicates the presence of a speciﬁc function
whereas an (–) implies that either the function is absent or
not explicitly discussed.
•
Collection and Processing: Collection and processing
of vital signs from the body sensors by a Patient
Cluster Head (PCH) or a wireless base station (BS)
•
Real Time Delivery: PCH or BS should be able to
deliver the processed data in real time for analysis to
speciﬁed destination such a remote hospital site or a
smart device.
•
Alarm generation: The investigating node, a server
at hospital or the smart device, should be able to
generate alarms based on the real time data received
both locally and remotely at hospital.
•
Interpretation: Local and remote investigating nodes
should be able to diagnose and interpret processed
vital sign.
•
Correlation: Local and remote investigating nodes
should be cable of correlating various vital sign such
as heart rate, diabetes level and blood pressure to
diagnose the correct health status
•
Data Request: Patient health history should be made
available whenever requested
•
Communication Interface: A communication inter-
face should be incorporated locally to enable expert
supervision for a remote patient.
•
Actuation: To assist elder patients or on demand basis
sensors or actuators should be able to saturate the
essential medicine or trigger the required action.
•
Mobility: The system should be able to support mo-
bility services to the patient. This includes tracking
the location and service availability while the patient
is moving.
B. Evaluating S&P Modeling
S&P service modeling literature reviewed in section III-B is
evaluated against the networking and communication require-
ments standardized by the U.S Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 speciﬁed in [45].
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

TABLE II.
IOT-BASED EHEALTH SYSTEMS EVALUATION
Function/ Reference
[19]
[26]
[20]
[17]
. [25]
[18]
[21]
[22]
[24]
[23]
Collection & Processing
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
Realtime Delivery
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
Alarm Gen.
–
√
–
–
–
√
–
√
√
√
Interpretation
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
Correlation
–
–
–
√
–
–
–
√
–
√
Data Request
√
–
–
–
√
√
–
–
√
–
Comm. Interface
–
–
√
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Actuation
–
–
–
–
√
–
–
–
–
–
Mobility
–
√
–
–
√
–
–
√
–
√
Besides, ensuring health insurance coverage and simpliﬁca-
tion of administrative policies, HIPAA aims to standardize
S&P mechanisms for electronic health information exchange.
Requirements stated by HIPAA are: Data Access, Conﬁ-
dentiality, Integrity, Availability, Alarm Generation, Identity
Management, Privacy Preservation, Authentication, and Event
Reporting. Table III depicts the requirement(s) covered by each
study as per HIPAA security requirements and how they are
approached in individual study.
C. InfoSec RM Models Suitability
IoT-based eHealth is a continuous service in which re-
sponse to an adverse situation should be made in a dynamic
fashion. Hence, it requires an ISRM solution that can estimate
and predict the security risk faced in real time and adapts
appropriate security setting accordingly [3]. To capture the
requirements of a real time RM in IoT-eHealth below we
devise a ﬁtness criteria, which we believe should be met by a
given ISRM model in order to fulﬁll the operational needs of
IoT-eHealth and efﬁciently manage the risk faced.
•
Operational Nature: The time at which an ISRM
process is executed. This can be on-demand basis
where the process is activated when required. For
instance, ISACA Risk IT method can be executed bi-
annually or quarterly by an enterprise. ISRM can be
performed in a dynamic manner where security risks
are analyzed in a real-time fashion such as in military
setups. For IoT driven eHealth the operational level
should be dynamic in order to be in line with the
continuous monitoring theme.
•
Context Awareness: It corresponds to the under-
standing of an adverse situation in a given time. In
most cases, risks are analyzed individually however;
in real computing environment, risk can be seen as a
combination of different adverse events. These events
and risks need to be correlated to understand a given
situation otherwise low impact risks might be tagged
as critical leading to false positives and unwanted
situations.
•
Analysis Complexity: It should be taken care of
that risk analysis method is lightweight and fast in
response to facilitate the theme of real time service
[3]. RA solutions having low computational complex-
ity can also be integrated in devices with limited
resources.
•
Self-Adaptation: For IoT-eHealth to be dynamic and
self-adaptive, an ISRM should have the ability to
react to an adverse situation and manage security au-
tonomously. Self-adaptation refers to the autonomous
effective reaction of a system to minimize the effect
of a risky situation [3].
In Table IV, we evaluate the suitability of the studied ISRM
approaches against the above mentioned metrics to see how
they address these metrics in order to be implemented in IoT-
based eHealth.
V.
TRENDS AND GAPS
Key elements of ISRM concerning IoT-eHealth are re-
viewed in this paper as system, S&P and InfoSec risk modeling
and are evaluated as per projected requirements. The objective
was to understand and recognize the essential operations,
S&P challenges and methodologies for effective ISRM in IoT
driven eHealth. A brief discussion on the evaluated knowledge
corresponding to individual domains is conferred below to
reﬂect the current trends and gaps in the existing literature.
– System Models
A total of 10 models are studied and analyzed according to
the required features in a RPMS or IoT driven eHealth. Some
of the models reviewed are focused on monitoring generic
vital signs such as ECG, Blood pressure and heart rate [21],
[25] while a few targets speciﬁc heart [17], [19] and chronic
diseases such as diabetes [22]. Systems corresponding to [17],
[19], [21], [22], [25] emphasized the use of cellular network
(GPRS, GSM and UMTS) for the transmission of sensed
data to the hospital site through the use of smart phones.
However, simultaneous transmissions on cellular networks can
cause performance degradation and may affect continuous
monitoring in critical situations [25]. Except for [22], the
importance of local analysis of sensed data is ignored in the
rest of the models, which enable a patient to view his health
status locally and schedule the daily routines accordingly.
Similarly, actuation of medical infusions is also overlooked. A
vital functionality of RPM is to diagnose the patient at home
to save the time and energy spent in regular checkups, i.e.,
the provisioning of communication interface between a doctor
and patient however, an absence is experienced of this feature
in most of the systems reviewed. Those who support this
functionality did not explicate it in detail. Santos et al. [20] on
the other hand fairly explained a patient-doctor communication
over a VOIP client, which can also be used in calling the health
facilities in case of emergencies as well. Alarm generation is
merely explored, except for [22] who detailed each alarm as
per the assigned agent’s responsibilities.
It can be seen that most of the system models are focused
on the basic functionalities of collection, processing and de-
livery of vital signs to the remote hospital site. Analysis and
correlation of various bio-signals are limited to the server side,
which is needed to be shifted to the patient side to increase
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

TABLE III.
MAPPING S&P REQUIREMENTS ONTO HIPAA
Author
Data Access
Conﬁdentiality
Integrity
Availability
Alarm
Gen.
Identity Mgt
Privacy
Authentication
Event
Rep.
Lin et al. [28]
–
Symmetric En-
cryption
Hash
–
–
PKI based on
Patient IDs
Symmetric
Encryp-
tion
&
Pseudo
ID
Shared Key
–
Apaporn et al. [30]
RBAC
Symmetric En-
cryption
–
–
–
–
–
Muliti-factor
–
Elkhodar et al. [32]
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Multi-factor
–
Mona et al. [33]
–
Symmetric En-
cryption
SHA–1
–
–
–
–
Message Authentication
Code(MAC) based on a
Secret key
–
Khalid et al. [34]
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
User: Digital Signatures
Message: Timestamps
–
Koichiro et al. [35]
AAA
over
NGN/IMS
–
–
Realtime
Transfer
Protocol
(RTP)
–
–
–
AAA over NGN/IMS
SIP Event
Sub-
scribe/Notify
Frame-
work
Sriram et al. [31]
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Multi-modal Biometrics
–
Malhotra [36]
RBAC
ECC
SHA-1
–
–
–
–
ECC based Digital Sig-
natures
–
TABLE IV.
ISRM APPROACHES SUITABILITY IN IOT-BASED EHEALTH
Author
Artifact
Analysis Method
Operational
Nature
Context Awareness
Complexity
Self Adaptation
Don et al. [6]
Framework
Quantitative Analysis of patient ac-
tivities
Dynamic
Event Correlation
No
Croll et al. [38]
Framework
Qualitative Investigation of Qual-
ity, Usability, Privacy and Safety
(QUPS) Attributes
Dynamic &
OnDemand
Investigating interdepen-
dent
critical
attributes
and events
No
Hong et al. [7]
Model
Qualitative Assessment based on a
questionnaire
On-
Demand
No
No
Liu et al. [43]
Method
Quantitative RA based on attack
detection in network packets using
Artiﬁcial Immune System
Dynamic
No
Attack detection & RA
are
done
by
speciﬁc
agents
Adaptation is performed
only
to
enhance
the
detection capabilities.No
mechanism of adapting
a RM strategy
Maglog et l. [40]
Case Study
Threat Identiﬁcation is performed
using Bayesian Network Modeling
whereas CRAMM is used as a RA
method
On-
Demand
Event dependencies are
used to build the context
of a speciﬁc threat
Unclear to evaluate the
actual computation com-
plexity just on the graph-
ical model presented
No
Nes et al. [39]
Case Study
Methodology: Australian & New
Zealand Standard for RM ASNZS
43601999. Qualitative Approach is
used in the RA process
On-
Demand
No
No
Abie et al. [3]
Framework
Monitor, Analyze & Adapt loop.
Dynamic
Game Theory & Context
Awareness
Yes
Zhao et al. [41]
Model
Methodology: FMEA . Risk (RPN)
is analyzed using Severity, Occur-
rence & Detection (SOD) values
On-
Demand
No
Low: RPN = SxDxO
No
ENISA [42]
Case Study
Qualitative
5-Step
EBIOS
RA
Methodology: Formulating Risk,
Asset Valuation, Probability Calcu-
lation, Impact Valuation & Priori-
tizing Risk Levels
On-
Demand
No
Low- Risk Calculation:
Risk = (Threat x Vulner-
ability x Impact)
No
patient satisfaction. Mobility features should be well designed
to support both in and out door patient and to facilitate ambu-
latory services [22]. Security and safety alarms are needed to
be designed intelligently to support critical patient monitoring.
Communication interface and GUIs needed to be constructed
in order to enrich a patient-doctor relationship and trust.
– Security & Privacy
Among the HIPAA required services for secure remote and
mobile patient monitoring systems, the most addressed are
the conﬁdentiality and authentication. However, none of them
addresses all the HIPPA requirements. Our objective here is not
to criticize this fact but to recognize how these requirements
can be approached and to identify the current focus of S&P
modeling and the necessary issues to be explored in future.
In most of the literature, Symmetric encryption is used
to attain conﬁdentiality [28] [30] [33]; however, asymmetric
encryption using ECC is also explored [36]. Multi-factor
authentication is used in a few studies where passwords, SIM
credentials, GPS location, ID cards [30], [32] and vital signs
(as biometrics) such as ECG and heart beats are used as various
factors of authenticating patients and doctors [31]. Digital
signatures are also used in authentication [34], [36]. Message
authenticity is achieved by using packet timestamps and mes-
sage authentication code [33], [34]. Hashing remained the only
method of ensuring message integrity however, discussed by
only a few [28], [33], [36]. Anonymity is only discussed in
[28], where pseudo patient IDs are used to ensure identity
privacy against global eavesdropping. Authorization through
RBAC are conversed in [30], [36] but are not explicitly deﬁned.
Some of the security services in a continuous RPM such as
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

event reporting, alarm generation and availability are yet to be
researched. These are the services which are used in real-time
delivery and emergency situations and are the key attributes
of RPMS. Most of the literature summarized targets the
extra-Body Area Network (Ex-BAN) security, which includes
traditional web services and back end database resources
in eHealth. As per our knowledge, there is a very limited
literature available on securing inter-BAN communication spe-
ciﬁc to medical information exchange. Research is necessary
to be done to secure these networks as they are the core
producers of the medical information in an IoT-based eHealth
or RPM. Also, the resources used in such networks have
limited capabilities thus there is a need to design lightweight
cryptographic solutions as discussed in [36] to be aligned with
sensors computational competencies.
– InfoSec RM Models
Managing InfoSec risk in IoT-based eHealth is a tough task
because of the diverse nature of technology utilized in it. The
evaluation of the studied literature in context of ISRM reveals
that almost all of them can be used in an On-Demand basis
most of which are analyzing the risk on qualitative grounds
[7], [39]–[42]. This is because of the subjective inﬂuence in
RM process which makes it stiffer to be adapted in a dynamic
environment. Those that can be executed in dynamic setups
are suggested frameworks [3], [38] and still needs a keen and
deﬁned method of quantitative risk analysis. Liu et al. [43]
on the other hand provide an effective method for analyzing
the risk in a real time manner on a quantitative basis, which
make it easier to program and usable for IoT-based eHealth.
It also includes intelligent agents to adapt its attack detection
capabilities and requires fewer resources as the threat detection
and analysis is performed by speciﬁc agents. However, the
suggested techniques are based on the inputs from signature
based IDS, which makes it to generate false positives [9]. Self-
adaptation as a risk management strategy is completely absent
and needed to be designed intelligently to make IoT-eHealth
an autonomous technology.
IoT-based eHealth needs quantitative methods for predict-
ing and estimating threats in a dynamic fashion and should be
capable of understanding and analyzing the threat situation and
transforming the system security autonomously [3]. Some of
the methods and framework discussed such as [3], [6], [43] can
be utilized as a reference point to design the desired InfoSec
RM methods for IoT driven eHealth.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have explored the existing literature
in the context of approaching InfoSec risk management in
IoT-based eHealth. A common knowledge of RMPSs, S&P
issues, security and risk management modeling was established
in the light of a standard risk management process. System
models are evaluated against a set of required functionalities,
models pertaining to security services are aligned with the
standard HIPAA requirements and existing RM approaches in
the context of IoT driven eHealth are weighed against a ﬁtness
criteria. An overall analysis is discussed and current trends and
gaps are identiﬁed.
Our future work includes devising lightweight real-time
InfoSec RM methods for IoT-based eHealth with the abilities
of context awareness and self-adaptation. An adaptive security
model will be developed that will address the mentioned
InfoSec RM requirements. Security metrics and options nec-
essary for the adaptation will be explored. To analyze the
foreseen risk, Game and Utility theory will be used to model
the dynamic and expected behaviors of adversaries and a
comprehensive case study will be formulated to validate the
model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented in this article is a part of the ASSET
(Adaptive Security in Smart IoT in eHealth) project. ASSET
(2012-2015) is sponsored by the Research Council of Norway
under the grant agreement no: 213131/O70. Wishing thanks
to the project colleagues and anonymous reviewers for their
valuable suggestions and comments.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. H. Weber, “Internet of things: New security and privacy challenges,”
Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23 – 30, 2010.
[2]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787 – 2805, 2010.
[3]
H. Abie and I. Balasingham, “Risk-based adaptive security for smart
iot in ehealth,” in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Body Area Networks, ser. BodyNets ’12.
ICST, Brussels, Belgium,
Belgium: ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2012, pp. 269–275.
[4]
H. K. Kalita and A. Kar, “Wireless sensor network security analysis,”
International Journal of Next-Generation Networks (IJNGN),, vol. 1,
pp. 1–10, December 2009.
[5]
M. Meingast, T. Roosta, and S. Sastry, “Security and privacy issues with
health care information technology,” in Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, 2006. EMBS ’06. 28th Annual International Conference
of the IEEE, 2006, pp. 5453–5458.
[6]
S. Don, E. Choi, and D. Min, “A situation aware framework for activity
based risk analysis of patient monitoring system,” in Awareness Science
and Technology (iCAST), 2011 3rd International Conference on, 2011,
pp. 15–19.
[7]
J. I. Hong, J. D. Ng, S. Lederer, and J. A. Landay, “Privacy risk
models for designing privacy-sensitive ubiquitous computing systems,”
in Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems:
processes, practices, methods, and techniques, ser. DIS ’04. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 91–100.
[8]
S. Kumar, K. Kambhatla, F. Hu, M. Lifson, and Y. Xiao, “Ubiquitous
computing for remote cardiac patient monitoring: a survey,” Int. J.
Telemedicine Appl., vol. 2008, pp. 3:1–3:19, Jan. 2008.
[9]
M. A. Rassam, M. Maarof, and A. Zainal, “A survey of intrusion
detection schemes in wireless sensor networks,” American Journal of
Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 10, p. 1636, 2012.
[10]
C. Karlof and D. Wagner, “Secure routing in wireless sensor networks:
attacks and countermeasures,” in Sensor Network Protocols and Appli-
cations, 2003. Proceedings of the First IEEE. 2003 IEEE International
Workshop on, 2003, pp. 113–127.
[11]
D. Christin, P. S. Mogre, and M. Hollick, “Survey on wireless sensor
network technologies for industrial automation: The security and quality
of service perspectives,” Future Internet, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 96–125, 2010.
[12]
B. Latr´e, B. Braem, I. Moerman, C. Blondia, and P. Demeester, “A
survey on wireless body area networks,” Wirel. Netw., vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 1–18, Jan. 2011.
[13]
J. L. Fernndez-Alemn, I. C. Seor, P. ngel Oliver Lozoya, and A. Toval,
“Security and privacy in electronic health records: A systematic litera-
ture review,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, no. 0, pp. –, 2013.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[14]
A. Vorster and L. Labuschagne, “A framework for comparing different
information security risk analysis methodologies,” in Proceedings of
the 2005 annual research conference of the South African institute
of computer scientists and information technologists on IT research
in developing countries, ser. SAICSIT ’05.
Republic of South
Africa: South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information
Technologists, 2005, pp. 95–103.
[15]
P.
L.
Campbell
and
J.
E.
Stamp,
“A
classiﬁcation
scheme
for
risk
assessment
methods,”
last
Accessed
On:
13-Sept-
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://prod.sandia.gov/techlib/access-
control.cgi/2004/044233.pdf
[16]
E. Paintsil, “Taxonomy of security risk assessment approaches for
researchers,” in Computational Aspects of Social Networks (CASoN),
2012 Fourth International Conference on, 2012, pp. 257–262.
[17]
C. Otto, A. Milenkovi´c, C. Sanders, and E. Jovanov, “System archi-
tecture of a wireless body area sensor network for ubiquitous health
monitoring,” J. Mob. Multimed., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 307–326, Jan. 2005.
[18]
R. S. Rajan, S.P. and S. Vijayprasath, “Design and development of mo-
bile based smart tele-health care system for remote patients,” European
Journal of Scientiﬁc Research, vol. 70, p. 148158, 2012.
[19]
M.-K. Suh, C.-A. Chen, J. Woodbridge, M. K. Tu, J. I. Kim, A. Na-
hapetian, L. S. Evangelista, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “A remote patient
monitoring system for congestive heart failure,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 35,
no. 5, pp. 1165–1179, Oct. 2011.
[20]
A. Santos, R. Castro, and J. Sousa, “Carebox: A complete tv-based
solution for remote patient monitoring and care,” in Wireless Mobile
Communication and Healthcare, ser. Lecture Notes of the Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engi-
neering, B. Godara and K. Nikita, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013, vol. 61, pp. 1–10.
[21]
A. Schacht, R. Wierschke, M. Wolf, M. von Lowis, and A. Polze,
“Live streaming of medical data - the fontane architecture for
remote
patient
monitoring
and
its
experimental
evaluation,”
in
Object/Component/Service-Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing
Workshops (ISORCW), 2011 14th IEEE International Symposium on,
2011, pp. 306–312.
[22]
S. Sneha and U. Varshney, “Enabling ubiquitous patient monitoring:
Model, decision protocols, opportunities and challenges,” Decision
Support Systems, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 606 – 619, 2009.
[23]
Y.-C. Wu, P.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Hu, C.-H. Chang, G.-C. Lee, and W.-C. Yu,
“A mobile health monitoring system using rﬁd ring-type pulse sensor,”
in Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, 2009. DASC ’09.
Eighth IEEE International Conference on, 2009, pp. 317–322.
[24]
I. Korkmaz, C. Atay, and G. Kyparisis, “A mobile patient monitoring
system using rﬁd,” in Proceedings of the 14th WSEAS international con-
ference on Computers: part of the 14th WSEAS CSCC multiconference
- Volume II, ser. ICCOMP’10.
Stevens Point, Wisconsin, USA: World
Scientiﬁc and Engineering Academy and Society (WSEAS), 2010, pp.
726–732.
[25]
A. T. van Halteren, R. G. A. Bults, K. E. Wac, D. Konstantas, I. A.
Widya, N. T. Dokovski, G. T. Koprinkov, V. M. Jones, and R. Herzog,
“Mobile patient monitoring: The mobihealth system,” The Journal on
Information Technology in Healthcare, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 365–373,
October 2004.
[26]
F. Kargl, E. Lawrence, M. Fischer, and Y. Y. Lim, “Security, privacy
and legal issues in pervasive ehealth monitoring systems,” in Mobile
Business, 2008. ICMB ’08. 7th International Conference on, 2008, pp.
296–304.
[27]
W. Leister, H. Abie, A.-K. Groven, T. Fretland, and I. Balasingham,
“Threat assessment of wireless patient monitoring systems,” in Infor-
mation and Communication Technologies: From Theory to Applications,
2008. ICTTA 2008. 3rd International Conference on, 2008, pp. 1–6.
[28]
X. Lin, R. Lu, X. Shen, Y. Nemoto, and N. Kato, “Sage: a strong
privacy-preserving scheme against global eavesdropping for ehealth
systems,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 27,
no. 4, pp. 365–378, 2009.
[29]
S. P. Ramli Rusyaizila, Zakaria Nasriah, “Privacy issues in pervasive
healthcare monitoring system: A review,” World Academy of Science,
Engineering & Technology, vol. 72, p. 741, 2011.
[30]
A. Boonyarattaphan, Y. Bai, and S. Chung, “A security framework
for e-health service authentication and e-health data transmission,” in
Communications and Information Technology, 2009. ISCIT 2009. 9th
International Symposium on, 2009, pp. 1213–1218.
[31]
J. C. Sriram, M. Shin, T. Choudhury, and D. Kotz, “Activity-aware
ecg-based patient authentication for remote health monitoring,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 international conference on Multimodal interfaces,
ser. ICMI-MLMI ’09. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 297–304.
[32]
M. Elkhodr, S. Shahrestani, and H. Cheung, “An approach to enhance
the security of remote health monitoring systems,” in Proceedings of the
4th international conference on Security of information and networks,
ser. SIN ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 205–208.
[33]
M. Kamel, S. Fawzy, A. El-Bialy, and A. Kandil, “Secure remote patient
monitoring system,” in Biomedical Engineering (MECBME), 2011 1st
Middle East Conference on, 2011, pp. 339–342.
[34]
K. Elmufti, D. Weerasinghe, M. Rajarajan, V. Rakocevic, and S. Khan,
“Timestamp authentication protocol for remote monitoring in ehealth,”
in Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, 2008. Pervasive-
Health 2008. Second International Conference on, 2008, pp. 73–76.
[35]
K. Rikitake, Y. Araki, Y. Kawahara, M. Minami, and H. Morikawa,
“Ngn/ims-based ubiquitous health monitoring system,” in Consumer
Communications and Networking Conference, 2009. CCNC 2009. 6th
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–2.
[36]
K. Malhotra, S. Gardner, and R. Patz, “Implementation of elliptic-curve
cryptography on mobile healthcare devices,” in Networking, Sensing and
Control, 2007 IEEE International Conference on, 2007, pp. 239–244.
[37]
E. A. Oladimeji, L. Chung, H. T. Jung, and J. Kim, “Managing
security and privacy in ubiquitous ehealth information interchange,”
in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Ubiquitous
Information Management and Communication, ser. ICUIMC ’11. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 26:1–26:10.
[38]
P. R. Croll and J. Croll, “Investigating risk exposure in e-health
systems,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 76(5-6),
pp. 460–465, 2006.
[39]
H. E. S. T. Bnes E, Hasvold P, “Risk analysis of information security
in a mobile instant messaging and presence system for healthcare,”
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 76(9), pp. 677–687,
2007.
[40]
I. Maglogiannis, E. Zaﬁropoulos, A. Platis, and C. Lambrinoudakis,
“Risk analysis of a patient monitoring system using bayesian network
modeling,” J. of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 637–647,
Dec. 2006.
[41]
X. Zhao and X. Bai, “The application of fmea method in the risk
management of medical device during the lifecycle,” in e-Business
and Information System Security (EBISS), 2010 2nd International
Conference on, 2010, pp. 1–4.
[42]
ENISA, “Being diabetic in 2011 - identifying emerging and future
risks in remote health monitoring and treatment,” Technical Publication
on ENISA website, 2009, last Accessed On: 13-Sept-2013. [On-
line]. Available: http://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/archive/being-
diabetic-2011/
[43]
C. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Zeng, L. Peng, and R. Chen, “Research on
dynamical security risk assessment for the internet of things inspired
by immunology,” in Natural Computation (ICNC), 2012 Eighth Inter-
national Conference on, 2012, pp. 874–878.
[44]
G. Paliwal and A. Kiwelekar, “A comparison of mobile patient mon-
itoring systems,” in Health Information Science, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, G. Huang, X. Liu, J. He, F. Klawonn, and G. Yao,
Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, vol. 7798, pp. 198–209.
[45]
D. A. Tribble, “The health insurance portability and accountability
act: security and privacy requirements,” American Jourmal of Health-
Systems Pharmacy, vol. 58, pp. 763–770, 2001.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

