Wireless Communications Enabling Smart Mobility:
Results from the Project PEGASUS
Alessandro Bazzi, Barbara M. Masini, Gianni Pasolini, and Oreste Andrisano
CNR-IEIIT and DEIS, University of Bologna @WiLab
Bologna, Italy
Email: {alessandro.bazzi, barbara.masini, gianni.pasolini oreste.andrisano}@unibo.it
Abstract—Wireless communications for real time trafﬁc
information are considered to efﬁciently provide smart mobility
in congested cities. In this work, we aim at summarizing objec-
tives the results of the Italian project PEGASUS, where wireless
communications have been exploited, in real time, to: i) acquire
trafﬁc information directly from vehicles (uplink) and ii) re-
transmit updated information to interested vehicles (downlink)
after a proper processing at a control center. Speciﬁcally we
focus on i) the uplink collection of data from vehicles through
the universal mobile telecommunication system (UMTS), ii)
the downlink transmission of updated information to vehicles
through UMTS, iii) the cellular resource saving through the
exploitation of short range communications based on wireless
access in vehicular environment (WAVE)/IEEE 802.11p, and
iv) the impact of updated information on travel time. Results
are provided through the development of an integrated simu-
lation platform that jointly takes into account vehicular trafﬁc
behavior in urban environment, data processing at the control
center, and performance of the communication networks at the
different layers of the protocol pillar.
Keywords-Intelligent transportation systems (ITS); real time
services; simulations in realistic scenarios.
I. INTRODUCTION
Keeping trafﬁc moving is a challenge that governments,
industries and researchers are facing worldwide nowadays.
Effective solutions can only be obtained with a capillary
real time knowledge of the trafﬁc conditions and a prompt
communication to the drivers; without updated and dynamic
trafﬁc information, only particular events or repetitive sit-
uations can be handled. The creation of an infrastructure
for communication between vehicles, service centers and
sensors, is thus one of the main needs identiﬁed by interna-
tional institutions, service providers and car manufacturers to
address with satisfactory results the problems generated by
trafﬁc, justifying the big efforts that are being pushed both
in Europe and in the rest of the world [1]. To this scope, dif-
ferent wireless access technologies could be exploited, from
short-range ad-hoc networks to cellular systems. Regarding
the former ones, wireless access in vehicular environment
(WAVE) [2], based on IEEE 802.11p [3] represents the
future for vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications. This
technology, well suited for safety applications, entertain-
ment, gateway access, and road charging, can also be
used for trafﬁc management service, on condition that a
connection to a remote control center is available. Vehicles,
in fact, must periodically collect their position and speed
and send such data to a control center, that is in charge of
retransmitting back aggregated trafﬁc information. Even in
the case that all vehicles were equipped with such technolo-
gies, the need for an infrastructure makes the adoption of
IEEE 802.11p for trafﬁc management services a long term
solution, due to the investment that the deployment of a
communication infrastructure requires.
Hence, thinking to short term, cellular systems appear as
the only feasible solution, already guaranteeing high penetra-
tion and wide coverage worldwide, also allowing continuity
of service at vehicular speeds. And this is particularly true
noting that, on the one hand, the last generation of on board
navigators are already equipped with a cellular interface,
and, on the other hand, smart phones embed navigation
functionalities (often for free). However, the expected in-
crease of vehicles equipped with on board units (OBUs)
could lead to an overload of the cellular access network,
and, consequently, to a degradation of the quality of service
provided to voice and data users [4].
This work is carried out in the framework of the Italian
project PEGASUS [5] and aims at summarizing the obtained
results. Most of them have been already published (see,
e.g., [4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]), but this is the ﬁrst paper
that summarizes the project as a whole. PEGASUS relies
on over one million vehicles already equipped with OBU
periodically transmitting their position and speed to a control
center. Considering this scenario, we focus on i) the uplink
transmission of data from vehicles through cellular systems,
ii) the downlink transmission of updated trafﬁc information
to vehicles through cellular systems, iii) the exploitation of
short range V2V and vehicle-to-roadside (V2R) communica-
tions to save cellular resources, and iv) the impact of updated
trafﬁc information on travel time.
In particular, ﬁrstly focusing on the universal mobile
telecommunications system (UMTS) as the enabling tech-
nology for uplink and downlink information, we aim at:
• investigating the feasibility of the acquisition of small
but frequent amount of data from many vehicles (uplink
performance). Is the UMTS capacity sufﬁcient for these
kinds of multiple connections?
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Figure 1.
Scenario: real time trafﬁc information exchange and enabling
technologies.
• verifying the feasibility of real-time transmissions to
vehicles of trafﬁc information, both in unicast and
multicast mode (downlink performance);
• investigating the impact of this service on the others
already supported by the network (both in uplink and
downlink). Is the quality of service (QoS) perceived by
the ﬁnal user sufﬁcient, or does the network (or the
service) need enhancements?
• evaluating the QoS perceived by the users of the trafﬁc
management service.
Then, considering also WAVE/IEEE802.11p-based V2V and
V2R communications, we:
• investigate the impact of V2V and V2R communi-
cations (short range communications) to share and
aggregate trafﬁc information with the aim to reduce the
cellular network load and the delivery delay. How many
road side units (RSUs) are needed? which is the impact
of multi hop V2V communications?
Finally, to also evaluate the impact of real time communi-
cations on trafﬁc management, we:
• estimate the travel time of vehicles equipped with smart
navigators (smart navigation service).
To address these issues, we developed a realistic simulation
platform taking into account the details of the protocol pillar,
the mobile propagation conditions, and the users’ mobility.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II related
works are reported; In Section III, the considered scenario
is depicted and the main characteristics and motivations
of enabling technologies are provided; In Section IV, the
simulation platform developed to investigate the considered
scenario is described; In Section V, the simulation settings
and output ﬁgures are given; In Section VI, numerical results
are provided; Finally, in Section VII conclusions are drawn.
II. RELATED WORKS
Cellular systems are nowadays widely recognized as
drivers of innovation in a wide range of technical ﬁelds,
and represent the shortest term solution to collect data from
vehicles and retransmit them to on board navigators avoiding
new set-ups or expensive installations [11], [12]. Various
activities are ongoing [6], [7], [13], [14], and products based
on cellular technologies are already on the market.
A. Uplink
Some studies on the cellular performances in vehicular
applications are coming out (see, e.g., [11]), but still few
investigations are performed on the impact that these new
services have on other cellular services (such as voice) in
terms of resource sharing and consequent QoS guaranteeing.
A study on the feasibility of data acquisition from vehicles
through cellular systems has been performed in the German
project Aktiv CoCar [15], [16], that deﬁned a new protocol,
called “trafﬁc probe data protocol” (TPDP), to upload trafﬁc
data through UMTS common channels. However, results
are given only in terms of cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of the end-to-end delay, and no evaluation of the
impact of this service on the network and user’s QoS is
given, which is, in turn, provided in [4] and here summarized
and reported in the context of the PEGASUS project.
B. Downlink
Focusing on communications from a control center to
vehicles, due to the widespread diffusion of connected on-
vehicle navigators and smart phones with positioning appli-
cations, cellular systems represent the short term solution to
solve the problem of real time trafﬁc information to and
from vehicles, so to suggest alternative routes and avoid
congestions. This is conﬁrmed by recent publications [11],
[17], [18] and market trends: many vehicles are worldwide
equipped with connected smart navigators receiving via gen-
eral packet radio service (GPRS) updated trafﬁc information.
Again focusing on UMTS, the objective is to investigate
which solution between unicast or multicast transmission
has to be preferred and which is the impact on the QoS
experienced by vehicular users and other users.
C. Short Range Communications
In the context of V2V and V2R communications, several
standardization processes and research works are currently
carried out (see, e.g.,[19], [20]) giving particular attention to
WAVE [2] based on IEEE 802.11p [3]. In [21], the perfor-
mance of WAVE/IEEE 802.11p vehicular ad hoc networks
(VANETs) are evaluated in terms of packet delivery rate
and delay assuming roadside access points. [4], [7], [13]
investigate the real time acquisition of trafﬁc information
through cellular systems and its impact on both the network
load and users’ satisfaction when no V2V communications
are considered. The novelty in this work is to share and
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

aggregate trafﬁc information with the aim to reduce the
cellular network load and the delivery delay when real
time trafﬁc information systems are concerned through the
exploitation of short range V2V and V2R communications.
III. SCENARIO AND ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
The considered scenario is shown in Fig. 1: vehicles
are equipped with on board units (OBUs) acting as trafﬁc
sensors and periodically transmitting their position and speed
to a remote control center through the cellular network. The
data collected at the control center are processed in real time
to evaluate the actual trafﬁc conditions (i.e., the travel time)
on each monitored road segment; when the control center
detects trafﬁc conditions different from those foreseen by
the static roadmap data base, it updates the roads status
on a dynamic data base that will be queried for the best
route evaluation. Updated measurements are then transmitted
from the control center to the interested vehicles through the
cellular network. We assume that updated trafﬁc conditions
can be transmitted from the control center to on board
navigation systems or to the user’s personal smart phone,
hereafter simply denoted as smart navigator. Hence, the
smart navigator receives information on the trafﬁc conditions
for each road segment from its current position to the
destination and calculates the optimal route; on a real time
basis, it updates its data and, in case, modiﬁes the route in
order to avoid any slowdown.
A. Uplink
Among the cellular technologies, GPRS is nowadays the
most adopted for uplink measurements transmission. How-
ever, to transmit data over the GPRS network, the mobile
station (MS) must ﬁrst send a message on a common channel
asking for a dedicated resource, with procedures requiring a
not negligible access time, in the order of seconds [22]; for
this reason, OBU collects tens of measurements before trans-
mitting them in a single packet. This approach obviously
increases the data acquisition delay at the control center.
Differently to this, UMTS also allows the transmission of
small amount of data over the shared signalling channel
random access channel (RACH), avoiding the set-up of
dedicated resources [23]. This way, any measurement can be
transmitted by the OBU as soon as it is taken, with minimum
delay and reduced signalling overhead. This solution appears
promising especially considering the forecasted increase in
the number of equipped vehicles, but it clearly requires
investigations on feasibility and resources occupation.
Here, we discuss the impact of the real time data acqui-
sition on capacity and coverage of existing cellular systems,
foreseeing the realistic perspective of an explosion in the
number of equipped vehicles.
B. Downlink
We exploit UMTS as the enabling technology either in
unicast mode via dedicated unicast channels (DCHs), or in
multicast mode via multimedia broadcast multicast service
(MBMS). The objective is to evaluate if the network can
support the additional new load and the impact it has on the
performance perceived by other UMTS users.
Due to the adoption of code division multiple access
(CDMA) [4], the number of active channels in UMTS is a
consequence of the trade-off between coverage and capacity,
and the amount of resources occupied by each transmission
is given in terms of used power: on the one hand, a higher
data rate as well as a higher distance from the base requires
a higher power for a sufﬁcient QoS; on the other hand, a
higher power reduces the cell capacity. The power is, in
fact, a limited resource at the base station (in downlink)
and each transmission turns into an interference to all other
active communications (in both directions).
As far as MBMS is concerned, it allows to share resources
among many user. Hence, power is allocated to MBMS
channels only once for any number of users in the cell
receiving the service. We assume that vehicles are equipped
with MBMS units joining the multicast group where trafﬁc-
related messages are distributed. It has to be remarked that
MBMS uses part of the available power at the base station,
thus limiting the number of DCHs that can be established.
Moreover, the broadcast/multicast nature of the channel does
not allow to exploit the fast power control feature that
is of main importance for an interference limited system
like UMTS; the base station pre-assigns a certain amount
of power to MBMS services depending on the coverage
planning and the desired bit rate.
The following strategies, thoroughly described in [7], are
assumed for trafﬁc updates:
• For the unicast mode, the update involves road segments
encompassed by an ellipse whose focuses are the actual
vehicle position and either the next intermediate point
or the ﬁnal destination. This strategy avoids the trans-
mission of information related to road segments too far
from the actual vehicle position, which would be out of
date when the vehicle needs it. Moreover, since only the
transmission of the coordinates of two points is needed
from the navigation system to the control center, the
amount of data transmitted in the uplink is very small,
thus limiting costs and resource occupation. Following
[7], 1000 road segments are updated every 5 minutes.
• For the multicast mode, a progressive coverage strategy
is considered, consisting in the transmission to the on-
board navigator of the information related to the most
important roads at national level and regional level, and
to the minor roads at local level only. Following [7],
12000 road segments are updated in average.
Independently on the unicast or multicast communication
technology, we assume the adoption of the transport protocol
experts group (TPEG) technology [24] at the highest layers
of the protocol pillar with 60 bytes packet per each road
segment (one packet per direction) [14].
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

C. Short Range Communications
When UMTS is the only available communication in-
terface, each OBU autonomously transmits collected data
through the cellular system either after a given time out or
when a certain amount of data has been collected. If also
V2V and V2R communications can be exploited, informa-
tion can be exchanged also between vehicles and between
vehicles and RSUs. In this case, OBUs communicate one
with each other exchanging information and aggregating
redundant data referring to the same road segment. Both
the aggregation of information and the transmission through
RSUs allow to reduce the UMTS load toward the control
center, thus saving the limited capacity of the cellular
network and the related costs. We assume that, when ve-
hicles are also equipped with technologies for short range
communications, WAVE/IEEE 802.11p [3] is adopted as the
standard for communication and OBUs know the positions
(i.e., the coordinates) of RSUs and are able to associate any
measured data with the correspondent road segment. In par-
ticular, the following routing strategy is assumed throughout
the paper: communications occur between two vehicles a
time; each vehicle identiﬁes among its neighbors the one
nearest to a RSU, which is elected as master. The master is
in charge of receiving the data, merging the received data
with its own if redundant, and transmitting them as far as
it is within the coverage distance of the RSU. Since this
procedure is performed iteratively, data can rapidly reach a
RSU even from a relatively far distance if a sufﬁcient density
of vehicles is equipped with OBUs. Packets that cannot be
transmitted to a RSU are transmitted via UMTS when one of
the following conditions occurs: after a maximum number
of packets is reached in the transmission queue or at a given
time out. To detect which vehicle is the nearest to a RSU,
GPS coordinates are also exchanged.
In the further, we show the advantages achievable by
sharing and aggregating the collected trafﬁc information
through the exploitation of V2V and V2R communications,
and the impact of number and positions of the RSUs.
IV. INVESTIGATION TOOLS
The investigation of the considered scenario requires a
complete simulation of the cellular network, both in the
uplink and in the downlink, as well as a realistic simulation
of vehicles’ movements. In fact, the vehicular mobility
signiﬁcantly impacts on the performance of the telecom-
munication network and on the trafﬁc redistribution itself.
A realistic mobility model is thus needed, and it has to
take into account all roads, with their speed limits, vehicles
acceleration and decelerations, queues at trafﬁc lights, etc.
Hence, we developed a simulation platform which integrates
VISSIM [25] as vehicular trafﬁc simulator and the sim-
ulation platform for heterogeneous interworking networks
(SHINE) [26] as cellular network simulator, thus allowing us
to provide realistic results both in terms of vehicular trafﬁc
Figure 2.
Integrated platform for the simulation of smart navigation.
(with queues, number of lanes, one way roads, etc.) and
communication systems [8].
Vehicular simulator: VISSIM [25]. It is a microscopic
simulation tool modelling trafﬁc ﬂow in urban areas as
well as interurban motorways, and allowing to reproduce
car-following and lane changing as in real scenarios. It
uses a psycho-physical car following model for longitudinal
vehicles movement and a rule-based algorithm for lateral
movements. VISSIM allows to be controlled by external
applications with the use of a component object model
(COM): by the adoption of dynamic link libraries (DLL),
it is possible for an application to control the movement of
vehicles and to manage the whole simulation.
Cellular network simulator: SHINE [26]. It is an event
driven dynamic simulator which allows to jointly take into
account the whole cellular network architecture from the
application layer to the physical layer, also carefully re-
producing the time and frequency correlated behavior of
the wireless medium, which is often approximated or even
neglected in most network simulator. All relevant aspects
of the real system are reproduced, including for example a
not uniform positioning of Nodes-B, any speciﬁc antenna
pattern, and hard, soft, and softer handover mechanisms.
Integrated platform. We realized a ﬂexible architecture
integrating VISSIM with SHINE, enabling the realistic sim-
ulation of vehicular trafﬁc together with real-time networks
communications [8]. This integrated platform allows the
simulation of the whole smart navigation scenario: the
vehicular mobility and the OBUs’s transmissions, the data
processing at the control center, the data base update with
dynamic data, and the retransmission of personalized dedi-
cated information to the smart navigators. The architecture
of the overall simulation platform is depicted in Fig. 2; each
component interacts with the others through sockets and
remote procedure calls (RCPs). In particular, the following
main blocks can be identiﬁed: OBU, which simulates the
on board device collecting and transmitting position and
speed; DRG, which stands for dynamic rout guidance and
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

represents vehicles ﬂeet equipped with a smart navigator
device, able to receive updated trafﬁc information from
the control center; Control Center, which is responsible of
the gathering of data transmitted by the OBUs to update
the dynamic data base; Communication Technology, which
simulates the cellular network from the application layer
down to the physical layer; Trafﬁc Control Framework,
which is charge of controlling vehicles and their interactions
and is based on VISSIM simulator; Simulation Globals,
which manages the overall architecture from the trafﬁc to
the network simulation. More details are available in [8].
V. SERVICE CLASSES AND FIGURES OF MERIT
The road-network layout of the reference scenario consists
of the medium sized Italian city of Bologna. In particular,
we considered 13.636 road segments, corresponding to a
length of about 600 Km. The digital-maps of the Italian
road network have been provided by TeleAtlas, the world’s
provider of location and navigation solutions, and given as
input to VISSIM. Results will be obtained considering two
classes of service: vehicles equipped with OBUs performing
packet transmissions over the cellular networks (hereafter
intelligent transportation system (ITS) users), and pedestri-
ans performing voice calls through cellular phones (hereafter
voice users) as background trafﬁc. Pedestrians can move
everywhere in the scenario and are randomly generated in
the scenario, with the same birth probability in each cellular
cell (this means that a higher density of users is assumed
where smaller cells are considered). Differently, vehicles’
positions are managed by VISSIM.
A. Uplink
The portion of Bologna considered for extracting UMTS
simulations results is shown in Fig. 3 and consists of a
rectangular area of the city center sized 1.8 km (longitude)
x 1.6 km (latitude) with 35 UMTS cells covered by 15
Nodes-B (1, 2 or 3 cells per Node-B are assumed). An
approximated area of coverage is depicted for each cell with
random colors. Black segments represent roads where ve-
hicles movements are constrained. Hereafter, Λ(v) indicates
the average offered voice load in Erlang per km2, while Λ(I)
indicates the average offered ITS load expressed in vehicles
per Km2. A single frequency planning is considered. In each
cell, one RACH (out of the available ones) is exclusively
used by the ITS service in the uplink. Propagation chan-
nels are realistically represented both for UMTS and IEEE
802.11p. Vehicles transmit 80 byte packets every 10 seconds.
For further details the reader may refer to [4].
Figures of merit. To evaluate the quality of the ITS
service, we aim at investigating the probability that each
measurement stored in vehicles is correctly received by the
control center, independently on the speciﬁc source.
A scheduled transmission fails in two cases: when the
RACH ramping procedure is unsuccessful, meaning that
Figure 3.
Map of the city center of Bologna and UMTS planning. Filled
black squares correspond to Nodes-B locations. An approximated area of
coverage is depicted for each cell with random colors.
the propagation conditions and the perceived interference
level are so disadvantageous that the maximum transmission
power is not sufﬁcient, and when an error is checked at the
receiver. In any case, the MAC layer may attempt a number
of retransmissions before discarding the packet.
Focusing on the ITS service, results will thus be expressed
in terms of packet discard rate (RD), that is the ratio between
the number of discarded packets and the total number of
packets generated by all on-board equipments.
B. Downlink
The portion of Bologna and the city planning of UMTS
are those of the uplink described in Section V-A.
1) Unicast Mode: Following the assumptions made in
Section III, vehicles receive updated trafﬁc information
through a 60000 bytes download (i.e., 1000 road segments
× 60 bytes) every 5 minutes. Data are transmitted adopting
the TCP protocol at the transport level, that assures data
reception. A 64 kb/s bearer is considered, corresponding
to a logical dedicated trafﬁc channel (DTCH), a transport
DCH, and a physical dedicated data channel (DPDCH).1
The DPDCH is transmitted adopting a spreading factor (SF)
equal to 16 in uplink (note, in fact, that a dedicated unicast
communication is required also in the uplink direction for
the TCP acknowledgment transmission) and 32 in downlink.
A transmission time interval (TTI) of 10 ms is assumed.
Figure of merit. An ITS user is satisﬁed if the update is
received with a delay lower than 15s (please consider that
less than 10 seconds would be required if data were trans-
mitted at 64 kb/s with no errors and no TCP redundancy).
2) Multicast Mode: Data are transmitted adopting the
user datagram protocol (UDP) at transport level, which
1The low amount of bytes and the relaxed delay requirements do not
justify the use of more consuming bearers.
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Figure 4.
Origin and destination of path-1 in the considered scenario.
introduces limited redundancy but do not grant reliable com-
munications; in this case, in fact, the absence of the uplink
connection does not allow the transmission of acknowledg-
ments. Two bearers at 64 and 128 kb/s are considered,
each corresponding to an MTCH (MBMS transport channel)
logical channel, a FACH (forward access channel) transport
channel and a S-CCPCH (secondary common control phys-
ical channel) physical channel. The S-CCPCH is transferred
(obviously, in downlink) adopting a SF equal to 64. A TTI
of 40 ms is assumed.
Figure of merit. An ended ITS session is assumed in
outage if less than the 95% of packets are correctly received.
C. Background Voice Trafﬁc
To evaluate the UMTS performance in the considered
scenario both in the uplink and in the downlink, the quality
perceived by users belonging to other services than the ITS
one is also of main interest. Without lacking of generality,
here we focus on random walking users performing voice
calls as interfered service both in the uplink and downlink.
Figures of merit. The evaluation of the quality of service
perceived by users is based on the following deﬁnitions:
per each frame lasting 10ms, a user (i.e., a voice call) is
deﬁned in outage if the BER after channel decoding of that
frame is greater than 2% (uplink and downlink are evaluated
independently to each other); an ended voice call is then
considered in outage when either in downlink or in uplink,
the outage intervals exceed a threshold of 5%. Hence, we
have an outage voice call when one user is able to talk to
the other party, but with poor audio quality.
A voice call may also incur in the following situations: it
may be blocked by the call admission control algorithm due
to insufﬁcient resources, or it may drop due to an excessive
reduction of the received signal power.
For this reason, results will be presented in the following
in terms of satisfaction rate (SatR), that is the ratio between
the number of users which are not blocked, neither dropped,
nor in outage, and the total number of call requests.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Λ (v) [E/km2]
SatR (Voice users)
 
 
Λ (I)=0 vehicles/Km2
Λ (I)=220 vehicles/Km2
Figure 5. Voice trafﬁc performance: voice SatR vs. the offered voice trafﬁc
Λ(v). Comparison between no ITS and ITS service on the network.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
RD (ITS service)
Λ (v) [E/km2]
 
 
Λ (I)=220 vehicles/Km2
Figure 6.
ITS trafﬁc performance: ITS packets RD varying the offered
voice trafﬁc Λ(v), with Λ(I) = 220 vehicles/Km2.
D. Short Range Communications
The use of V2V and V2R is envisioned in order to
reduce both the cellular network load, which represents
the main component of the service cost, and the delivery
delays, that impact on the accuracy of vehicular trafﬁc
estimation (lower delays, in fact, mean a more frequent
update of trafﬁc conditions). In the simulations, a parametric
percentage of vehicles is assumed equipped with an OBU
that every τ seconds acquires several vehicle parameters,
such as speed and position (which are referred in the
following as measured data). Measured data are stored in the
OBUs transmission queues and then transmitted according to
the transmission strategies described in Section III-C. Both
ﬂuent trafﬁc conditions and congested trafﬁc conditions with
car-queues arising in the proximity of some crossroads are
considered. The former case is characterized by Λ(I) =150
vehicles/km2 in average, whereas an average density of
Λ(I) = 220 vehicles/km2 characterizes the latter case.
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Maximum average voice calls / km2
δ (fraction of vehicles equipped with the smart navigator)
 
 
Voice and unicast 64 kb/s
Figure 7.
Voice capacity as a function of the fraction of vehicles receiving
dedicated trafﬁc information in unicast mode. Λ(I) = 220 vehicles/Km2.
Curves will show the ratio of saved cellular resources SR,
i.e. the number of packets not delivered through cellular net-
work exploiting the adoption of the considered strategy over
the number of generated packets; considerations on delivery
delay are not reported here for the seek of conciseness, and
can be found with other details in [10].
E. Smart Navigation Service
To also evaluate the impact of a timely communication
on trafﬁc management, we evaluate the travel time to des-
tination of a vehicle equipped with smart navigator. To this
aim, the following are the simulation settings. In this case we
considered non stationary trafﬁc conditions, with a vehicles
density that during each simulation vary in the range 1-10
vehicles/Km.
A parametric percentage of vehicles is assumed equipped
with OBUs. No V2V and V2R communication is assumed
in this case; every τ seconds, each OBU transmits the actual
position and speed to the control center. Measured data
are stored in the control center queue and averaged on a
parametric Tint interval time.
Then, every Tupdate seconds, the control center retransmits
the processed data back to those vehicles equipped with
smart navigators. To avoid altered measurements in those
roads where no vehicles or a too low percentage of them
passed, we set up an average speed equal to that given by the
static roadmap provided by TeleAtlas lowered by the 30%:
this allows to not overestimate the speed. In addition, when
the measured speed is lower than 15Km/h, we force the
measurements exactly to 15Km/h: this avoid to overestimate
the travel time in the involved road segment. As a case
study, the origin-destination couple, denoted as path-1 and
represented in Fig. 4, has been considered in simulations.
−20
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Maximum average voice calls / km2
Power to MBMS relative to maximum [dB]
 
 
Voice and multicast 64 kb/s
Voice and multicast 128 kb/s
Figure 8.
Voice capacity as a function of the Node-B power dedicated to
MBMS multicast service. Λ(I) = 220 vehicles/Km2.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Uplink
The SatR for voice users and the RD for ITS service
are plotted in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, respectively, as a function
of Λ(v). Λ(I) = 220 vehicles/Km2 is assumed, which corre-
sponds to a heavy trafﬁc condition with many trafﬁc queues.
In Fig. 5, the SatR of voice users is depicted, and the
case with no ITS service (Λ(I)=0) is shown for comparison.
Observing Fig. 5, the presence of the ITS service seems not
to impact on voice users, since their satisfaction remains
almost unchanged. In Fig. 6, however, the RD as a function
of Λ(v) is also plotted for the same value of Λ(I). As can
be observed, the higher is the network load, the higher the
RD, and the QoS of the ITS service results deteriorated. If
Λ(v)=740 (corresponding to SatR=0.95) is taken as refer-
ence value, a packet loss higher than 5% can be observed,
meaning that guaranteeing a SatR=0.95 to voice users, does
not imply that the ITS users are also served. To improve the
QoS of the ITS service, a lower number of voice calls must
be accepted. For instance, if RD lower than 10−2 is targeted,
with respect to a maximum of Λ(v)=740 in the absence of the
ITS service, a reduction of about 100 (13.4%) average voice
users per Km2 must be considered, drastically reducing the
voice users’ capacity.
B. Downlink
In Fig. 7, the maximum voice capacity normalized in a
one Km2 area is plotted as a function of the number of
equipped vehicles receiving updated trafﬁc information via a
dedicated unicast channel. In particular, the x-axis represents
the ratio δ of vehicles that are equipped with the smart
device. The y-axis represents the maximum amount of voice
calls that allow the system to serve both trafﬁc classes with a
satisfaction rate (i.e., ratio of satisﬁed users over the number
of users of that class) grater than 95%. When the number
of equipped vehicles is zero, we obtain results referred to
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Figure 9.
RSUs positions in the considered scenario.
the presence of voice only, considered as a benchmark (695
average voice calls). We can observe that, as the number of
equipped vehicles receiving updated information increases,
the maximum number of voice calls (i.e., the number of
voice users) decreases, due to larger resources dedicated
to the ITS service. However, we can note that, if the 50%
of vehicles were equipped with smart navigators receiving
updated information in unicast mode, the system could serve
them also satisfying about 620 voice calls per Km2. If all
vehicles were equipped (δ = 1), the capacity of the system
in terms of servable voice calls would, instead, be halved.
Multicast results, shown in Fig. 8, are obtained varying the
power used to transmit the S-CCPCH carrying the MTCH
channel of the MBMS channel (which is used for the
ITS service). More speciﬁcally, a constant fraction of the
maximum available power at the base station is reserved for
this use. In Fig. 8 results are presented assuming the fraction
of Node-B power dedicated to MBMS in the x-axis and the
maximum amount of voice calls (per km2) that allow the
system to serve both classes of trafﬁc with at least 95%
satisfaction rate in the y-axis. Multicast at 64 kb/s and 128
kb/s are compared. As can be observed, independently on
the adopted bearer, the number of voice calls increases with
the power dedicated to MBMS until a maximum, then it
start decreasing: low power levels to the MBMS service,
in fact, require low interference in order to guarantee a full
coverage to the ITS service, while high power levels generate
strong interference that limits the number of servable voice
calls. We can thus note that a trade off between voice and
ITS service can be obtained for both 64 kb/s and 128 kb/s,
corresponding to -18 dB to MBMS with 690 average voice
calls and -16 dB to MBMS with 500 average voice calls,
respectively. These numbers also highlight that the adoption
of a 128 kb/s bearer greatly reduces the number of voice
calls with respect to 64 kb/s.
C. Short Range Communications
Numerical results are initially given considering a single
RSU in the most crowded junction and then modifying
the position and number of active RSUs. To increase the
probability to reach the RSU before the time out for trans-
mission over the cellular link expires, the maximum number
of packets that can be queued is here set to a very high
number (1000); with this assumption, in our results, the time
out is always reached before the threshold on stored data.
In Fig. 9, the sites we considered for RSUs deployment in
the reference scenario of Bologna are shown, corresponding
to the mostly crowded junctions (note, in fact, that major
junctions are suitable sites also owing to the likely presence
of lighting, trafﬁc lights, and therefore of power supply).
As ﬁrst case we assume that only RSU A is available
for communication in the entire scenario depicted in Fig. 9.
RSU A is positioned, in particular, in the busiest crossroad
of the whole scenario. The average ratio of saved cellular
resources that can be achieved in this case taking advantage
of both V2V and V2R communications is shown in Fig. 10
as a function of the sampling interval τ, varying the trafﬁc
conditions and the percentage of vehicles equipped with the
OBU. Results show that even when a single RSU is properly
positioned in a large area, a signiﬁcant amount of data can
be transmitted to it. Let us observe, in fact, that even with
τ lower than 30 s and only the 10% of vehicles equipped
with OBU, SR is still signiﬁcant (more than 10%). It could
be veriﬁed that also delivery delays are reduced [10].
The impact of RSUs position on the beneﬁt they can pro-
vide is quite relevant: in order to investigate this aspect we
report, in Fig. 11, SR considering different positions of a sin-
gle RSU (RSU A, RSU B, and RSU C) and the deployment
of all RSUs depicted in Fig. 9. For the sake of conciseness,
only the case of heavy trafﬁc and 100% equipped vehicles is
considered. Curves are shown as a function of the sampling
interval τ. We can observe that RSU B and RSU C, being
located in less busy junctions, are less effective than RSU
A, owing to a reduced amount of vehicles passing in their
proximity. Comparing the beneﬁt provided by RSU A to
the one achievable with all RSUs simultaneously active we
can infer that the advantage obtained deploying all RSUs is
not very high with respect to the one achievable deploying
only RSU A and would not justify the ﬁnancial investments
required. The great effectiveness of RSU A suggests that
a relevant role is played by V2V communications. It is
likely, in fact, that also vehicles not passing in the proximity
of RSU A are successful in the attempt to transmit their
information without cellular transmissions by means of
multi-hop V2V communications and the strategic position
of RSU A. Here we can observe that the effectiveness of
the roadside infrastructure is signiﬁcantly enhanced by the
joint adoption of V2V communications. If V2V interface
was not available, then the number of deployed RSUs would
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ [s]
SR
 
 
Λ (I)=150 vehicles/km2, 10% OBUs
Λ (I)=150 vehicles/km2, 100% OBUs
Λ (I)=220 vehicles/km2, 10% OBUs
Λ (I)=220 vehicles/km2, 100% OBUs
Figure 10.
SR as a function of τ, with RSU A only.
be decisive to reduce the cellular load.
D. Smart Navigation Service
Results are presented for Tint = 10 s, Tupdate = 20 s,
and τ equal to 10, 30, or 60 s. Figures show the travel
time, from origin to destination, of a controlled vehicle
equipped with the smart navigator for different percentage
of equipped vehicles and different scenarios. In each ﬁgure,
results are compared with the following three cases adopted
as benchmarks: i) Free running, referred to the case of a
single vehicle moving alone on the entire scenario; ii) Best
case with smart navigation, referred to a vehicle equipped
with a smart navigator continuously updated with the best
route, iii) No smart navigation, referred to the the same route
as in Free Running in the presence of trafﬁc (a navigator may
be present, but without knowledge of real time trafﬁc).
In Fig. 12, the travel time to destination is shown for path-
1. These results follow an extensive simulation campaign,
where also other paths were considered; similar results have
been however obtained in all cases, and other plots are here
omitted for length limitation. Figures 12(a), 12(b), and 12(c)
refer to three different (uplink) transmission times τ: 10 s,
30 s, and 60 s, respectively. For each percentage of OBU
equipped vehicles, six results are presented, corresponding
to six different simulations providing time and space ran-
domness (i.e., different vehicles are equipped with OBU,
and the sampling process starts at different instants). By
observing Figs. 12(a), 12(b), and 12(c), it can be noted
that the time to destination increases with τ, showing a not
negligible impact of a timeliness update of road segments
status. Focusing on Fig. 12(a), the impact of the percentage
of OBU equipped vehicles can be appreciated: with a so
prompt update in the uplink (τ = 10 s), the 10% of vehicles
equipped with connected OBUs is sufﬁcient to have a time
to destination very near to the best case (i.e., about 600 s).
When the transmission time τ from vehicles to the control
center is higher (see Figs. 12(b), and 12(c) referring to
τ = 30 s and τ = 60 s, respectively) the 10% of vehicles
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ [s]
SR
 
 
RSU A
RSU B
RSU C
All RSUs
Figure 11.
Impact of RSUs position and number. SR as a function of τ
with Λ((I)) = 220 vehicles/Km2 and 100% vehicles equipped with OBUs.
is no more sufﬁcient to obtain optimal results, that can be
instead achieved only when all vehicles are equipped with
OBUs.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we summarized the results of the Italian
project PEGASUS with focus on wireless technologies for
smart mobility. Speciﬁcally, we considered UMTS as the
enabling technology for the real time acquisition and trans-
mission of trafﬁc information. We discussed the feasibility
of the service and we evaluated the impact of such a commu-
nication on other services already provided by UMTS. Our
studies highlighted that the service appears feasible and that
the number of equipped vehicles does not seem a critical
issue; we also pointed out, however, that a not negligible
loss in capacity for the other services must be accounted
for in order to guarantee a satisfactory quality of service.
The beneﬁts arising from the adoption of V2V and V2R
communications have also been explored. We ﬁnally showed
that the knowledge in real time of the trafﬁc conditions
allows an efﬁcient smart navigation and a not negligible
saving of travel time.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Papadimitratos, A. La Fortelle, K. Evenssen, R. Brignolo,
and S. Cosenza, “Vehicular communication systems: Enabling
technologies, applications, and future outlook on intelligent
transportation,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47,
no. 11, pp. 84 –95, 2009.
[2] IEEE Trial-Use Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular
Environments (WAVE) - Multi-Channel Operation, Std., 2006.
[3] Standard for Information Technology- Telecommunications
and Information Exchange between Systems- Local and
Metropolitan Area Networks-Speciﬁc Requirements Part 11
- Amendment 6: Wireless Access in Vehicular Environment,
IEEE Std. 802.11p, 2010.
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free running
Best case with smart navigation
No smart navigation
(a) τ = 10s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free running
Best case with smart navigation
No smart navigation
(b) τ = 30s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free running
Best case with smart navigation
No smart navigation
(c) τ = 60s.
Figure 12.
Travel time to destination for several percentage of vehicles equipped with OBU.
[4] A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano, “On the frequent
acquisition of small data through RACH in UMTS for ITS
applications,” Vehic. Tech., IEEE Tran. on, vol. 60, no. 7, pp.
2914 – 2926, Sep. 2011.
[5] PEGASUS
project.
Accessed
on
Oct.
2012.
[Online].
Available: http://pegasus.octotelematics.com
[6] A. Conti, A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano, Vehicular
Networks: Techniques, Standards, and Applications.
Auer-
bach Pub., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009, ch.
Heterogeneous Wireless Communications for Vehicular Net-
works, pp. 63–107, ISBN: 9781420085716.
[7] A. Bazzi, B. Masini, G. Pasolini, and P. Torreggiani,
“Telecommunication systems enabling real time navigation,”
in IEEE ITSC, Sep. 2010, pp. 1057 – 1064.
[8] A. Toppan, A. Bazzi, P. Toppan, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano,
“Architecture of a simulation platform for the smart naviga-
tion service investigation,” in IEEE WiMob, Oct. 2010, pp.
548 – 554.
[9] A. Bazzi and B. Masini, “Real time trafﬁc updates via UMTS:
Unicast versus multicast transmissions,” in IEEE VTC Fall,,
Sep. 2011, pp. 1 – 6.
[10] A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and G. Pasolini, “V2V and V2R for
cellular resources saving in vehicular applications,” in IEEE
WCNC, Apr. 2012, pp. 1–5.
[11] P. Belanovic, D. Valerio, A. Paier, T. Zemen, F. Ricciato,
and C. Mecklenbrauker, “On wireless links for vehicle-to-
infrastructure communications,” Vehic. Tech., IEEE Trans. on,
vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 269 – 282, Jan. 2010.
[12] D. Valerio, A. D’Alconzo, F. Ricciato, and W. Wiedermann,
“Exploiting cellular networks for road trafﬁc estimation: A
survey and a research roadmap,” in IEEE VTC Spring 2009,
april 2009, pp. 1 –5.
[13] The aktiv CoCar project. Accessed on Oct. 2012. [On-
line].
Available:
http://www.aktiv-online.org/english/aktiv-
cocar.html
[14] S. Cho, K. Geon, Y. Jeong, C.-H. Ahn, S. I. Lee, and
H. Lee, “Real time trafﬁc information service using terrestrial
digital multimedia broadcasting system,” Broadcasting, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 550 –556, Dec. 2006.
[15] U. Dietz, “CoCar Feasibility Study: Technology, Business and
Dissemination,” CoCar Consortium, Report, May 2009.
[16] C.
Sommer,
A.
Schmidt,
R.
German,
W.
Koch,
and
F. Dressler, “Simulative Evaluation of a UMTS-based Car-to-
Infrastructure Trafﬁc Information System,” in IEEE GLOBE-
COM.
New Orleans, LA: IEEE, December 2008.
[17] C. Sommer, A. Schmidt, Y. Chen, R. German, W. Koch,
and F. Dressler, “On the feasibility of umts-based trafﬁc
information systems,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 8, no. 5, pp.
506 – 517, 2010.
[18] I. Lequerica, P. Ruiz, and V. Cabrera, “Improvement of vehic-
ular communications by using 3G capabilities to disseminate
control information,” Network, IEEE, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 32 –
38, Jan.-Feb. 2010.
[19] B. Bai, W. Chen, K. Letaief, and Z. Cao, “Low complexity
outage optimal distributed channel allocation for vehicle-to-
vehicle communications,” Selected Areas in Communications,
IEEE Journal on, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 161 –172, 2011.
[20] J. Karedal, N. Czink, A. Paier, F. Tufvesson, and A. F.
Molisch, “Path loss modeling for vehicle-to-vehicle com-
munications,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 323 –328, 2011.
[21] C. Campolo and A. Molinaro, “Vehicle-to-roadside multihop
data delivery in 802.11p/WAVE vehicular ad hoc networks,”
in IEEE GLOBECOM, 2010, pp. 1 –5.
[22] P. Benko, G. Malicsko, and A. Veres, “A large-scale, passive
analysis of end-to-end TCP performance over GPRS,” in
IEEE INFOCOM, vol. 3, Mar. 2004, pp. 1882–1892.
[23] I. Vukovic and T. Brown, “Performance analysis of the
random access channel (RACH) in WCDMA,” in IEEE VTC
Spring., vol. 1, May 2001, pp. 532–536.
[24] Trafﬁc and Travel Information (TTI) via Transport Protocol
Expert Group (TPEG) data-streams: Parts 1 to 6, ETSI Std.
ISO 18 234.
[25] Vissim.
Accessed
on
Oct.
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.english.ptv.de/cgi-bin/trafﬁc/traf vissim.pl
[26] A. Bazzi, G. Pasolini, and C. Gambetti, “SHINE: Simulation
platform for heterogeneous interworking networks,” in IEEE
ICC, vol. 12, 2006, pp. 5534 –5539.
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

