KeyGait: Framework for Continuously Biometric
Authentication during Usage of a Smartphone
Matthias Trojahn
Volkswagen AG
Wolfsburg, Germany
matthias.trojahn@volkswagen.de
Frank Ortmeier
Otto-von-Guericke University
Magdeburg, Germany
frank.ortmeier@ovgu.de
Abstract—The ability of having a secure mobile device is
determined by different aspects (e.g., hardened system, authen-
tication or anti-virus). Normal authentication methods are only
requesting authentication characteristics at the beginning of the
usage. The aim of this paper is to create a framework which
can continuously analyze which user is using the device at each
moment. While mobile devices are easy to lose or can be stolen,
it is important to do an authentication process during usage.
We propose a continuous trust model using keystroke dynamics
and movements of the device as biometrical modalities to have a
certainty of the usage at each time.
Keywords—security framework; mobile devices; biometric au-
thentication; continuously authentication; usability
I.
INTRODUCTION
The need of a continuous authentication process exists for
mobile devices. These devices can be stolen or lost easily
because they are so small. For example, a survey from Credant
Technologies reported in 2008 that in six months 55,000 cel-
lular phones were left in London taxis [1]. The ﬁrst challenge
is that these devices are only secured by a password. In
addition, only if the device is unlocked properly the password
is asked when accessing the device. This means a continuous
authentication system with a properly initial authentication
combined with a re-authentication during usage is needed.
Re-authentication means an additional authentication during
usage, which happens in the background.
In this paper, we present a framework which uses inertial
sensors and a capacitive display to fulﬁll the need for the
continuous authentication system.
For this, we describe the related work and the contribution
of our work in this section. In Section 2, we present our
continuous authentication model with the concept and the trust
model which handles the certainty of the device which user is
using the device. Then, we will present hypothetical test cases
for using this model. Finally, we discuss the framework in
Section 4 and conclude our research in Section 5.
A. Related work
Two related researchs were identiﬁed. First, we will focus
on the biometrical authentication via keystroke on smart-
phones. This can be separated into text dependent or inde-
pendent analysis. The second approach is concerning the gait
recognition of a person.
Prior work for keystroke dynamics was mainly focused
on keyboard for a PC [2], [3] or on the mobile phone with
12 keys [4], [5]. Most of the experiments are using the
features “duration of pressing one key” or the “time between
pressing two / three keys”. In general, error rates like false
acceptance rate (FAR) or false rejection rate (FRR) are used
to compare different results. The FAR describes how intruders
can access a system. In addition, the percentage of rejections
of an authorized person divided by all attempts of authorized
person is called the FRR. Both error rates have to be as
small as possible to have a secure system. The point where
FAR is equal to FRR is called equal error rate (ERR). Good
results for text dependent authentication are already shown by
Karatzouni et al. [6] with a EER of 12.2 % (experiment with
50 person). The advantage of keystroke is that not all attempts
by an intruder are successful compared with a simple password
authentication. A FRR of 12 % means that only every ninth
attempt of all unauthorized attempts is successful.
Zahid et al. [7] did a text independent keystroke authentica-
tion. They used key hold time, error rate and different digraphs
(horizontal, vertical, non-adjacent horizontal and non-adjacent
vertical) as features. The different digraphs are used because
there is no prediction of the combination between different
keystrokes. These experiments on a mobile phone with 12 keys
had a result of FAR 11 % and FRR 9.22 %.
As in the survey done by Banerjee [8], a lot of different
experiments showed better results then the previous mentioned
experiments but there the number of subjects was low (under
50 people).
The gyroscope is employed to measure any rotation of the
device. Only the uniqueness for single persons turned out to be
rather low. In an experiment Derawi et al. [9] had in the study
an EER of 20 % (the device was carried on the hip of the test
person). This is not enough to be a good single authentication
method. A fusion with the keystroke dynamics is necessary.
Further work has shown that with a higher sampling rate the
EER can be improved [10], [11]. If more than one smartphone
could be used the recognition rate could be reduced [12].
B. Contribution of this work
The major shortcoming of all existing approaches is that
they do not allow continuous authentication on smartphones.
Keystroke dynamics with a ﬁxed text is only possible during
the unlock process. After this, the user is not typing the same
pass phrase again. Text independent keystroke authentication is
not analyzed properly for the new generation of mobile phones
with capacitive display. Gait authentication is an approach
which can be used as a continuous authentication but the error
rates are too high to give a certainty which is needed for a
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 1: Activities during usage of a smartphone
secure environment. It only can be used during fusion with
another modality.
The goal of this work is to propose a generated framework
which can be used to authenticate a person continuously during
the whole process of usage. For this, we present a solution
using different sensors of smartphones. The solution is based
on a trust model where the users are authenticated with a
particular certainty.
Fig. 1 describes the whole process of unlocking and
locking of a device. If the user wants to use the device, an
authentication has to be done. For this task, the keystroke
authentication is suitable.
Fig. 1 also shows also which possibilities exist after usage.
First, the user locks the device himself. Second, the device is
locking itself after a predeﬁned time. The last possibility is
that the user wants to use the device again. In this situation
it is without a continuous authentication not possible to say
whether it is the same user or not. This model which includes a
continuous authentication will be described in the next section.
II.
OUR CONTINUOUSLY AUTHENTICATION
METHODOLOGY
The fundament of our model is a fusion of different
modalities and a transparent trust measurement. This fusion
has to be done continuously while the device is unlocked. First,
we will describe which modalities are included, then, we will
present the trust model.
A. Concept for a model
There are three basic points where a model can be attached:
during the unlocking of the device, during the usage of the
device and during the time the device is not used but unlocked.
Only if all points are included in an authentication system
it can continuously give information about how certain the
temporally user is recognized.
Because we focused on the capacity display and the gyro-
scope of the device, we could do the initial authentication on
Fig. 2: Data of the gyroscope sensor (Left: Z-axis during
walking; Right: X-axis during putting device on table)
the device via keystroke or gait. As we already stated, the error
rates for gait recognition are too high to give enough certainty
about the user. That is why we propose to use the keystroke
in addition to the password which we analyzed previously on
smartphones [13]. We suggested in different experiments the
usage of the capacitive display to extract additional features
(e.g., size of ﬁnger during typing or the correct coordinates).
In both of the next use cases, it is demonstrated how the
gyroscope data can be used. Fig. 2 shows the changes of the
one of three vectors (axis x, y and z - z vector was used).
On the left, a person was asked to walk with the device in the
pocket for 20 seconds. All the recorded steps show consciously
similar changes between different steps. The other two axis
show the same similarities which means a function can be
created which make it possible to recognize these pattern of
values as a walking person. The right ﬁgure represents how
a device is rotated. At ﬁrst, the user had to put the device
form a table to his pocket and then do it the other way
around. In this use case it can be seen how sensitive the
data are. Small changes are existing even if the device is
placed on a table that means a ﬁlter has to be used to extract
these incorrect data. After cleaning the data streams different
scenarios can be extracted by generating models for use cases
(unique combination of the gyroscope values).
In general, it is possible to detect whether the device moves
or stays at a location. This is important to trace whether the
device was unused by the user. In addition, as already stated,
the gait recognition could be used for a re-authentication if the
user is walking during using the device.
On the other hand, if the user is typing, the capacitive
display can be used to record data and authenticates the user
by the behaviour during typing (see Subsection I-A).
Gait
and
the
text
independent
authentication
using
keystroke can be used for a re-authentication. This could be
used to decide whether the user can reuse the device (see
Fig. 1). If no decision could be made or the device is already
locked, the user has to authenticate himself via his password.
B. Trust model
In the previous subsection, we described which modalities
we use for our framework. Now, we will deﬁne a trust model
for continuous authentication.
In Fig. 1, all use cases were shown which have to be
represented by the model. The device is locked and the user
has to authenticate him by using password and his biometric
keystroke behavior. Basically, the trust level depends on the
initial authentication. A higher certainty (authintial) results
in a higher trust level at the beginning of the usage process.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 3: Scale for the trust model
Furthermore, the time has an important role. With a rising
time difference between the initial authentication and the
current time the certainty decreases. Only with further re-
authentication methods the trust level could rise again. This
concept can be represented with the next formulas.
trust(t) = authintial − α
N
X
i=0
(cert(i))
(1)
cert(t) =













0,
if(key(t) ̸= null) and
(β move + χ key ≥ δ)
δ
2 − β move(t),
if(key(t) = null)
δ − (β move(t)
+χ key(t)),
otherwise
(2)
This means the initial authentication and the decreasing
certainty cert during a time box are inﬂuencing the trust in
which the device know which person is using the device.
The time length of the time boxes has to be evaluated in
combination with β and χ. During this time box the decreasing
certainty is calculated by recognition of the movements of the
devices move(t) and the interaction with the capacitive display
key(t). Both values are representing the certainty of each
sensor whether it is still the same person. They can be between
0 and 100. The value δ describes the threshold which is needed
that the trust level does not change. The value move(t) can
be walking of the person, text input or a combination. For
example, if a user is walking all the time after the unlock
it, the trust level should not decrease a lot. The second case
represents the case if the user is not using the device (e.g., is
in the pocket or is laying somewhere).
Fig. 3 shows the scale for the trust value. The position x
represents the initial authentication. The value is inﬂuenced by
the threshold of the authentication system and the amount in
which the authentication value was higher than the threshold.
With a bigger difference the authinitial is rising. In Figure 3,
additional areas are shown. The trusted area is the range where
the device knows who the user is with a speciﬁc trust level.
If the trust level is under the threshold ϕ, the device is unsure
and the device gets locked (the user cannot be temporally rec-
ognized enough). Only with an initial authentication the user
could access the device again. Before this could happen, the
temporally trust level gets under the value η. Then the certainty
is not enough to access all systems. In some companies policies
exist where with a one-factor-authentication (password) not
every system could be accessed whereas with a two-factor-
authentication (public key infrastructure with password) the
access is granted. This can be adapted to this model. If the
trust is over the trust level η the systems grants access to
Fig. 4: Trust level for scenario 1
applications which are normally accessed with a two-factor-
authentication. Between point ϕ and η it could be used as a
one-factor-authentication.
III.
HYPOTHETICAL TEST CASES
In this section, we will show how the framework works.
For this, we present the steps for two different scenarios. The
framework was implemented. For this, the variables (χ, β ...)
which are described in the formulas of Subsection II-B have
been replaced by the number 1 (naive approach). The time for
a time box is set to ﬁve seconds.
A. Scenario 1: Trust level is always given
In the ﬁrst scenario, a user is writing emails while walking
(b) after the initial authentication (a). Then, the user stops
writing and puts the device in the pocket of his trousers (c).
After this, the user is continuing walking (d) and when an
email is incoming, he is taking the device out of the pocket
(e) and reads the email (f). The last step is the locking by the
user (g). All the time the user was over both trust level lines
so the trust was high enough for all applications.
Different context changes can be seen in the Fig. 4. The
initial authentication has a very high trust value. This has two
reasons, ﬁrst the error rates for keystroke authentication are
low (at least under 5%) and second the user was identiﬁed with
a high certainty. During writing and walking the sensor collects
a lot of data. With this it is possible to recognize a person
that is why the trust level does not decrease much. Putting the
device in and out of the pocket the system recognizes a context
change. This can be used in next time boxes. We know with
this context changes that the user is still in the position of the
device to a very high level. It is, especially, in the situation
that the capacitive display is not used because the error rates
of gait are higher than the error rates for keystroke.
On the other side, if walking and reading are compared
the trust level decreases more because while reading on the
device, not enough input is generated to identify a person.
B. Scenario 2: Where an automatic lock happens
The second scenario was generated to show in which
situation an automatic lock of a device happens. For this, we
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 5: Trust level for scenario 2
proposed a solution where the device is laying on a table for
a non-deﬁned time.
Like the ﬁrst scenario the start is again an initial authenti-
cation (a). After this, the device is unlocked and can be used.
Here, the user writes an SMS (b) and after this puts the device
on a table (c) and it lays there for a time period (d). Then the
user reads a SMS (f) that he just received (e). Then the device
is locked (g) because the trust level reached the minimum. In
Fig. 5, these steps are shown.
The ﬁrst two steps are the same like in the previous
scenario, one only that a SMS is written. Then, if the user
puts the device on a table, both sensors do not get any more
data in this case the trust level decreases a lot because the user
can be everywhere. During this time the trust decreases under
the ﬁrst trust level line. After this, if the user wants to access
a high secure application, a new initial authentication has to
be done. While reading the SMS, no input has been done in
this case the trust level decreased more until the second line is
reached and the device gets locked no matter if the user wants
to read the SMS or do other think. In this case the user has to
input his initial credentials again to use the device again.
IV.
DISCUSSION
This section will discuss this approach and will present
some advantages and disadvantages.
With this framework, not only can the trust be established
at the beginning of the usage, but even during usage it is possi-
ble to recognize the user. For this, no additional interaction has
to be done. And no common attack is possible (e.g., shoulder
surﬁng or social engineering) because the additional feature
cannot be recorded. That means the security is raised. For
comparison, with a password the FAR is 100 %. Together with
the knowledge factor this biometric framework could be seen
as a two-factor-authentication.
On the other hand, some limitations exist at the moment.
The energy consumption for all the required sensors is too high
for the general usage during one day. In addition, most of the
studies for biometric modalities are not tested in general use
cases. All possible movements are not tested how well they
can be recognized and the system needs a lot of training to
identify the user.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we ﬁrst identiﬁed the problem of the continu-
ity of an authentication method on smartphones. Therefore, we
proposed a continuous authentication method using keystroke
dynamics (text dependent and independent) in addition to the
movement of the device (e.g., gait recognition). These methods
have to be fused and checked during several predeﬁned timed
boxes.
We presented a decision model how the trust can be
calculated during one and more time boxes. Especially, the
introduction of different thresholds is important for using
applications with different security level.
We proposed some scenarios, which show how the frame-
work is working, e.g., in which scenario the device locks
the device. In addition, advantages and disadvantages are
presented.
Overall, the proposed framework is an option for a bio-
metrical authentication on smartphones. It is an important step
towards a more effective and continuous authentication.
In the future, more tests have to be done with the modal-
ities, especially, in more general use cases. In addition, the
energy consumption has to be reduced.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Twentyman, “Lost smartphones pose signiﬁcant corporate risk,” 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://www.scmagazineuk.com/lost-smartphones-
pose-signiﬁcant-corporate-risk/article/126759/ [retrieved: 09/2013]
[2]
D. Umphress and G. Williams, “Identity veriﬁcation through keyboard
characteristics,” in Intl. J. of Man-Machine Studies, 1985, pp. 263–273.
[3]
F. Monrose and A. D. Rubin, “Keystroke dynamics as a biometric
for authentication,” in Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 16.
Elsevier Science Publishers B. V, 2000, pp. 351–359.
[4]
S.-s. Hwang, S. Cho, and S. Park, “Keystroke dynamics-based authen-
tication for mobile devices,” in Computers & Security, vol. 28, no. 1–2,
2009, pp. 85–93.
[5]
A. Buchoux and N. L. Clarke, “Deployment of keystroke analysis on a
smartphone,” in 6th Australian Inf. Sec. & Management Conf., 2008.
[6]
S. Karatzouni and N. L. Clarke, “Keystroke analysis for thumb-based
keyboards on mobile devices,” in Proceedings of the IFIP TC-11 22nd
Intl. Inf. Sec. Conf., H. S. Venter, M. M. Eloff, L. Labuschagne, J. H. P.
Eloff, and R. v. Solms, Eds., 2007, pp. 253–263.
[7]
S. Zahid, M. Shahzad, S. A. Khayam, and M. Farooq, “Keystroke-
based user identiﬁcation on smart phones,” in Intl. Symposium on Recent
Advances in Intrusion Detection, ser. RAID ’09.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 224–243.
[8]
S. Banerjee and D. Woodard, “Biometric authentication and identi-
ﬁcation using keystroke dynamics: A survey,” in Journal of Pattern
Recognition Research, vol. 7, 2012, pp. 116–139.
[9]
M. O. Derawi, C. Nickel, P. Bours, and C. Busch, “Unobtrusive user-
authentication on mobile phones using biometric gait recognition,”
in 6th Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Inf. Hiding and Multimedia Signal
Processing, Washington, DC, USA, 2010, pp. 306–311.
[10]
K. Holien, “Gait recognition under non-standard circumstances,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Gjøvik University College - Department of Computer
Science and Media Technology, 2008.
[11]
J. M¨antyj¨arvi, M. Lindholm, E. Vildjiounaite, S.-m. M¨akel¨a, and
H. Ailisto, “Identifying users of portable devices from gait pattern with
accelerometers,” in IEEE Intl. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, 2005.
[12]
G. Pan, Y. Zhang, and Z. Wu, “Accelerometer-based gait recognition
via voting by signature points,” in Electronics Letters, vol. 45, no. 22,
2009, pp. 1116–1118.
[13]
M. Trojahn and F. Ortmeier, “Biometric authentication through a
virtual keyboard for smartphones,” in International Journal of Computer
Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT), 2012.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

