Mobile Service Business Models for Cities: 
A Framework Bridging Public and Business Model Design Parameters 
Nils Walravens 
IBBT-SMIT 
Vrije Universiteit Brussel 
Brussels, Belgium 
nils.walravens@vub.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract— This paper proposes a business model framework 
that allows the design and analysis of value networks for 
mobile services in a public context. It starts from a validated 
business model framework and expands it to include 
parameters that come into play when a public entity (i.e., a city 
administration) becomes involved in the value network. In the 
quickly changing mobile telecommunications industry, this 
framework offers both an academic and practical tool, 
enabling the comparison and analysis of complex mobile city 
service business models that include public actors. After its 
theoretical development, the framework can be further 
validated by applying it to specific (inter)national and real-life 
cases.  
Keywords-Mobile services; business models; public value; 
public governance 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The telecommunications industry - and specifically the 
mobile communications sector - has undergone profound 
change in recent years, as commercial and public entities 
aim to find strategic fits while adapting their business 
models. This also applies to the subsector of mobile service 
provision (e.g., mobile applications and websites) on a 
regional, municipal or more local level. New players enter 
the sector (e.g., Apple and Google), actors shift their 
business strategies (e.g., Nokia and Microsoft), roles 
change, different types of platforms emerge and vie for 
market dominance while technological developments create 
new threats and opportunities (e.g., NFC and LTE) 
[10][11][25].  
These developments have not been without importance 
in the context of major metropolitan areas. Both private 
parties as well as city governments have seen the potential 
of mobile services, and several, divergent initiatives have 
been set up and applications or services developed. Mobile 
services can be particularly attractive in fields such as 
mobility, cultural activity (discovery), tourism, hotel and 
catering industry, interactions with government and so on. 
However, as these services grow in popularity and 
importance in the market, questions arise for city 
governments interested in harnessing the potential of mobile 
service provision in order to increase the quality of life for 
citizens in a meaningful way [24]. These questions relate to 
which roles cities can take up in the value network, how 
they should interact with emergent players, which data they 
may leverage in providing services, how they may take up 
platform roles or how they can create additional public 
value. 
This paper will provide an initial step towards answering 
these questions by building on the business model matrix, 
developed and validated in [2]. We will expand it to include 
business model design parameters that become relevant as 
soon as a public entity or government actor become involved 
in the value network. Section II offers a quick reminder of 
the parameters in the original framework –as they remain 
important in the newly developed matrix– followed by the 
development of the additional parameters in Sections III, IV 
and V. Finally, we propose an expanded framework that can 
be used both as a design and validation tool in discussing 
business models for mobile applications, which include 
public actors. This paper decidedly starts from the 
perspective of the city and takes mobile services as a case to 
explore new ways of thinking about business models in a 
public context and proposes a new theoretical framework to 
tackle pressing questions in this sector. 
II. 
BUSINESS MODEL MATRIX 
In this section, we briefly reiterate the basic concept of 
the business model framework we will be building on. 
Ballon [1][2] proposes a matrix that is centered around two 
types of parameters: control parameters on the one hand and 
value parameters on the other. It examines four different 
aspects of business models: (1) the way in which the value 
network is constructed or how roles and actors are 
distributed in the value network, (2) the technical 
architecture, or how technical elements play a role in the 
value creation process, (3) the financial architecture, or how 
revenue streams run between actors and the existence of 
revenue sharing deals, and (4) the value proposition 
parameters that describe the product or service that is being 
offered to end users.  
For each of these four business model design 
parameters, three underlying factors are at play, which can 
be summarized in a dichotomous way, but in reality operate 
on a scale between the proposed extremes. The use of the 
matrix as a tool for qualitative analysis has been validated 
through case studies in several sectors and extensively in 
relation to mobile services (e.g., in [3]). However, the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

specific nature of mobile city services, and more particularly 
the addition of a public component into the value network, 
adds increased complexity to the business model. In order to 
capture the intricacies of combining commercial and public 
control and value creation, we propose a reorientation and 
expansion of the business model matrix. This expanded 
matrix is represented in the figure below and the added 
parameters will be explained in the following sections. 
 
 
Figure 1. Expanded Business Model Framework. 
 
We note here that all the design parameters important for 
the business model certainly remain so when a public entity 
is involved or when certain policy goals are to be achieved. 
These criteria stay applicable and are not in need of retooling 
since they were designed with mobile service provision in 
mind. However, when we take the perspective of a city 
government or various public bodies, additional business 
model design parameters become important. We simply refer 
to these extra parameters as public design parameters. In the 
original business model matrix, a distinction is made 
between parameters related to control on the one hand and 
value on the other. This is not different for the public design 
parameters, however in a public setting we refer to these 
factors as public governance parameters on the one hand and 
public value parameters on the other. 
III. 
PUBLIC GOVERNANCE PARAMETERS 
The concept of governance is used in a variety of fields 
and can be defined in divergent ways (e.g., in strategic 
management literature [17][29]). This view is however less 
suited for our approach: the business model matrix assumes 
a complex value network of several companies, rather than 
focusing on the internal operations of a single firm. For our 
purposes, we will use the concept of governance starting 
from the perspective of the institutions organizing it, i.e., 
local governments. Our approach is thus based in the idea of 
public governance as described in, e.g., [8]. The United 
Nations define governance as: “… the process of decision-
making and the process by which decisions are implemented 
(or not implemented)” [27] and identifies government as a 
main actor in governance. It also highlights the added 
complexity to governance in an urban context, given the 
large number of actors involved [28]. A policy brief by the 
Institute on Governance focuses more on the public 
characteristics of the concept and defines it as being: “… 
about how governments and social organizations interact, 
how they relate to citizens, and how decisions are taken in a 
complex world. Thus governance is a process whereby 
societies or organizations make their important decisions, 
determine whom they involve in the process and how they 
render account.” [15]. The World Bank [30] offers another 
take on the process and says governance highlights efficient 
management of government resources and a mutual respect 
between citizens and the state. 
Depending on the viewpoint, the operationalization of 
governance can thus be quite variable. For the purposes of 
defining the governance parameters in relation to the 
business model matrix, we take note of the UN’s definition 
and can already identify two different layers on which 
governance can operate, namely in reaching certain policy 
goals (the implementation process) and organizationally 
(decision-making). This idea will be expanded upon later on. 
Elements that are related to the relationships between public 
and private entities, which stakeholders are involved in the 
decision-making process, how power and competences are 
distributed in the value network, the impact of different 
levels of regulation (transnational, international, national, 
regional, local), how decisions for or against certain 
technologies can have effects on the value network and value 
proposition and so on, are important parameters related to 
governance, which can be added to the business model 
through the participation of a public actor. The following 
section will detail the second set of public design parameters 
as an addition to the value parameters in the original matrix, 
namely those related to public value. 
IV. 
PUBLIC VALUE PARAMETERS 
The extension of value parameters to public value 
parameters is a logical one as it is clear that the involvement 
of a public entity in the value creation and value proposition 
can have consequences in the public sphere. For example, 
when public funds are used to develop and deploy a certain 
service, one might expect a government to justify to tax 
payers why such an investment is important and whether it 
fulfills a certain public value.  
Mark Moore, author of the seminal work Creating Public 
Value [20], together with John Benington, starts by 
exposing two ways in which public value can be regarded: 
firstly, “what the public values and secondly, what adds 
value to the public sphere”[5]. He argues that the first 
question ‘what the public values’ is a more recent one and 
can serve as a counterbalance to the top-down determination 
of what public value should be. It empowers citizens to 
become more active participants in government. However, 
tensions can form between these two, for example when 
public service is regulatory in nature (e.g., police) and may 
impose things on an “unwilling user” [20]. With relation to 
the second question of what adds value to the public sector, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Benington [5] answers with more questions in trying to 
define what the public sphere or the public itself is, as well 
as the interesting point on “what value constitutes in the 
public sphere, and who decides?”, exposing questions on 
power relations, the process of democratic dialogue and 
absolute and relative values, which are relevant to our 
analysis. He goes on to detail potential actors that can create 
value, situate where and how value is created and how it 
may be measured, and we will come back to this later.  
Talbot takes a related approach and identifies different 
areas in which public values may conflict and proposes that 
understanding these competing values better, offers a way 
for public agencies to deal with them [26]. He selects five 
dimensions on which a public entity should satisfy the 
public: trust and legitimacy, collectivity, security, personal 
utility and autonomy. Already, we begin to see similar 
concepts emerging to the ones appearing in the section on 
governance and issues such as transparency, responsibility, 
participation, trust and accountability will be an important 
part in the further development of the business model 
matrix.  
We take away that the concept of public value is clearly a 
multi-layered and complex one. For our purposes, we will 
need to limit the scope in analyzing public value to a more 
narrow set of parameters. We will define these new 
parameters in line with the existing business model 
framework, i.e., per domain (value network, technical 
architecture, financial architecture and value proposition), 
but add criteria to reflect the increased complexity when 
public actors are introduced to the value network. 
V. 
INTRODUCING PUBLIC DESIGN PARAMETERS 
The combination of governance parameters and public 
value parameters to the control and value parameters of the 
business model matrix, means expanding the framework 
downward to include additional parameters. The new 
parameters related to the public domain are explained 
below. Each time, the first parameter reflects a policy goal, 
the second an organizational challenge. 
A. Governance Parameters Related to the Value Network 
1) Good Governance 
Similarly to governance, several definitions of what 
constitutes good governance can be found. The United 
Nations Development Program states good governance is 
“participatory, transparent and accountable”, as well as 
“effective and equitable” and “promotes the rule of law” 
[27]. Hirst [16] proposes a definition, which focuses on the 
stabilizing elements good governance should entail, and 
Munshi [21] emphasizes the importance of participation in 
governing. Graham et al. [15] list five principles for good 
governance, based on a similar list of eight characteristics of 
good governance defined by UNESCAP [28], namely 
participation, rule of law, transparency, responsiveness, 
consensus oriented, equity and inclusiveness, effectiveness 
and efficiency, and accountability.  
Given the relatively vague nature of these concepts and 
the difficulties in operationalizing them, we will focus on 
what binds them together: a striving towards equilibrium in 
governing. This often means finding a balance amongst 
existing policy goals on the one hand and between those 
policy goals and existing regulation on the other. As 
existing policies and regulations can in many cases be 
contradictory, 
a 
striving 
towards 
consensus 
and 
harmonization of interests is deemed essential in good 
governance [16]. Since good governance can hardly be 
regarded as a confined concept [18] and several sources 
state it should be seen as a process, we propose selecting the 
trade-offs between often contradictory, existing policy 
objectives and regulation as an important parameter. In 
practice, this parameter is dependent on the context in which 
a certain initiative is taken, but could for example entail an 
analysis of the goals a service tries to reach and to what 
extent it contradicts other policies within a government (or 
e.g., a political coalition) or existing regulation. For 
example, as more ICT-related regulation comes into play on 
different decision-making levels (e.g., the Digital Agenda 
framework laid out by the European Commission [10]), 
local authorities need to take their compliance with this 
regulation into account when developing an initiative.  
Additionally, 
we 
emphasize 
the 
concepts 
of 
accountability and trust, as it is important to consider which 
public entity can be held accountable if something should go 
wrong and how the citizen’s rights are protected or can be 
enforced (see for example [9]). 
 
2) Stakeholder Selection and Management 
This organizational parameter refers to the choices that are 
made related to which stakeholders (be they public, semi-
public, non-governmental, private or so on) are involved or 
invited to participate in the process of bringing a service to 
end-users (see also the section on governance). In light of 
the good governance parameter and the striving for balance 
and consensus described above, including or excluding a 
particular stakeholder can have consequences for the 
viability of the final value network and is related to 
achieving a strategic fit [2] within the business model (cf. 
supra). Several (sometimes even pragmatic) elements can be 
important to take into account when deciding on which 
stakeholders to involve. For example, one aspect could be 
how competences are distributed among the government 
actor(s) involved in the value network. When discussing the 
city, it quickly becomes clear many different levels of 
government could come into play when offering a certain 
service, e.g., international, transnational, national, regional, 
provincial and local. Particularly in the case of large cities 
or municipalities with large or complex structures, it will be 
necessary to consider which public organization is 
responsible for a certain competence or application domain 
when developing a service, and how these different levels 
are organized and interact with each other. With the goal of 
achieving a strategic fit among the actors involved, the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

selection process of which stakeholders to involve or not, 
and how this is decided, is thus important to consider in the 
analysis. 
B. Governance Parameters Related to the Technical 
Architecture 
1) Technology Governance 
We borrow this term (more precisely technological 
governance) from [32] who builds upon the concept of 
technological citizenship and links it to how technology is 
shaped by powerful actors within society. He makes an 
argument for a more participatory process in which the 
citizen is the deciding entity in technological choices, which 
should lead to those technologies “being more compatible 
with 
democratic 
principles” 
than 
some 
current 
“authoritarian technologies”.  We are not inclined to go as 
far in this argument, but do recognize the importance of 
transparency, participation and emancipation in making 
technological choices, especially by public entities. Choices 
for a particular technology or platform (e.g., by only 
offering an iPhone application) may exclude certain parts of 
the population, something a government should be wary of. 
This is captured in this parameter through the area of 
tension “inclusive versus exclusive”.  
A second element we link to technology governance is the 
use of open data and whether government information is 
made available to citizens through the use of ICTs. Many 
cities and governments are sitting on a wealth of 
information, which does not find its way to citizens. Okot-
Uma [23] lists five important principles related to open 
government and citizen access to information through 
digital technologies and ICTs, namely access, process, 
awareness, communication and involvement. Opening up 
certain data sets and letting developers and the public 
experiment with them can be an important addition made by 
a public entity in the mobile services value chain. The 
choice of a public entity whether or not to open up its data is 
captured by this parameter. 
 
2) Public Data Ownership 
If the decision to open government data to the public is 
made, the responsible government body should carefully 
consider the terms under which this data is opened up and to 
which actors. This is a technological decision in the sense 
that selecting or limiting the type and amount of formats the 
data is available in, has consequences to which parties can 
start working with it (e.g., if the data is machine-readable or 
not, presented in natural language as well, only available in 
proprietary formats and so on).  Related to this we also 
consider whether the data is made available to exclusive 
partners or not and what type of licensing schemes might be 
in place, as well as their terms. This could be the case when 
for example a public transportation company decides to 
provide its real-time travel information to Google, but 
blocks small developers from accessing the data. These are 
technical and organizational decisions that can have an 
important impact on the way the business model is 
constructed and the final value proposition to the end user. 
C. Public Value Parameters Related to the Financial 
Architecture 
1) Return on Public Investment 
The phrasing of this parameter is far from new; the notion 
of expecting a return on public investment in the economic 
sense is for example mentioned by Margolis [19]. In the 
context of the business model matrix, we mainly refer to the 
question whether the expected value generated by a public 
investment is purely financial, public, direct, indirect or 
combinations of these, and - with relation to the earlier 
governance parameters – how a choice is justified. A 
method, which is often used in this respect, is the 
calculation of so-called multiplier effects, i.e., the secondary 
effects a government investment or certain policy might 
have, which are not directly related to the original policy 
goal. In practice, these effects could be measured by looking 
at increases in GDP, economic activity, job creation and so 
on. Calculation of these factors would lead us too far, but 
we will consider if such indirect return effects are expected 
or formulated by governments investing in a particular 
initiative. Also important to consider here is whether these 
reflections are made ex-ante or ex-post, i.e., before or after a 
value proposition is offered to end-users. 
2) Public Partnership Model 
The organizational parameter to consider in this case is 
how the financial relationships between the private and 
public participants in the value network are constructed and 
under which legal entities they set up cooperation. One 
example of such a model is the public-private partnership 
(PPP). Flinders [13] highlights the importance of politics 
and political tensions behind PPP-constructions as an 
addition to the traditional analyses from an administrative, 
managerial, financial or technical viewpoint. While we 
acknowledge the importance of the political aspect behind 
PPPs and take into account that political issues may delay or 
advance particular initiatives, a complete analysis of 
political tensions underlying certain PPPs is out of scope 
here. PPPs can also operate in very different areas such as 
public transport, public utilities, infrastructure and so on. 
Zhang [31] lists critical success factors for PPPs in 
infrastructure development such as a favorable investment 
environment, economic viability, a strong technical 
consortium, a sound financial package and an appropriate 
allocation of risk via contractual agreements. Bovaird [6][7] 
provides an overview of PPP development in the UK and 
details several potential purposes for and types of PPPs. We 
also take note of his remarks related to responsibility and 
risk distribution in this context, namely that the focus should 
be on the success of the partnership, rather than on that of 
individual agencies [6]. 
In the context of the business model matrix, and given the 
location of the parameter in the financial architecture 
column, it is clear we choose to emphasize the financial 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

implications and risk distribution effects of a PPP-model. 
While other considerations related to the structuring of a 
PPP are clearly important to the business model design, 
these are already captured in other public design parameters, 
e.g., those on good governance or technology governance. 
In this perspective, it is also interesting to consider other 
models, such as a Private Finance Initiative (PFI), a “more 
financially-driven PPP, in which the motive for the 
partnership is fundamentally the readier access to capital 
finance enjoyed by private sector partners” [7] or forms of 
purchasing consortia (PC) which are aimed at seeking 
economies of scale and bulk purchasing. These and other 
financial constructions between public and private entities 
are the subject of this parameter. 
D. Public Parameters Related to the Value Proposition 
1) Public Value Creation 
This parameter examines public value from the 
perspective of the end user and refers to the justification a 
government provides in taking the initiative to deliver a 
specific service, rather than leaving its deployment to the 
market. A first element that can be of interest is – again 
borrowed from the broadcasting sector – whether a form of 
market failure is present in a certain domain, i.e., when 
there is a lacuna in service provision that cannot be met by 
commercial entities. Of course, depending on the domain, 
this can be a sensitive discussion (as it is in broadcasting), 
so together with establishing whether market failure can be 
identified, we should consider if the fact that there is a 
specific need in society that is not being met (so that 
government needs to intervene) is contested by other actors 
in the value network, or not. And, in the spirit of 
transparency and good governance, such a justification 
should also be provided to the public.   
We also refer to Moore again here, who, in his Public 
Value Framework for public organizations [20], proposes 
some attention points in creating public value (see also 
[24]): organizational vision (captured in the next parameter 
by us); strategic goals; links among goals, activities, outputs 
and outcomes; the range of outcomes; and activities and 
outputs that create outcomes. We take away here that the 
goals, outputs and outcomes that public entities wish to 
achieve need to be clearly outlined and detailed ex ante, so 
that they can be verified once a service is launched (see the 
next parameter) and be held accountable (under the good 
governance principles) should questions on improper 
behavior arise. The definition of these goals and the promise 
of their evaluation may also alleviate concerns that can be 
present with the public. 
 
2) Public Value Evaluation 
The organizational parameter we identify as important 
with regards to how the value proposition is constructed, is 
whether and how the public value that is (supposedly) 
created by a public service is evaluated. One way of 
evaluating the potential success and impact of a public 
service, can be found in public service broadcasting, with 
the public value test (PVT) organized by the BBC Trust (the 
body governing the BBC) and Ofcom (the UK media 
regulator) as probably one of the most famous examples of 
such a test. The PVT consists of two parts: the Public Value 
Assessment (PVA), which is performed by the BBC Trust, 
and a Market Impact Assessment (MIA), performed by 
Ofcom. The Trust has a general framework it applies to 
identify the public value of a service (in some cases ex ante, 
in others ex post as the debate on which is favorable in 
which case has not been settled), which is an extension of 
the public purposes the BBC should fulfill in its role as 
broadcaster. The parameters of this framework are: reach, 
quality, impact and cost (and value for money) [4]. These 
parameters are quite broad and will receive a particular 
interpretation depending on the service under investigation 
according to the Trust. The MIA looks at the potential direct 
and indirect impacts a proposed service may have on 
consumers and producers of other services in the market 
[22].  
Given the specific nature of broadcasting and the still 
broad terms describing the PVT, the main take-away 
towards the business model matrix is whether or not an 
evaluation is performed in the first place, as well as a 
description of the form of that evaluation (e.g., a PVT). 
Clearly, such a test requires clear policy goals that have to 
be laid out by policy makers and a set of predefined targets 
such an evaluation should verify. 
VI. 
BUSINESS MODEL MATRIX INCORPORATING PUBLIC 
DESIGN PARAMETERS 
These new parameters are important in a context where a 
public entity becomes part of the value network and have 
been added to the business model matrix. While this matrix 
may also be a useful tool in other sectors, we started from 
its origins in mobile services.  
This updated business model matrix, incorporating public 
parameters, can be used in two ways. In the first place it can 
guide a qualitative analysis, facilitating the detailed 
description and comparison of business models in the 
mobile (public) services industry. By using the parameters 
to describe different aspects of the business model, a 
structural comparison between different models becomes 
possible. Secondly, the matrix can be a useful guide when 
designing potential business models during the conceptual 
phase of a service.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper set out to build a framework that could 
facilitate a better insight into mobile service business 
models when public entities play a role in the value 
network. We started from the business model matrix, 
proposed by [1], and expanded it to include public design 
parameters. Similarly to the distinction [1] makes between 
control and value parameters, we propose a division 
between parameters related to governance on the one hand 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

and public value on the other. Within this division, we 
delineated eight new parameters to take into account. These 
operate on two levels: an organizational one, which focuses 
on how the government organizes itself in realizing the first 
level, namely the policy goals it sets out to reach. These two 
levels of analysis are included in the updated matrix. 
After making this distinction, we detailed the new 
parameters and explained their origins. Each of them can be 
linked up to the original business model matrix, of which 
the parameters remain applicable. The newly defined 
governance parameters are good governance, stakeholder 
management, technology governance and public data 
ownership. The parameters related to public value are return 
on public investment, public partnership model, public 
value creation and public value evaluation. We consider 
these parameters to be of importance when analyzing a 
business model in which a public entity (i.e., a city 
government) is part of the value network.  
This expanded framework can be both used as a tool for 
qualitative analysis (a posteriori) and to design (a priori) the 
business model of new service initiatives. The parameters 
allow us to perform a structural analysis of the complex 
value network of public services and help to identify 
important aspects that would have been less likely to come 
to light when only using the business parameters. The 
addition of the public parameters to the business model 
matrix adds and interesting and useful layer that allows a 
more detailed analysis of complex mobile service business 
models that include public actors.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was performed in the framework of a 
Prospective Research for Brussels grant, funded by 
Innoviris and the Brussels Capital Region.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Ballon, Business Modelling Revisited: The Configuration of 
Control and Value, Info - The Journal of Policy, Regulation and 
Strategy for Telecommunications, Information and Media, vol. 9, no. 
5, 2007, pp. 6-19. 
[2] 
P. Ballon, Control and Value in Mobile Communications: A political 
economy of the reconfiguration of business models in the European 
mobile industry, PhD thesis, Department of Communications, Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel, 2009, [retrieved: August, 2012] Available online 
at http://papers.ssrn.com/paper=1331439.  
[3] 
P. Ballon and N. Walravens, Towards a New Typology for Mobile 
Platforms: Validation Through Case Study Analysis, presented at the 
1st Europe, Middle East, North Africa Regional ITS conference (20th 
European Regional ITS Conference), Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain, 
26-28 October 2009. 
[4] 
BBC Trust, Public Value Test: Guidance on the Conduct of the PVT, 
BBC Trust Regulatory Framework, 2007, [retrieved: August, 2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/regulatory_framework/
pvt/pvt_guidance.pdf 
[5] 
J. Benington and M. Moore, Public Value: Theory and Practice. 
London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011, 314p. 
[6] 
T. Bovaird, Public-private Partnerships: From Contested Concepts to 
Prevalent Practice, International Review of Administrative Sciences, 
vol. 70, no. 2, 2004, pp. 199-215. 
[7] 
T. Bovaird, Developing New Forms of Partnership With the 'Market' 
in the Procurement of Public Services, Public Administration, vol. 84, 
no. 1, 2006, pp. 81–102. 
[8] 
T. Bovaird and E. Löffler, Public Management and Governance. New 
York: Routledge, 2009. 
[9] 
H. Davis, Ethics and Standards of Conduct, in Public Management 
and Governance (T. Bovaird and E. Löffler, Eds.). New York: 
Routledge, 2009, pp. 311-326. 
[10] H. Dediu, The Lives and Deaths of Mobile Platforms, Asymco, 2011, 
[retrieved: 
August, 
2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://www.asymco.com/2011/02/19/the-lives-and-deaths-of-mobile-
platforms/ 
[11] H. Dediu, The Proliferation of Mobile Platforms, Asymco, 2011, 
[retrieved: 
August, 
2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://www.asymco.com/2011/09/04/the-proliferation-of-mobile-
platforms-continues/ 
[12] European Commission, Digital Agenda for Europe, Information 
Society and Digital Agenda Website, 2012, [retrieved: August, 2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/digital-
agenda/index_en.htm 
[13] M. Flinders, The Politics of Public-Private Partnerships, The British 
Journal of Politics and International Relations, vol. 7, no. 2, 2005, pp. 
215-239. 
[14] R. Freeman and J. McVea, A Stakeholder Approach to Strategic 
Management, Darden Business School Working Paper N° 01-02, 
2001, 
[retrieved: 
August, 
2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=263511 
[15] J. Graham, B. Amos, and T. Plumptre, Principles for Good 
Governance in the 21st Century, Policy Brief of the Institute on 
Governance, vol. 15 (August), 2003, [retrieved: August, 2012] 
Available online: www.iog.ca/publications/policy_briefs 
[16] P. Hirst, Democracy and Governance, in Debating Governance: 
Authority, Steering and Democracy (J. Pierre, ed.). Oxford University 
Press, 2000. 
[17] J. Hunger and T. Wheelen, The Essentials of Strategic Management, 
Prentice Hall, 2003. 
[18] G. Hyden and O. Dele, African Perspective on Governance, Africa 
World Press, 2000. 
[19] J. Margolis, Benefits, External Economies, and the Justification of 
Public Investment, The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 39, 
no. 3 (August), 1957, pp. 284-291, [retrieved: August, 2012] 
Available online: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/1926044 
[20] M. Moore, Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in 
Government, Harvard University Press, 1995. 
[21] S. Munshi, Concern for Good Governance in Comparative 
Perspective, in Good Governance, Democratic Societies and 
Globalization (S. Munshi and P. Biju, eds.). New Dehli: Sage 
Publications, 2004. 
[22] Ofcom, Methodology for Market Impact Assessments of BBC 
services, Ofcom, 2007, [retrieved: August, 2012] Available online: 
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/other/tv-
research/bbc-mias/statement/ 
[23] R.W. Okot-Uma, Electronic Governance: Re-inventing Good 
Governance, Commonwealth Secretariat, London, UK, 2000, 
[retrieved: 
August, 
2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://www.zapataver.gob.mx/work/sites/ELOCAL/resources/LocalC
ontent/1192/9/Okot-Uma.pdf 
[24] T. O'Reilly, Government as a Platform, in: Lathrop, D. & L. Ruma 
(eds) Open Government, O'Reilly Media, 2010, p. 11-30 
[25] E. Slivka, Apple and Samsung Claim 99% of Profits Among Top 
Mobile Phone Vendors, Macrumors, 2012, [retrieved: August, 2012] 
Available online: http://www.macrumors.com/2012/05/03/apple-and-
samsung-claim-99-of-profits-among-top-mobile-phone-vendors/ 
[26] C. Talbot, Measuring Public Value: A Competing Values Approach, 
The Work Foundation Research Report, 2008, [retrieved: August, 
2012] 
Available 
online: 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

http://www.theworkfoundation.com/Assets/Docs/measuring_PV_fina
l2.pdf 
[27] UNDP, Governance for Sustainable Human Development, UNDP 
Policy Document, 1997, [retrieved: August, 2012] Available online: 
http://mirror.undp.org/magnet/policy/ 
[28] UNESCAP, Good Governance, UNESCAP, 2011, [retrieved: August, 
2012] 
Available 
online: 
http://www.unescap.org/pdd/prs/ProjectActivities/Ongoing/gg/govern
ance.asp 
[29] O. Williamson, Strategy Research: Governance and Competence 
Perspectives, Strategic Management Journal, vol. 20, 1999, pp. 1087-
1108. 
[30] World Bank, The State in a Changing World", World Development 
Report, 1997, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
[31] X. Zhang, Critical Success Factors for Public-Private Partnerships in 
Infrastructure development, Journal of Construction Engineering, vol. 
131, 2005, pp. 3-14. 
[32]  A. Zimmerman, Toward a More Democratic Ethic of Technological 
Governance, Science, Technology & Human Values, vol. 20, no. 1 
(Winter), 1995, pp. 86-107, [retrieved: August, 2012] Available 
online: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/689882.pdf?acceptTC=true
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

