Position Estimation for People Waiting in Line Using Bluetooth Communication
Ryo Nishide, Shuhei Yamamoto, Hideyuki Takada
Faculty of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Kusatsu, Japan
email:{r nishide, s yamamoto}@cm.is.ritsumei.ac.jp, htakada@cs.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—Unpredictable wait time at such places as bus stops,
banks, and amusement parks is likely to create frustration to
people in line. So far, efforts have been focused on estimating
and displaying the wait time of users or customers in line. In
most cases, the time has been estimated by counting the number
of people waiting in line. It is not cost-efﬁcient, however, as the
method requires human resources or installation of expensive
equipment. Moreover, the method can only provide the wait time
for the last person in line, and cannot deal with such problems
as ﬂuctuations caused by wait time due to the latency of service.
Therefore, it is desirable to extract the wait time corresponding to
each person’s position in line, without relying on human resources
and equipment. This paper proposes a position estimation method
based on the relative positions of users in line, using mobile
terminals and a position management server. The devices held
by the users are classiﬁed into groups depending upon their
positions. Speciﬁcally, the device at the front of the line detects
other devices using Bluetooth communication, and then places
them into a second group. In the same way, devices in the
second group detect the following devices and assign them to
a third group. When this process has been repeated, the relative
positions of terminals are identiﬁed. In addition, the Received
Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) values are also collected from
Bluetooth communication to restrict the number of devices in
each group. While generating smaller, subdivision groups, the
nearby devices are picked out from the closest ones having strong
RSSI values. As a result of experiments, the terminal’s position
has been estimated with an accuracy of 94.2% in a typical
scenario.
Keywords–Relative Positioning; Mobile Phone; Bluetooth; Lo-
cation; Waiting in Line.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In a crowded urban city, there are many occasions when
waiting in line might increase frustration of people in their
everyday lives. Lines form constantly at entrance gates to
amusement parks, security gates at the airport, department
store doors during sales, or occasionally at train stations and
bus stops. Companies and stores that provide products and
services are also concerned about wait time, as it is one
factor affecting customer satisfaction. Houston states that there
is a strong negative correlation between waiting time and a
customer’s evaluation of the quality of a service [1]. Maister
addresses the fact that customer waiting at the store is the most
important factor affecting customer satisfaction, and states
eight rules regarding waiting time [2]. He states that customers
are likely to be stressed and feel that the wait time is longer
than the actual time if the wait time is unpredictable.
Considering these circumstances, if the waiting time in
line is provided to the customer, it might be possible to
reduce stress and raise customer satisfaction. There are various
approaches to extract the waiting time. For example, by
considering the number of people in line or the time taken to
provide the service. The number of people can be calculated
by counting them while in line, or estimating the number of
people from the length of the line. There are also methods to
estimate the wait time employing special equipment. Queuing
time estimation system [3], for example, calculates the wait
time automatically by extracting the length and moving speed
of the line from the images of surveillance cameras. It is not
cost efﬁcient, however, as it requires human resources to count
the number of people and the installation of special equipment
on site. Moreover, the wait time can change due to the latency
of providing the service. Furthermore, it can only estimate the
wait time of the last person in line, and cannot easily estimate
the wait time for all customers in the line.
Two points must be considered in order to estimate wait
time according to location in line: estimating the position of
customer in line, and estimating the time for providing the
service. Here we focus on estimating the position of each
person in line. The location of each person in line can be
estimated by generating groups of terminals according to the
Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI). RSSI is extracted
from wireless communication hardware of customers’ mobile
terminals, and groups are assigned sequentially. Bluetooth has
been used as the wireless communication technology in our
work; however, the authors believe that the proposed algorithm
works with other communication technologies as well. Note
that the geographical locations of people are not determined
absolutely, but rather we determine their relative location
within the line. An experiment has been conducted to verify
the effectiveness of the proposed method.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the estimation of wait time in line and relative location using
Bluetooth communication. The method for estimating the
location in line is presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents
the evaluation results and discussion, and Section 5 concludes
the paper and suggests future work.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Related work concerns the estimation of wait time and user
location for lines of people.
A. Wait Time Estimation in Line
Most existing work on estimating the wait time or monitor-
ing the line are conducted by installation of ﬁxed devices such
as cameras [4], infrared sensors [5] and ﬂoor mats [6] on site.
These systems focus on macroscopic movement of pedestrians
in both single or multiple lines, and usually require preparation
and installation of single or multiple special devices. Such
systems can provide information such as the length of the
entire line, the average wait time, and the fastest lane among
multiple lines. This overall line information is only useful
for passengers before deciding to wait in line. Those already
waiting in line are more likely to appreciate information about
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

their precise location in line and the time it will take until the
service is provided.
Other research has focused on estimating the wait time
from the user’s mobile terminal instead of installing special
devices or using human observers. LineKing [7] employs the
users’ carry-on devices and a data aggregation server, and
estimates the wait time by measuring the number of people
in line. The number of people is estimated by observing
the terminals within a radius of 50m–100m of the line,
and terminals that leave the area. To determine the terminal
location either GPS, or the distance from a base station or
access point, is used. However, errors of predicted wait time
may occur as the estimated number of people differs from the
actual number of people in line, because this method detects all
terminals within a radius of 50m–100m. To reduce the rate of
error, it is necessary to measure the wait time beforehand. The
error can be reduced to between two and three minutes if the
measured wait time and the detected data are used together, but
it requires effort to measure the wait time before the system
is launched. The order of people waiting in line cannot be
extracted. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to obtain the wait time for
a speciﬁc location in line.
Wang [8] investigates smartphone WiFi signals to track
people waiting in line by installing a ﬁxed monitoring device
near the service area. Some experimental scenarios and anal-
yses show that monitoring WiFi signals from a ﬁxed device
enables estimating total wait time in a queue and distinguishing
different phases such as waiting, service and leaving periods.
If the line is not too long, WiFi communication distance may
be wide enough to cover the entire line, however, this method
cannot estimate the location and wait time for each individual
in line.
B. Estimation of Relative Location
Some work has focused on the features of Bluetooth RSSI
to estimate the relative location of users. Maekawa estimates
a train user’s car number and the congestion of the train by
extracting the RSSI from the user’s personal devices [9]. They
look at the changes of RSSI due to train doors, distance, and
intervening people in order to determine whether or not the
user is in the same car as other users. Other work recognizes
relative location by aggregating RSSI and user movement
traces at gathering places such as special event sites [10].
Exploiting the fact that weak signals beyond 6km will not
be detected, they classify nearby and distant devices with
high accuracy. This work estimates relative location from
the features of RSSI ﬂuctuation caused by obstacles, but the
situation of people waiting in line is not considered.
Luciani and Davis have performed experiments to ﬁnd
a correlation between RSSI values and distance in a grassy
ﬁeld, on a concrete surface, and in a hallway with various
elevations [11]. There seems to be a tendency for RSSI value
to decrease proportionally with increasing distance. However,
the variance of the RSSI tends to increase considerably with an
increase of distance. The RSSI value for 1m to 2m indicates a
strong signal that settles in the range of −60dBm to −80dBm,
while the RSSI values for distances over 2m are widely
scattered in the range of −80dBm to −100dBm. Thus, it
seems difﬁcult to deal with the entirety of long lines since
the RSSI value is not a reliable measure of large distances.
However, it seems highly accurate to measure short distances
(i) Straight Line	
(ii) Bended Line	
(iii) Parallel Line	
A	
B	
C	
(iv) Line Turning Around	
Figure 1. Types of Line Formation
1st Group	
2nd Group	
3rd Group	
4th Group	
Front	
Rear	
Figure 2. Groups Subdivision for Location Estimation in Line
up to approximately 2 meters, which is sufﬁcient to detect the
device of a person in front or behind.
In this paper, we explore a method to estimate location
considering RSSI and the relative positions of people waiting
in line. The proposed method is not intended to extract the
geographic location of users, but rather deals with their relative
locations.
III.
LOCATION ESTIMATION IN LINE
This section describes our method to estimate location in
line and its implementation.
A. Environment Settings
There are various types of line, as shown in Figure 1, such
as: (i) a straight line, (ii) a curved or bent line, (iii) two parallel
lines, and (iv) a line that turns back upon itself. In (iv), the
RSSI of terminals B and C, as received by A, are almost the
same when the distance to those terminals is the same. The
proposed method generates groups using the RSSI between
pairs of terminals, thus it is difﬁcult to estimate locations for
the line in (iv). We therefore focus on lines which do not turn
around, such as in (i)–(iii).
The proposed method uses Bluetooth communication to
detect devices in the line. Therefore, all of the Bluetooth
devices in the line are assumed to be in Discoverable mode,
which allows other devices to detect them.
B. Location Estimation Method
The location estimation is performed with user terminals
and a location management server. The relative location is
determined by dividing terminals into groups, from the front to
the rear, as shown in Figure 2. The location estimation method
to determine the relative location is shown in Figure 3. The
ﬁrst terminal in line determines the base of location estimation.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Request	  to	  Server	
Is	  there	  a	  table	  
on	  the	  Database?	
Detect	  
Surrounding	  Devices	
Determine	  the	  
Nearby	  Devices	  
Request	  to	  Server	
Receive	  loca;on	  
informa;on	
Is	  the	  loca;on	  of	  
mobile	  device	  
already	  established?	
Register	  Nearby	  
Devices	  on	  a	  Server	
Register	  Mobile	  
Device	  as	  First	  
Device	  
No	
Yes	
No	
Mobile Device	
Server	
Figure 3. Location Estimation Method
It is assumed to be the ﬁrst terminal to join a server in
which no other terminals with location information are yet
registered. Next, the ﬁrst terminal detects nearby terminals,
and registers them on the server as a second group. Then, the
second terminal group performs the same process, and registers
a third group. This process is performed repeatedly, until the
relative locations of all terminals have been determined.
Bluetooth is used to detect nearby terminals. The maximum
value for signal strength is determined by each device’s Class,
and the approximate range of communication is known for
each Class, as shown in Table I. The approximate distance is
calculated from signal strength. Mobile terminals usually fall
into class Class 1 or Class 2. Devices within approximately
5m can be detected even though there are human obstacles.
However, if all of the detectable terminals are registered
as the next group, the group will have too many terminals
and location accuracy might fall. Therefore, it is necessary
to classify detected devices as ‘nearby devices’ and ‘other
devices’, and register only the nearby devices as the next
group.
C. Classiﬁcation of Nearby Devices
The RSSI between pairs of terminals is used in order to
distinguish nearby devices from other devices, and the nearby
devices are added to the next group. RSSI has the following
features.
TABLE I. REACHABLE DISTANCE OF BLUETOOTH
COMMUNICATION
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Reachable Distance
100m
10m
1m
RSSI value generally decreases proportionally to the square
of distance, but human obstacles and the surrounding envi-
ronment can greatly weaken the signal strength. In addition,
the RSSI differs depending upon the types of user terminal
(e.g., mobile phone brand). As the Bluetooth Class indicates
the maximum RSSI value, the user terminal will be classiﬁed
with an appropriate Class with according to the RSSI value
irrespective of the type of terminal. Some terminals in the same
Class have different RSSI values. Therefore, it is impossible to
determine whether or not the terminal is within the designated
distance shown in Table I or to assign the threshold of RSSI
in such situations.
In this paper, we aim to identify the nearby devices from
the RSSI. The signal of terminals in a line can be received
several times, and the average RSSI calculated. The terminals
with a relatively large RSSI are assigned as nearby devices.
This process limits the number of terminals in each group, and
enables accurate determination of location.
D. Experiment Settings
There are several steps in our method, namely, detecting the
surrounding terminals, choosing the Nearby Devices among
the detected terminals, and designating the terminal’s location
in line.
Detection of Surrounding Terminals
Bluetooth functionality is used to scan for the surrounding
terminals. When a new terminal is detected, the Bluetooth
MAC address, RSSI, detection time and detection count are
registered in the database (SQLite) installed in users’ terminals.
If the detected terminal has already been registered, the RSSI
and detection counts are updated.
Let AvgRSSI be the average RSSI, Count be the number
of times a device has been detected, and InRSSI be the
incoming newly-received RSSI value, then the average RSSI
is calculated by equation (1), and the database is updated.
AvgRSSI = (AvgRSSI × Count) + InRSSI
(Count + 1)
(1)
After the detection of terminals in range, the next step sepa-
rates nearby devices from other devices.
Determination of Nearby Devices
Nearby Devices are chosen among all of the detected
devices one minute after the ﬁrst detection. A one-minute
interval is necessary because without the interval only a few
values of RSSI may be sampled, which is not enough to decide
whether or not it is a nearby device. The four devices having
the highest average RSSI are assigned as Nearby Devices. In
other words, the two terminals in front of and behind each
terminal are assigned as Nearby Devices. The ﬁrst terminal,
however, has no terminal in front of it and therefore only
the top two terminals are assigned as Nearby Devices. After
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Server	
Mobile Device	
①Send Bluetooth MAC Address	
②Send Mobile Device’s Location in Line	
③Send MAC Address of Nearby Devices	
④Register Location Information of	
     Unregistered Nearby Devices	
Figure 4. Process for Designating Location in Line
the assignment of Nearby Devices, the next step identiﬁes
locations.
Designation of Location in Line
The location management server stores the MAC address
of terminals, and their locations once determined. The process
for determining location is shown in Figure 4.
Terminals send their MAC addresses to the server. If the
location of the terminal is known then the server responds with
the terminal’s location in line; otherwise the server registers
the MAC address but does not yet respond. When a terminal
receives its location information it responds to the server by
sending the MAC addresses of its Nearby Devices, which
allow the server to determine the location information of the
following group. Any of these Nearby Devices that do not yet
have a location must be behind the terminal in the line (those in
front have already been assigned a location) and belong to the
following group. The server therefore assigns that location to
those terminals and informs them about their location. They
in turn respond with their Nearby Devices, and the process
repeats continuously to determine sequentially the location of
all terminals in the line.
IV.
EVALUATION OF OUR PROPOSED SYSTEM
An experiment has been conducted in order to verify the
accuracy of the location in line, by comparing the actual
location and the location determined by the proposed method.
A. Method of Experiment
All of the terminals are assumed to be in Discoverable
mode, as explained in Section III-A. Under such conditions,
if there is an existing terminal running the system within the
detectable range of Bluetooth, the location can be estimated
even though not all of the terminals are running the system.
However, this experiment has been conducted in a desirable
situation in which all of the terminals are running the system,
in order to verify the efﬁciency of the proposed method. As
shown in Figure 5, the experiment has been held in an outdoor
environment, where six users holding an Android terminal
stand in line at intervals of 0.5m. We cannot prepare the
same model of Android terminal, so different terminals were
used as listed in Table II. The ﬁrst person in line runs the
system and registers as the ﬁrst terminal on the server, and
then the other terminals run the system consecutively. The
experiment concludes when all of the location information of
the terminals has been registered by the server. The experiment
was performed seven times.
Figure 5. Experimental Environment
TABLE II. TYPES OF TERMINALS USED FOR EXPERIMENT
Terminal Number
Terminal Model
1st terminal
Galaxy Nexus
2nd terminal
Nexus 5
3rd terminal
Xperia A
4th terminal
Nexus S
5th terminal
Galaxy Nexus
6th terminal
Galaxy Nexus
TABLE III. THE RESULT OF CHOSEN NEARBY DEVICES
Loss Count
False Detection Count
Number of Trials
4
10
35
TABLE IV. THE RESULT OF NEARBY DEVICES FOR EACH
TERMINAL
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Loss
0
0
1
3
0
False Detection
0
1
1
5
3
B. Experiment Results
It is important to choose the Nearby Devices correctly in
order to estimate locations accurately. Thus, the results are
analyzed in two ways: for correctness of choosing Nearby
devices and for accurate estimation of location.
1) Correctness of Choosing Nearby Devices: The two de-
vices in front and behind are examined to verify the correctness
of choosing Nearby Devices. We examine the correspondence
between the Nearby Device information aggregated on the
server and the actual nearby terminals. The ﬁrst ﬁve terminals
chosen as Nearby Devices are analyzed in this experiment.
The correspondences are shown in Tables III and IV.
Table III shows the overall result of terminal information
aggregated on the server, and Table IV shows the result for
each terminal individually. “Loss” refers to terminals which
were supposed to be (but were not) identiﬁed as Nearby
Devices, and “false detection” refers to incorrect detection of
a remote terminal that was more than two terminals away.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

-­‐90	  
-­‐85	  
-­‐80	  
-­‐75	  
-­‐70	  
-­‐65	  
-­‐60	  
2nd	  terminal	  
3rd	  terminal	  
4th	  terminal	  
5th	  terminal	  
6th	  terminal	  
Figure 6. Average RSSI Received by the 1st Terminal
-­‐80	  
-­‐75	  
-­‐70	  
-­‐65	  
-­‐60	  
-­‐55	  
-­‐50	  
-­‐45	  
1st	  terminal	  
2nd	  terminal	  
3rd	  terminal	  
5th	  terminal	  
6th	  terminal	  
Figure 7. Average 4th Terminal RSSI Received by the Other Terminals
The RSSI values received from each terminal are also
analyzed, as they are used to pick out the Nearby Devices.
The average RSSI values that the ﬁrst terminal received for
the other ﬁve terminals in line are shown in Figure 6. The
fourth terminal in the line was the one most often incorrectly
detected as a Nearby Device by the other terminals; Figure 7
shows the RSSI of the fourth terminal as received by the other
ﬁve terminals in the line.
2) Location Estimation Accuracy:
When the proposed
method is properly performed, the groups are classiﬁed as
shown in Table V and the sequential order for each terminal
can be assigned. The correct location (Table V) and the
location determined by the server are compared in Table VI.
The result for the ﬁrst terminal is omitted as it is automatically
registered by the server as the ﬁrst group and the ﬁrst terminal
in line. The number of trials for the 2nd and 3rd Groups differs
from that of the 4th Group because the number of terminals
included in a Group varies.
The result shows that the 2nd and 3rd Groups are formed
correctly. However, the 4th Group was incorrectly included in
the 3rd Group twice, because a 2nd Group terminal determined
the last (6th) terminal as a Nearby Device. The overall result
shows that the proposed method determines location with an
accuracy of 94.2%.
TABLE V. GROUPING OF PEOPLE IN LINE
Groups
Terminals
1st Group
1st Terminal
2nd Group
2nd and 3rd Terminal
3rd Group
4th and 5th Terminal
4th Group
6th Terminal
C. Discussion
The experiment has shown that the proposed method can
estimate the relative location in the line with high accuracy, but
false location estimation can occur when the Nearby Devices
are incorrectly chosen.
Table IV shows that the 4th terminal had low accuracy
when choosing Nearby Devices. The 4th was supposed to
choose the 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 6th terminals. However, it
sometimes choose the 1st terminal as a Nearby Device. This
occurred probably because the average RSSI of the 1st terminal
was approximately the same as that of the 6th terminal, even
though the 1st terminal was located 0.5m farther away than
the 6th terminal, and its signal attenuated by one additional
intervening person. The incorrect choice of Nearby Device by
the 4th terminal increased the number of terminals in another
Group and adversely affected the accuracy.
D. Applicability to the Real Environment
Further issues relating to deployment in a real environment
are discussed in this section.
Terminal Conditions in Line
In the proposed method, all terminals are assumed to be in
Discoverable mode. In real situations, on the other hand, not
many terminals are in Discoverable mode, because of security
vulnerabilities and increased energy consumption. However,
this situation may start to change as security and energy
consumption are improve [12], and several services with low
energy consumption have been developed. Thus, owing to
these improvements, we believe that the number of users who
would set their terminal to Discoverable mode will increase.
Signal Strength Depending Upon the Terminal’s Brand
The signal strength and accessible range of Bluetooth
may differ depending upon the types of user terminals. A
distant terminal emitting a strong signal can be recognized
as a Nearby Device and consequently affect the accuracy of
location estimation. Such problems can be reduced if terminals
and the server work cooperatively to determine the Nearby
Devices. The server, which aggregates the RSSI received from
multiple terminals, designates the strong signal terminal by
comparing the values of RSSI and then determines the closest
terminal as the Nearby Device. The location accuracy can be
improved by excluding distant terminals with strong signals.
Distinguishing Other Devices from Those in Line
When people are waiting in line or moving forward, the
signals of their terminals are detected in a consistent pattern.
If some of them leave the line, the strength of their signals
will be gradually weakened and may eventually disappear.
By checking the detection count of terminals in the line,
the signals of people leaving the line can be detected. For
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

TABLE VI. LOCATION ESTIMATION RESULT
Successful Counts
Num. Trials
Accuracy
2nd Group
14
14
100%
3rd Group
14
14
100%
4th Group
5
7
71.4%
Total
33
35
94.2%
people outside of or away from the line, the signals from
their Bluetooth devices can also be falsely detected and chosen
as Nearby Devices. Thus, it is necessary to distinguish these
devices from those of people in the line. People who are
standing still, or moving towards or away from the line, will
have terminals transmitting in an inconsistent pattern different
from those picked up from the line. The terminals distributing
the consistent patterns are thus classiﬁed as Nearby Devices
to perform location and wait time estimation in line.
Reduction of RSSI due to Obstacles
In our experiment, users held the terminals in their hands.
However, terminals are more likely to be placed inside pockets
or in bags, which may cause inaccurate selection of Nearby
Devices. It is necessary to consider these points by investigat-
ing the RSSI values in order to enhance the method of choosing
the Nearby Devices.
Number and Distance between People
The experiment was held with a limited number of people,
but there are usually more people waiting in line. It is necessary
to examine the applicability of our method in such situations.
The location estimation accuracy may improve if the distance
between the devices increases, as the difference of RSSI will
be more pronounced.
V.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have presented a method to estimate the location of
terminals of users waiting in line. In the proposed method,
employing the user’s terminal and a server, the relative location
between users has been assigned in order starting from an
initial user (the ﬁrst in line). Bluetooth RSSI from mobile
terminals was used to determine the Nearby Devices to enable
more detailed location estimation. An experiment was con-
ducted to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method with
the result that the user terminal location was estimated with
high accuracy. However, false detection of Nearby Devices has
caused the grouping process to overestimate the number of
terminals, which reduced the accuracy of location estimation.
In the recent social trend, the use of Bluetooth technology
has been declining due to the evolution of new radio tech-
nologies such as D2D, M2M, mmWave, and Massimo MIMO.
However, iOS devices are installed with iBeacon which uses
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE). Furthermore, deployment of
iBeacon technology to OS X, Android and Windows Phone
devices implies that it is not the end of Bluetooth technology.
Therefore, it is necessary to watch for the wave of future
consumers. Whichever wireless communication technology is
used, the necessity of the proposed algorithm will remain.
Further planning is necessary to investigate the feasibility of
the proposed algorithm to these other radio technologies.
WiFi technology is currently being used very often as it
is widely deployed in everyday environments at home, school,
company, ofﬁce, and so on, since it is convenient to connect
smartphones in such an environment. Recent work shows good
detectability of WiFi packets emitted from smartphones in
public transportation [13]. Our next target will be application
to WiFi technology in conjunction with other new radio
technologies.
Identifying terminals leaving the line, locating coordinates
of user terminals, terminals emitting different signal strengths,
and energy consumption issues other than the use of BLE are
currently not considered. For future work, these issues and the
characteristics of RSSI need to be examined in order to explore
the application of our method in real environments.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. B. Houston, L. A. Bettencourt, and S. Wenger, “The relationship
between waiting in a service queue and evaluations of service quality:
A ﬁeld theory perspective,” Psychology & Marketing, vol. 15, no. 8,
1999, pp. 735–753.
[2]
D. H. Maister, Ed., The psychology of waiting lines. Harvard Business
School, 1984.
[3]
J. Abe, N. Takahashi, K. Nakamura, and E. Iteya, “Gyoretsu no machi-
jikan no keisoku system (system for measuring a queueing time,
translated from Japanese),” Jpn. Unexamined Patent Application No.
2007-317052, December 2007, patent Application No. 2006-147751,
May 2006.
[4]
“Blueeyevideo: Innovative queue management,”
http://www.blueeyevideo.com/, accessed 2015-01-30.
[5]
“Irisys - queue management,”
http://www.irisys.co.uk/queue-management/, accessed 2015-01-30.
[6]
D. Bauer, M. Ray, and S. Seer, “Simple sensors used for measuring ser-
vice times and counting pedestrians,” Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, vol. 2214, no. 1, 2011,
pp. 77–84.
[7]
M. F. Bulut, Y. S. Yilmaz, M. Demirbas, N. Ferhatosmanoglu, and
H. Ferhatosmanoglu, “Lineking: Crowdsourced line wait-time esti-
mation using smartphones,” in Mobile Computing, Applications, and
Services.
Springer, 2013, pp. 205–224.
[8]
Y. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Chen, H. Liu, M. Gruteser, and R. P. Martin,
“Tracking human queues using single-point signal monitoring,” in
Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Conference on Mobile
Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys ’14).
ACM, 2014, pp.
42–54.
[9]
Y. Maekawa, A. Uchiyama, H. Yamaguchi, and T. Higashino, “Car-
level congestion and position estimation for railway trips using mobile
phones,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Confer-
ence on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’14).
ACM,
2014, pp. 939–950.
[10]
T. Higuchi, Y. Hirozumi, and H. Teruo, “Relative position estimation
using dead reckoning and received signal strength of bluetooth (in
Japanese),” Journal of Information Processing Society in Japan (IPSJ
Journal), vol. 54, no. 8, 2013, pp. 2048–2060.
[11]
D.P Luciani and A. Davis, “RSSI based range analysis of near-ground
nodes in Wi-Fi crowded environments,” IEEE International Conference
on Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), 2013, pp.693–697.
[12]
“Bluetooth technology special interest group: Core version 4.2.”
https://www.bluetooth.org/en-us/speciﬁcation/adopted-speciﬁcations,
accessed 2015-01-30.
[13]
T. Oransirikul, R. Nishide, I. Piumarta, and H. Takada, “Measuring
Bus Passenger Load by Monitoring Wi-Fi Transmissions from Mobile
Devices,” Elsevier Procedia Technology, vol. 18, 2014, pp. 120–125.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

