Towards a Semantic-aware Radio Resource Management 
 
Luis Guillermo Martinez Ballesteros, Cicek Cavdar, Pietro Lungaro, Zary Segall 
Mobile Services Lab 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Kista, Sweden 
lgmb@kth.se, cavdar@kth.se, pietro@kth.se, segall@kth.se 
 
 
Abstract—	   In this paper semantic-aware model for radio 
resource management in wireless networks is introduced and 
studied through simulation. By semantic-awareness, the 
network can selectively manage the radio resource allocation 
based on the evaluation of transferred content, and its 
associated processing, and prioritize users that are close to 
experience interruptions, in order to improve the wireless 
resource utilization and the user’s Quality of Experience 
(QoE). Different radio resource management (RRM) strategies 
are proposed and investigated, considering buffer capacity at 
the terminals and the experience of the users in time while 
watching a video and waiting for resource allocation. The 
simulation results show that the users can reduce the total 
duration, frequency and length of the interruptions during a 
playback by applying semantic-awareness in the radio 
resource allocation, which might affect positively user’s QoE. 
Keywords-Radio Resource Management; resource allocation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recent introduction of new generation of wireless 
infrastructures is being accompanied by an increase in both 
the number of users and their interest in multimedia content. 
This growth has been driven in the last decade by the 
popularity of multimedia content (e.g. video-sharing 
websites, social networks, video on demand sites, mobile 
IPTV, etc.), that according to the tendency will generate 
much of the mobile traffic growth through 2016, showing, at 
the same time, the highest growth rate of any mobile 
application ([1]).  Before this scenario, a common approach 
to reach the goal of high quality information delivery has 
been the implementation of resource management schemes 
and scheduling algorithms to optimize resource allocation 
and traffic distribution as function of network parameters 
([2]-[13]). Solutions have evolved from a perspective mainly 
centred on the evaluation of network based constraints (e.g., 
Signal to Noise Ratio or instant data rates) deprived of 
knowledge about the transferred content [3], to a perspective 
where inherent characteristics of the content are considered 
to improve network performance. In some cases ([11] [12]), 
the video distortion level is used to calculate the rates to 
deliver a multimedia content in a gradient-based scheduling 
and resource allocation scheme.  Even though these studies 
consider the evaluation of content status to allocate 
resources, their objective is to maximize the average peak 
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) of all video users, which not 
always impacts positively the QoE. In [13], a resource 
allocation scheme that considers both the average rate 
achieved so far and the future expected rate is proposed with 
the goal of maximizing sigmoid function of the average bit 
rate. Prediction does not consider what happens to the 
content in the terminal by establishing a direct relation 
between the bit rate and the QoE. In ([2][9]), authors 
improve 
system 
throughput 
by 
allocating 
resources 
according to predefined utility functions to measure the QoE 
and QoS respectively, without considering how the content is 
processed at the terminal side. However, the idea of 
maximizing 
performance 
through 
infrastructure 
improvements and adjustment of network parameters is 
usually not optimal with respect to user perceived quality for 
multimedia applications [2]. In this paper, we want to 
investigate the effect of using semantic information (i.e., 
buffer capacity, player data rate, waiting times) provided by 
users terminals on the radio resource allocation in the 
downlink transmissions (base station (BS) to device) in 
mobile networks and its impact on the user’s perception. In 
particular, some QoE related parameters (i.e., duration, the 
length and the frequency of the interruptions) are quantified 
to provide an initial measure of the effect of incorporating 
semantic-awareness to wireless infrastructures.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II, we present the semantic-aware proposed architecture and 
RRM schemes considered in this study. In Section III, we 
describe 
the 
simulation 
settings 
and 
performance 
measurements considered in the paper.  In Section IV, we 
present the results obtained with the simulation scenario. We 
conclude the paper in section V.  
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL 
A. Network Description and Service Model 
Semantic-aware networks are infrastructures with the 
capacity to selectively manage the information flow 
depending on its importance from an application point of 
view. Unlike the concept of content-awareness, where the 
network management is considering the type of content in a 
static way, semantic-aware approach requires infrastructures 
with the capability to exchange information dynamically 
with the terminal and evaluate the content related 
information provided by users (i.e., both specific details 
regarding transferred content and the status of their 
processing in the terminal) in order to selectively manage the 
information flow, and distribute resources depending on the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

applications performance. In this regard, two elements are 
essential for the operation of the semantic-aware engine: a 
semantic-aware resource manager (SRM) and a semantic 
client (SC) (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Example of the main elements composing the Semantic-aware 
system. 
The SRM is centrally located in the base station and 
collects the reports provided by the user terminals. It keeps 
track of the terminals and the processing content current 
status. The SCs report information regarding the buffer 
capacity at the terminal, the player data rate consumption, 
and the users waiting times to the semantic-aware resource 
manager. SCs are software applications with collecting and 
sensing functionalities installed in the mobile terminals. 
Once the gathered data is passed to the SRM, this selects the 
time instants more appropriate for allocating resources and 
delivering content to individual users according to the 
operator’s goal, by applying a scheduling policy. 
At the fixed side of the infrastructure, the BS is 
connected to a multimedia server with capacity to store 
different multimedia files of size Sv bits. With regard to the 
wireless side of the architecture, we assume that the total 
user population of size Nu is uniformly distributed and 
downloading multimedia files, v. Each user l ∈ {1,…, Nu} is 
interested in receiving a maximum of M items, all of them 
with size Sv and duration in seconds Tv. Once a user l 
requests content, information will be downloaded at an 
instantaneous data rate from the BS to the user l at time t, 
Rl(t). Downloaded information is placed into a buffer Bl of 
infinite capacity before being effectively consumed by user l. 
An initial buffering time of b seconds is considered. This 
time b, counted only once by a multimedia file, corresponds 
to the interval between the first request time and the time at 
which the effective consumption of bits by user l from the 
buffer Bl starts.  Once the time b has elapsed, the playback 
starts and bits from the buffer Bl will be consumed at time t 
with a data consumption rate Cl bps. Cl is a constant value 
that depends on the size and the duration of time that needs 
to be spent to watch the multimedia file v requested by user l, 
Sl
v  and Tl
v  respectively. So, 
 
Content processing will continue until the file stored in 
the server has been consumed by user l. Duration of 
processing one multimedia file will determine how long 
users will last in the system, and the request for a new 
multimedia file will stay active until M multimedia files has 
been processed by user l.  
B. Semantic-aware Resource Management Schemes 
In our implementation, all proposed semantic-aware 
schemes follow a similar procedure to assign resources every 
slotted time interval n of duration Δt. The SRM starts by 
detecting how close the users are of experiencing a lack of 
resources in the buffer Bl that can affect the correct 
processing of the information and the user perception. 
Proximity of shortage is measured in terms of the video 
watching time left in the buffer at time t, Tb seconds, given 
the Cl(t)  rate. So, 
 
This identification process based on the evaluation of the 
Tb value lead to a classification of the users in two queues, 
one with those users with imminent shortage and other filler 
with those with no imminent shortage, called X and Y, 
respectively. If size of queue X is equal to one, the user l in 
that queue receives the resource with no consideration of the 
users present in the queue Y. In contrast, if the length of the 
queue X is more than one, users in the queue will be ranked 
in descending order considering the utility function of the 
RRM scheme. Then the scheduler allocates the resource to 
the user in the top of the ranking. If queue X is empty, the 
procedure described before will be executed with the users 
placed in the queue Y. Supported by Tb other values extracted 
from the semantic information, the scheduler will look first 
at the users of X group. If size of X is equal to one, that user l 
receives the resource. In contrast, if there is more than one in 
the set X, users will be ranked in descending utility order 
considering the criteria of the semantic aware RRM scheme. 
Then the scheduler allocates the resource to the user in the 
top of the ranking.  Different RRM used in this study, 
including the reference case, and the utility functions linked 
to them are described below:  
1) Proportional Fair (PF): This 
RRM 
strategy 
represents the reference case or no semantic-aware scheme. 
In this case, users are not classified according to Tb value. 
By contrast, there is no buffer capacity consideration. At 
each time interval n, this scheme assigns the resource to the 
user with the largest ratio 𝑅! 𝐴!  where Rl is the instant 
download data rate achievable by user l and Al is the 
average download data rate of user l. 
2) Buffer based (BB): This RRM strategy tries to 
allocate resources to the user with the smallest video 
watching time from the buffer based on the evaluation of Tb 
by considering current buffer capacity. This scheduler tries 
to allocate a time slot to the user with the higher imminence 
of having an interruption. Utility function for grading the 
users is the inverse of the Tb, 1 𝑇! . 
Serve
 
3) Inactive online time based (IB): This RRM uses the 
time a user has been active in the system but with no 
wireless resource assigned to download bits. We evaluate 
the total time a user l has been active in the system, with 
outstanding bits in the server to download, but without a 
wireless resource assigned to place bits in the buffer or 
𝑇!"#$
!
  in seconds. Utility function for grading the users is the 
current 1
𝑇!"#$
!
.  
 
4) Active online time based (AB): This scheduler looks 
at the time a user has been selected by the scheduler while it 
is consuming bits from the buffer Bl or 𝑇!"#!
!
.  Utility 
function for grading the users is the current   𝑇!"#!
!
.  
 
5) Mixed criteria based (MB): In this RRM the utility 
function for the user l is computed as the sum of the 
individual values 𝑇!"#$
!
 and 𝑇!"#!
!
 divided by the value of 
𝑇!
!.  
III. 
INVESTIGATION 
A. Simulation Settings 
To investigate the performance of using semantic-aware 
RRM in a wireless infrastructure we performed extensive 
simulations of an HSDPA network focusing on the downlink 
connection between one 3-sector BS, with 300m of cell 
radius, and the user devices requesting for the streaming of 
content stored in a multimedia server. Propagation model is 
the 
3GPP 
model, 
where 
path 
loss 
is 
𝐿 = 128.1 + 37.6  𝑙𝑜𝑔!"   𝑅 , 𝑅  𝑖𝑛  𝐾𝑚. We assumed that the 
backbone is lossless and the transmission delay from the 
media server to the BS is negligible. Maximum BS 
transmission power 𝑃! = 20𝑊, and maximum data rate of 
14.4 Mbps. One user is allocated in a time slot of 0.25s. The 
basic system level assumptions used in the simulations are 
summarized in Table I. In our system, we played with users 
densities ranging between 5 and 25 users. In each case the 
user requests of multimedia content have been modelled with 
expected inter-arrival time equal to 1 minute. In all cases, 
users are supposed to pick a video of 57.76 Mbytes, 
representing a 1080p YouTube-like video of 5 minutes 
duration. In the simulation, users will watch up to 20 videos 
of the same size and resolution (homogeneous scenario), 
being a realization the completion of this number of videos 
by all users present in the system. 
B. Performance Measures 
From the operators’ perspective, performance is 
evaluated considering the average Total Duration of 
Interruption (TDI) obtained by using each one of the 
proposed schedulers. The maximum and minimum length of 
interruptions represents the values of the longest and shortest 
interruptions experienced by user l during the playback. 
Finally, the average frequency of the interruptions will 
represent how often a user l can experience cuts during the 
playback. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Figure 2 demonstrates the average TDI comparison of 
different RRM schemes for different number of users 
watching HD videos. With the implementation of the MB 
scheme there is reduction in the average TDI during the 
streaming session compared to the PF scheme. Reduction 
goes from 74%(with 5 users) to 8% (with 25 users). The 
other scheme that looks at the buffer capacity (BB) also 
guarantees a reduction in the TDI that goes between 53% (5 
users) to 3% (25 users) regarding the PF. In contrast, 
schemes focused on the evaluation of online times 
(inactive/active) reduce the performance of the system 
increasing TDI.  
 
Figure 2.  Average TDI by number of user for the different resource 
schedulers in a HD scenario. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. 
Figure 3 shows the length of the shortest interruption 
experienced by different number of users when the proposed 
RRM schemes are used. The figure reflects that schemes PF, 
MB and BB can guarantee that the shortest interruption in 
any case will be less than 1.3s. Schedulers that do not 
consider Tb in its allocation criteria will generate as shortest 
interruption duration values between 2s to 400s, which will 
generate a negative impact on the QoE perceived by users in 
a real scenario. Figure 4 shows the average maximum length 
of interruptions perceived by different number of users with 
different RRM schemes. In this case network reflects a better 
performance when PF, BB and MB are used as resource 
allocation 
schemes. 
Although 
PF 
shows 
the 
best 
performance when maximum length of interruptions is 
considered, observing the frequency of the interruptions in 
Figure 5, PF shows around 25% more interruptions during 
the playback than the best of the other considered RRM 
schemes. This recurrence in the number of interruptions will 
affect more the user’s perceived quality, according to the 
results obtained in [14]. In summary, semantic-aware 
schemes that use buffer-related information will reduce the 
TDI through a reduction in the frequency and the length of 
interruptions.  
0"
100"
200"
300"
400"
500"
600"
700"
800"
5"users"
10"users"
15"users"
20"users"
25"users"
Average"Total"Dura8on"of"Interrup8ons"[s]"
Number"of"users"served"by"the"BS"
PF"
BB"
Min"IB"
Max"AB"
MB"
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
Figure 3.  Average minimum length of interruptions by number of users 
for the different resource schedulers in a HD scenario. 
 
Figure 4.  Average maximum length of interruptions by number of users 
for the different resource schedulers in a HD scenario. 
 
Figure 5.  Average frequency of interruptions by number of users for the 
different resource scheduler in a HD scenario.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The concept of Semantic Radio Resource Management 
has been introduced in this paper as an alternative to improve 
the user service perception in video streaming services. The 
considered solution simply requires the introduction of 
software agents both at the network and terminal side, 
capable of monitoring applications behaviours. Different 
RRM strategies were simulated and results show that by 
using semantic-aware schemes evaluating user’s buffer 
capacity, it is possible to improve the total duration of video 
stalling, and impact the length and frequency of the 
interruptions users can experience during the video playback. 
This indicates a potential of proposed solution to generate 
improvements in terms of the final QoE perceived by a user 
in comparison to the ”classical” RRM. As future work, the 
extension of the proposed scheme considering more semantic 
elements to make resource allocation decisions is planned. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Cisco, “Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile data traffic 
forecast update, 2011–2016.” Cisco, White Paper, 2012.  
[2] 
S. Thakolsri, S. Khan, E. Steinbach, and W. Kellerer, “Qoe-driven 
crosslayer optimization for high speed downlink packet access,” 
Journal 
of 
Communications, 
Special 
Issue 
on 
Multimedia 
Communications,Networking and Applications, Vol. 4, No. 9., 2009, 
pp. 669–680.  
[3] 
H. Yin and H. Liu, “An efficient multiuser loading algorithm for 
ofdm-based 
broadband 
wireless 
systems,” 
in 
Global 
Telecommunications Conference, 2000. GLOBECOM ’00. IEEE, 
vol. 1, 2000, pp. 103 –107.  
[4] 
G. 
Aristomenopoulos, 
T. 
Kastrinogiannis, 
V. 
Kaldanis, 
G. 
Karantonis, and S. Papavassiliou, “A novel framework for dynamic 
utility-based qoe provisioning in wireless networks,” GLOBECOM 
2010, 2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, pp. 1–6, 
2010.   
[5] 
K. Piamrat, C. Viho, J.-M. Bonnin, and A. Ksentini, “Quality of 
experience measurements for video streaming over wireless 
networks,” Information Technology: New Generations, 2009. ITNG 
’09. Sixth International Conference on, pp. 1184 – 1189, 2009.  
[6] 
S. Rabiul Islam and M. Hossain, “A wireless video streaming system 
based on ofdma with multi-layer h.264 coding and adaptive 
radioresource allocation,” in Image Information Processing (ICIIP), 
2011 International Conference on, nov. 2011, pp. 1 –6.  
[7] 
M. Shehada, S. Thakolsri, Z. Despotovic, and W. Kellerer, “Qoe-
based cross-layer optimization for video delivery in long term  
evolution mobile networks,” in Wireless Personal Multimedia 
Communications (WPMC), 2011 14th International Symposium on, 
oct. 2011, pp. 1 –5. 
[8] 
P. Dutta, A. Seetharam, V. Arya, M. Chetlur, S. Kalyanaraman, and  
J. Kurose, “On managing quality of experience of multiple video 
streams in wireless networks,” in INFOCOM, 2012 Proceedings 
IEEE, march 2012, pp. 1242 –1250. 
[9] 
S.-P. Chuah, Z. Chen, and Y.-P. Tan, “Energy-efficient resource 
allocation and scheduling for multicast of scalable video over 
wireless networks,” Multimedia, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 14, no. 4, 
aug. 2012, pp. 1324–1336. 
[10] H. Adibah Mohd Ramli, K. Sandrasegaran, R. Basukala, R. 
Patachaianand, M. Xue, and C.-C. Lin, “Resource allocation 
technique for video streaming applications in the lte system,” in 
Wireless and Optical Communications Conference (WOCC), 2010 
19th Annual, may 2010, pp. 1 –5. 
[11] P. Pahalawatta, T. Pappas, R. Berry, and A. Katsaggelos, “Content-
aware resource allocation for scalable video transmission to multiple 
users over a wireless network,” in Acoustics, Speech and Signal 
Processing, 2007. ICASSP 2007. IEEE International Conference on, 
vol. 1, april 2007, pp. I–853 –I–856. 
[12] X. Ji, J. Huang, M. Chiang, G. Lafruit, and F. Catthoor, “Scheduling 
and resource allocation for svc streaming over ofdm downlink 
systems,” Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 19, no. 10, , oct. 2009, pp. 1549 –1555. 
[13] C. Yang and S. Jordan, “Power and rate allocation for video 
conferencing in cellular networks,” in Communication, Control, and 
Computing (Allerton), 2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on, 
sept. 2011, pp. 127 –134.  
[14] Acision, “Seizing the opportunity in mobile broadband - a global 
perspective,” Acision, Tech. Rep., 2011.  
0"
50"
100"
150"
200"
250"
300"
350"
400"
450"
5"users"
10"users"
15"users"
20"users"
25"users"
Shortest"interrup3on"Experienced"
"in"Average"[s]"
Number"of"users"served"by"the"BS""
PF"
BB"
Min"IB"
Max"AB"
MB"
0"
50"
100"
150"
200"
250"
300"
350"
400"
450"
500"
5"users"
10"users"
15"users"
20"users"
25"users"
Longest"interrup3on"Experienced"
"in"Average"[s]"
Number"of"users"served"by"the"BS""
PF"
BB"
Min"IB"
Max"AB"
MB"
0"
10"
20"
30"
40"
50"
60"
5"users"
10"users"
15"users"
20"users"
25"users"
Average"Frequency"of"Interrup;ons"
Number"of"users"served"by"the"BS""
PF"
BB"
Min"IB"
Max"AB"
MB"
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

