On Systematic Identification of Requirements  for  Vehicle-to-Everything  5G 
Slices 
 
Eugen Borcoci, Marius Vochin, Serban Georgica Obreja 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest - UPB 
Bucharest, Romania 
Emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro,  serban@radio.pub.ro, marius.vochin@elcom.pub.ro  
 
 
Abstract — Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) and Internet of 
Vehicles and their services have been intensively studied and 
developed in the last decade. The V2X supports a large range 
of applications, such as safety oriented, vehicular traffic 
optimization, autonomous driving, infotainment and auxiliary 
operations in vehicular area. Various stakeholders/actors are 
playing roles in such a complex system, e.g., regulators, 
authorities, 
service 
or 
network 
providers, 
operators, 
manufacturers, tenants and end users. Therefore, to specify 
and design a specific V2X system, one should first identify the 
ecosystem actors and then derive in a structured way the 
system requirements, while harmonizing needs coming from 
different entities. The 5G slicing technology is seen as a strong 
candidate to support V2X, in multi-tenant, multi-domain, 
multi-operator and end-to-end contexts. The 5G slicing allows 
construction of dedicated slices, to meet particular V2X 
requirements. Given the large variety of environments and 
actors involved in a planned V2X system, the identification of 
the system requirements is a complex process that could 
benefit from a structured approach. This paper contributes to 
develop a methodology to perform a top-down systematic 
identification of requirements for a V2X system supported by 
5G dedicated slices. 
 
 
Keywords — Vehicle-to-Everthing; V2X; 5G slicing; 
Ecosystem; Business model; Stakeholders; Requirements, 
Software Defined Networking; Network Function Virtualization; 
Service management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communications and 
services include several types, where X can be:  vehicle 
(V2V), road/infrastructure (V2R/V2I), pedestrian (V2P), 
vulnerable road user (VRU), network (V2N) - including 
cellular networks and Internet, sensors (V2S), power grid 
(V2G) and home (V2H) [1]. The V2X systems can be 
deployed in single or multi-tenancy, multi-operator and 
multi-domain contexts. V2X support a large range of 
services/applications: road safety (warnings, notifications, 
assistance); road traffic optimization and management; 
autonomous driving; infotainment. Recently, V2X has been 
extended to Internet of Vehicles (IoV) aiming to create a   
global network of vehicles – enabled by various Wireless 
Access Technologies (WAT) [1][2].  
The V2X/IoV systems are complex, involving several 
technical and organizational entities which cooperate in a 
business ecosystem V2X-ES (or, equivalently, business 
model V2X-BM). The participating entities/actors can be 
organizations/ stakeholders such as technology suppliers, 
distributors, 
road 
authorities, 
customers/users, 
municipalities, regulators, vehicle manufacturers Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEM), government agencies, 
etc. The above entities interact with each other, in order to 
achieve together the general goals of the system. A large 
variety of use cases and deployments can exist, each one 
having different 
functional 
and 
performance–related 
requirements. Apart from general V2X requirements, a 
specific set should be identified and adapted to the 
particular V2X-ES selected (including the use cases 
targeted), and also to some technological solutions and 
constraints. Initially defined as LTE V2X in 3GPP Release 
14, C-V2X has been defined as a platform for an evolution 
track that further enables enhancements in Releases 15, 16, 
etc. for LTE-Advanced Pro and for the 5G New Radio (NR) 
[3]-[5].  
Advanced solutions - 5G [6]-[8] and especially the 
slicing 
technology 
(based 
on 
virtualization 
and 
softwarization) - can successfully support V2X. 5G can 
provide dedicated types of services to satisfy various 
(vertical) customer/tenant demands in a multi-x fashion (the 
notation –x stands for: tenant, domain, operator and 
provider) [9]-[12]. A Network Slice (NSL) is a virtual 
dedicated managed network, isolated from other slices 
(w.r.t. performance and security), but they share the same 
infrastructure.  
The functional components of a network slice are 
Physical/Virtual Network Functions (PNFs/VNFs). They 
are   chained in graphs, in order to compose services 
dedicated to different sets of users. The slices are 
programmable and expose their capabilities to the users. 
The actual run-time entities are instantiated slices (NSLIs), 
whose life cycles are controlled by the management and 
control 
entities 
belonging 
to 
the 
Management, 
Orchestration and Control architectural Plane (MO&C). 
The Network Function Virtualization (NFV)[13-15] and 
Software Defined Networks (SDN) technologies can 
cooperate [16] to manage, orchestrate and control the 5G 
sliced environment. The 3GPP [7][8] has defined three 
fundamental categories of 5G slices: Massive machine type 
communication (mMTC); Ultra reliability low latency 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

communication (URLLC); Enhanced mobile broadband 
(eMBB). 
Several proposals of V2X systems based on 5G slicing 
exist, e.g., [17]-[21]. The V2X dedicated 5G slices can 
provide the required capabilities for multiple tenants, while 
working mono or multi-domain infrastructure. However, the 
basic reference slice types – like eMBB, URLLC and 
mMTC cannot fully solve the needs of the heterogeneous 
features of V2X services [20]; additional customization of 
V2X oriented slice is necessary. 
 
The definition of BMs/ESs, essentially determines the 
entities, their roles and responsibilities in a system; out of 
these, one can derive the system requirements and 
functional architecture. In V2X area, the 5G PPP 
Automotive Working Group, Business Feasibility Study for 
5G V2X Deployment [22]) outlined the BM picture; 
however, they shows a lack of a complete vision on 
different 
stakeholders 
roles, 
necessary 
investments, 
required rollout conditions, and expected profit from 
Connected and Automated Mobility (CAM) services.  
This paper contributes to develop a methodology to 
perform a top-down and complete identification of 
requirements for a V2X system supported by 5G dedicated 
slices. The paper structure is described below. To make the 
paper more self-contained, the first two sections introduce 
the elements of the ecosystem/business model.  Specifically, 
Section II offers a summary of ES/BMs in a 5G sliced 
system, while Section III completes the general ES/BMs and 
adapt them to 5G V2X environment. Section IV proposes our 
methodology for systematic requirements identification.  
Section V details V2X- 5G general requirements.  Finally, 
Section VI develops the requirements identification for a 
V2X- 5G slice in a structured and top-down way. Section 
VII summarizes conclusions and future work.  
II. 
 5G SLICING ECOSYSTEM  
This section will shortly present a few relevant ES/BMs 
proposed for 5G sliced systems which will be further 
extended for V2X environment in Section III.  
The work by Galis [10] introduces a basic ES/BM for 5G 
slicing, including several actors: 
Infrastructure Provider (InP) - owns and manages the 
physical infrastructure (network/cloud/data centre). It could 
lease its infrastructure (as it is) to a slice provider, or it can 
itself construct slices (the BM is flexible) and then can lease 
the infrastructure in network slicing fashion.  
Network Slice Provider (NSLP) - is typically a 
telecommunication service provider (owner or tenant of the 
infrastructures from which network slices are constructed). 
The NSLP can construct multi-tenant, multi-domain slices, 
on top of infrastructures offered by one or several InPs.  
Slice Tenant (SLT) - is a generic user of a specific slice, 
including network/cloud/data centers, which can host 
customized services. A SLT can request from a Network 
Slice Provider (NSLP) to create a new slice instance 
dedicated to support some SLT specific services or 
subscribe to a convenient existing one.  The SLT can also 
lease virtual resources from one or more NSLPs in the form 
of a virtual network, where the tenant can realize, manage 
and then provide Network Services (NS) (composed of 
Network Functions (NFs)) to its individual end users. A 
single tenant may define and run one or several slices in its 
domain. 
End User (EU): consumes (part of) the services supplied 
by the slice tenant, without offering them to other business 
actors. 
The above model is operational only, i.e., it does not 
detail all external entities which may influence the system 
architecture and functionalities, e.g., Standards Developing 
Organizations (SDOs), policy makers, etc. The above BM is 
its recursive (see Ordonez et al., [11]); a tenant can at its 
turn offer parts of its sliced resources to other tenants, and so 
on.  
The 5G-PPP Architecture Working Group [7] introduces 
a BM in which the main entities are:  Service Customer (SC), 
Service Provider (SP) and Network Operator (NOP). The SP 
role is actually an umbrella, comprising three possible sub-
roles, depending on the service offered to the SC: 
Communication SP, Digital SP and Network Slice as a 
Service (NSLaaS) Provider. The SPs must design, build and 
operate high-level services, using aggregated network 
services. The NOP orchestrates resources, potentially offered 
by multiple virtualized infrastructure providers (VISP) and 
uses aggregated virtualized infrastructure services to design, 
build, and operate network services that are offered to SPs. 
Another actor could be Data Center SP (DCSP) which   
designs, builds, operates and offers data center services. A 
DCSP differs from a VISP by offering “raw” resources (i.e., 
host servers) in rather centralized locations and simple 
services for consumption of these raw resources. In practice, 
a single organization can play one or more roles of the above 
list. 
Other similar models have been proposed [23]-[27], 
some of them being more refined than the basic previous 
one. Several recent Public Private Partnership (PPP) Phase 
I/II research projects have as objectives 5G technologies  
[10]. Some of them extended the list of role definitions, to 
allow various possible customer-provider relationships 
between verticals, operators, and other stakeholders.  
III. 5G V2X ECOSYSTEM 
This section provides an extended example of ES/BM 
for 5G V2X. It is forecasted that advanced CAM services 
(e.g., 
high-definition 
(HD) 
maps 
support, 
highway 
chauffeur, 
tele-operated 
driving, 
platooning, 
fully 
autonomous driving, extended sensors, etc.) will be enabled 
through next-generation 5G V2X defined in 3GPP Release 
16 specifications [4][5][24].    
The 5G PPP Automotive Working Group [22] has 
defined a general 5G V2X-ES, capturing operational 
features and business relationships. One can distinguish 
among operational BM including: 5G industry (network 
operators, network and devices vendors), automotive 
industry, road infrastructure operators, users and external 
entities such as Standards Developing Organizations 
(SDOs), and policy makers - the latter providing input 
requirements for the operational BM (Figure 1).  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
Users 
Oerational V2X-ES 
Road 
Infrastructure 
Operators 
5G  
Industry 
Standards 
developing 
organization
ss 
Automotive 
industry 
Policy 
makers 
Overall  
V2X-ES 
R1 
R2 
R3 
R4 
R5 
R6 
R7 
R8 
R9 
Rules, constraints 
Operational interactions 
 
Figure 1. The main stakeholders and interactions in 5G V2X-ES 
(adapted from [22]) 
5G industry - includes any business entity developing or 
using/providing 5G-related services, e.g., Mobile Network 
Operators (MNOs), Telecom vendors, Cloud providers, 
device providers, software developers, etc.  
Automotive Industry (AutoIn) - includes car Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEMs) (e.g., car/component   
manufacturers), Tier 1 suppliers, CAM SPs HD map 
providers 
and 
other 
automotive-specific 
technology 
providers. This category brings the automotive expertise and 
services (including mobility services) to customers (business 
and consumers).  
Road Infrastructure Operators (RIO are national or 
regional entities performing deployment, operation, and 
maintenance of physical road infrastructure. They may   also 
manage road traffic operations, own or operate the toll 
system, etc. Users can be drivers, vehicle owners, 
passengers or pedestrians. 
The external entities are providing significant inputs to 
the operational V2X-ES actors, strongly influencing the 
requirements to be met by the overall system.   
The set of SDO is large: 3rd Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP), European Tele-communications Standards 
Institute (ETSI), Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and 5G-related alliances 
such as Next Generation Mobile Networks (NGMN), 
Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC), 5G Automotive 
Association (5GAA) and Automotive Edge Computing 
Consortium (AECC). For safety-related 5G applications 
(e.g. Advanced Driver Assistance Systems - ADAS and 
autonomous 
driving), 
pertinent 
standards developing 
organizations such as International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) may be also relevant players.  
Policy Makers (PM) are the highest authorities that   
regulate the relationships within the V2X-ES. They are 
international 
or 
national 
government 
authorities 
or 
organizations defining the legal framework and policies, 
such as road and transport authorities or telecom regulators. 
The ITU as well as national spectrum regulators belong to 
this category.  
The detailed description of the interactions between the 
stakeholders is given in [23]. They will influence the 
system requirements addressed to different functional 
blocks. The interactions are shortly described below. 
The policy makers and SDOs provide sets of rules to the 
operational entities and get feedback from the latter. The 
interactions are:  R1 (Users - PMs), R3 (PMs - AutoIn), R6 
(PMs - 5G Industry), R8 (SDO - 5G Industry). The R7 (PMs 
-SDO) represents cooperation between SDOs and policy 
makers in order to harmonize their specifications. The 
interactions inside the V2X-ES operational part are: R2 
(Users – AutoIn, R4 (Users - 5G Industry), R5 (AutoIn - 5G 
Industry), R9 (5G Industry - RIO).  
Usually, the 5G network providers will own and operate 
most or parts of the network infrastructure. However, RIOs 
may participate in the deployment of 5G V2X and provide or 
facilitate licenses or other infrastructure requirements that are 
under their responsibility (PMs are also involved here). The 
5G Industry shall offer communication services to the RIO 
based on commercial agreements. 
The 5G part can be split into Radio Access Network 
(RAN) infrastructure provider and cloud infrastructure 
provider (central data centers providing virtual resources, 
such as computing, storage, and networking). In practice, the 
roles of 5G network providers can be taken by the Mobile 
Network Operators (MNOs), but is possible that RIOs 
deploys or operate (parts of) the 5G V2X network, directly 
providing the necessary coverage for CAM services to the 
users. The model in Figure 1 is general; potentially, any actor 
(e.g., a road operator) could invest in network deployment. 
Another similar V2X-ES/BM is adopted in the research 
projects 5GCAR [25][26]. 
 The variety of involved (directly or indirectly) actors and 
also generating requirements for a V2X-ES/BM, is still 
larger than that described in Figure 1. Actors providing key 
services for the automotive sector can be split in two major 
categories:  
- service providers of enabling platforms, which manage 
the data and allow services to be built on top of the data; 
- connectivity providers, which construct and manage 
connectivity facilities over cellular networks. Inside each 
category several types of actors can be included.  
A non-exhaustive list of actors comprises: Connectivity 
Players (MNOs, Transport Services Providers, (TSPs), ICT 
Solution 
& 
Cloud 
Platform 
Providers, 
Intelligent 
Transportation System (ITS)); Automotive OEMs (Cars, 
Trucks); Suppliers (Tier 1 & 2 (System Integrators), 
Wireless 
Module 
Vendors, 
Chipset 
Vendors, 
Software/Solutions, Middleware, Over the Top Services 
Providers (OTT), Connectivity/ Bluetooth, Databases, etc.); 
Application platforms (Software - based, Fleet/ Commercial, 
Autonomous Driving, Smartphone Platforms); Business 
Users (Public Transport, Company Fleets, Freight, Car 
Rental, Taxi Fleets, Delivery systems, Emergency Response 
systems); Consumers (End user consumers, Families, Small 
Office Home Office (SoHo); Application types (Mobility as 
a Service, Maps & Navigation Telematics / Tracking, 
Communications 
Safety 
& 
Maintenance, 
Media 
& 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Entertainment, Productivity). More than these, additional 
stakeholders can play specific roles: Insurance, Dealers, 
Auto 
Repair, 
Regulatory Bodies, Local Authorities 
(Government, Law Enforcement, Smart City, Road 
Operators), Location-based commerce players, Security 
infrastructure and services providers. The above large 
picture clearly shows that the process of collecting and 
aggregating system requirements for a V2X system is really 
a challenging one and a methodology for this would be 
useful. 
IV. REQUIREMENTS IDENTIFICATION  METHODOLOGY 
This section will outline a methodology to structure the 
process of system requirements identification with example   
of a use case - V2X system 5G-sliced based. This will be 
shortly named “SYSTEM”. 
A. The Business Model Impact on Requirements 
The V2X-ES/BM (Section III) will be considered and 
particularly the operational part of the BM. The target is to 
identify the system requirements for a V2X-5G sliced 
system. The factors outside the operational BM itself will be 
called “external”. The influence of them can be captured by 
some Assumptions, Dependencies and Constraints (ADC).  
The ADCs are expressed as initial - general (predefined) 
statements derived from both the environment in which the 
SYSTEM will work and from its main objectives. They can 
also represent predefined restrictions obtained from 
SYSTEM scope. So, the ADCs also establish the limits of 
the SYSTEM related to services offered, technologies used 
and the scope and its relationship with its environment.  
The assumptions are factors considered to be true during 
the SYSTEM life cycle. If changed, they may affect 
negatively the system outcomes. They include, but are not 
limited to, End-User characteristics, technology used, 
resource availability, and funding availability. Some external 
dependencies may exist, that can affect the system 
requirements specification (SRS). They are outside of the 
system scope of control and must remain true for the 
SYSTEM life, to succeed. (e.g., an application relies on a 
different application, outside the SYSTEM, to get specific 
data). 
The constraints are factors to be obeyed by the 
SYSTEM; they can impose rules, can limit the system scope 
and functionality, etc. Here, one can include (but not limited) 
regulatory policies, e.g., coming from SDOs and policy 
makers (see Section III, V2X-ES/BM).  Also, one may have   
limitations related to infrastructure, technologies, resources    
and licensing. Constraints are imposed on the solution by 
circumstance, force, or compulsion. They limit the options 
available to the system design by imposing immovable 
boundaries and limits. 
The ADCs may be expressed at two levels: Business 
(High) level – resulted from business or regulation   
considerations; Technical (Low)/ level – usually derived 
from the former (expressed as technical sets or can be 
directly expressed in technical form.  
 
Source/Actor  
(provider/operator):  
 Automotive industry 
 5G industry 
 Road infrastructure 
operators 
 
Requirements 
Source/Actor: 
End User  
(Services/Use 
cases) 
 
Requirements 
 
 
General Assumptions & Dependencies 
 
Constraints 
o Sources: SDOs, Policy makers 
V2X  SYSTEM Requirements 
(Operational actors) 
General V2X 
Requirements 
Business/Rules 
(High) level 
Technical 
(Low) level 
Figure 2. Requirements identification methodology for a V2X system 
The ADCs scope is global to a multi-domain 
environment if they are related to the SYSTEM as a whole. 
However, the ADCs can also be applied recursively to 
subsystems. There can be a mapping 1-to-1 or 1-to-many 
between an ADC statement and a requirement in the sense 
that a given ADC can induce a single system requirement or 
several ones. 
The Figure 2 shows the relationships between entities. 
The general ADCs can influence directly the General, User 
and Provider Requirements. The End-User Requirements 
and Provider Requirements specify refinements of the 
assumptions from their point of view and introduce 
additional specific requirements which will be finally 
mapped on system requirements. Two generic sources/actors 
issuing 
requirements 
are 
defined: 
End-User 
(usage 
scenarios) – defining requirements to be met by the 
SYSTEM in order to satisfy the high level services scenarios 
and user needs; Provider/Operator – defining  requirements 
to be met by the SYSTEM to satisfy the provider/operator 
needs (can be specific to the development, exploitation and 
maintenance). 
A bi-directional interaction arrow between End-User 
(usage scenarios) and Provider/Operator may exist because: 
a. 
Some 
End-User 
needs 
will 
influence 
the 
Provider/Operator choices if wanting to satisfy the user 
needs; b. Some Provider/Operator business or technical 
decisions may affect or limit the range of requirements asked 
from the system by the End-User. 
B. Requirements Taxonomy 
In a simplified view, two generic actors/business entities 
are generating requirements: customer and provider. The 
customer asks services from a provider and therefore this 
induces some requirements on provider side. In a V2X 
system one can consider as generic customers the entities 
providing applications and services to real end users. The 
providers could be 5G industry (network operators, network 
and 
devices 
vendors), 
automotive 
industry, 
road 
infrastructure operators, etc. They may also impose a set of 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

requirements upon the system which is managed by it as a 
consequence of: some ADCs that have been already 
generally defined and/or some own business and technical 
considerations. 
The requirements categories can be: Functional - related 
to the correctness which the functions of the system should 
fulfil; Non-functional – related to flexibility, reliability, 
availability, 
scalability, 
security, 
traffic 
capacity, 
performance metrics, etc. Note that, generally, depending on 
the system role, some non-functional requirements can be 
included in the functional category (e.g., security).  
One 
can 
distinguish 
two 
levels 
of 
expressing   
requirements: Business/Rules (high) level – they are resulted 
from business considerations or regulations; Technical (low) 
level - usually translated from the former in a set of technical 
ones, or can be directly expressed in technical form.  The 
requirements may have one of the three scopes: Global to a 
multi-domain environment, i.e. referring to a larger 
environment than SYSTEM scope. Such requirements will 
characterise the environment in which the SYSTEM will act. 
They are actually needed and should be fulfilled in order that 
SYSTEM 
can 
smoothly 
cooperate 
in 
end-to-end 
environment with other systems. Actually, these global 
requirements are expressed as general ADCs or derived from 
them; Local to “SYSTEM” (Local_SYSTEM); Local to a 
subsystem of the SYSTEM (Local_subsystem). 
One can define as a class, a “dimension” or a “point of 
view” on a given requirement. Therefore, the same particular 
requirement may belong to several classes. We may have:  
Specific 
function 
class 
- 
defining 
the 
specific 
requirements of a functionality or subsystem. On the vertical 
architectural vision, it is not strictly related/ limited to a 
given architectural layer.  
Architectural class - related to one or more architectural 
layers set seen as a whole.  
The degree in which some requirements have to be met 
are: Mandatory: must be met (during system validation the 
decision on their fulfillment is yes or no); Trade-offs: they 
are more or less quantitatively met; note that mandatory 
requirements could be seen in some cases as lowest limits of 
the trade-offs requirements. 
V. 5G V2X GENERAL REQUIREMENTS  
This section will shortly present the general 5G V2X 
requirements which are coming from SDOs, Policy makers, 
V2X application scenarios (serving the users) and 5G 
industry actors. Then, for different use cases, specific 
refined requirements should be derived. 
Support of the CV2X requirements has been introduced 
for Long Term Evolution (LTE) in 3GPP Release 14, 15 [3], 
and then, with regards to 5G, Release 16 has been completed 
in 2019 [4][5][24].  The document 3GPP TS 22.186 V16.2.0 
(2019-06) “Enhancement of 3GPP support for extended 
eV2X scenarios”, Stage 1 (Rel.16) [4] specifies the general 
requirements for eV2X based on 5G. The generic SYSTEM 
considered in the Section IV will be here a 3GPP System.  
The service requirements to enhance 3GPP support for 
V2X are grouped in six areas: General aspects (interworking, 
communication-related requirements valid for all V2X 
scenarios); 
Vehicles 
platooning; 
Advanced 
driving; 
Extended sensors; Remote driving; Vehicle quality of service 
support. In a slicing solution one can design a specific slice 
to serve a given scenario/use case, e.g., platooning, advanced 
driving, extended sensors, etc., or a more complex slice 
could offer several services. Of course, the system 
requirements will strongly depend on such a choice. 
As an example, advanced driving enables semi-
automated or fully automated driving. Longer inter-vehicle 
distance is assumed. Each vehicle and/or Roadside Unit 
(RSU) should share data obtained from its local sensors with 
vehicles in proximity, thus allowing vehicles to coordinate 
their trajectories or manoeuvres. In addition, each vehicle 
should share its driving intention with vehicles in proximity. 
The benefits of this use case group are safer travelling, 
collision avoidance, and improved traffic efficiency. 
A relevant aspect of eV2X applications is the Level of 
Automation (LoA), which reflects the functional aspects of 
the technology and affects the system performance 
requirements. In accordance with the levels from SAE  Int’l. 
Std. J3016", US Homeland Security Digital Library, "Self-
Driving Cars: Levels of Automation", March 2017, the LoA 
are: 0 – No Automation, 1 – Driver Assistance, 2 – Partial 
Automation, 3 – Conditional Automation, 4 – High 
Automation, 5 – Full Automation. A general 3GPP system 
should be able to be customized for all levels of automation. 
The document 3GPP [4] defines general requirements for 
a 3GPP system supporting V2X, to be met by any particular 
V2X system, irrespective if slicing technology is used or not. 
Considering the taxonomy developed in Section IV, these 
requirements are applied for the overall system and belong to 
the architectural class, i.e., they can affect several layers of 
the functional layered architecture. Given the importance of 
security, confidentiality and reliability capabilities in V2X 
systems, those specific requirements have been included in 
the functional categories. Note: when “User Equipment” (UE) 
appears in a requirement text, actually it means “UE 
supporting V2X applications”. 
A. Functional 5G-V2X requirements-3GPP 
The 3GPP system shall support 
- a defined communication range for a message 
transmitted by a UE; 
- the message transfer for group management operations 
as requested by the application layer; 
- message transfer among a group of UEs;  
- message transfer between two UEs belonging to the 
same group of UEs;  
- confidentiality and integrity of message transfer among 
a group of UEs; 
- relative lateral position accuracy of 0.1 m between UEs;  
- high connection density for congested traffic; 
- control the UL and DL reliability of transport of V2X 
communications, depending on the requirement of V2X 
application; 
- message transfer of type UE-UE and UE-[UE-type RSU]  
(UEs could be or not subscribers of the same PLMN); 
- discovery and communication between UEs supporting 
the same V2X application; 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

- the operators to select which 3GPP RAT to use for a 
V2X application; 
- a UE to obtain network access via another UE 
supporting V2X application; 
- a UE to discover another UE supporting V2X 
application that can offer access to the network; 
- switching between direct 3GPP connection and indirect 
3GPP connection via a UE;  
- confidentiality and integrity of message transfer 
between a UE and network, when the UE is using an indirect 
3GPP connection; 
- a UEs to use New Radio (NR) direct communication 
when the UEs are not served by a RAN using NR;  
- UEs to use E-Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA) for direct communication when the UEs are not   
served by a RAN using E-UTRA; 
- an RSU to be able to communicate with up to 200 UEs; 
- confidentiality and integrity of message transfer 
between a UE and a V2X application server; 
- provision of addressing information (e.g. IP address) of 
V2X application server(s) to the UEs;  
-  the UE to use multiple 3GPP RATs (i.e. NR & E-
UTRA) simultaneously for direct communication. 
B. Non-functional 5G-V2X requirements 
The 3GPP system shall  
- optimize the communication between UEs belonging to 
the same group and in proximity; 
- support efficient coordination of radio resources used 
(spectrum utilization and reliability); 
- minimize the impact to E-UTRA(N) by UE supporting 
only New Radio (NR) based V2X communication;  
- minimize the impact to NR by UE supporting only E-
UTRA based V2X communication;  
- in case the UEs are subscribers to different PLMNs, 
there shall be no service degradation of the message transfer. 
C. Other 5G  V2X General Requirements  
Apart from requirements defined in Subsection A, still 
more general requirements can be identified, for 5G V2X 
systems and also specific ones, in order to support V2V, V2I, 
V2N, V2P, V2S, V2H scenarios in multi-domain, multi-
operator/provider, multi-tenant contexts. Let us consider for 
instance, the Mobile Network Operator (MNO) as a principal 
actor belonging to the 5G Industry category, in a general 5G-
V2X-ES/BM environment. Usually, the MNO owns and 
manages the physical and logical (virtualized) infrastructure, 
to support the above services. Specific sets of requirements 
can be identified for 5G dedicated slices, provided by MNO, 
for V2V, V2I, V2N, etc. However, more general aspects are 
still open issues in V2X area. 
For critical vehicle functions and improved safety, 
connectivity is demanded from MNO but also for the 
delivery of audio, video, social media access and location-
based services, among others, in daily driving. However, 
there is still lack of flexibility for vehicle owners to choose 
the MNO to serve their vehicles. Currently, the connected 
service packages integrated in vehicles are limited to a single 
designated provider. From a business perspective it is a 
future requirement that vehicle owners may select their 
MNO, as they do for their smart phones today. So, 
interoperability of vehicles among available cellular 
networks will ensure redundancy for critical safety features 
and will result in better value and service for consumers. 
Such a multi-MNO model is proposed in the work [28][29] 
as an extended business model including several MNOs, 
while sharing the same infrastructure. Also, some other 
entities are defined in the BM, e.g., location-based services 
providers, cloud providers, intermediate bodies, etc. The 
mobile system should provide “predictive QoS”, i.e.,  inform 
the vehicle of connectivity quality changes to be provided in 
the future so that the vehicle could decide to switch from 
autonomous driving mode to manual driving mode (factors: 
weather conditions, road situation, network availability at the 
vehicle position/location, etc.). 
D. General requirements for applications 
The large range of V2X applications generates a lot of 
requirements. Here we only give some examples of general 
requirements [31]. We denote with VAE, a V2X Application 
Enabler. Considering the taxonomy of the Section IV the 
requirements below belong to the architectural class and are 
focused mainly on the functional application layer. 
- 
The VAE client and the VAE server shall support  
o one or more V2X applications; 
o obtaining information of the available V2X 
services (e.g. identified by V2X service ID) from 
the V2X application; 
o obtaining 
information 
of 
the 
associated 
geographical area from the V2X application; 
- 
The VAE client shall be able to communicate to 
multiple VAE servers 
- 
The VAE capabilities should be offered as APIs to the 
V2X applications; 
- 
the VAE capabilities shall enable V2X UEs to obtain 
o  the address of available V2X application servers 
associated 
with 
served 
geographical 
area 
information; 
o the information of available V2X services (e.g. 
identified by V2X service ID). 
Specific requirements are defined for V2X group 
communication, V2X dynamic groups, File distribution 
capability, V2X application message distribution, Service 
continuity 
E. Example of  5G  V2X Requirements for Specific 
Scenarios : Advanced Driving 
Specific scenarios have different requirements; therefore, 
a slicing approach is attractive. As an example, TABLE I 
shows the performance requirements for a 5G-V2X system, 
dedicated to advanced driving adapted from [4]. The 
requirements are coming from the use cases scenarios. Their 
level is Technical (low), specifying quantitative ranges for 
different parameters. Their scope is system-wide, i.e.,    
addressed to the system as a whole. However, after defining 
the system architecture and subsystems, these requirements 
should be mapped on those specific subsystems mainly 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

involved to contribute to achieving the required ranges. 
Similar examples of technical requirements are identified   in 
[4] for other scenarios like Vehicles platooning, Extended 
sensors, Remote driving and Vehicle quality of service 
support. 
TABLE I. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR ADVANCED DRIVING (simplified, adapted from [4]) 
Communication scenario description 
Payload 
(Bytes) 
Tx rate 
(Message/Sec) 
Max 
E2E latency 
(ms) 
 
Data rate (Mbps) 
Min required 
Communication 
range (meters)  
(NOTE 4) 
Scenario 
Automation 
Degree 
Cooperative collision avoidance between UEs  
2000 
(NOTE 5) 
100 
(NOTE 5) 
10 
10 
(NOTE 1) 
 
Information sharing for automated driving 
between UEs  
Lower  
6500 
(NOTE 1) 
10 
100 
 
700 
Higher  
 
 
100 
53 
(NOTE 1) 
360 
Information sharing for automated driving 
between UE and RSU 
Lower  
6000 
(NOTE 1) 
10 
100 
 
700 
Higher  
 
 
100 
50 
(NOTE 1) 
360 
Emergency trajectory alignment between UEs  
2000 
(NOTE 5) 
 
3 
30 
500 
Intersection safety information between an RSU and UEs  
UL: 450 
UL: 50 
 
UL: 0. 25  
DL: 50 
(NOTE 2) 
 
Cooperative lane change between UEs  
Lower  
300-400 
 
25 
 
 
Higher  
12000 
 
10 
 
 
Video sharing between a UE and a V2X application server  
 
 
 
UL: 10 
 
Note 1: The reliability required for all scenarios is higher than 99.9% 
Note 2: All UEs are supposed to support V2X applications. 
Note 3: This includes both cooperative maneuvers and perception data exchanged using two separate messages within the same period of time (e.g., required 
latency 100ms).  
Note 4: This value is referring to a maximum number of 200 UEs. The value of 50 Mbps DL is applicable to broadcast or is the maximum aggregated bitrate 
of all the UEs for unicast. 
Note 5: Sufficient reliability should be provided even for cells having no values in this table  
Note 6: This is obtained considering UE speed of 130km/h. Vehicles may move in different directions.  
Note 7: These values are based on calculations for cooperative maneuvers only. 
 
VI. 5G V2X SLICING REQUIREMENTS 
The slicing solution to realize 5G V2X systems should of 
course take into account the general requirements issued by 
different participating actors in the 5G V2X ES/BM. 
However, it has been shown (C. Campolo, [20]) that V2X 
services require complex features which do not map exactly 
on the basic reference slice types: eMBB, URLLC and 
mMTC. Therefore, dedicated V2X slicing solutions have 
been proposed [17][20][30].  This paper space does not allow 
to detail and structure all the aspects of 5G V2X slices 
requirements in the manner presented in Section IV. So, an 
outline of more relevant challenges will be presented here. 
Traffic safety and efficiency oriented slices  (use cases - 
V2V, V2P, V2I) should be able to: transport and process 
periodic and event-driven messages (carrying position and 
kinematics information of vehicle); allow vehicles to 
broadcast messages to surrounding environment; assure low 
latency and high reliability requirements.  
Autonomous driving oriented slices (use cases - V2V, 
V2I, V2N) should: enable ultra low-latency V2V RAT 
connection mode; support additional RAN/Core Network 
(CN) functions (e.g., for network-controlled resource 
allocation over the interface PC5 - in eNBs); support 
mobility, authentication, authorization and subscription 
management (in Mobility Management Entity – MME and 
Home Subscribers System – HSS ); support low-latency and 
reliable video/data exchange needs by the V2X Application 
servers (AS), deployed at the network edge. 
Tele-operated driving slices should: assure ultra-low 
latency and highly-reliable E2E connectivity between the 
controlled vehicle and the remote operator (typically hosted 
outside the CN; data flows passes through a Packet Gateway 
P-GW); identify the special circumstances in which such 
services should be activated.  
Vehicular Internet and Infotainment slices should be able 
to use multiple RATs to get a high throughput; the contents 
can be located in the remote/edge cloud (e.g., server co-
located in eNodeBs via Multi-Access Edge Computing  
technology - MEC); multiple MME instances may be 
required depending on the users mobility degree. 
Vehicle management and remote diagnostics slices 
should support the exchange of low-frequency small 
amounts of data between vehicles and remote servers outside 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

the core network; the architectural Data Plane and Control 
Plane should handle multiple interactions. The general 
approach of V2X 5G slicing involve multi-tenant, multi-
domain multi-operator and E2E capabilities. E2E V2X slices 
need dynamic composition of different slice instances in the 
RAN and in the CN segments; e.g., some functions in CN 
can be shared by several specific slices (authentication/ 
authorization), while each slice in RAN domain could be  
differently customized.   
3GPP proposed for slices creation a multi-dimensional 
slice descriptor. It contains among others: Tenant ID (e.g., 
the car manufacturer, the road authority), Slice Type (e.g., 
vehicular infotainment, remote diagnostic), but also some 
additional specific parameters like: position/kinematics 
parameters. A vehicle can be a multi-slice device, able to 
simultaneously attach to multiple slices. 
Multi-tenancy and multi-operator capabilities raise 
several new requirements given that different providers can 
offer different services mapped onto different slices, over the 
infrastructure owned by different network operators. Optimal 
Resource 
allocation 
between 
domain-scoped 
slices 
composing a general E2E slice generates a rich set of 
functional and security performance requirements.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper had as objective to develop a systematic 
procedure for V2X system requirements collection and 
apply it on examples of implementation solutions based on a 
5G sliced infrastructure. First, the paper introduced the 
ecosytems/ business models (ES/BM), given that the system 
requirements are issued by the participating actors.  
It has been shown that business models/ecosystems for 
5G V2X systems are considerably richer than those for basic 
5G slicing. The reason consists in large set of V2X 
applications and variety of commercial services offered. 
A general methodology is proposed to structure the 
process of system requirements identification. Considering 
the above, examples of V2X system requirements have been 
exposed. 
Several steps should be followed to identify the system 
requirements. First, the V2X set of high level of services 
(seen from the end user perspectives) to be implemented 
should be defined among the rich possible ones. Then, the 
identification of the set of involved actors and a first 
assignment of their roles (especially from business/services 
point of view) is the next step. Here, some actors would 
provide only indirect actions (Policy Makers, SDOs, local 
regulators, etc.). Other actors will participate at operational 
phases (MNOs, OEMs, Service providers - e.g., OTT, 
Infrastructure providers, etc.) at run-time. 
Some general characteristics of the overall system should 
be defined such as multi-domain, multi-tenant, multi-
operator characteristics. Definition of interactions between 
the actors will complete the high-level description of the 5G 
V2X BM/ecosystem. The regulations, standards, etc., to be 
enforced have to be identified; they will define but also limit 
the system capabilities and scope.  
The following steps will refine the BM and go to the 
requirement identification, where inputs coming from all 
actors involved in ES/BM should be considered. To refine 
the requirements for a 5G V2X slicing solution, it is 
necessary to select technologies for RAN, core and transport 
part of the network) should be selected. Then, the system 
architecture (general and layered - functional) has to be 
defined, allowing further technical refinement of the system 
design.  Future work can go further to consider more deeply 
depending on use cases targeted, and the multi-x aspects, 
system capabilities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the Operational 
Programme Human Capital of the Ministry of European 
Funds through the Financial Agreement 51675/09.07.2019, 
SMIS code 125125. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. K. Priyan and G. Usha Devi, "A survey on internet of 
vehicles: 
applications, 
technologies, 
challenges 
and 
opportunities", Int. J. Advanced Intelligence Paradigms, Vol. 
12, Nos. 1/2, 2019. 
[2] 
C. Renato Storck and F. Duarte-Figueiredo, “A 5G V2X 
Ecosystem Providing Internet of Vehicles”, Sensors 2019, 
19,550, 
doi: 
10.3390/s19030550, 
www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors, [retrieved January, 2020]. 
[3] 
3GPP TS 22.185 V15.0.0 (2018-06) "Service requirements 
for V2X services" Stage 1, Release 15.  
[4] 
3GPP TS 22.186 V16.2.0 (2019-06) "Enhancement of 3GPP 
support for V2X scenarios", Stage 1, Release 16. 
[5] 
3GPP TS 23.286 V16.3.0 (2020-03), "Application layer 
support 
for 
Vehicle-to-Everything 
(V2X) 
services; 
Functional architecture and information flows", Release 16. 
[6] 
N. Panwar, S. Sharma, and A. K. Singh ‘A Survey on 5G: 
The Next Generation of Mobile Communication’ Elsevier 
Physical 
Communication, 
4 
Nov 
2015,  
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.01643v1.pdf  
[7] 
5G-PPP Architecture Working Group, “View on 5G 
Architecture”, 
Version 
3.0, 
June, 
2019, 
https://5g-
ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/5G-PPP-5G-
Architecture-White-Paper_v3.0_PublicConsultation.pdf, 
[retrieved June,  2019]. 
[8] 
3GPP TS 23.501 V15.2.0 (2018-06), System Architecture 
for the 5G System; Stage 2, (Release 15)  
[9] 
X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashfi, and M. K. Marina, 
“Network Slicing in 5G: Survey and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, May 2017, pp. 94-100. 
[10] A. Galis, “Network Slicing- A holistic architectural 
approach, orchestration and management with applicability 
in 
mobile 
and 
fixed 
networks 
and 
clouds”, 
http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10051374/, [retrieved July, 2019]. 
[11] J. Ordonez-Lucena et al., “Network Slicing for 5G with 
SDN/NFV: Concepts, Architectures and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 2017, pp. 80-87, Citation 
information: DOI 10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600935. 
[12] I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. 
Flinck, “Network Slicing & Softwarization: A Survey on 
Principles, Enabling Technologies & Solutions”, IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, March 2018, pp. 
2429-2453.  
[13] ETSI GS NFV 002, “NFV Architectural Framework”, 
V1.2.1, December 2014. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[14] ETSI GR NFV-IFA 028, “Network Functions Virtualisation 
(NFV) Release 3; Management and Orchestration; Report on 
architecture options to support multiple administrative 
domains”, Technical Report, V3.1.1, January, 2018. 
[15] ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012, Release 3 “NFV Evolution and 
Ecosystem; Report on Network Slicing Support with ETSI 
NFV Architecture Framework”, Technical Report, V3.1.1, 
December, 2017. 
[16] ONF TR-526, “Applying SDN Architecture to 5G Slicing”, 
April 
2016, 
https://www.opennetworking.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/10/Applying_SDN_Architecture_to_5
G_Slicing_TR-526.pdf, [retrieved December, 2019].  
[17] A. 
Molinaro 
and 
C. 
Campolo, 
“5G 
for 
V2X 
Communications”, 
https://www.5gitaly.eu/2018/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/5G-Italy-White-eBook-5G-for-
V2X-Communications.pdf, [retrieved December, 2019]. 
[18] S. A. Ali Shah, E. Ahmed, M. Imran, and S. Zeadally, "5G 
for Vehicular Communications", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, January 2018, pp.111-117. 
[19] K. Katsaros and M. Dianati, "A Conceptual 5G Vehicular 
Networking 
Architecture“, 
October 
2017,  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309149571,   DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-34208-5_22, [retrieved December 2019]. 
[20] C. Campolo, A. Molinaro, A. Iera, and F. Menichella, "5G 
Network Slicing for Vehicle-to-Everything Services", IEEE 
Wireless Communications, Volume: 24 Issue: 6, DOI: 
10.1109/MWC.2017.160040, [retrieved December, 2019]. 
[21] Friedhelm Ramme, ITS, Transport & Automotive, Ericsson 
5G: "From Concepts to Reality“ Technology Roadmaps 
https://5gaa.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Final-
Presentation-MWC19-Friedhelm-Ramme-ERICSSON.pdf, 
[retrieved January, 2020].   
[22] 5G PPP Automotive Working Group, “Business Feasibility 
Study 
for 
5G 
V2X 
Deployment”, 
https://bscw.5g-
ppp.eu/pub/bscw.cgi/d293672/5G%20PPP%20Automotive
%20WG_White%20Paper_Feb2019.pdf, [retrieved, January, 
2020]. 
[23] H2020-ICT-2016-2, Monarch Project, 5G Mobile Network 
Architecture for diverse services, use cases and applications 
in 5G and beyond, Deliverable D2.2,  "Initial overall 
architecture and concepts for enabling innovations", 
https://5g-monarch.eu/deliverables/ 2018,[retrieved June, 
2019]. 
[24] 3GPP TR 22.830 V16.1.0, TS Group Services and System 
Aspects, "Feasibility Study on Business Role Models for 
Network 
Slicing", 
(Release 
16), 
2018 
https://itectec.com/archive/3gpp-specification-tr-22-830/ 
[retrieved May, 2020]. 
[25] 5GCAR White Paper : Executive Summary, Version: v1.0, 
2019-12-10, 
https://5gcar.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/5GCAR-Executive-Summary-
White-Paper.pdf, [retrieved, January 2020]. 
[26] 5GCAR, Fifth Generation Communication Automotive 
Research and innovation Deliverable D2.2 “Intermediate 
Report on V2X Business Models and Spectrum”, v2.0, 
2019-02-28, 
https://5gcar.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/5GCAR_D2.2_v1.0.pdf, [retrieved, 
January, 2020]. 
[27] B. Martínez de Aragón, J. Alonso-Zarateand, and A. Laya, 
"How 
connectivity 
is 
transforming 
the 
automotive 
ecosystem". Internet Technology Letters. 2018; 1:e14. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/itl2.14 [retrieved, January, 2020]. 
[28] Katsalis, N. Nikaein, and A. Edmonds, "Multi-Domain 
Orchestration 
for 
NFV: 
Challenges 
and 
Research 
Directions", 2016 15th Int'l Conf. on Ubiquitous Computing 
and Communications and International Symposium on 
Cyberspace and Security (IUCC-CSS), pp. 189–195, DOI: 
10.1109/IUCC-CSS.2016.034, 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7828601, 
[retrieved 
July, 2019]. 
[29] M. Usman  et al., "A Business and Legislative Perspective 
of V2X and Mobility Applications in 5G Networks", IEEE 
Access, 
2020, 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9057672, 
[retrieved June, 2020]. 
[30] J. Mei, X. Wang, and K. Zheng, "Intelligent Network 
Slicing 
for 
V2X 
Services 
Towards 
5G“, 
arXiv:1910.01516v1 [cs.NI] retrieved October,  2019. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-808-2
MOBILITY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

