A Framework for Data Roving in Ubiquitous
Computing Infrastructure
Richard E. Gunstone and David Newell
Computing and Informatics, School of Design, Engineering and Computing
Bournemouth University, Poole, Dorset, United Kingdom
rgunstone@bournemouth.ac.uk, dnewell@bournemouth.ac.uk
Abstract—In future Ubiquitous Computing Infrastructure, a
growing data demand from users particularly of mobile de-
vices will create further pressures on infrastructure to deliver
information at the right time. We introduce the concept of
"data roving", where smart infrastructure predicts the likely
information needs and replicates data to parts of infrastructure
in the vicinity of the user concerned. We propose this concept
to reduce the impact of congestion, reduce pressure on ﬁnite
infrastructure resources, and improve data access performance
for the mobile user. Unknown quantities at this stage include the
efﬁciency of anticipating information needs of users, and whether
this offers a performance advantage over more straightforward
demand-based caching. The main contribution of this paper is
a description of how a network infrastructure could be used in
predicting information needs and to support replication of data
to enhance performance.
Index Terms—mobility; middleware for mobile environments;
ubiquitous computing; mobile content delivery networks
I. INTRODUCTION
The concept of ubiquitous computing is acknowledged as
beginning with the work of Mark Weiser at Xerox [1]. Weiser
can be considered something of a visionary, describing a
future paradigm of computing that eschewed then-accepted
approaches in favour of a highly distributed, interactive and
pervasive world. Similarly, we view ubiquitous computing as
a move toward an environment where technology diffuses
into the background and where software systems are used
that adapt to user needs autonomously. A prevalent example
of ubiquitous computing to date has been the emergence
of converged devices such as smartphones and tablet-class
computers, such devices being indicative of a widespread trend
toward more ubiquitous architectures.
Contemporary converged devices and mobile devices (MDs)
in particular have placed unprecedented demand on commu-
nications infrastructure. Current-generation MDs are pushing
the data bearing capacities of even recent innovations to 3G
cellular networks, necessitating widespread deployment of
data service upgrades. Growth areas such as mobile video,
and increasing device capabilities and consumer need, are
likely to expand these demands further (and are spurring on
the development of new technologies such as Cognitive Radio
[2]). Increasing demands on ﬁnite radio spectrum for wireless
networking indicate the introduction of smart techniques into
the management of data across networks is of beneﬁt.
We introduce data roving (DR) as the ‘anticipation of
data consumption needs in advance, by either a client or
infrastructure, and the reproduction of data locally to the client
to satisfy data consumption needs in sufﬁcient time and to
required quality’. We consider this to be an evolution of data
staging (DS), which has its origins in business intelligence,
data warehousing, and dynamic infrastructure provisioning.
DS in these contexts refers to the provision of a duplicate or
replica of an information source suitable for processing, that
is then moved back into an storage library after processing is
completed. (Similarly, where the replica is not moved back into
a storage library, DS is equivalent to caching, for instance the
service offered by Content Delivery Network (CDN) nodes or
HTTP caches.) DR has relevance for mobile users particularly
in the development of middleware for mobile environments
and mobile content delivery networks.
The concept of DR, much like DS, offers beneﬁts in terms
of the reduced latency of access for the user. Rather than the
mobile user performing I/O operations across a potentially
large network of varying performance levels, I/O can be
performed with a nearby replica of the information required.
This is achieved by providing information locally to the client,
which makes use of a computer system local to the MD with
sufﬁcient capacity to vend data to mobile users (in many
respects similar to a CDN). Employing DR may also reduce
the exposure of the mobile user to congestion effects on busy
network links between the user and the source, particularly
where the hop count from the client to the DR replica is
shorter. Performance may also be higher if network links to
the replica have equal or greater reliability than the non-DR
equivalent.
The DR concept becomes important when evaluated against
a backdrop of increasingly high data consumption demand by
consumers, and the exchange of increasingly large ﬁle sizes
especially for multimedia. The use of MDs with limited local
storage also creates further pressure for data to be frequently
in transit over a ﬁxed or wireless network link. Therefore,
the ability to intelligently move data around is becoming
increasingly important. While concepts such as Quality of
Service (QoS) provide alternative options, these are typically
focused on real-time trafﬁc management according to the type
of service required.
In section 2, the paper the DR architecture is described,
including a high-level process and a discussion of how infor-
mation can be selected for DR. This is followed by conclusions
in the ﬁnal section, including consideration of related topics.
100
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

Figure 1.
The three steps involved in Data Roving: initiating the process,
reserving resources within the UCI, and provisioning of the replica(s) to
a nearby LDV that also includes committing changes back to the original
information store.
II. DATA ROVING ARCHITECTURE
Figure 1 shows the three steps in the DR process, namely
initiation, reservation and provisioning, and Figure 2 shows
a sketch of an example Ubiquitous Computing Infrastructure
(UCI) supporting DR. We deﬁne at this point several terms:
the Mobile Device (MD) is a converged device that has data
provision managed via DR; a Local Data Vendor (LDV) is
a node in the UCI that is presently or anticipated to be in
proximity (physically, topologically, or both) to the MD, of
which there may be more than one at any time; and the
“source” is the principal and authoritative manager of the data
for the user (and MD).
The initiation phase (1) is concerned with the management
of the user data in preparation for distribution to LDVs. The
reservation phase (2) is concerned with the selection of LDVs
and the reservation of resources both at the source and the
LDV. The provisioning phase (3) is concerned with the transfer
and synchronisation of ﬁles between the source and the LDV.
The provisioning phase may also refer or proxy requests from
the client for any ﬁles that are not available at the LDV but
are provided by the source.
In the initiation phase (1), a prediction should made as to
what data (ﬁles) the mobile user is likely to require. Key
elements of this phase include the selection of a set of ﬁles that
the mobile user is likely to require, based upon a prediction
function. As necessary, this stage should include prioritisation
of the ﬁles into a sorted list based upon a prioritisation rule.
Potential algorithms for selecting ﬁles for DR include: (1)
Selection of all ﬁles (in the case of small data stores); (2)
The most recently accessed ﬁles by the user; (3) The most
recently created ﬁles by the user; (4) Inspection of recently
modiﬁed ﬁle content and derivation of queries to select further
content; (5) A more elaborate ﬁle selection based on logical
query/policy (e.g., for selecting media by attributes such as
Figure 2.
The infrastructural aspects to DR: the most optimal node is
designated as the LDV, to provide data to MD without recourse to the source
unless the predicted data needed does not match actual needs for MD. More
than one LDV may be selected depending on actual and anticipated mobility
modelling of MD and other relevant performance factors.
genre, artist, year, etc.) developed by the user.
At this point in the DR process, knowledge of a candidate
LDV may not be available, and thus a prioritisation of the
ﬁles after prediction may be suitable for later use. A variety
of approaches can be employed for predicting the ﬁles a user
is likely to need, and in a sense this can be parametrised based
on policy settings (including for instance user preferences).
In the reservation phase (2), the process moves onto the
selection of the LDV(s). This can identify more than one
node in the UCI that can be used to host data nearby to
the MD. The selection of candidate LDVs should integrate
as many relevant factors as possible; probable factors include
the present geographical location of the MD relative to the
candidate nodes, the proximity of the MD to the candidate
nodes based on number of network hops, quality of link types,
applicable policies at the LDV, available LDV resources, etc.
This may also involve a historical analysis of the character-
istics of interest, of both the LDV and the MD, in an effort
to predict a set of LDVs that could be of use to the MD in
the future (and not just the present). This could be achieved
by integrating the outputs of a mobility modelling process on
the UCI and MD. The LDV chosen should be within reach
or likely reach of a wireless (or ﬁxed) links from the mobile
user, and therefore be in a position to vend data to the mobile
user as necessary.
The reservation phase should also reserve resources (storage
space, etc.) on the LDV and update the source to maintain
awareness of the present state of DR for ﬁles identiﬁed in
phase I. Moreover, appropriate resources should be reserved
on the LDV to cater for contention and availability.
After the reservation phase is completed, the process moves
into the provisioning phase (3). This part of DR is concerned
with the provisioning of data from the source to the MD, via
the LDV. Files identiﬁed in phase I should in this phase be
transferred to candidate LDVs. Taking into consideration the
available storage capacities of, and link qualities to, the LDV,
a suitable quantity of ﬁles are then transferred. Once ﬁles are
transferred, both the LDV, source and MD should receive a
101
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

notiﬁcation of recent changes.
The provisioning phase is also responsible for monitoring
for changes to the ﬁles transferred to the LDV, and these
changes should be propagated back to the source at the earliest
opportunity. Finally, the provisioning phase should provide a
function for referral of clients to the source-managed ﬁles if
these are not available on a local LDV and/or provide a proxy
service to retrieve these ﬁles on behalf of an MD. The mobile
device should be notiﬁed by the UCI that a nearby LDV is
available for data access needs. The provisioning phase also
encompasses the access from the MD to the data provided by
the LDV.
Research related to phase 3 includes the work of Flynn
et al. [3], which explored the use of data staging (not to be
confused with the more generic use of data staging used in
the introduction) through the use of the Coda ﬁlesystem. They
address issues that are beyond the scope of this work at this
stage, though the issues are of relevance, and in particular
investigate the issue of using untrusted nodes in a network as
a vehicle for DS, an aspect that requires further investigation
in this framework.
III. CONCLUSIONS
This work-in-progress paper has provided a description
of a framework for data roving for ubiquitous computing
infrastructure. Three phases in the DR process have been
described. Against a backdrop of increasing data demand
requirements, relatively low quantities of storage on MDs com-
pared to desktop counterparts, and an increasingly congested
communications infrastructure, the concept of DR provides a
means through which efﬁciencies may be feasible.
A number of experimental steps are necessary to validate the
DR concept. Firstly, an implementation of DR is necessary to
evaluate feasibility characteristics (an early version is shown in
Fig. 3). Whereas the work in [3] uses a ﬁlesystem, we initially
envisage a simpler model to transfer individual ﬁles based
upon a unique identiﬁer at this stage principally focused on the
predictive element of DR. We do not consider heterogeneous
trafﬁc at this stage, however this is a future potential area for
investigation. Figure 3 shows initial experimental work using a
homogenous network type (though we note network selection
is a more complex problem more generally, as illustrated in
[4]).
A performance evaluation is also required, to assess the
performance beneﬁt of particularly the predictive element of
DR. That is, the process of anticipating the ﬁles needed by a
user and transferring this data through the infrastructure to a
nearby node. An important parameter in whether the algorithm
should consider short- or long-term usage data. Anticipating
LDV nodes may lead to several redundant copies of data across
the network. While this may be optimised through the use
of ﬁle synchronisation protocols, there remains a potential
inefﬁciency that can only be justiﬁed through the optimal
prediction of ﬁles the user is likely to require.
Further, and as the introduction noted, employing DR may
reduce the exposure of the mobile user to congestion effects on
busy network links between the user and the source. In cases
Figure 3.
Initial ad-hoc wireless simulation over a 2km/square area.
where access to the source is lost, DR may offer considerable
beneﬁts, and this should be characterised.
An important consideration, brieﬂy mentioned in passing,
is a means through which privacy of information transited
through the UCI can be ensured. This is not addressed as
part of this framework at this stage.
The primary difference between DR and other approaches
such as caching, is that the process can be initiated in advance
of the anticipated time of need. Particularly in the reservation
step, an opportunity to make use of low utilisation of UCI,
for instance during night time or early morning, when demand
network trafﬁc is lower, may create an opportunity to reduce
any inefﬁciencies through the use of DR.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Weiser, “Some Computer Science Issues in Ubiquitous
Computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 36, pp. 75–84, July
1993.
[2] S. Hamouda and B. Hamdaoui, “Dynamic spectrum access
in heterogeneous networks: HSDPA and WiMAX,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 International Conference on Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing: Connecting the
World Wirelessly, IWCMC ’09, (New York, NY, USA),
pp. 1253–1257, ACM, 2009.
[3] J. Flinn, S. Sinnamohideen, N. Tolia, and M. Satya-
naryanan, “Data Staging on Untrusted Surrogates,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX Conference on File and
Storage Technologies, (Berkeley, CA, USA), pp. 15–28,
USENIX Association, 2003.
[4] D. E. Charilas and A. D. Panagopoulos, “Network Selec-
tion Problem Multiaccess Radio Network Environments,”
IEEE Ve, pp. 40–49, December 2010.
Digital Object
Identiﬁer 10.1109/MVT.2010.939107.
102
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

