COmpAsS: A Context-Aware, User-Oriented Radio Access Technology  
Selection Mechanism in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
 
Sokratis Barmpounakis,  
Panagiotis Spapis, Nancy Alonistioti 
Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications  
University of Athens, Greece 
{sokbar,pspapis,nancy}@di.uoa.gr 
Alexandros Kaloxylos 
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications, 
University of Peloponnese, Greece 
kaloxyl@uop.gr
 
 
Abstract—5G networks will have to cope with an increase of 
data traffic, as well as a vast number of devices, which already 
transpires in the wireless/mobile communication environments. 
Several on-going efforts both from 3rd Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) and several proposals from the literature as 
well, attempt to overcome the existing barriers by enabling the 
use of Wi-Fis and femto-cells. The evolution of Access Network 
Discovery and Selection function (ANDSF) in Evolved Packet 
Core (EPC) networks, as well as the Hotspot 2.0 approach, can 
be used to facilitate a seamless integration of WiFis with the 
cellular networks. Although this integration clearly presents 
benefits, a handover mechanism that will capitalize on the new 
standards is still missing. This paper acts in a two-fold way. 
We design and evaluate a novel context aware selection 
mechanism that is using fuzzy logic to select the most 
appropriate Radio Access Technology (RAT). To this end, we 
propose network extensions that allow the ANDSF entity to be 
aware and provide up to date information to end devices about 
the network status. Extensive simulation results illustrate the 
advantages of our approach. 
Keywords-RAT selection;ANDSF;LTE;handover. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traffic analysis clearly indicates that 5G networks will 
have to cope with a huge increase of data traffic and the 
number of the end devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets, 
sensors etc). To address this issue the research community 
designs solutions to improve the spectral efficiency, to 
increase the network cell density and to exploit the 
underutilized radio spectrum resources [1]. Such approaches 
suggest the exploitation of the available femto-cells or Wi-Fi 
Access Points (APs) to reduce the network load of an 
operator in a particular area [2]. 
Integrating Wi-Fi access points with cellular networks 
has been a hot topic for over a decade. However, apart from 
limited deployment examples, this approach has not been 
widely adopted by the network operators.  This is because of 
a number of reasons. Wi-Fi suffers from interference issues 
since it operates on the unlicensed spectrum. Typically, the 
installed access points in homes, offices, public spots do not 
belong to the cellular operator. Also, up to now, switching 
from a cellular network to a Wi-Fi access point was not a 
transparent process for the end users (e.g., authentication). 
Finally, there was not a clear business case for the operators 
on how to increase their revenues by supporting Wi-Fi 
access points.  
Some new technological solutions may change the 
landscape. ANDSF and Hotspot 2.0 if combined together 
may prove the right solution for simplifying the access of 
end users among RATs. Also, roaming among cellular 
operators and wireless internet service providers may also be 
supported. The new business case for cellular operators 
would be the support of the same QoE for their services 
among different RATs that may even belong to another 
operator. Thus, the integration of cellular networks with Wi-
Fi APs needs to be revised not only due to the new business 
cases that arise, but also because the new protocols can be 
exploited 
to 
design 
more 
efficient 
RAT 
selection 
mechanisms.  
3GPP has already specified how Wi-Fi access points may 
be integrated with the Evolved Packet Core (EPC) 
architecture [3][4]. Also, a new network entity, which takes 
account of policy rules and security requirements was 
introduced, namely Access Network Discovery and Selection 
Function (ANDSF) [5]. Closely coupled with the Policy and 
Charging Rules Function (PCRF) [6], ANDSF implements 
dynamic data offload for the User Equipment (UE) in a 
structured method. The ANDSF is a cellular technology 
standard, which enables the operator to store its policies for 
discovery and selection of RATs on a server. The UEs are 
updated with these polices either via push (network-initiated 
information to the UE) or pull (UE-initiated request) 
methods by the server. The policies within ANDSF contain 
information on which of the available Wi-Fi hotspots are 
preferable during specific a specific time or day, and at a 
specific location as well, based on indications from past 
measurements. 
The ANDSF information is represented by the ANDSF 
Management Object (MO) and may contain information with 
regard to the UE location, Inter-System Mobility Policies 
(ISMPs) and Inter-System Routing Policies (ISRPs) ([7]). 
The ISRPs are available for UEs, which support IP Flow 
Mobility (IFOM), multiple-access Packet Data Network 
(PDN) connectivity (MAPCON), or non-seamless offload [8] 
- [10]. MAPCON enabled UEs may establish different PDN 
connections through different RATs. IFOM enabled 
terminals may establish a single PDN connection via 
multiple access networks, for instance 3G/LTE and Wireless 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Local Area Network (WLAN). For such UEs, IFOM enables 
to move individual IP flows from one access network to 
another with session continuity.  The ANDSF prioritized 
rules in the case of MAPCON apply per PDN connections, 
while in IFOM and non-seamless offload cases per flow. 
ANDSF communicates with the UE over the S14 reference 
point. 
Hotspot 2.0 Wi-Fi technology standard from Wi-Fi 
Alliance acts in a complementary way to ANDSF as it 
improves the ability of WLAN devices to discover and 
connect in a secure way to public Wi-Fi APs. Hotspot 2.0 
builds on 802.11u specifications that enable devices to 
discover information about the available roaming partners 
using query mechanisms. The query and response protocol, 
which supports Hotspot 2.0, is the Access Network Query 
Protocol (ANQP) [11]. ANQP is used to collect the 
following: the operator’s domain name, the accessible 
roaming partners, the IP address type availability, the type of 
the access point (private, public free, public chargeable, etc.), 
and most significantly load information (i.e., total number of 
currently associated devices to the AP, channel utilization 
percentage and an estimate of the remaining available 
admission capacity). 
The WLAN_NS working item of 3GPP ([12]) is working 
to Enhance 3GPP solutions for WLAN and access network 
selection based on Hotspot 2.0 and ensure that data, i.e., 
Management Objects (MO) and policies provided via 
HotSpot 2.0 and ANDSF are consistent. This alignment of 
ANDSF and HotSpot 2.0 provides an excellent basis for the 
complementarity of ANDSF and Hotspot 2.0, as well a 
number of multi-operator scenarios that can be supported. In 
[2], a rather exhaustive list of possible scenarios is presented. 
From the above description it is clear that several efforts 
have already taken place to address the interworking 
between cellular networks and WiFi. In the new landscape it 
is imperative to design new mechanisms for the RAT 
selection for every terminal. The reason is that UEs will have 
to choose among typical macro-cells, femto-cells and APs. 
Due to the diverse set of parameters that have to be evaluated 
by a UE and the network we adopt the use of fuzzy logic 
[13] that can handle multi-criteria problems.   
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we present related work from the literature, which 
attempts to deal with the aforementioned challenges. Section 
III is split into two main parts: the first presents a proposed 
extension of the ANDSF entity to collect information from 
HeNBs and APs to support the RAT selection process; the 
second part goes through a comprehensive description of our 
mechanism, which we call COmpAsS. In Section IV, 
simulation results based on a realistic business case are 
presented. In Section V, we describe the conclusions, which 
are derived from the overall work and we discuss our future 
steps. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There has been a lot of effort into further optimizing the 
standardized mechanisms, and plenty of proposals and 
algorithmic solutions to improve the handover procedure.  
The survey in [12] provides an overview of the main 
handover (HO) decision criteria in the current literature and 
presents a classification of existing HO decision algorithms 
for femto-cells. According to this, some researchers focus on 
evaluating the Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP), 
the user location or speed, the mobility patterns, the battery 
level, the mean UE transmit power and the UE power 
consumption, the load of the cell and the service type. Apart 
from the case of RSRP, typically researchers are using 
multiple criteria (e.g., battery lifetime, traffic type, cell load, 
speed) and are using different tools (e.g., cost based 
functions, fuzzy logic, etc.) to reach a decision.  
Xenakis et al. [14] present an overview of the vertical 
handover (VHO). Initially, a categorization of the 
information parameters of the VHO processes into layers is 
made: application (e.g., user preferences), transport (e.g., 
network load), network (e.g., network configuration, 
topology), data-link (e.g., link status) and physical (i.e., 
available access media). From the network perspective the 
ones highlighted are: latency, coverage, RSS, RTT, number 
of retransmissions, BER, SINR, packet loss, throughput, 
bandwidth, network jitter and the number of connected users. 
From the UE perspective, the parameters that are presented 
are user monetary budget, preferred network (user choice), 
location, 
movement 
(change 
of 
direction), 
velocity, 
technologies available in the device, as well as battery 
consumption. Many of the proposed mechanisms that this 
survey presents attempt to create an overall context-aware 
mechanism, by combining several of the aforementioned 
parameters for the VHO decision outcome.  
Several other existing surveys attempt to present a 
unifying perspective with regard to HO mechanisms. Rao et 
al. [15] deal with the network selection concept as a 
perspective approach to the always best connected and 
served paradigm in heterogeneous wireless environment. 
From the origin point of view, they classify them in four 
categories: network-related criteria, terminal-related, service-
related and finally, user-related. In addition, in [16]-[18], 
several efforts are described, which aim to improve the 
selection mechanisms, which support heterogeneous RATs. 
In principle, all mechanisms combine parameters like RSS, 
bandwidth, mobility, power consumption of the UE, security, 
monetary cost and user preferences. 
In all the above a cases, the researchers are using for the 
most advanced schemes a number of parameters. However, 
very rarely they clearly state how this information is 
collected and from which network entities. Such information 
is necessary because the hypothesis that a value (e.g., the 
location of terminal) can be collected may require extensive 
signaling exchange among the network components. Also, in 
most cases solutions target either handovers for macro-femto 
cells or vertical handovers among different RATs. In this 
paper, we attempt to clearly indicate how the information 
required for our solution is collected and from which 
network entities. We also examine the possibility of UE to 
handover among macro-femto and Wi-Fi APs.  
When dealing with diverse parameters in order to reach a 
decision, in the literature many authors have proposed Fuzzy 
Logic (FL) Inference Systems. Indicatively, Xia et al. [19] 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

propose a scheme taking into consideration the actual RSS, 
as well a predicted RSS, and they combine it with the speed 
of the UE in order to determine if a handover should be 
made or not. Moreover, they estimate the suitability of a 
RAT for handover, taking as input the current RSS, the 
estimated RSS, as well as the available bandwidth. In [20], 
FL is also used for estimating the output suitability of a 
network based on the inputs of the environment (bandwidth, 
delay, charging, power consumption). In addition, Ma and 
Liao use GPS, in order to adapt the monitoring rate of the 
afore-mentioned values. For our solution we have also 
chosen to use a FL scheme to support the decision making 
process. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED SOLUTION 
A. COmpAsS mechanism 
The aim of the COmpAsS is to enable a UE at selecting 
in an intelligent way the most suitable RAT to perform a per-
flow handover. COmpAsS is a user-oriented, context-aware 
scheme, which takes into account the mobility of the UE, the 
Received Signal Strength (e.g., RSRQ for 3GPP access 
networks), the load of the (Home) eNodeBs ((H)eNBs) and 
WLAN APs, the backhaul load of the network, as well the 
sensitivity to latency for each of the candidate flows for 
handover (Fig. 1). Based on FL, the five inputs are assessed 
using a Fuzzy Inference process, which resides in the UE and 
calculates the suitability of the available RATs for each one 
of the flows of the UE. The calculation inside the FL 
Inference Engine is based on pre-defined rules regarding all 
the possible combinations of the different inputs. According 
to the rules, in principle, it is assumed that a RAT is more 
attractive to the UE when it is characterized by low 
(backhaul) load and high RSS. In addition, the higher the 
sensitivity to latencies, the more important is the mobility of 
the UE; high mobile UEs prefer larger cells to avoid 
unnecessary handovers. In the proposed scheme, the 
information is obtained from an extended ANDSF network 
entity, which is described in detail in the following section. 
 
 
Figure 1. Context-aware RAT selection by COmpAsS 
Although the FL computational requirements are 
minimum, in order to further optimize the energy 
consumption of COmpAsS inside the UE, as well as to 
minimize the unnecessary handovers, additional mechanisms 
are used (Fig. 2), i.e., a) a suitability threshold: no FL 
computation is performed if the current RAT’s suitability is 
higher than 90%, b) a suitability hysteresis value, i.e.: 
neighbor RAT’s suitability must be at least 10% higher than 
the current RAT’s (if a neighbor RAT is a macro cell) or at 
least 1% higher than the current RAT (if neighbor RAT is a 
femto-cell) in order to trigger a handover. The higher 
hysteresis in the case of macro neighbor RAT is chosen 
aiming to impel the handover to smaller RATs for offloading 
reasons. 
 
Figure 2. RAT suitability Hysteresis and Margin for minimizing 
unnecessary handovers 
 
B. Extension of Access Network Discovery and Selection 
Function (ANDSF) functionality 
As described earlier in this paper, ANDSF is a cellular 
technology standard, which implements dynamic data 
offloading for the UEs in a structured way. However, the 
purpose of ANDSF is currently limited to provide the UE 
with policies with regard to access networks. Moreover, one 
of the most crucial aspects in relation to offloading and 
handover mechanisms, that the ANDSF MO is missing, is 
real-time network conditions, such as the load of a Base 
Station. This type of information, as well as additional 
features, which are not provided by the ANDSF, may be 
provided by the Hotspot 2.0 standard described earlier, 
supported by the ANQP protocol.  
On the contrary, ANDSF provides WLAN AP location 
information, supports UE location reporting, as well as may 
provide a list of preferred or restricted access networks, -  
features, which are not provided by Hotspot 2.0 -. 
It becomes clear that ANDSF and Hotspot 2.0 could act 
in a supplementary way to maximize the available 
information to the UE, resulting in more efficient offloading 
mechanisms. In this paper, we propose an enhanced version 
of the ANDSF server capable of: 
a) collecting real-time load information regarding the 
available 3GPP access networks, based on a new logical 
interface (e.g., between the (H)eNB and the ANDSF entity). 
This information is evaluated in a coarse manner (i.e., low, 
medium, high). 
b) supporting queries to Hotspot 2.0 enabled WLAN 
APs using the ANQP protocol  
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

c) gathering information from the UE measurements 
regarding RSRQ measurements  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Extended ANDSF architecture 
 
As a result, the UE will be capable of assessing both 
3GPP and non-3GPP available RATs using the same input 
parameters and ultimately take the optimal decision for 
handover. S14 existing interface between the UE and the 
ANDSF component will provide to the UE already-
supported information, as well as the additional information 
obtained from the available (non-) 3GPP RATs. A high-
level description of the above architecture is demonstrated 
in Fig.3. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In order to evaluate the performance of COmpAsS 
mechanism advanced topology simulations were carried out 
using the ns-3 simulator [21]. The fuzzylite C++ Fuzzy 
Logic library is also integrated inside the custom NS-3.19 
build. The figure, which follows, presents a realistic 
business case scenario of a shopping mall comprising 3 
floors (ground floor, 1st and 2nd floor), and 20 shops per 
floor (Fig. 4). The UEs are either static or moving, and are 
roaming around the shopping mall rooms (shops, cafes, 
etc.). Several HeNBs are deployed in the three floors. In 
addition, two macro cells (eNBs) exist outside the mall area 
in a distance of 200m to different directions. Due to the fact 
that COmpAsS handles Wi-Fi APs and HeNBs in a similar 
way, with regard to the pre-defined rules of the Fuzzy 
Inference Engine, for the sake of simplicity, in the 
simulations only macro and femto-cells are deployed. 
 
 
Figure 4. Shopping Mall with 3 floors and 20 shops per floor (simulation 
environment) 
 
Besides the several UEs, which are roaming inside the 
mall area and creating respective traffic to the HeNBs, we 
use one “test UE”, in which COmpAsS is deployed. 
Different simulations were carried out to test the UE at 
different velocities (low, medium, high), in each one of the 
scenarios in order to evaluate the proposed scheme for 
varying UE mobility, as mobility is one of the inputs, which 
are taken into consideration for the decision. The test UE is 
moving with linear velocity between the rows of the shops, 
on the 1st floor. An overview of the simulation details is 
presented in the following table: 
 
Table 1 SIMULATION DETAILS. 
Environment 
Shopping mall: 3 floors, 100 x 200 meters per floor, 
20 rooms per floor ( 2 rows of 10 equal rooms) 
Number of UEs 
Variable (UEs connecting/disconnecting) 
Number of (H)eNBs 
2 eNBs, 9 HeNBs 
Carrier frequency (MHz) 
Downlink: 2120.0, Uplink: 1930 
Channel bandwidth  
50 RBs for eNBs, 15 RBs for HeNBs 
Transmit power 
35.0 dBm (eNBs) , 23.0 dBm (HeNBs) 
Simulation time 
100 s 
Time unit 
0.1 s 
UE mobility 
0.4 m/s, 0.8 ms, 1.4 m/s (linear constant velocity) 
HeNB load 
Varying depending on the number of associated UEs 
(very low, low, medium, high, very high) 
Traffic sensitivity to latency 
High (0.7/1.0) 
The proposed scheme is evaluated against A2A4 RSRQ 
mechanism –a well-established handover algorithm found 
often in the literature-. A2-A4-RSRQ may be triggered by 
the two events; Event A2 is defined as the situation during 
the serving cell’s RSRQ becomes worse than a threshold. 
A4 event describes the situation when a neighbor cell’s 
RSRQ becomes better than a threshold. 
The following figures illustrate the measured Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs), which resulted from the two 
mechanisms with regard to the number of overall handovers 
which took place during the simulation, the throughput of 
the test UE, the experienced delays, as well as the packet 
loss during the measurements.  
Variable load of the femto-cells of the shopping mall was 
tested, calculated in relation to the overall associated users 
per base station and traffic that is generated. In particular, 
the load of the base stations varies from 10% up to 90% of 
their available resources (horizontal axis in Fig. 5-11). 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
Figure 5. Number of handovers 
 
In Fig. 5, the overall number of handovers is shown. 
According to the graph, the proposed mechanism tends to 
minimize the number of handovers as it realizes less 
handovers than A2A4 RSRQ in all load situations. 
 
 
Figure 6. Downlink throughput 
 
In Figs. 6-8, the results of the downlink are illustrated: 
throughput, delay and packet loss. With regard to the 
throughput (Fig. 6), COmpAsS outperforms the A2A4 
RSRQ algorithm in all load scenarios by 10-20 %. In the 
case of the proposed scheme, the high interference, which 
results from the tested environment retains the UE from 
handing over to the femto-cells, which suffer more; instead, 
the UE tends to stay more time attached to the eNBs, 
achieving finally a higher throughput. Moreover, the UE 
mobility is taken into consideration from COmpAsS, in 
contrast to A2A4 RSRQ; for high mobile users femto-cells 
are less attractive, particularly if the load of them increases 
as well, which makes them even more unattractive. In the 
case of the delay (Fig. 7), a significant difference between 
the 
two 
mechanisms 
is 
observed 
throughout 
the 
measurements. Similarly, the packet loss (Fig. 8) that 
experiences the UE, which uses the COmpAsS mechanism, 
is by 20% lower than the other scheme, no matter how high 
the load of the network –and as a result the experienced 
interference as well- is. 
 
 
Figure 7. Downlink delay 
 
 
Figure 8. Downlink packet-loss 
 
Figs. 9-11 illustrate the measured KPIs of the uplink. 
Noticeably, the difference of the throughputs of the two 
schemes is even higher than in the case of the downlink, i.e., 
200 – 400 Kbps (Fig. 9).  
 
 
Figure 9. Uplink throughput 
 
 
Figure 10. Uplink delay 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

With regard to the uplink delay (Fig. 10), it is shown that, 
although at medium load the two algorithms have almost 
identical results, as the load increases further, COmpAsS’s 
performance is significantly better –roughly 50ms-, 
maintaining constant delay. In contrast, A2A4 RSRQ’s 
delay is increasing further. This is explained by the fact that, 
the suitability by COmpAsS during the load increase of the 
femto RATs, reduces radically, particularly for faster users. 
 
 
Figure 11. Uplink packet-loss 
 
The packet-loss in the uplink case (Fig.11), similarly with 
the previous figures confirms the superior performance of 
the proposed mechanism. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STEPS 
This paper proposed COmpAsS, a context-aware RAT 
selection mechanism, based on Fuzzy-Logic. The proposed 
solution emphasizes on the actual way of obtaining the 
different types of information, which ultimately lead to the 
handover decision, via an extension of the current solutions 
such as ANDSF and Hotspot 2.0. The realistic business case 
scenario, which was simulated, and the extensive results 
confirm the high performance of COmpAsS in challenging 
environments of several mobile users and different co-
existing RATs, while at the same prove that it can be broadly 
applicable, in simpler, less demanding use cases as well. 
The proposed mechanism, on the one hand avoids the 
unnecessary handovers minimizing the redundant signaling 
overhead; on the other hand, the context awareness of the UE 
remarkably improves the handover decisions resulting at the 
end in higher service quality and -eventually- higher quality 
of experience for the end-user. 
Future steps will be: (a) define an adaptive sampling rate 
of the mechanism, in order to further optimize the battery 
consumption of the UE and minimize the unnecessary 
signaling, and (b) carry out more simulation scenarios with 
more users and diverse service types. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Commission’s 7th Framework program 
FP7-ICT-2012 under grant agreement Nᵒ 317669 also 
referred 
to 
as 
METIS 
(Mobile 
and 
Wireless 
Communications Enablers for the 2020 Information 
Society). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. 
Wannstrom, 
“LTE-Advanced 
(2012)”. 
May 
10, 
2012, 
http://www.3gpp.org/IMG/pdf/lte_advanced_v2.pdf [retrieved: April, 
2014]. 
[2] 
BT & Alcatel Lucent White paper, Wi-Fi Roaming building on 
ANDSF and HOTSPOT 2.0, October 2012. 
[3] 
3GPP TS 23.401, V12.1.0, “GPRS enhancements for E-UTRAN 
access, (Release 12)”, June 2013. 
[4] 
3GPP TS 23.402, “Architecture enhancements for non-3GPP 
accesses, (Release 12)”, June 2013. 
[5] 
3GPP TS 24.312, “Access Network Discovery and Selection Function 
(ANDSF) Management Objects (MO), (release 12)”, June 2013. 
[6] 
3GPP TS 23.203 V12.2.0, “Policy and charging control architecture”, 
September 2013. 
[7] 
Wi-Fi Roaming Building on ANDSF and Hotspot 2.0”, Alcatel 
Lucent – BT White Paper . 
[8] 
3GPP 24.237 V10.1.0, “Mobility between 3GPP Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) interworking (I-WLAN) and 3GPP systems”, 
March 2013. 
[9] 
3GPP TS 24.302 V10.5.0, “Access to the 3GPP Evolved Packet Core 
(EPC) via non-3GPP access networks”, Release 10, September 2011. 
[10] 3GPP TS 23.261 V10.0.0, “IP Flow Mobility and Seamless Wireless 
Local Area Network (WLAN) offload”, Release 10, June 2010. 
[11] IEEE 802.11u-2011 IEEE Standard for Information Technology-
Telecommunications and information exchange between systems-
Local and Metropolitan networks-specific requirements - Amendment 
9: Interworking with External Networks. 
[12] 3GPP, TR 23.865 “Study on Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) 
network selection for 3GPP terminals; Stage 2” September 2013. 
[13] T. J. Ross, “Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications”, 2nd Edition, 
October 2004. 
[14] D. Xenakis, N. Passas, L. Merakos, and C. Verikoukis, “Mobility 
Management for Femtocells in LTE-Advanced: Key Aspects and 
Survey of Handover Decision Algorithms”, Communications Surveys 
& Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 16, iss. 1, 1st Quarter 2014, pp. 64-91. 
[15] K. R. Rao, Z. S. Bojkovic, and B. M. Bakmaz, “Network Selection in 
Heterogeneous Environment: A Step toward Always Best Connected 
and Served”, Telsiks 2013, October 2013, pp 83-92. 
[16] A. Ahmed, L. Merghem Boulahia, and D. Gaıti, “Enabling Vertical 
Handover Decisions in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks: A State-
of-the-Art and a Classification” , IEEE Communications Surveys and 
Tutorials, 
accepted 
for 
publication. 
Available: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6587998 
[retrieved April, 2014]. 
[17] P. Bellavista, A. Corradi, and C. Gianneli, “A Unifying Perspective 
on Context-Aware Evaluation and Management of Heterogeneous 
Wireless Connectivity”, IEEE Communications Surveys and 
Tutorials, vol. 13, No. 3, 3rd quarter 2011, pp. 337 - 357. 
[18] X. Yan, Y.A. Sekercioglu, and S. Narayanan, “A survey of vertical 
handover decision algorithms in Fourth Generation heterogeneous 
wireless networks”, Computer Networks vol. 54, 2010, pp. 1848-
1863. 
[19] L. Xia, L Jiang, and C. He, “A novel fuzzy logic vertical handoff 
algorithm with aid of differential prediction and pre-decision 
method”, IEEE ICC, June 2007, pp. 5665 - 5670. 
[20] B. Ma and X. Liao, “Vertical Handoff Algorithm Based on Type-2 
Fuzzy Logic in Heterogeneous Networks”, Journal of Software, vol. 
8, No 11, November 2013, pp. 2936-2942. 
[21] Ns-3 
simulator, 
http://www.nsnam.org/overview/what-is-ns-3/ 
[retrieved: May, 2014]. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

