Wireless Communications in Railway Systems
Anna Lina Ruscelli∗, Gabriele Cecchetti∗, Andrea Sgambelluri∗, Filippo Cugini†,
Alessio Giorgetti∗, Francesco Paolucci∗, Silvia Fichera∗, Piero Castoldi∗,
∗Scuola Superiore S. Anna, Pisa, Italy
Email: {a.ruscelli | g.cecchetti | a.sgambelluri | a.giorgetti | fr.paolucci | s.ﬁchera | p.castoldi}@santannapisa.it
†CNIT, Pisa, Italy
Email: f.cugini@cnit.it
Abstract—Railway management systems are based on a centra-
lized structure where the Central Post centrally manages all the
components, trains and railways, with the aim to guarantee the
safety of the service and the efﬁciency of the network capacity.
This architecture requires an extended exchange of information
between management units, monitoring systems and actuators. In
general, the communication is based on wired links that ensure
required performance, but present also some drawbacks. For
instance, copper cable-based links are affected by cables thefts
or can limit the type and the amount of information that can
be sent due to the capacity of involved technologies. In all these
scenarios, the introduction of a wireless link can improve the
safety, the performance and the ﬂexibility of the communications.
In this paper, the use of wireless communications as backup or
extension of the pre-existent wired links is deepened. Trackside
and on-board communications, as well as European Rail Trafﬁc
Management System and EURORADIO protocol are studied
analyzing the issues related to wired links and illustrating how
the use of wireless communications can face off their drawbacks.
Keywords—Railway systems; wireless communications; trackside
systems; on-board systems; signalling; ERTMS; EURORADIO;
RadioInﬁll; MRP.
I. INTRODUCTION
Railways are complex systems composed by infrastructure,
vehicles, and all the elements required to make these compo-
nents work together efﬁciently and safely. Vehicles for freight
and passengers transit on the railways that are a complicated
network of connections where they have to be synchronized
in order to avoid accidents. Furthermore, the transport system
has to be managed efﬁciently in order to increase the system
capacity in terms of number of convoys travelling on the
network. Both these requirements, safety and efﬁciency, require
and required along the time to monitor and manage the
trains transit and the railways. This is the motivation of the
complex and highly populated system composed by trackside
and on-board equipments used by the signalling system to
monitor the state of infrastructures and convoys, to dispatch
and actuate command. In particular, a huge variety of devices
performing important functions are distributed along a railway.
Examples are railway switches boxes that command switches,
equipment that monitor the trains status (bush temperature
detector) and the trains transit (axle counter, track circuit),
light signals used to communicate with the train drivers,
components that allow the communication between the ground
management system (Computer-Based Interlocking) to the on-
board management system (Lineside Electronic Equipment
and Encoder), etc. Furthermore, both on-board and trackside
devices communicate with the centralized management units
through some intermediate management and information points.
Indeed, the trains management has a centralized structure where
a central unit, the Central Post, has the task of manage the
network infrastructure and the trains. This unit distributes its
commands by means of intermediate points, the Peripheral
Posts, in general corresponding to the trains stations. At their
turn the Peripheral Posts dispatch and elaborate the command
received by the Central Posts to the trackside and on-board
equipments by means of the Computer-Based Interlocking
(CBI) system. Moreover Peripheral Posts and CBI receive
and elaborate the information collected by trackside and on-
board equipments and send the derived information to the
Central Posts in order to update the management system. This
centralized architecture allows to organically and safely manage
the complex railways system reaching all the devices distributed
along the railways.
Reﬂecting and following the historical evolution of the
railway systems dragged by the modiﬁcations of the involved
technologies, most of these equipments are evolved starting
from simple mechanical devices, to electromechanical, to
electric-digital components, see for instance the ﬁrst CBI, where
the logic where implemented by a mechanical leverage, or old
railway switches that were manually operated. Furthermore,
these components are not isolated entities but they communicate
together in order to exploit their functions. Until now, most
of the communications are based on wired links, where the
information derived by the monitoring systems are dispatched
to the central management unit and the commands set by the
last one are sent to the actuators spread on-board of trains or
trackside. In dependency of the type of message and of the
involved devices these communications are based on different
protocols. However, as previously said, wired links based, for
instance, on copper cables, or optical ﬁbers, are used. Through
the right choice of transmission technology and protocols and
thanks to the appropriate setting of transmission parameters,
wired links ensure required performance but present also some
drawbacks. For instance, copper cable-based links are affected
by cables thefts due to the high monetary value of copper
[1]. This is a severe damage, especially in the case of links
used for critical communications since their interruption can
seriously jeopardize safety trains transit. Furthermore, in some
cases, such as on-board communications, wired links limit the
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

type of information that can be sent due to the capacity of
involved technologies. In all these scenarios the introduction
of a wireless link can improve the safety, the performance
and the ﬂexibility of the communications. In this paper, the
use of wireless communications as backup or extension of
the pre-existent wired links, in dependency of the application,
is deepened. Both trackside and on-board communications
are studied analyzing the issues related to wired links and
illustrating how the use of wireless communications can face
off their drawbacks. Some meaningful case studies will be
provided in order to corroborate the proposal along with the
highlight of some open issues related to the introduction of
wireless links.
The rest of the paper is composed by the mentioned study
that is exposed in Section II, whereas in Section III some
conclusions are drawn.
II. INTRODUCING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS IN
RAILWAY SYSTEMS
The railway management deals with a capillary structure
where railway lines are populated by a huge amount of devices
suitable to monitor the transit and the status of the train and
by actuators used to manage railway lines. They communicate
with the Central Post, responsible to centrally manage the
whole infrastructure, through the Peripheral Posts. Furthermore,
on board of convoys monitoring and actuators collect the
information about the state of the train and execute the received
commands. In general, the communication is based on wired
links that, in dependency of the applications, can result not
sufﬁcient to support new functionalities, for instance video
surveillance or on-board entertainment, or are subject to critical
damages or copper cable thefts that seriously jeopardize the
critical management applications. Thus the evolution of railway
systems has to consider new solutions suitable to face off these
challenges. A possible solution is the adoption of wireless
communications both as a backup of the wired one, for instance
to ensure the service until the system is recovered, or as
integration to the wired one in order to allow new services or
to improve the pre-existent ones.
In the following, some use cases about the introduction of
wireless communications in the railway domain are illustrated
in order to highlight the potentialities of this approach.
A. Communications between wayside equipment and Peripheral
Post
Copper or ﬁber optic cables typically support communica-
tions between trackside devices and accidental or intentional
damage of copper cables can cause unavailability of the
corresponding link. Wireless communication can be introduced
as a backup of the wired link. This require to analyze the
communication requirements in terms of bandwidth, delay,
packets loss strictly related to the particular application. To
overcome the problem of possible interference, a Spread
Spectrum technology can be Zang2005Zang2005chosen as pos-
sible alternative to narrowband technologies [2]. Indeed, thanks
to its robustness against noise and intrusion, this technology is
suitable to provide the required reliable communication level.
Beyond the precise design and setting of the wireless link that
has to be apt to provide the required Quality of Service, further
investigations require analyzing the compatibility of legacy
communication interfaces of the involved railway devices, often
based on proprietary connectors, with the proposed wireless
devices that in general have standardized interfaces. In this
case, either a re-engineering of the devices is required, either
an interface adapter has to be designed for this connection.
A considered use case is the link between Eurobalise
and Lineside Electronic Unit (LEU). Switched Eurobalise
communicates with the corresponding LEU through the C
interface, which is continuously powered by the LEU and
it is connected to the physical wired link for the exchange
of telegrams, powering and other information about the train
transit. In order to use wireless links for their communications,
an interface adapter is required to be connected to the C
interface on one side and to the Ethernet interface of the
wireless device on the other side, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The same apply on the corresponding interface of the LEU.


	
	
	











	







Figure 1. Eurobalise - LEU case of study.
The adapter mechanically interconnects the proprietary input-
output connector of the C interface to the standard interface
of the Wi-Fi module. It adapts electrical features of the cable
signals to the corresponding ones of the serial or Ethernet
standard and preserves timing requirements. Creating wireless
link requires a careful design in order to connect in a point-
to-point topology the two Wi-Fi devices for the wireless
transmission between Eurobalise and LEU that implies to
consider different aspects. Since Eurobalise and LEU are placed
in ﬁxed locations, the position of the directional antenna of each
Wi-Fi device has to be chosen carefully. Each antenna has to
be placed far not more than few meters from the corresponding
Wi-Fi equipment to minimize signal losses through the cable
and should be placed in Line of Sight of trackside poles where
the antennas are mounted, at a height compatible with other
railways elements eventually present. In case of obstacles and,
in general, in presence of Non Line of Sight, it is necessary to
insert one or more bridge-repeaters that turn around the obstacle.
Obviously, the radio link has to meet the requirements about
bandwidth, frame loss and delay, preserving the connection
between Eurobalise and LEU. In particular, the link budget, i.e.,
the algebraic sum of all gains and losses of each component of
the radio system has to be taken into account since it allows
to decide if it is necessary to act on transmission power or
antenna gains to obtain the desired performance. Experimental
results shown that the wireless link can meet the mentioned
requirements providing a backup connection suitable in case of
hard damage of the wired one due to accidental or intentional
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

0
50
100
150
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
Switch-over times [ms]
Detection time Td [ms]
Failure 1 - Tf
1
Recover 1 - Tr
1
Failure 2 - Tf
2
Recover 2 - Tr
2
Figure 2. Switch-over time of MRP. vs detection time
damage (theft or physical cut), improving the system fault
tolerance.
The completely reduction/elimination of copper cables
implies further open issues, related to the presence of power
cables. In this case the approach is completely different with
respect to communication cables, since the requirements involve
the continuous power provisioning. For instance, solution based
on energy harvesting could overcome this challenge [3].
B. Railway control networks and communications between
Peripheral Post and Central Post
Ethernet is penetrating railway communication networks
mainly for its simplicity and cost effectiveness but also thanks
to several emerging Industrial Ethernet solutions that improve
the Ethernet standard. Speciﬁcally, Industrial Ethernet solutions
often include proprietary redundancy management protocols
for the automatic handling of failures on ring topologies.
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) has
published IEC 62439 in 2010 [4] including the speciﬁcation of
a standard redundancy management protocol, i.e., the Media
Redundancy Protocol (MRP), that attracted the attention of
most network equipment vendors. With the settings speciﬁed
in IEC 62439, MRP guarantees a worst case recovery time
of 30 ms in rings composed of up to 50 switches, and can
support multi-ring topologies guaranteeing similar performance.
MRP is currently used in various network segments of RFI
railway communication serving the control of high-speed high-
capacity train. In [5], two factors are identiﬁed (i.e., offset
time and the physical detection time) that jointly affect the
MRP performance. Their impact on the recovery time has
been consistently evaluated with an analytical approach, with
simulations (see Figure 2 and Figure 3), and by means of
experimental measurements. Obtained results conﬁrmed that,
in all the considered scenarios, the switch-over is performed
within the target time declared in IEC 62439.
In this scope, wireless communications can be used as a
backup of PVS wired communications between Peripheral
Post and Central Post, in most of the system performed by
0
50
100
150
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Switch-over times [ms]
Offset time Toffset [ms]
Failure 1 - Tf
1
Recover 1 - Tr
1
Failure 2 - Tf
2
Recover 2 - Tr
2
Figure 3. Switch-over time of MRP. vs offset time
EURORADIO standard protocol or by proprietary national
protocols, such as Italian Protocollo Vitale Standard (PVS).
This intervention could have a huge impact involving important
communications, whereas the adoption of wireless communica-
tions, for instance based on IEEE 802.11ac protocol, can easily
provide the required levels of Quality of Service in terms of
bit data rate and security.
C. On-board LAN
Another important challenge is the introduction of wireless
communications on the Local Area Network on the train (i.e.,
on-board LAN). Typically on-board LANs on the trains are
implemented using commercial layer 2 switches interconnected
by means of copper cables traversing the several carriages.
This solution is able to provide adequate bandwidth (e.g.,
100 Mbps or 1 Gbps) on the LAN, but introduces some
rigidity in the dynamic re-combination of carriages. The
utilization of a wireless bridge among adjacent carriages
could facilitate dynamic re-arrangement of trains carriages
while guaranteeing adequate network performance. The main
problems to be addressed are the maximum supported bitrate,
and the required integration of the wireless devices in the
failure recovery mechanisms typically supported by the on-
board LAN. Regarding the supported bit rate trafﬁc bandwidth
of up to 200 Mbps can be supported with very cheap hardware
(e.g., about hundred dollars each wireless bridge). Regarding
the integration of the recovery techniques, properly designed
scripts should be implemented and deployed on the wireless
devices so that failures of the local interfaces can be announced
to the rest of the on-board LAN to properly recover the affected
trafﬁc ﬂows.
D. ERTMS
European Rail Trafﬁc Management System (ERTMS) [6],
[7] is the European reference management system suitable to
homogeneously manage different national trains when they
cross national boundaries. It aims to overcome the limits of
the diverse national management systems, each one based
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

on different communication protocols, system architectures,
trackside and on-board components. This heterogeneity implies
that when a train travels across different countries the on-board
equipment has to be able to interface to different signaling
systems. This problem is generally overcame by substituting
the locomotive, where the on board system is placed, or
equipping the locomotive with all the different equipment
corresponding to the different crossed nations. Obviously, this
approach is not ﬂexible and efﬁcient, impacting on travel
time and railway capacity. In this context ERTMS aims to
homogenize the signaling systems by the introduction of
a unique management system. Furthermore, its goal is to
improve the railway efﬁciency by a progressive substitution of
wired communications with wireless ones. This will allow a
reduction of trackside devices and the introduction of further
and improved functionalities, as will be described in the
following. The introduction of ERTMS theoretically follows
three different steps, starting from Level 1, compatible with pre-
existent systems based on exclusively wired communications,
to Level 2, see Figure 4, where wireless communications are
side by side to the wired ones, to the Level 3, where only
wireless links are used.
Figure 4. ERTMS Level 2
1) EURORADIO: ERTMS deﬁnes as secure communication
protocol EURORADIO [8] based on an open communication
network such as Global System for Mobile Communications
â ˘A¸S Railway (GSM-R). It is based on a layered architecture
and all the layers are executed onboard of the train to enable
the communication. In particular, a Safety Functional Module
(SFM) and a Communication Functional Module (CFM)
respectively deal with safety transmission functionalities and
communication system functionalities.
In [2], an implementation of EURORADIO is presented,
developed with open-source tools for better portability. It is
based on software stack of different layers that form a hierarchy
of functionalities starting from the physical hardware compo-
nents (Modem GSM-R) to the user interfaces at the software
application level (Radio-Inﬁll Application), see Figure 5.
EURORADIO layers communicate together by means of
API. Each layer receives information from the layer above,
Figure 5. EURORADIO protocol.
processes and transfers that to the layer below, adding its own
encapsulation information (header).
EURORADIO is the basis for ERTMS Level 2 and Level 3
but it allows to improve the behavior also of ERTMS Level
1, where the trackside-traiborne communication (communi-
cation between the ground subsystem SST and the onboard
subsystem SSB) is through Eurobalises based on a duplication
of information. This communication is discontinuous being
Eurobalises placed in ﬁxed and meaningful positions along the
railways lines. Furthermore, the train driver can modify the
train speed only after these information points. This makes the
speed curve not optimal, due to discontinuous accelerations and
decelerations, and the trains circulation not efﬁcient. However,
the introduction of the RadioInﬁll function is suitable to provide
a compromise between the use of ERTMS Level 1 and the
continuous communications.
2) RadioInﬁll: RadioInﬁll function supported by EURORA-
DIO in ERTMS Level 1 at the application layer faces off the
lack of responsiveness typical of discontinuous ATP systems.
In ERTMS Level 1 the signaling information delivered to
the train driver is based on information points, for instance
light signals used to deliver stop and go information to the
train driver. A scheme based on duplicated information is
used for safety reasons. Double information points convey a
single type information: one notice point as an advice, and
one protection point as a conﬁrmation. RadioInﬁll allows
an early release of the running restriction before the next
information point, as shown in Figure 6. The early release
function is used when routes conditions are further exchanged
and a train deceleration is no more necessary and to manage
deceleration in proximity of stations. Some implementation of
RadioInﬁll are based on pre-existent signaling system sending
coded electric signals through the track circuit or on dedicated
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Figure 6. The early release of RadioInﬁll function.
trackside components (Euroloop). In [2], an implementation
of EURORADIO protocol and of RadioInﬁll is described. The
experimentation shown as this function can reduce the travel
time and improve the power saving reducing the number of
braking.
3) ERTMS Level 3: As mentioned, the distinctive element
of ERTMS Level 3 is the exclusive use of wireless commu-
nications for the exchange of information between train and
ground system, see Figure 7.
Figure 7. ERTMS Level 3
This allows the reduction of trackside signaling devices
with a consequent reduction in costs and maintenance load.
Furthermore, the speed curve is continuous improving energy
consumption efﬁciency and passenger travel comfort. At the
present time there are no implementations of ERTMS Level
3 but railway operators and European national authorities
are actively considering the evolution of their systems in
order to implement its functionalities, see Norway or Finland,
and some nations of the East of Europe are evaluating to
update their national management systems directly to ERTMS
Level 3, pushing forward the evolution and avoiding the huge
implementation of the consecutive different levels, starting
from Level 1.
4) Moving Blocks: The goal is to improve the efﬁciency of
rail trafﬁc management and the quality of service offered by
increasing the capacity of the line. For this purpose, ERTMS
Level 3 is based on the use of the Moving Block concept to
manage trains on the same line [9]. Moving Block Signaling
(MBS) is an intelligent control system where safety zones
around the train are deﬁned that can not be crossed by adjacent
trains. Speciﬁcally, MBS exceeds the Fixed Block limits where
the line is divided into ﬁxed length blocks determined based
on the braking capacity of the train in worst case conditions,
taking into account the speed allowed in the line, and delimited
by signals. According to this system, a train can access a block
only if its next one is free, so the distance between two trains
on the same line is more than one block [10] [11]. This results
in an accumulation of braking times and excessive spacing
between the trains, affecting the density of trains on the line. To
increase the capacity of the line, i.e., the number of trains on it,
MBS introduces "mobile" blocks that are no longer delimited
by long distance signals and whose length is not ﬁxed but
determined by the safety distance needed to completely stop
the train.
According to this method, the moving block is determined
by the position of the train and the safety distance from it,
and no other signaling equipment is needed being managed by
the ERTMS control system. Particularly in Moving Block, the
train is modeled with a safe-envelope consisting of the sum
of its length, a rear safety margin that takes into account the
distance of rollback, uncertainty in determining the position of
the train and spacing with the next train, and a frontal security
margin which, in turn, takes into account the uncertainty in
determining the train head and the distance traveled during
the maximum permissible time interval in which ground-
to-earth communication can be interrupted [12]. Thus, the
minimum distance of a train from the preceding one, the Limit
of Movement Authority (LMA), is dependent on the position
of the train ahead and its speciﬁc braking and speed properties.
This interdiction space moves along the line to proceed to
the next train. This reduces the length of the moving blocks
and, consequently, the distance between the trains, allowing to
increase the capacity of the line.
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, some use cases about the introduction of
wireless communications as backup or integration to the
wired ones in the railway domain are illustrated. Trackside
and on-board communications, as well as ERTMS systems
and EURORADIO protocol are studied analyzing the issues
related to wired links and illustrating how the use of wireless
communications can face off their drawbacks.
Despite the use of wireless communications in most cases is
a challenge especially considering the strict safety and service
requirements but, from the other hand it opens new ﬁeld of
application and feeds the evolution of the railway systems.
Future works will be focused on the management of the train
integrity. Until now, this function is guaranteed by the train
inauguration process and by the monitoring of the train and of
its queue in particular by means of the Train Communication
Network (TCN). Furthermore, it can be integrated by the use
of wireless communications, for instance, monitoring the round
trip time between the head and the queue of the train.
Further application of wireless communication that deserves
to be deepened is the "cloudiﬁcation" of railway management
and services which can be based on wireless links as backup
connections.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

REFERENCES
[1] H. of Commons Transport Committee, “Cable theft on the railway -
Fourteenth Report of Session 2010-2012,” House of Commons, Tech.
Rep., 2012.
[2] G. Cecchetti, A. L. Ruscelli, A. Sgambelluri, F. Cugini, and P. Castoldi,
“Wireless Spread Spectrum for trackside railways communication
systems,” in 11th World Congress on Railway Research WCRR, 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sparkrail.org/Lists/Records/DispForm.
aspx?ID=23559
[3] A. L. Ruscelli, G. Cecchetti, and P. Castoldi, “Energy Harvesting
for Trackside Railways Communications,” in 11th World Congress
on
Railway
Research
WCRR,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.sparkrail.org/Lists/Records/DispForm.aspx?ID=23560
[4] “Iec 62439,” https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/24447, (Retrieved: May,
2017).
[5] A. Giorgetti, F. Cugini, F. Paolucci, L. Valcarenghi, and A. e. a. Pistone.
[6] “Directive
DC
2001/16/ec,”
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/
sga_doc?smartapi!celexplus!prod!DocNumber&lg=en&type_doc=
Directive&an_doc=2001&nu_doc=16, (Retrieved: May, 2017).
[7] “Directive DC 96/48/ec,” http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=CELEX:31996L0048:it:HTML, (Retrieved: May, 2017).
[8] S.-. ERTMS/ETCS, “Subset-037 ERTMS/ETCS - class 1 EURORADIO
functional interface speciﬁcations,” www.era.europa.eu, UNISIG, jul
2005.
[9] H. Takeuchi, C. J. Goodman, and S. Sone, “Moving block signalling
dynamics: performance measures and re-starting queued electric trains,”
vol. 150, no. 4, July 2003, pp. 483–492.
[10] Z. Li-yan, L. Ping, J. Li-min, and Y. Feng-yan, “Study on the simulation
for train operation adjustment under moving block,” in Proceedings. 2005
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2005., Sept 2005, pp. 351–356.
[11] N. A. Zafar, “Formal model for moving block railway interlocking system
based on un-directed topology,” in 2006 International Conference on
Emerging Technologies, Nov 2006, pp. 217–223.
[12] L. Xu, X. Zhao, Y. Tao, Q. Zhang, and X. Liu, “Optimization of
train headway in moving block based on a particle swarm optimization
algorithm,” in 2014 13th International Conference on Control Automation
Robotics Vision (ICARCV), Dec 2014, pp. 931–935.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

