Mobile Applications for Independent Living of Isolated Elderly 
 
Taxiarchis Tsaprounis, Katerina Touliou, Konstantinos Kalogirou, Konstantinos Agnantis, Evangelos 
Bekiaris 
Hellenic Institute of Transport 
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas 
Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece 
e-mail: Taxiarchis.Tsaprounis@certh.gr, touliouk@certh.gr, kalogir@certh.gr, kagnantis@certh.gr, abek@certh.gr 
 
 
Abstract-REMOTE aims at an open and innovative reference 
architecture, based upon ontologies and semantic services that 
allow plug and play of existing and new services in all domains 
required for the independent and autonomous living of the 
elderly and their Quality of Life enhancement. It utilizes ICT 
and other key technologies in order to provide holistic services 
to the elderly to support their physical, social or psychological 
engagement and foster their emotional well being. This paper 
is strong evidence that telemonitoring applications may ensure 
maximum gain for patients as long as they are properly 
designed and implemented. 
Keywords-Symbian OS; Java ME; Elderly; Independent 
Living; 
Guardian 
Angel; 
Nutritional 
Advisor; 
Personal 
Calendar; Environmental Home Control 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The older population is growing at a considerably faster 
rate than that of the world’s total population. In absolute 
terms, the number of elderly persons has tripled over the last 
50 years and will be more than triple over the next 50-year 
period. The percentage of the ageing population using 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) is also 
rising every year [1]. Hence, future elderly users will have 
high ICT literacy compared to the elderly populations using 
similar systems to improve their overall wellbeing. The 
necessity of creating a platform that contains applications in 
all relevant domains for the benefit of the elderly user is 
clear and evident. REMOTE (Remote health and social care 
for independent living of isolated elderly with chronic 
condition) [2] is a Collaborative Project within the AAL 
(Ambient 
Assisted 
Living) 
joint 
programme 
which 
revolutionises the interoperability, quality, breadth and 
usability of services for all daily activities of the elderly [3].  
The REMOTE approach is simple and straightforward. 
The core concept is direct re-usability of information across 
heterogeneous services and devices. The REMOTE solution 
is to provide foundational ontology [4] components, 
specifically tailored to the requirements of the applications to 
be covered and the services provided. 
The structure of this document complies with the 
following description. The second section provides a general 
description of the project, a short state-of-the-art overview of 
the most crucial and relevant to the project domains and 
focuses on innovations over the state-of-the-art.  
The 
third 
section 
is about 
REMOTE 
system’s 
architecture. An overview of the functionality and the role of 
each module are presented. 
The fourth section analyses the internal architecture of a 
very important component in REMOTE’s architecture 
named Ambient Intelligence Framework. 
The fifth section analyses the methodology used in the 
early stages of the project in order to derive REMOTE 
system’s use cases. The sixth section presents technical 
specification details that a device should follow in order to 
be applicable for REMOTE applications’ installation.  
The following five sections give a detailed description of 
four applications which have been developed and integrated 
on Symbian OS platform to ensure remote access to various 
services related to the independent living and support of the 
specific target user group. Specifically, the following Java 
ME applications, which were developed for Symbian OS [5] 
mobile devices are presented:  
(1) Guardian Angel [6] includes wearables and sensors 
for detecting body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, 
human posture and motion/acceleration recognition and 
sends alerts to the healthcare professional in case an 
abnormal measurement is detected. 
(2) Nutritional Advisor [6] offering everyday tips on 
nutrition, weekly menus and recipes according to the user’s 
needs and preferences. 
(3) Personal Calendar [6] for scheduling/managing daily 
tasks for the elderly (concerning nutrition, medication and 
to-do lists) under the unobtrusive supervision of their carers. 
(4) Environmental Home Control [6] for interacting with 
home appliances and monitoring the house’s status remotely. 
All the above applications are interoperating with each 
other by the use of the user profile mechanism and store 
patient’s monitored data to remote servers which can only be 
accessible by the professional healthcarers with the use of 
web applications. 
The pre-last section presents the evaluation phase results 
at determining the usability and acceptance of four of 
REMOTE’s applications and the last section is about 
conclusions that were gathered during the evaluation phase 
of the project. 
II. 
REMOTE CONCEPT, STATE-OF-THE-ART AND 
INNOVATIONS 
REMOTE EU project can be divided to REMOTE 
ontology, REMOTE platform and REMOTE applications.  
REMOTE ontology basis is a set of existing ontologies 
related to each application, which was initially planned to be 
developed for the needs of the project, i.e., health 
monitoring, physical activity, mental exercise, nutrition, 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

communication and calendar tasks. After its finalization the 
ontology was evaluated by the use of the “Competency 
Questions” process [7]. REMOTE platform is a framework 
that allows integration of single services using ontological 
layering. Services are integrated into the system through a 
“service-ontology alignment” process. Specifically, the 
service alignment is realised by the service provider through 
an alignment and anchoring tool, which is provided through 
REMOTE and semantically matches (aligns) ontological 
concepts to web services structural components, i.e., their 
I/O (input/output) parameters. REMOTE applications, which 
are invoking the integrated services, are provided to the 
elderly through the main menu. 
Because of the fact that any service following certain 
specifications may be integrated in the system, REMOTE is 
considered to be an open reference architecture that allows 
data and (external) services fusion.  
Primary users of REMOTE are the elderly with specific 
user conditions, especially those living in rural and isolated 
areas. Secondary users are the professional health carers with 
tools for continuous monitoring run-time and history patient 
data. Tertiary end-users are the service providers who are 
integrating their services into REMOTE platform with the 
use of the alignment tool. 
Taking into account all previous research projects 
REMOTE’s applications have used and further developed 
results from, i.e., for elderly people: ASK-IT [8] and 
MAPPED [9], for mobility issues: COGKNOW [10] and 
EMPOWER [11], to foster daily activities: SOPRANO [12], 
INHOME [13], OLDES [14] and AMIGO [15]. The most 
significant innovation in REMOTE is the multi sensor 
approach, i.e., body and home environmental sensors, 
performing a data fusion of their various inputs, combined 
with expert knowledge and individual user information. 
Particularly, new mechanisms have been defined to hide the 
complexity of the various sensor network environments and 
user interface adaptation algorithms have been created that 
take into account the users’ needs and preferences in order to 
adapt the user interface according to situational and technical 
context of interaction. The use of ontologies in REMOTE is 
an innovative feature that gives added value to the platform. 
The ontologies assist in sharing common understanding of 
the structure of information among people or software, they 
enable reuse of domain knowledge and make it easier to 
analyze it. 
A fundamental aspect of REMOTE system (sensors, 
devices, software, etc.) is its scalability, flexibility and 
adaptability “characters” that help to be easily integrated into 
existing set-ups and contexts. REMOTE prototypes and 
technology-based solutions are well-adapted to the respective 
diagnosis, prevention and treatment opportunities that can be 
attained while allowing the elderly to stay “at home” 
(detecting signs, symptoms, and risk factors; monitoring cure 
processes; etc.). The REMOTE system developed new 
elderly-oriented human-machine interaction paradigms, new 
systems for monitoring users at home, e.g., Dehydration 
level measurement and/or when they are on the move, e.g., 
Guardian Angel application. Moreover, the system detects 
important events (health risks, daily activity and behaviour).  
III. 
REMOTE’S ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW 
The most important components of the REMOTE 
architecture are briefly described in the following list 
(Fig.1). 
A. Ontology Repository (OR) 
It is the technological layer that supports the Ontologies 
storage and management [16]. 
B. Common Ontological Framework (COF) 
The COF defines a formal specification of ontology 
modules, and how they relate. The COF defines a 
methodology and best practice for ontology construction. It 
makes possible to define an ontology and facilitate and 
optimize the integration of new emerging ontologies. 
C. Content Anchoring and Alignment Tool (CAAT) 
This tool aligns the functionality of the provided web 
service through its Web Service Description Language 
(WSDL) [17] file with the ontologies stored in the OR. The 
concepts of the same or different application areas, after 
being aligned with the appropriate ontological concepts are 
ready to be used seamlessly through the CCM. The purpose 
of the Concept Anchoring and Alignment tool is to allow 
service providers insert their web services into the REMOTE 
framework. 
D. Content Connector Module (CCM) 
CCM receives a request for service by the end-user 
(client) application via the Ambient Intelligence Framework 
(AmI) and invokes the appropriate service that returns the 
requested content to the client [18]. 
E. Ambient Intelligence Framework (AmI) 
The role of AmI framework [18] in REMOTE system is to 
provide 
seamless 
interactivity 
between 
REMOTE 
applications and the Content Connector Module. The 
Content Connector Module exposes its functionality as a 
web service and it is invoked by the AmI through a web 
service client. 
F. User Profile 
It contains all the context information related to a specific 
user. If a REMOTE component needs to retrieve some 
information related to the user context but out of its own 
scope, it should make a query to this user profile [18]. 
 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
Figure 1.  
REMOTE Architecture 
IV. 
AMBIENT INTELLIGENCE FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW 
The AmI framework consists of four agents [19]. It 
directly communicates with the Content Connector Module 
through the Service Provider Agent and with the device 
through the Dialog Manager Agent. The User Profile Agent 
is responsible for accessing the User Profile Repository. The 
AmI internal communication and the user profile repository 
location are depicted in Fig.2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  
Ambient Intelligence Framework 
The Dialog Manager Agent role is to contribute to a 
distinct and clearer AmI internal architecture. It resides on 
the client side and handles the communication between the 
mobile and the REMOTE server part. 
The Content Connector Module of the REMOTE 
framework performs semantic search among suitable 
available web services, in order to satisfy the user request. 
The results produced as outcome of the search mechanism 
are then fed to the Service Prioritisation Agent, whose role 
is to provide a ranking of the returned services according to 
the specific needs, preferences and habits of the user. It 
actually implements a low-level information filtering 
process, thus providing the most valuable services to the end 
user. It prioritizes web services by taking into account meta-
data received from CCM. Concerning the meta-data 
parameters currently used for service prioritization it is 
important to define that they are distinguished between 
parameters used for filtering services and parameters used 
after the filtering process for prioritizing them. In case the 
meta-data values of a service do not match the filtering 
parameters the corresponding web service is not taken into 
consideration in the prioritization process. 
The filtering meta-data parameters are the following: 
• 
Language (Comparison with the user’s preferred 
languages) 
• 
Country (Comparison with the user’s country) 
• 
City (Comparison with the user’s city) 
The prioritizing meta-data parameters are stated below: 
• 
Age Category (young elderly, elderly, old elderly) 
• 
Max Accepted Cost 
• 
Impaired Category 
The Service Provider Agent is responsible for the AmI-
CCM communication. 
The User Profile Agent is the agent who has direct 
access to the User Profile Repository in order to obtain data 
that will be used for filtering the returned services and 
optimising the result returned to the user. It is responsible for 
the storage and retrieval of all these profile properties of the 
user that are needed by REMOTE applications. 
V. 
METHODOLOGY 
Use Cases were created early in the project and the 
process for finalising them followed several adjustment 
phases. Firstly, a State-of-the-Art search for identifying 
relevant systems and services in the domain of Telemedicine 
applications was carried out. Secondly, an online survey-via 
REMOTE website - was conducted in eight European 
countries and a set of interviews has been carried out in five 
of them for the extraction of user needs and requirements. 
Based on these findings, the initial Use Cases were 
developed.  Both face-to-face interviews and online surveys 
were conducted in order to gather as much information as 
possible about the needs of end users.  
A total of 266 individuals from 6 countries (Spain, Israel, 
Greece, Germany, Norway and Italy) were surveyed via 
face-to-face 
interviews, 
as 
well 
as 
through 
online 
questionnaires. As a result of the whole process, 41 use cases 
have been defined. These use cases were the cornerstone of 
the architectural design and development of the REMOTE 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

system, which has been continuously improving by taking 
into consideration each one’s of the evaluation phases’ 
results. 
VI. 
DEVICE TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
In terms of application development for Symbian OS 
devices, Java ME (Java Mobile Edition) technology [20] has 
been used. The Lightweight User Interface Toolkit (LWUIT) 
[21], which is a versatile and compact API for creating 
attractive application user interfaces for mobile devices, has 
been applied for the implementation of the REMOTE mobile 
user interface. 
REMOTE application can be downloaded to CLDC 
(Connected Limited Device Configuration) 1.1 [22] and 
MIDP (Mobile Information Device Profile) 2.x [23] devices.  
The devices that may be used for REMOTE installation 
should support JSR (Java Specification Request)-75 
(specification that standardizes access in Java on embedded 
devices -such as mobile phones and PDAs- to data that 
resides natively on mobile devices), JSR-179 (GPS-Global 
Positioning System- functionality), JSR-135 (extends the 
functionality of the JME platform by providing audio, video, 
and other time-based multimedia support) and JSR-172 
(enables Java ME devices to be web service clients). The use 
of a Wi-Fi enabled mobile device is recommended because 
of the faster responses the user receives when invoking a 
service through a WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) 
rather than 3G/GPRS/UMTS connection and the fact Wi-Fi 
can often fill-in some of those dead spots or signal losses 
(i.e., inside the house). 
VII. MAIN MENU OVERVIEW 
When launching the REMOTE application, the user is 
prompted to insert his/her username on a login screen. The 
initialisation of user profile is taking place in the Medical 
Contact Centre (administrative web application) and its 
medical details are filled with face-to-face communication 
with the health care professionals. Main Menu (Fig. 3) 
displays only the registered applications of the logged-in 
user, which are also defined during the user profile 
initialization process (Medical Contact Centre). Personal 
preferences acquired by the user profile are taken into 
account for the automatic selection of the appropriate theme, 
font size and language. REMOTE supports eight different 
languages (i.e., English, Greek, Romanian, Spanish, German, 
Norwegian, Italian and Hebrew), four different themes for 
different user chronic conditions and three font sizes. 
 
 
Figure 3.  
REMOTE Main Menu: (a) blue theme, (b) high contrast 
theme 
VIII. GUARDIAN ANGEL 
Guardian Angel application aims to support the users on 
the move via monitoring technologies based on state-of-the-
art wearable and mobile systems, throughout their daily 
activities. For this purpose, sensor-enhanced devices are 
incorporated for the unobtrusive monitoring of various vital 
parameters such as heart rate, breathing rate, posture and 
activity, skin temperature, blood pressure, weight, etc. 
According to the definition of personalized monitoring 
schemas, appropriate alerts can be generated so as to assist 
the patients in avoiding or overcoming hazardous health 
conditions or situations, i.e., arrhythmia, high blood pressure 
and fall. The system is primarily targeted at patients with 
chronic diseases such as hypertension and Parkinson’s 
disease. 
The Guardian Angel Mobile Application is mainly 
consisted of five distinct services, deployed on the user’s 
mobile device: a) The sensors communication, b) the sensor 
data handling, c) the emergency management, d) the vital 
signs management, and e) the proximity. 
The sensor-enhanced devices can communicate via 
Bluetooth with the patient’s mobile device, forming in this 
way a body-sensor network around the user for health 
monitoring purposes. Guardian Angel mobile application 
utilizes the multi-sensing wearable strap Zephyr BioHarness 
[24]. BioHarness is a device particularly suited for 
monitoring the heart rate, breathing rate, activity, posture and 
skin temperature.  
The patient is provided, by the initial application screen, 
with instructions for wearing the strap properly, since this is 
a critical requirement for the efficient monitoring of his/her 
health status. Clicking on “What is measured” button, the 
patient can view his/her measurement values as well as their 
corresponding thresholds. If a measurement is out of range 
then proper alerts are generated. 
                     (a)                                    (b) 
 
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
 
Figure 4.  
REMOTE Guardian Angel: (a) Vital sign measurement, (b) 
Emergency alert 
 After pressing the “Start” button, communication with 
the BioHarness sensor is initialized and the patient’s 
parameters - heart rate, breathing rate, skin temperature and 
posture (i.e., controlling for fall detection) start being 
monitored (Fig. 4a). 
In case of alert (Fig. 4b), the user is notified and an 
orange alert is transmitted to the emergency service of the 
Medical Contact Centre. If the alert persists for a period of 
55 seconds, a red alert is triggered and sent to the Medical 
Centre so that appropriate actions are routed. The patient will 
be notified when the measurement value is back to safe 
levels. The patient’s monitoring values (received by the 
BioHarness device every second) are sent to the back-end 
system periodically and health professionals are informed of 
his/her current health status. The patient is notified in case of 
loss of internet or Bluetooth connection. 
IX. 
NUTRITIONAL ADVISOR 
The main purpose of nutritional profiling is to detect 
nutritional risks and preferences for users and the nutritionist 
can determine the best nutritional plan taking into account 
their health condition. Nutritional Advisor application aims 
at controlling and influencing the nutritional habits of the 
elderly. It provides appropriate data that facilitate their 
nutritional-related daily habits (i.e., grocery shopping and 
cooking activities). In particular, the shopping list feature 
assists the elderly in purchasing everything he/she needs for 
preparing the meals of the day/week and the recipes feature 
provides everything that the user may need in order to 
prepare a meal such as meal photos, detailed instructions and 
precise quantities of each ingredient needed (Fig. 5a). 
The system recommends to the user a daily menu 
(Breakfast, Lunch and Dinner) based on the nutritional plan 
prepared by the nutritionist, which takes into account the 
calories of each menu, the user’s medical profile and health 
status (allergies, medications and diseases) and also the 
user’s activity level (Fig. 5b).  
 
 
Figure 5.  
REMOTE Nutritional Advisor application: (a) Shopping 
List, (b) Lunch menu display – Nutrition telemonitoring 
All the nutritional content provided by the Nutritional 
Advisor service, is customized for each specific user, taking 
into account their user profile, which gathers the likes, needs 
and requirements of the elderly user. Due to the fact that 
nutritional content is totally depended on the service 
provider, no extra details can be given about it. The 
exchange of information between the Nutritional Advisor 
and other REMOTE applications like the Guardian Angel or 
the Activity Coach improves both the nutritional service, as 
well as the other applications connected to it.  
X. 
PERSONAL CALENDAR 
The personal calendar application for REMOTE is used 
for scheduling and managing the daily tasks of the elderly 
under the unobtrusive supervision of the caregiver. The 
application enables the user to keep a good schedule of their 
life and activities and also serves as a memory aid to assist 
their memory. 
The 
application 
offers 
four 
different 
kinds 
of 
functionalities: 
(a) 
calendar 
management, 
(b) 
task 
management, (c) notifications and (d) integration with other 
applications.  
Calendar management has to do with the daily schedule 
of the user. A standard calendar view is provided and the 
user can check and navigate through days and months (Fig. 
6a). The tasks that have been added to the calendar are 
visible and can be examined in detail. These can be either 
user-created tasks or notes by the healthcare professional or 
the caregiver. It contains all entries that are relevant to the 
current day (e.g., including any suggested activities), 
medication intake and calendar tasks and notes (Fig. 6b). 
Task management has to do with personal or third-party 
tasks that concern the user. The application can show the list 
of tasks that have been added to the calendar and offers 
services for adding or deleting them.  
                    (a)                                   (b) 
  
  
                 (a)                                  (b) 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
Figure 6.  
REMOTE Personal Calendar application: (a) Calendar 
panel, (b) Lunch stored as nutrition task 
These services are also offered to other applications that 
may need to manage the user’s tasks, such as an application 
for the professional, allowing him to add medicine-related 
tasks for the user or the nutritionist’s application that 
displays the daily meals of the elderly as calendar tasks. 
XI. 
HOME ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL 
The Environmental Control application enables the users 
to control household appliances from a remote distance. The 
user can either be at home controlling devices of a room 
from another room or from a place outside his house. This 
interaction is achieved through actuator devices such as 
switch or dimmer switches. Home monitoring is also 
possible through the use of sensors which have been installed 
in different places inside the house. Temperature, humidity, 
luminance are some of the various measurements that can be 
monitored in order to make the user feel more secure about 
the environment s/he lives in. A home automation lab was 
built at CERTH’s (Centre for Research and Technology 
Hellas) premises in order to demonstrate and validate the 
functions that are supported by the REMOTE system. The 
home environment is very heterogeneous composed of 
different 
application 
areas, 
devices 
communication 
standards, user needs and wants. Moreover, many 
incompatible systems are available on the Market. This leads 
to many incompatible "communication islands" at home, 
with no interoperability and no "overall interaction". 
Therefore, the Home Environmental server should follow a 
“multi-standard-approach”, facilitating to control devices 
using different communication protocols on various busses at 
the same time. This defined some technical requirements to 
the architecture of the server: 
• 
It needs to “know” the busses, its protocols and how 
to use them. 
• 
Each device has to provide a communication 
protocol, able to receive commands and/or answer requests. 
 
 
Figure 7.  
REMOTE Home Environmental Control application: (a) 
Available rooms, (b) Integrated sensors/devices 
• 
The server needs to “know” the devices that should 
be controlled. 
Each device is described by a Device Profile using XML, 
defining the communication protocols and their parameters 
and containing the names of the devices and other device 
properties [25]. 
All devices are using wireless communication protocols 
based on 868MHz ISM band, i.e., FS20, HMS, S300. 
Clicking on the “Environmental Control” button on the 
REMOTE main menu displays the Environmental Control 
menu which consists of a horizontal menu with the “Rooms” 
and “Home” buttons and a vertical menu where each button 
represents a room (Fig. 7a) except the last which updates the 
sensor values and the pre-last one which displays the energy 
that is currently consumed by the devices which are 
connected to the system. 
Clicking on any of the room buttons (Living room, 
Kitchen or Bedroom) displays the devices connected to the 
room and the current sensor values. The living room 
electrical appliances can be seen on Fig.7b. On the left side 
of the central panel the user can check the room’s 
temperature and humidity, whether there is any motion 
inside the house, if the door is opened and if the room is dark 
or light. 
XII. RESULTS 
A user-centred approach was adopted early in the 
REMOTE project aiming to accommodate the needs of 
patients with chronic diseases that might live in isolated 
regions. An iterative testing cycle was conducted with 
experts in the field of usability testing and developing. 
Overall, applications were regarded as sufficient and 
accepted. Comments for both functionalities and Graphical 
User Interface (GUI) were uploaded to the Mantis tool [26] 
for responsible partners (i.e., developers) to have access. It 
was necessary- as first rectification step to match experts’ 
                   (a)                                        (b) 
  
                   (a)                                    (b) 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

prioritisation to developers’ prioritisation for pragmatic 
improvements. Respective bugs, errors and issues were dealt 
with prior the final evaluation phase with real users. The 
evaluation phase aimed at determining the usability and 
acceptance of the mobile applications.  
A. Participants 
17 female (57.8±6.61 years old) and 13 male (59.8±4.12 
years old) users participated in the pilot study. All users were 
derived by an existing user database. 27 users suffered from 
chronic diseases (e.g., hypertension, diabetes, arthritis) and 3 
were healthy elderly. Most users live with their spouses 
(25/30). All users are adequately familiar with mobile 
phones. 
Participants 
provided 
written 
consent 
prior 
participation and received compensation. 
B. Main Findings 
Evaluation was based on tasks’ completion derived by 
two fictional scenarios. Each session lasted approximately 
two hours with short breaks and was audio recorded in order 
to gain as much insight as possible from “think aloud” 
processes. Users had constant support by two facilitators 
throughout testing.  
Post-task analysis showed that overall success to 
completed appointed tasks to users was high (Fig. 8) for all 
mobile applications tested. Task analysis was based on steps 
and time taken to successfully complete the appointed task. 
At least three tasks were completed by each user per tested 
mobile application.  
Calculation of task completion success rates was based 
on both users’ and facilitators’ ratings. Users had to state if 
they thought they successfully completed each task and at 
the same time the facilitators recorded their own rating (i.e., 
success/partial success/failure). The average score from both 
facilitators and user was the overall user success rate. 
Increased success in completing the tasks was found for the 
health monitoring application. However, fewer steps were 
required to complete the respective tasks for this application 
and it might have affected the overall success rate for this 
specific mobile application. Nevertheless, success rates are 
all above 90% and are quite impressive taking into 
consideration that most users (83%) were not acquainted 
with touch screen mobile phones. These findings support 
both the easiness and learnability of the mobile applications 
developed within the framework of REMOTE but also their 
increased potential for deployment and penetration to 
existing telemedicine and health mobile applications with 
minimal instructions and training.  
User acceptance ratings ranged from -2 (negative) to 2 
(positive). The two extremes were defined by the content of 
each questionnaire item (e.g., unpleasant-pleasant). Mean 
user acceptance ratings ranged from 1.62 (SD: ± 0.32) to 
1.76 (SD: ± 0.26) (mean and standard deviation for 
Nutritional 
Advisor 
and 
Environmental 
Control, 
respectively). Mean user acceptance scores for Health 
Monitoring and Calendar were similar (1.69 ± 0.41 and 
1.72±0.22, respectively). Mean acceptance scores were high 
for all four mobile applications. 
 
Figure 8.  
User success rates (%) per tested mobile application 
Fig. 9 depicts Usability scores [27] for each application 
tested. Overall, all mobile applications were perceived as 
useful with higher percentages found for both Environmental 
Control (78.5%) and Calendar (77.5%) applications. Lower 
ratings were recorded for Health Monitoring (67.3%) and 
Nutritional Advisor (66.6%) applications probably because 
users were not familiar with these types of applications at all. 
Hence, the differences might lie in the purpose of usage and 
content of these applications. In addition, for Environmental 
Control the results were evident (e.g., they switched on a 
light and they could see it). On the other hand, they received 
information about a vital sign (e.g., heart rate) but they did 
not know if this was true or not. In other words, the trust to 
the system was higher for some applications when compared 
to others. Moreover, the content for Health Monitoring and 
Nutritional Advisor was increased compared to the other two 
applications for both complexity and appearance (i.e., 
Information appearing on the screen).  
Overall usability (72.5%) is adequate and above average 
but it also shows that further improvements could be made 
resulting into an even more usable system. Therefore, 
decreasing complexity and amount of information displayed 
at screen might increase usability.  
 
 
Figure 9.  
Usability scores (%) per tested mobile application  
XIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The REMOTE mobile system provides a flexible 
solution for elder patients for services ranging from health 
94%
97.5%
90%
92.2%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Environmental 
Control
Health 
Monitoring
Calendar
Nutritional 
Advisor
User Success Rate (%)
78.5%
67.3%
66.6%
77.5%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Environmental 
Control
Health 
Monitoring
Nutritional 
Advisor
Calendar
Usability (%)
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

monitoring 
to 
environmental 
control. 
Technical 
advancements are required for these services to be available 
and accessible to the older populations.  
The REMOTE system has been developed within a 
research framework and it is not yet a marketable product. 
Therefore, its adaptation to the commercial needs should be 
implemented with the assistance of relevant stakeholders 
(i.e., telecommunication service providers and mobile device 
vendors) in order to be optimised when a marketable version 
will be available. 
Overall, all four mobile applications were regarded as 
usable, easy to learn and desired by most users. The latter is 
highly dependable to the affordability of this system as it is 
an important prerequisite for most elder users. 
Finally, it is worth to be indicated that research on 
holistic approaches to providing services to isolated elderly 
and patients via New Technologies is nowadays an essential 
research tool that could result into a valuable assistive and 
supporting product for better quality of life [28].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Work presented in this paper was achieved in REMOTE 
research project, which is cofounded by the European 
Commission, under the Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) 
joint program (AAL-2008-1-147). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Pazienza M.T., Stellato A., Vindigni M., and Zanzotto F.M., 
“XeOML: An XML-based extensible Ontology Mapping 
Language”, Workshop on Meaning Coordination and 
Negotiation, held in conjunction with 3rd International 
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC-2004) Hiroshima, Japan, 
November 8, pp. 83-95, 2004. 
[2] REMOTE 
EU 
project, 
http://www.remote-project.eu/ 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[3] Rocker C., Ziefle M., and Holzinger A., “Social Inclusion in 
AAL environments: home automation and convenience 
services for elderly users”, Proceedings of the international 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ICAI’11), vol.1, Las 
Vegas, NV USA, pp. 55-59, July 18-20, 2011. 
[4] Uschold M. and King M. “Ontologies: Principles, Methods, 
and Applications.  Knowledge Eng. Rev., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 
93-155, 1996. 
[5] Symbian OS, http://licensing.symbian.org/   
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[6] Tsaprounis T., REMOTE D4.2, “Mobile and portable self-
care services and applications”, 2011. 
[7] Gómez-Pérez A., Fernández-López M., and Corcho O.,  
“Ontological Engineering”, Springer-Verlag London Limited, 
London, UK,  pp. 119-120, 2004. 
[8] ASK-IT EU project, http://www.ask-it.org/ 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[9] MAPPED EU project, http://services.txt.it/MAPPED/ 
[retrieved: October, 2012]  
[10] COGKNOW EU project, http://www.cogknow.eu/ 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[11] EMPOWER EU project, http://www.ep-empower.eu/  
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[12] SOPRANO 
EU 
project, 
http://www.soprano-ip.org/  
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[13] INHOME 
EU 
project, 
http://www.ist-
world.org/ProjectDetails.aspx?ProjectId=fdb62df32f954628a
8308a0de08cbf6f&SourceDatabaseId=7cff9226e5824408942
00b751bab883f  
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[14] OLDES EU project, http://www.oldes.eu/ 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[15] AMIGO, 
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/amigo/  
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[16] REMOTE Ontology Repository, http://orate.iti.gr/  
[retrieved: August, 2012] 
[17] WSDL, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-wsdl20-adjuncts-
20070626/#_http_binding_default_rule_method 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[18] Tsaprounis T. and Giannoutakis K., REMOTE D2.2, 
“REMOTE AmI framework and agents”, 2010. 
[19] Bellifemine F., “Developing multi-agent systems with 
JADE”, , Wiley, Liverpool University, UK, 2007  
[20] JavaME, 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javame/index.html 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[21] LWUIT, http://lwuit.java.net/ [retrieved: October, 2012] 
[22] CLDC, http://java.sun.com/products/cldc/overview.html 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[23] MIDP, http://www.midp.net/ [retrieved: October, 2012]  
[24] Zephyr, 
http://www.zephyr-technology.com/bioharness-bt 
[retrieved: October, 2012]  
[25] Kalogirou K. and Telkamp G., “An ontological framework for 
the elderly to control their home environment”, Durban, South 
Africa, 19-21 May, IST 2010. 
[26] Mantis Tool, http://www.mantisbt.org/  
[retrieved: October, 2012]  
[27] Brooke J.,  SUS: a "quick and dirty" usability scale.  In P. W. 
Jordan, B. Thomas, B. A. Weerdmeester, & A. L. 
McClelland. Usability Evaluation in Industry. London: Taylor 
and Francis, pp. 189--194 , 2006. 
[28] Pare G., Jaana M., and Sicotte C., Systematic Review of 
HomeTelemonitoring for Chronic Diseases: The Evidence 
Base: J Am Med Inform Assoc., vol.14, pp. 269-277,  2007. 
 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

