Basic Internet Access: Capacity and Trafﬁc Shaping
Elin Sundby Boysen
University of Oslo/UNIK
Kjeller, Norway
email: elinsbo@ifi.uio.no
I˜naki Garitano
Enginering Faculty
Mondragon Unibertsitatea
Mondragon, Spain
email: igaritano@garitano.org
Josef Noll
Basic Internet Foundation
University of Oslo/UNIK
Kjeller, Norway
email: josef@unik.no
Abstract—This paper analyzes economical and technological as-
pects for service provisioning on varying networks. Though
mobile networks are continuously evolving, the use of mobile
broadband is and will be limited. Availability and affordability
are two aspects, which are addressed in this paper through
the introduction of basic information and low capacity (LC)
services. The paper addresses how information provisioning and
network-aware applications work together to achieve a digital
society including everyone, rather than enhancing the digital
gap. Initiatives like Facebook’s Free Basic and the Basic Internet
Foundation and their approaches on LC-service and information
provisioning are addressed. The second focus is on a pro-
active approach for mobile applications (apps), adjusting to the
network capacity and bandwidth limitations. The main results are
recommendations towards a low-capacity Internet for everyone,
supported by examples of LC-service provisioning, as well as
network-aware apps.
Keywords–Internet; Basic Internet; broadband; devices; net-
work; information; developing economies; availability; affordability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet now links several billion devices worldwide
together, and consists of a multitude of networks with local
or global scope, private or public connected to a broad array
of networking technologies [1]. In the 1990s, the Internet had
developed into a usable and efﬁcient service that changed the
economy. Today, around 46% of the world’s households have
access to Internet through either ﬁxed or mobile subscriptions
[2]. However, the gap between developed and developing coun-
tries is still wide. According to ITU [2], by the end of 2015,
34% of households in developing countries had Internet access,
compared with more than 80% in developed countries. In the
least developed countries, only 7% of households have Internet
access. In this same set of countries, 12 of 100 inhabitants have
active mobile broadband subscriptions, whereas less than 1 of
100 inhabitants have ﬁxed broadband subscriptions.
Higher penetration of Internet access in these areas is
important for three main stakeholders:
i) for local governments, as digital inclusion is vital for
six key sectors: health, education, ﬁnancial services, retail,
government and agriculture [3]. In the latter Internet access
is an important premise for harvesting beneﬁts that lie in the
use of IoT-technologies that can automate labor-intensive and
health-hazardous industrial and agronomic work [4].
ii) for the inhabitants themselves to gain access to infor-
mation related to education and healthcare, and thus providing
a possibility to provide better care for themselves and their
families.
iii) for companies that realize the market potential behind
this vast number of people currently without access to Internet.
This may not be in terms of the purchasing power of each
inhabitant, but as a result of the mere number of people.
Serving such a number of customers - often residing in rural
areas - will only be possible through Internet instead of
physical presence.
Access to mobile networks and feature phones have already
increased drastically over the last 15 years, where the propor-
tion of the worldwide population covered by a 2G mobile-
cellular network grew from 58% in 2001 to 95% in 2015
[4]. A similar growth in access to mobile Internet access is
envisioned, but relies on overcoming the main challenges for
adoption:
i) pricing of phones. Many in these regions cannot afford to
buy smart phones and seldom use their mobile phones for more
than the occasional voice call. Companies such as Micromax,
Xiami, Google and Mozilla are however trying to meet the
challenge of expensive phones by developing low cost handsets
targeting these markets’ needs [4].
ii) availability and affordability of data trafﬁc. GSMA
has pointed out that by the end of 2014 around 77% of the
developing world only had access to no (59%) or narrowband
(18%) [5]. Though operators plan for cheaper networks with
wider coverage, there will still be a substantial amount of
people in the developing world not being able to connect.
iii) trafﬁc speed. When connections with less than 2Mbit/s
are the normal situation, access to widely used web sites
and services, and downloading necessary information becomes
cumbersome and sometimes even impossible due to time-outs.
iv) lack of local content that is relevant for inhabitants in
the region, in their local languages, and which also embraces
the challenges of trafﬁc speeds in the region.
The Basic Internet Foundation has been established to
provide Basic Access to Information to inhabitants addressing
these challenges. Free access to low-capacity information is
seen as a minor extra cost for the network operator, being
either an ISP or a mobile operator. In this paper we address
the Basic Internet solution and how it relates to other solutions
with similar goals. Further we describe the main technological
challenges of content delivery for capacity-limited networks,
being trafﬁc shaping on the server side and selected access on
the mobile client side. The main contributions of this paper are
solutions for trafﬁc shaping and better matching of content to
capacity. These solutions are vital in providing access to basic
information, but will also be relevant and applicable for other
implementations and usage scenarios.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
solutions from companies with similar goals. Section III
presents the technology challenges, and Section IV addresses
ﬁrst results from pilot implementations. Section V concludes
the paper.
II.
RELATED INITIATIVES
In this section, we provide an overview of existing solu-
tions for Internet distribution in areas with economic issues,
and discuss some of their limitation. We then give a brief
introduction to our solution and its main technical challenges.
Initiatives like ConnectTheWorld [6] and Digial Impact Al-
liance (DIAL [7]) form the political and societal platforms for
digital inclusion. From the technical point of view, this paper
concentrates on the approaches by Free Basics, Mozilla, and
the Basic Internet Foundation.
A. Free Basics from Facebook
Internet.org is a partnership between Facebook and several
companies to bring affordable access to Internet services. The
initiative targets both areas where access is non-existent and
areas that have a mobile infrastructure. Non-existent access is
provided through local Internet Service Providers (ISPs) using
Wiﬁ Express. In areas with mobile coverage, zero-rated content
is offered to mobile operators. Zero-rated content are web
pages and apps, which are provided free-of-charge to the end
customer. Free Basics by Facebook is launched in 39 countries
provides an open platform for providers of apps, websites or
services an open platform. These can be added to Free Basics
as long as they abide by Facebook’s participation guidelines
that shall ensure acceptable performance on older phones and
slower network connections. The idea is that the free access
will help people understand what Internet is and what it can be
used for, and thus, that paying for further access to the broader
internet is worth the cost. Internet.org estimates that 50% of
people who use Free Basics will pay for data and access the
broader internet within 30 days.
A similar platform, Airtel Zero, offers free access to certain
mobile applications and services [8]. Developers and service
providers who pay Airtel a ﬁxed fee for the cost of data transfer
can offer their apps free to end customers.
Both Free Basics and Airtel Zero has been criticized for
violating net neutrality [9] as their approach creates a walled
garden around information their users can access. Lately Free
Basics has published technical guidelines for efﬁciency and
size [10], and has thus transferred the evaluation of apps and
web sites to objective measures.
B. Free access paid by ads
Mozilla has targeted the challenge of high prices on hand-
sets by developing a low-cost handset with their own Firefox
OS. In Bangladesh and several African countries they have
teamed up with local mobile operators such as Grameenphone
and Orange. In Bangladesh, Grameenphone offers the users
20MB of free data per day given that they visit the phones
marketplace where users are exposed to advertisements that
fund the access. Orange offers buyers of Mozilla’s smart phone
unlimited free Internet for a set period of time in several
African countries.
C. Basic Internet Foundation
The Basic Internet Foundation started its activities back
in 2010 for developing Internet access in Africa, following the
idea that information should be accessible to everyone. A series
of pilots were established in 2011, amongst others the Internet
access for the region and the University of Lisala (DRC).
Experiences from these pilots showed that the bandwidth
limited and costly satellite link was the biggest hurdle for
affordable Internet access.
Basic Internet thus introduced compressed text and pictures
as the core elements for Basic Information. Information is seen
as social, economic, political and cultural content depending
on the background of the reader, and its importance will
vary accordingly. Hence, non-discriminating access to Basic
Information and net neutrality are fundamental for the Basic
Internet solution. The solution allows any Internet provider,
being it a mobile or an ISP operator, to set up a system
where they can provide each user with free access to Basic
Information. Voucher sales covers operating costs and allows
end users to buy access to more data trafﬁc. As opposed to the
solutions described in Section II-B, the Basic Internet solution
is not dependent on speciﬁc operating systems or apps on the
users’ phones.
Basic Internet
 access
payed access
The Internet
Local Core Network 
Signaling
Local Access
Centralised core
Basic 
Information
Local
Information
Figure 1. The cost-effective Basic Internet Architecture
As data costs constitute a barrier from accessing mobile
data, the main focus of the Foundation is getting as much in-
formation as possible through a bandwidth-limited link. Some
examples of such low-availability links are satellite links and
congested mobile networks. The Foundation has implemented
a network architecture (see Figure 1) answering the need of a
low-cost local infrastructure and rapid deployment.
The Basic Internet network contains in its complete form:
a local core network with local information, a local network,
a centralised core, and the backhaul network/network termi-
nation. In areas where no Internet connection is available, the
network termination can be achieved through either a radio link
or a satellite connection. The solution provides high capacity
access to local content, payed access for Internet services, and
free access to Basic Information. Further elaborations on the
business models are given in section IV.
The next section describes the major challenges related to
information provisioning and trafﬁc shaping that allows for
Basic Internet access.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

III.
TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES
Currently, the technological department of the Basic In-
ternet Foundation is focused on solving two main challenges
related to capacity optimization and trafﬁc shaping: (i) the
notiﬁcation of information and (ii) trafﬁc recommendation.
The ﬁrst challenge is related to information provisioning
and the way information is best presented in bandwidth-limited
systems. Thus, we try to characterize information content
related to the amount of bits being used in the communication.
Instead of restricting content, we suggest to restrict content
types, e.g., to allow text and pictures, but dismiss videos.
However, both deﬁnition and technological implementations
are not straight forward. Taking the example of the resolution
and the size of a picture. Depending on the content of a picture,
a certain resolution and size is required to provide meaningful
information. This part of capacity optimization takes place in
the back-end of the Basic Internet system.
The http archive provides various measures of content of
web pages [11]. An average Web page has doubled in size
from 2012 to 2015, being 1.09 MB in 2012, and 2.1 MB in
2015. The space used by scripts on web pages is between 15
and 19%, while images account to slightly more than 60%. The
raise of video is documented ﬁrst time in 2015, accounting for
10% of the web size.
TABLE I. WEB SITE GROWTH AND CONTENT
1Jul2012
1Jul2013
1Jul2014
1Jul2015
av. web site [kB]
1090
1485
1829
2135
Images [kB]
684
909
1159
1348
Scripts [kB]
210
225
293
344
Video [kB]
204
Though the total size has doubled, there are remarkable dif-
ferences in size. Google.com uses only 90 kB, while Wikipedia
uses around 300 kB, both substantially lower than the 3.3 MB
used by the NYTimes.com. On thin lines, e.g., a satellite link
of 1 Mbps, a web page of 2.1 MB would load in 20 s, and
block the satellite capacity for other users.
Thus affordability requires reduction of information, which
can be achieved through removing content, content elements,
resizing images and compression of the whole web page.
Opera Mini is one of the best examples of a browser designed
primarily for mobile phones, smartphones and personal digital
assistants that can provide a maximum of information, even
though it has limited capacity in the network [12]. Statistics
from Opera point to an average of 340 pages/user, resulting in
an average of 4 MByte per month for users in Nairobi [13].
The second challenge is related to providing a better
foundation for app developers to make their apps adhere
to changing network conditions and the users’ limited data
plans by providing a trafﬁc recommender. Basic Internet will
be delivered to end users via WiFi hot spots or mobile
broadband. Most smart phones allow the users to limit the
apps from transferring large amounts of data when using
mobile data. However, when WiFi is available, these apps
usually do not consider the amount of data transferred, the
end-to-end throughput, or allow for limited trafﬁc proﬁles.
This easily results in high bandwidth usage and poor user
experience. The needs for better capacity usage in Basic
Internet access networks is one application area. Addressing
the bandwidth limitations is a second application area for the
trafﬁc recommender, as shown in these two scenarios:
A) The mobile unit perceives the WiFi as a high-capacity
link when indeed the back end is a low-capacity 2G or satellite
link limiting trafﬁc (see Figure 2).
Internet access
low capacity
Local Core 
and Access 
Local
content
Wiﬁ access
high capacity 
to local content
Figure 2. Bandwidth is limited by the low-capacity backhaul.
B) The WiFi AP and backhaul does indeed allow for high
trafﬁc, but the payment plan sets limitations. In the latter case,
a misguided app can end up downloading unnecessary data
worth a month’s quota unless it is informed that access to WiFi
is not the same as ”send as much as you like”. (see Figure 3).
Figure 3. Free/low-cost use up to a certain data amount, and then experience
full stop or high prices
A recent report by Morgan Stanley Research [14] describes
that more than 50% of network trafﬁc was initiated from web
browsers. However, the report also show that users spend more
than 80% of screen time in apps. These numbers indicate ﬁrst
of all that the browsers still constitute an important source of
trafﬁc, and that much network trafﬁc can be reduced through
adapting the browser. Secondly, there are large network trafﬁc
savings due to better guiding of apps.
In popular apps like Facebook and YouTube, further spec-
iﬁcation of bandwidth usage is available for deﬁning whether
videos should be started automatically or not, and in which
quality. However, these settings require that users are aware
that they can change these settings and also that they actually
use that opportunity. With an average of 26 apps per mobile
phone [15], we argue that the average users will not change
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

these settings dynamically enough to a) limit their bandwidth
usage as much as needed when on restricted networks nor b)
get the full experience when connected to a higher-capacity
access point without restrictions on bandwidth or cost. Table
II shows typical bandwidth usage with different app types. Our
proposal of a trafﬁc recommender can pave the way for a more
automated compliance with bandwidth restrictions.
TABLE II. NORMAL BANDWIDTH USAGE FOR TYPICAL
APPILCATIONS
Service
Trafﬁc
Web browsing
2.5 MB/min
Social Networks (1 Hour)
90MB
Video Streaming(i.e.YouTube) (1 Hour)
1125MB (720p)
Online Music, i.e. Spotify, 1 h
43.2MB (96kbps)
Mobile MMS with Video
100KB
Mobile SMS (1 message)
0.13KB
IV.
RESULTS AND IMPACT
Section I summarised the main challenges for information
provisioning to everyone. This section will focus on how
information provisioning and network-aware applications work
together to achieve the a digital society including everyone,
rather than enhancing the digital gap.
Results of a simpliﬁed model for providing information
over a satellite link are provided in Table III. For simpliﬁcation,
the costs per user are based only on the operational costs
of the satellite link. The numbers are based on a 1 Mbit/s
(Mbps) satellite link to Africa, with costs of 2000 US$/month,
12 h duty time, and a simpliﬁed linear distribution of the
trafﬁc. Table I in the previous section clearly shows the effect
of basic information and compression, allowing to provide
information at a satellite cost of half a dollar per month, given
the average use of compressed 4 MByte per user and month.
In comparison, a video transmission of 8 min, accounting to
50 MByte, would cost roughly 6 US$. Using a radio link or a
mobile network termination will signiﬁcantly reduce the cost,
and can drop the Basic Internet provision to lower than 0.1
US$/month.
TABLE III. INFORMATION PROVISIONING COSTS
Usage [MB]
Users/1 Mbps
costs/user [US$/month]
4
3996
0.5
20
799
3
50
320
6
The Basic Internet Core Network (Figure 4) is the one
responsible for the information optimization and supports traf-
ﬁc shaping, trafﬁc balancing, free access to basic information
and voucher-based access to full Internet including video and
gaming.
The enhanced infrastructure, as piloted in Kinshasa (DRC),
provides free access to Wikipedia and other educational sides
from Cedesurk [16]. The customer infrastructure includes a
local server, adding free-of-charge educational videos and
content. The pilot had 5 phases (I-V), where phases I to III had
the focus on integration of the centralised and the local core,
the access to local information, and the provision of vouchers
for the payed Internet access.
The major goal of the pilot was to bring the students up
to Internet users (see Figure
5), allowing them to use their
Figure 4. The Basic Internet central AAA and the Customer Equipment
own devices to search and use relevant content. The ﬁnal goal
is to leverage 90% of the students to be able to use the local
content. An additional goal is to get students become creator
of digital content, and digital services providers.
At the time of writing (March 2016) the ﬁrst phases were
concluded, and the conversion into an operational and self-
sustainable network operation is ongoing. This self-sustainable
network operation consists of (i) voucher sales for access
to Internet, and (ii) the provision of free access to Basic
Information. This free access is ﬁnanced by license fees, where
a certain percentage of the sold Internet capacity is used for
ordering bandwidth for Basic Internet.
Figure 5. The expected update of Internet access
The results of the pilot implementations verify that
•
A cost-effective Internet distribution is possible, pro-
viding a local core for roughly 400 US$, and of-the-
shelf access points.
•
The deployment leverage of students, using their own
devices for free access to (local) educational content.
•
Through the Basic Internet Infrastructure students can
become creators of digital content, and digital service
providers.
•
The service offer is complementary to conventional
telecom services, providing services to people who
cannot afford the access to the basic information.
Other actors like Google have dedicated resources for
building and helping the development of running wireless
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

networks in emerging markets for connecting more people to
the Internet [17]. The main concepts being provided by the
Basic Internet Foundation and others are services reaching
those who cannot access or cannot afford wireless Internet
services. In that way, the access provision is complimentary
to conventional Telecom services. Current activities include
the marketing trial in Kinshasa to address potential scalability
issues. Upcoming steps are pilots in selected African countries
in order to address the ecosystem for digital education. Further
steps include global alliances to reach out to countries seeing
the need for digital inclusion.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we addressed the needs for digital inclusion,
both in developing and developed economies. Findings related
to digital societies indicate that developing economies need
to address digitisation as the driver of economical growth.
What is common in both approaches is the need for an
information infrastructure. Such an information infrastructure
consists of low capacity (LC) services as a basic service for
their inhabitants, as well as network-aware applications.
A LC-service offer can be provided as part of a public
digital infrastructure, and through wireless as well as mobile
networks. They will provide an always on-line experience, and
thus reduce the digital gap. The LC-infrastructure is accompa-
nied with a pro-active recommender, using the mobile device
as decision maker. The recommender addresses technological
aspects like actual bandwidth and economical aspects like indi-
vidual capacity limits. Examples are provided how services can
be adjusted to bandwith-limited systems like LC-networks, to
individual data planes, and to combinations including network-
availability forecast and personal information needs.
The paper further presents the results from the pilot im-
plementation of LC-service provisioning in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC). The pilot proved the technical
viability of LC-service provisioning, and is transferred into
commercial operation following a novel business model.
REFERENCES
[1]
IETF - Internet Engineering Task Force. (1989, October) RFC 1122
- Requirements for Internet Hosts - Communication Layers, 1.1.2
Architectural Assumptions. Accessed 01Apr2016. [Online]. Available:
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1122
[2]
International Telecommunication Union - ICT Data and Statistics
Division, “ICT Facts & Figures,” May 2015, accessed 03Apr2016.
[Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/
facts/ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf
[3]
J.
Manyika,
A.
Cabral,
L.
Moodley,
S.
Moraje,
S.
Yeboah-Amankwah,
M.
Chui,
and
J.
Anthonyrajah,
“Lions
go
digital:
The
Internets
transformative
potential
in
Africa,”
November
2013,
accessed
01Apr2016.
[Online].
Available: http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high-tech/our-insights/
lions-go-digital-the-internets-transformative-potential-in-africa
[4]
GSMA, “The Mobile Economy report 2015 - Global,” 2015, accessed
03Apr2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/
GSMA Global Mobile Economy Report 2015.pdf
[5]
B. A. Lucini and D. Evans, “Mobile internet usage challenges in Asia —
awareness, literacy and local content,” July 2015, accessed 30Mar2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/2015/07/
mobile-internet-usage-challenges-in-asia-awareness-literacy-and-local-content/
513/
[6]
“Connect the world,” 2016, accessed 02Apr2016. [Online]. Available:
http://connecttheworld.one.org/
[7]
“Digital impact alliance,” accessed 01Apr2016. [Online]. Available:
http://digitalimpactalliance.org
[8]
Airtel
Media
Centre,
“Airtel
launches
airtel
zero:
A
win-win
platform
for
customers
and
marketers,”
02
2015,
accessed
02Apr2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.airtel.in/about-bharti/
media-centre/bharti-airtel-news/corporate/airtel+launches+-+airtel+
zero-+a+win-win+platform+for+customers+and+marketers
[9]
P.
Doval,
“Airtel
Zero,
Internet.org
against
net
neutrality,”
The
Times
of
India,
May
23
2015,
accessed
03Apr2016.
[Online]. Available: http://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/tech/tech-news/
Airtel-Zero-Internet-org-against-net-neutrality/articleshow/47391729.
cms
[10]
Internet.org,
“Participation
guidelines,”
accessed
01Apr2016.
[Online]. Available: https://developers.facebook.com/docs/internet-org/
participation-guidelines
[11]
“http
archive,”
accessed
03Apr2016.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//httparchive.org/interesting.php?a=All&l=Jul\%201\%202015
[12]
G. Duncan. (2006, 01) Opera mini ofﬁcially brings web to mobiles.
Accessed 03Apr2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.digitaltrends.
com/mobile/opera-mini-ofﬁcially-brings-web-to-mobiles/
[13]
Opera Software, “State of the mobile web report,” Online, 06 2011, ac-
cessed 03Apr2016. [Online]. Available: http://techloy.com/wp-content/
uploads/2011/07/opera-state-of-the-mobile-web-report-june-2011.pdf
[14]
Morgan Stanley Research, “Google: There’s an App for that...the
Browser,” Online, September 2015, accessed 02Apr2016.
[15]
Z. Fox, “The Average Smartphone User Downloads 25 Apps,”
Mashable,
Sept
2013,
accessed
29Mar2016.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://mashable.com/2013/09/05/most-apps-download-countries/
\#9aqOLOcy6Zqo
[16]
“CEDESURK, Centre de documentation de l’enseignement superieur,
universitaire et recherche a Kinshasa,” accessed 01Apr2016. [Online].
Available: http://cedesurk.cd/
[17]
A.
Efrati,
“Google
to
Fund,
Develop
Wireless
Networks
in
Emerging Markets,” The Wall Street Journal, Tech. Rep., 05 2013,
accessed 02Mar2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887323975004578503350402434918
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

