Usability Evaluation Using Eye Tracking for Iconographic Authentication on 
Mobile Devices  
 
Claudia de Andrade Tambascia, Ewerton Martins Menezes, Robson Eudes Duarte 
CPqD Foundation 
Campinas – SP, Brazil 
{claudiat, emenezes, robsond}@cpqd.com.br 
 
 
Abstract— This article aims to present the results of a usability 
evaluation for the use of iconographic authentication on mobile 
devices as a way to improve security aspects in handling 
information. This way of authentication was defined in a 
project called Multimodal Biometric and Iconographic 
Authentication for Mobile Devices. These assessments were 
carried out with eye tracking support tools as a means of 
proving the difficulty points and allow the design decision 
could be made more accurate to the application final purpose. 
Keywords-Usability evaluation; iconographic passwords; eye 
tracking observation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Considering that human brain recognizes and reminds 
visual 
information 
better 
than 
textual 
information 
[1][2][3][4], the usage of authentication mechanisms that 
explore the later rather than the former represent a new 
paradigm for safety and usability issues in the context of 
mobile devices due to increasing demands for safer and more 
flexible new ways of authentication.  
In this context, the iconographic authentication may be 
used to totally or partially lock the device, configuring one 
level of authentication, which can be then integrated to 
biometric techniques to increase safety to the process. 
A system for local iconographic authentication, where 
the password verification happens within the device, with no 
external database access has been proposed. Usability and 
accessibility issues must be addressed considering the 
multiplicity of user profiles, including those with little or no 
familiarity to computing interfaces, with disabilities or with 
low literacy. 
This paper will describe the methodology used to 
evaluate the usability of iconographic passwords on mobile 
devices, in the context of a Multimodal Biometric and 
Iconographic Authentication project [5], as well as 
presenting the results obtained taking into account aspects 
like ease of use and memorization, time spent for 
authentication and the strategies for password creation. This 
research is important to determine the viability and the 
benefits of iconographic passwords in this usage context.  
In the following sections, the concepts of iconography 
and usability applied to mobile devices, the prototype 
employed for iconographic passwords creation and usages, 
the methodology of evaluation, results obtained and final 
considerations will be presented. 
The section two will present graphical authentication 
concepts used in this project followed by section three that 
will present related works. The section four will present a 
prototype develop for iconographic passwords followed by 
section five with test methodology used. The section six will 
present the obtained results followed by section seven with 
some conclusions and future works. 
II. 
GRAPHICAL AUTHENTICATION 
Graphical authentication is a type of knowledge-based 
authentication that has been explored for over twelve years. 
It can be basically categorized in three groups [6]: (1) the 
recall-based authentication systems, in which the user is 
asked to recall and reproduce a secret drawing, (2) the cued-
recall systems, where the user has to remember, (3) and 
target specific locations within an image and the recognition-
based systems, which usually demand the users to memorize 
a group of images. 
As 
a 
recognition 
technique, 
the 
iconographic 
authentication demands less cognitive load than recalls 
techniques and tends to increase the usability, the security 
and the user performance, besides being specially appealing 
in the mobile context, where typewritten input is less 
common than pointing at the screen. 
While some recognition-based systems use faces [7], 
assuming that the brain has got a special ability to recognize 
them, other systems use abstract images [8], which are 
stronger from a security point of view, due to their difficulty 
of describing. Nevertheless, the use of icons brings a better 
compromise between usability and safety, once it facilitates 
mnemonic 
strategies 
and 
then 
consequently 
the 
memorization. 
The security level offered by such systems depends on 
many factors, such as the length of the repository available to 
the user, the password length, the input method, and the 
icons themselves which must ideally show similar 
probabilities of choice avoiding dictionary attacks. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
According to Nielsen and Mack [9], problems with 
usability found on an interface might be related to different 
aspects such as user difficulty in learning how to use a 
system; user delay to complete his/her tasks; deception of the 
user in operations caused by the system and non-attractive 
interfaces.  Often, the use of inadequate language causes 
intelligibility problems, which combined with the above 
117
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

aspects, further contribute to user dissatisfaction and 
interfering with the quality of experience. 
We can find in literature studies like the Jun Gong's one 
[10], which is based on Shneiderman’s “Golden Rules of 
Interface Design” that proposes a generic set of guidelines 
for mobile devices. In addition, it is possible to find main 
mobile manufacturers recommendations, but they usually 
cover specific cases [11][12], which evidences the lack of 
standards and consensus mobile usability field. 
To 
ensure 
effective 
application 
of 
iconographic 
authentication and to fulfill the user expectations, specific 
usability aspects for mobile environment, such as extremely 
dynamic context use and limited user attention, must be 
taken into account. Applications must be capable to start, 
stop and resume with little or no human effort, and also have 
to provide multiple feedbacks and be customized under user 
needs. 
The mobile devices present hardware limitations related 
to screen size, processing power and input methods. These 
facts draw attention to images and text size definition as well 
as buttons displayed on the interface, so the error and 
cognitive effort rates can be reduced, besides prioritize the 
choice of icons rather than text input.  
IV. 
PROTOTYPE FOR ICONOGRAPHIC PASSWORDS 
One of the main goals of the use of iconic passwords in 
process of authentication is to increase usability, assuming 
that the password memorization gets easier for the visual 
inclined users, and to ensure the user will keep this 
information in mind for a longer time. 
To evaluate iconographic aspects of the authentication 
process, such as, quality of icons, repertory length, password 
length and amount of icons displayed it was implemented a 
prototype that runs in an Android emulator. With this 
prototype it was possible to do tests in a conventional 
desktop using an eye tracker device and analyze the user 
visual behavior during password creation and usage. 
A repertory of seventy-two icons was considered as it is 
shown at Fig. 1. Each column was filled with a category of 
icons, totalizing twelve categories with six icons each. With 
the intention of reaching a balance between usability and 
security the order of the columns and the placement of the 
icons within the columns change at each interaction action. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Icons repertory considered in the prototype. 
The categories considered for the icons were fruits, 
animals, technological devices, and means of transportation, 
balls, sea elements, musical instruments, scholar material, 
smiles, banners, body parts and hats.  
The selection of such icons in each category was made 
after an analysis of possible strategies to help memorization 
of iconic passwords and, consequently, usability increase of 
iconographic authentication, without loss of mathematical 
security, as presented in [13].  
The first screen of the prototype allowed the user to 
choose the option of creating or using an iconographic 
password. It was possible to configure the password length, 
as shown at Fig. 2. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Prototype initial screen. 
Passwords were categorized in fixed lengths of four, six 
and eight icons and tests with five users for each of this 
category were defined, according to the methodology 
presented in the following section. 
V. 
TEST METHODOLOGY 
A. User selection and tests frequency 
The first step for the test realization was to determine the 
users that would participate on it as well as the frequency of 
the test sessions. 
According to [14], practitioners of usability recommend 
many different quantities of interviews, for several different 
reasons. For shipping products, it was recommend six 
interviews, for the following reasons: i) six one-hour 
interviews can be conducted in one calendar day; ii) testing 
six respondents allows you to identify trends. For this project 
five users were selected for each category of password.  
These users were divided into man and woman with 
under-thirty years old, thirty to forty-five year old and forty-
five years old or older, as showed in Fig. 3.  
118
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 3.  Summary of user profiles (gender, level of experience and age 
groups). 
Such division was necessary once the memorization was 
to be measured, which implied the need of considering 
different age groups. It was also taken into account previous 
experience with mobile devices, for it could influence the 
usability requirements. 
The users were separated into three groups, with five 
users each to optimize test sessions in a work day. After the 
four first interactions with the first group, the test sessions 
with group occurred. 
Since one of the main criteria to be evaluated will be the 
memorization of passwords after a period of time. It was 
defined that the test would happen during fifteen days 
according to the schedule presented at Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Tests schedule. 
The first use was composed by password creation and 
confirmation. If the user could not be able to remember the 
password the creation process was restarted. The second use 
had to be one day after its creation. The third use was 
planned to happen five days after password creation, 
encompassing a weekend that could influence password 
memorization. Finally, the fourth use had to happen nine 
days after password creation for it was a period considered 
enough for the password is forgotten in case the 
memorization strategy failed.  
B. Test configuration 
All the tests were performed in a usability laboratory 
composed of two rooms: the participant room and the 
observation room. The eye tracking device employed was 
Tobii Eye Tracker T60 [15], which consists of a seventeen 
inches display with cameras and embedded infrared sensors. 
The iconographic authentication prototype run on this 
display and the interaction method for selection and 
browsing was the mouse. 
 During the test execution users were asked to keep a 
distance of about sixty centimeters far from the display to 
enhance eye tracking quality. The screen recording was 
made together with viewpoints using gaze plots, heat maps, 
and audio. User’s expressions were also important in case the 
eye tracker might not capture relevant data. 
C. Results tabulation 
After the realization of four tests rounds, the user’s 
performance was grouped according to password length and 
compared with the time spent during the creation and usage. 
For passwords with four icons, a concern in the password 
creation was observed, which lead a better time performance 
in confirmation task as shown at Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Evolution of users performance for passwords with four icons. 
There was only one mistake by one user in his second 
interaction, identified by a black square in the following 
graphic shown at Fig. 5. Further interactions happened with 
no significant changes.  
For six icons passwords, the user’s behavior presented 
wider variation and more mistakes after the second 
interaction, as shown at Fig. 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Evolution of users performance for passwords with six icons. 
Password creation, compared with four icons password, 
was faster, which can explain why subsequent interactions 
lasted longer and had more mistake occurrences. 
Finally, for eight icons password, it was possible to 
observe the best performance in interactions after password 
creation, except for a user who quickly created the password 
119
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

and could not remember it in the subsequent interactions (as 
shown at Fig. 7.  
It is important to highlight that the mentioned user made 
a mistake in the second interaction and last a long at the third 
one, but after that he would not forget the password 
anymore, showing satisfactory result in the last interaction 
 
 
Figure 7.  Evolution of users performance for passwords with eight icons. 
D. Eye tracking data 
Based upon Duchowski's recommendations [16] for 
experiments involving eye tracking data it was observed the 
visual behavior of the participants during the iconographic 
password creation and use processes. 
The tests videos were separate into relevant video 
segments and using the gaze plot resource was possible to 
compare different ways of exploring visually the grid of 
icons. Three samples of interaction schemas by the time of 
password creation were shown in Fig. 8. The circles 
represent the visual fixation points and its size is 
proportional to the duration of the look. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (a)                             (b)                             (c) 
Figure 8.  Ways of eye interaction in password creation. 
Fig. 8 (a) presents the behavior of a user who analyzes 
the icons in a chaotic or random way, searching for 
familiarization among the images for the creation of the 
password. Fig. 8 (b) presents the behavior of a restrained 
user that what limits his/her field of view to two categories, 
aiming at easing password creation. Fig. 8 (c) presents the 
behavior of a methodical user who observes invariably all 
icons available on the prototype to make his/her choices. 
In all cases of user behavior it was possible to notice a 
concern in observing icons according to the strategies chosen 
to ease the memorization process. 
E. Memorization strategies 
After password creation, the test conductors tried to infer 
the strategy used to memorize it. At the end of the round of 
testes the users were briefly interviewed and asked about 
strategies used and face difficulties. 
During the test realization it was observed that 
iconographic passwords enable a wide universe of possible 
combinations which favors the use of most varied strategies 
of memorization and creation of passwords that are stronger 
and less susceptible to dictionary attack. 
The strategies are extremely dependents on the repertory 
of icons used and the amount of icons to be memorized and a 
direct relation among the level of difficulty perceived by 
each user was observed. 
Table 1 shows a categorization of strategies used by each 
participant of the tests.  
TABLE I.  
MEMORIZATION STRATEGIES 
Strategies 
Users 
Peer association 
5 
Creating history 
3 
Category elimination 
3 
Icons with similiar colors 
2 
Cultural issues 
2 
Memorization of individual icons 
2 
Visual affinity with icon 
2 
None specific 
9 
 
Have a fixed or a free password order strongly influences 
the creations strategies and for this reason it was not 
announced to the participants that the icons order did not 
matter on creation process. Even so, many users created and 
used the password in order, especially in the cases where 
there were associations of the icons to stories or sentences. 
Nonetheless, the larger the password was, the less users 
selected icons in the created order. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
Many performance factors such as the execution time, 
error rates, screen browsing and password memorization in a 
time interval were evaluated. 
In this context, passwords composed by four icons were 
the ones which presented best use performance, with lower 
error rates and time average in all interactions. The eight 
icons passwords were the ones with more occurrences of 
history creation as a way to improve the memorization and 
when histories were not created, the elimination of categories 
was used to reduce the possibilities and to ease the password 
creation. 
It was possible to observe that there is not a direct 
relation between the quantity of icons in a password and the 
time necessary for authentication, for users with different 
120
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

password 
sizes 
get 
very 
similar 
performance 
in 
authentication. However, the time spent to create passwords 
may influence directly its memorization, that is, users who 
spent more time creating the password had less error rates 
and tended to not forget it. 
This fact was ratified by testimonies of the users who 
have not remembered the password and assigned it to the 
lack of attention by the time of the password creation. It 
indicates the need of thinking about strategies which may 
favor the password memorization. 
As one of the premises of the test was that it did not need 
to be entered in the creation order, many users that had 
initially created strategies prioritizing the icons order 
finished by abstracting this strategy as the familiarization to 
the password increased. It corroborates researches that point 
as a usability factor the use of passwords by order and 
disorder, a different paradigm from the one used for 
traditional passwords. 
The choice frequency of the icons to compose the 
iconographic passwords was another important factor. It was 
possible to observe a regular distribution of the icons where 
the most and less chosen categories kept constant, as shown 
at Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Distribution of icons chosen by the participants. 
 The user preference for gaudy icons was also observed. 
The icons under technology devices category, which were 
the less chosen ones, had grey as predominant color. 
However, cultural and esthetic aspects had major choice 
weight. For this reason, icons such as Brazilian banner, 
soccer ball, red car, and cherry were chosen much more than 
orders. 
The appropriated feedback at the authentication proved to 
be a key factor to guide the user throughout the process. As 
observed in the survey the user needs to know how many 
icons have already been chosen, should be clear the number 
of screens, if there are more than one, and the current screen. 
This information must be presented to users in clear and non-
blocking way avoiding the slowdown of the authentication 
process. 
At last, it was identified a characteristic named “love at 
first sight” that consists of a situation in which the user 
thinks about choosing an icon to compose his/her password, 
but he/she does not do so. By the time of the authentication, 
the user then finds him/herself in doubt about chosen and 
will not know whether it compounds or not the password. 
This problem may be solved by considering a little training 
process just after password submission. This training may 
include, e.g., three authentication simulations before 
password registration. Alternatively, the system could itself 
choose the password for the user what, on the other hand, 
could reduce the usability of the solution. 
VII. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
As the use of icons to make authentication can be 
considered a new paradigm, it was adopted an initial 
approach considering six icons passwords to reach an 
adequate usability level and allowing the use of histories to 
ease memorization and reducing time spent for creation and 
use of the passwords. 
On the other hand, it is reasonable to claim that as the 
familiarity of the users to this new paradigm increases, the 
results of usability tests will be better either. And higher 
levels of security will also be reached. 
At last, in the performed tests it was also observed a 
preference for some icons instead of others, what may 
weaken the security of iconographic authentication. But there 
is a positive feature that reduces this risk which is the 
possibility of substituting some icons as well as letting to the 
system the definition of the password. 
Considering the security and usability aspects presented 
in the Sections II and III, some project decisions were 
established to lead the prototype implementation. In a 
general way, the users that made the usability tests with four 
icons did not only have a very good performance but also 
reported that it was easy to memorize only four icons. As for 
the six and eight password users, they had very 
heterogeneous test result and performance. 
The security comparison between iconographic and 
alphanumeric passwords in the evaluated scenarios, it was 
defined an initial password size of six icons within a 
repertory of ninety icons. This repertory was split into three 
screens with thirty icons each (six rows and five columns). 
The use of bigger repertory of icons impacts significantly in 
the usability of the solution, resulting in the increasing of the 
security not proportional to this impact, which makes 
impossible the use of a bigger repertory. As for the size of 
the password, it could be bigger, and it would result in an 
increment of security for the solution. But, as it deals with a 
paradigm change, it was decided to maintain initially the six 
icons for iconographic authentication. 
The tests performed in the context of this project have 
presented an analysis, which contributes for the definition of 
the iconographic authentication solution that will be used for 
implementation of the functional prototype of project 
Multimodal Biometric and Iconographic Authentication for 
Mobile Devices. 
Despite the missing standardization among the methods 
it’s possible to ensure that iconographic password systems 
meet the usability and security requirements. As a future 
work it’s necessary to provide a comparison between the 
Tecn
School
Hat
Sea
Inst. Mus
Body
Smiles
Animals
Fruits
Bols
Transp Flags
121
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

performance of iconographic and alphanumeric paradigms, 
besides test the proposed solution in real mobile devices with 
dynamic usage contexts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We express our gratitude to FUNTTEL – Fundo 
Nacional 
das 
Telecomunicações, 
do 
Ministério 
das 
Comunicações, which funds this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Kirkpatrick. “An experimental study of memory”. 
Psychological Review, 1894, 1:602-609. 
[2] S. Madigan. “Picture memory”. In J. Yuille, editor, “Imagery, 
Memory, and Cognition: Essays in Honor of Allan Paivio”, 
cap.3, pp.65-89. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1983. 
[3] A. Paivio, T. Rogers, and P.C. Smythe. “Why are pictures 
easier to recall than words?” Psychonomic Science, 1968, 
11(4):137-138. 
[4] R. Shepard. “Recognition memory for words, sentences, and 
pictures”. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 
1967,  6: pp. 156-163. 
[5] R.P.V. Violato, M.U. Neto, F.O. Simões, I.M.A. Ávila, M.A. 
Angeloni, T.F. Pereira, E.T. Nakamura, and R.S. Cividanes. 
“BIOMODAL 
Project 
– 
Multimodal 
Biometric 
Authentication and Image-Based Authentication for Mobile 
Devices”. 8th Sumer School for Advanced Studies on 
Biometrics for Secure Authentication. 2011. 
[6] R. Biddle, S. Chiasson, and P.C. Van Oorschot. “Graphical 
Passwords: Learning from the First Twelve Years”, School of 
Computer Science, Carleton University, 2011. 
[7] Passfaces Corporation. The Science Behind Passfaces. Write 
paper, 
http://www.realuser.com/enterprise/resources/white_ 
papers. htm, accessed May 2011. 
[8] R. Dhamija and A. Perrig. “Déjà Vu: A user study using 
imagens for authentication”. In 9th USENIX Security 
Symposium, 2000. 
[9] J. Nielsen and R. Mack. “Usability Inspection Methods.” New 
York, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,1994. 
[10] J. Gong and P. Tarasewich. “Guidelines for handheld mobile 
device interface design”. College of Computer and 
Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 
2004. 
[11] R. Blum, K. Khakzar, and W. Winzerling. “Mobile Design 
Guidelines in the Context of Retail Sales” Support Fulda 
University of Applied Sciences. Germany, 2008. 
[12] S. Chan, X. Fang, J. Brzezinski, Y. Zhou, X. Shuang, and L. 
Jean. “Usability For Mobile Commerce Across Multiple Form 
Factors”. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 3, 
no. 3, 2002. 
[13] I.M.A. Avila, “Estratégias Mnemônicas para Senhas Icônicas”, 
Abril de 2011. 
[14] S. Weiss, “Handheld Usability”, Ed. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 
New York, 2002. 
[15] Tobii Eye Tracking. “Screen based eye tracking - Tobii T60 
& 
T120”. 
http://www.tobii.com/en/analysis-and-research/ 
global/products/hardware/tobii-t60t120-eye-tracker/, accessed 
May 2011. 
[16] A. Duchowski. “Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and 
Practice”, Springer, 2nd edition, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

