Development of a Context-Aware Information System for Baseball Service 
 
 
Young-Tae Sohn, Jae Kwan Kim, Myon-Woong Park 
Center for Bionics 
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) 
Seoul, Korea 
{ytsohn, kimjk, myon}@kist.re.kr 
Jae Kwon Lim, Soo-Hong Lee 
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering 
Yonsei University  
Seoul, Korea 
{ljk1225, shleee}@yonsei.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—A context-awareness is one of the important issues 
for developing an intelligent information service system in 
order to provide the information most useful for the users. In 
this paper, a context-aware information service system for 
baseball game is described. To recognize the context of 
baseball play, a contextual knowledge model is suggested. An 
‘observation point’ concept is also introduced to provide 
baseball information effectively and proactively. A proto-type 
context-aware 
information 
service 
system 
has 
been 
implemented on smart phone, and evaluated in the aspects of 
usefulness and appropriateness. The system was appreciated in 
understanding over the progress and immersion of the match. 
Keywords-context-awareness; contextual knowledge model;  
information service; observation point 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Rapid 
and 
remarkable 
progresses 
in 
computing 
environment such as World Wide Web and powerful yet 
affordable server systems enable the application programs to 
provide more intelligent and proactive information services. 
Software agent is usually the kernel of those information 
services, and intelligent agents for information services have 
been developed to satisfy user’s requirement and to provide 
practical services in many different domains such as finance, 
traffic, e-health  [6][7][8]. Among those agents, the agent for 
context-aware information service is supposed to recognize 
not only the current situation of the information content and 
user, but also the changes of their situation, in order to 
supply the information most useful for the user at the 
contextual aspect. The recognition of the situation is based 
on the overall assessment about all the related factors such as 
context of content, user location, surrounding objects, 
environmental conditions, and their semantic relations. As a 
consequence, for the recognition of the situation, contextual 
knowledge models and reasoning techniques based on 
ontology concept have drawn many attentions, and reported 
as highly effective [5][10][11]. For the representation of 
situation, the changes over time should be considered as one 
of the important factors since the agent needs to adapt to the 
dynamically changing situation and corrects its behavior 
[3][4]. These changes are even more significant in the case 
of the context-aware information service for baseball game.  
Baseball game continues couple of hours, and the 
situation consisted of many factors like pitcher, batter, runner, 
inning, out count, ball count, etc. keeps changing. At every 
change, game audience might be interested in specific 
information through which the progress of the game is 
predicted. For the simplicity, in the rest of this article we 
refer to these kind of information as ‘observation points 
(OP)’. There can be many observation points relevant to the 
specific situation of the baseball game. In addition, each 
audience might be interested in different observation points 
according to his or her knowledge of baseball game. For 
instance, the record on the stolen base of a runner might be 
more interesting than the hitting average of a batter if the 
runner is on the first base with out-count one at late inning 
while both team scored nil. In the broadcasting of baseball 
game, even though some observation points are usually 
provided by commentator, these information are only the 
commentator’s observation points, so that likely to fail to 
satisfy every TV audience. Moreover, the commentator’s 
observation points are very limited as the commentator 
should prepare the observation points before the specific 
situation take place. Currently, several mobile information 
services for baseball game have been developed and 
commercialized [9][12]. These services, however, focused 
on providing the current status of a game and live video clips. 
In this paper, we investigate the use of a software agent 
which can systematically provide the observation points at 
the specific situation of baseball play in order to address the 
above-mentioned problem. The agent was regarded as the 
kernel of artifact being capable of playing the role of 
commentator and recommending proactively the observation 
points suitable for the context of game as shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual  diagram of the intended information service. 
107
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

For the inference of the observation points at the specific 
situation of baseball play, a contextual knowledge model 
(‘Context-OP Ontology Model’ in Figure 1) representing the 
relations between contextual factors and observation points 
of baseball play is suggested. All the possible observation 
points at the specific situation of baseball play are collected 
from the interviews with baseball experts. Also, the records 
of players are gathered manually, and statistically managed 
to be linked with the observation points in the contextual 
knowledge model. Each situation of baseball play is entered 
by game recorder as a play event defined with situation 
factors. The agent has been implemented as a context-aware 
information service on a smart phone, which becomes the 
powerful platform for mobile internet services and the most 
useful personal assistant for watching baseball game. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
describes the context-awareness and functional requirement 
for information services. Section 3 illustrates the functional 
structure and its role of the proposed context–aware 
information service for baseball game. Section 4 explains the 
contextual knowledge model used for recognition of 
situation and inferring observation points. Section 5 
discusses the service platform and a proto-type mobile 
application of the developed information service system. 
Section 6 sums up the work and concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
CONTEXT-AWARE INFORMATION SERVICE 
As the agent needs to recognize current situation and 
recommend information appropriate for the context, it 
requires number of functionalities such as context-awareness, 
inference of matching items, information retrieval, and 
priority indexing (see Figure 2) [1][2]. For the context-
awareness, the formalization of the contextual factors 
defining the situation of the target content is necessary. The 
recognized contextual factors can be represented in a 
formalized context model by applying ontology technology. 
The function to recognize and assess current context by 
analyzing the model is identified as context recognition. 
Clear definition on the contextual elements is necessary for 
context-awareness. Moreover, grouping of the elements and 
converting them into knowledge are also necessary. Once 
current context is recognized, the agent refers to the 
knowledge model and infers the information appropriate for 
the context. The knowledge model defines context element 
and information element for generating the relations between 
two elements in knowledge map. Then, the agent retrieves 
the specific information relevant to the context from the 
database and supplies it to the user. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Functions required for a context-aware information service. 
III. 
CONTEXT-AWARE INFORMATION SERVICE FOR 
WATCHING BASEBALL GAME 
There are various records in baseball game as often 
referred as the game of data. They are commonly provided 
by caster or commentator. However, inevitably the service is 
uni-directional and limited in quality and quantity in many 
cases. Introduction of the ‘observation point’, and 
proactively providing the observation point and relevant 
statistics in suitable timing by the system would improve the 
service and add the zest to watching the game. The 
observation point means the group of the player’s record and 
interesting information relevant to the current context of 
baseball play, which attracts audience’s interest. The system 
structure of the context-aware information service applied to 
the baseball game watching is depicted in Figure 3. The role 
of each module on the structure diagram is introduced, and 
the flow from context recognition to providing observation 
points is explained in this section. 
Provisioning of observation points starts when a play-
event occurs, that means the change of the situation in 
baseball game. The event is recorded by game recorder 
through the interface as shown on Figure 4, and analyzed to 
match to the context model, which is then stored in the ‘Play-
Event DB’. The server process (i.e. agent) regularly checks 
the change of content in the ‘Play-Event DB’. In case of any 
changes detected, the agent recognizes the current context   
through the ‘Context Recognition Module’, and extracts 
observation points relevant to the context. Then, the 
observation points are served through the user interface. The 
extraction of the observation points is carried out in the 
‘Observation Point Inference Module’ by inferring the 
‘Context-Observation Point Ontology Model’ representing 
the relations between context and observation points. The 
agent extracts all the instances of observation points matched 
to the context. Then, detail information of each extracted 
observation points are retrieved from the ‘Observation Point 
DB’. As shown in Figure 5, the instance of the observation 
point has the name of the related database table, name of 
column, searching constraints, etc. as the ‘Related Data’ 
properties. The details of each observation points are stored 
in the database through ‘Player Stats Analysis Module’ when 
the players’ records are imported. 
 
 
Figure 3.  System structure of the context-aware information service for 
watching baseball game. 
108
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 4.  User interface for recording play event. 
Also, a weight value is given to each observation point 
instance in order for comparing the importance of the 
observation points. The inferred observation points are sorted 
in the order of weight values given to the observation points. 
Finally, the derived observation points are changed into 
XML files, and provided to user in the ‘Web Interface 
Module’. Through this integrated process, the agent 
proactively provides users with situation relevant observation 
points of baseball game, and users are able to get interesting 
information. 
 
IV. 
CONTEXTUAL KNOWLEDGE MODEL FOR INFERENCE 
OF OBSERVATION POINTS 
The structure of the contextual knowledge model for the 
representation of the relations between context and 
observation points is shown in Figure 5. The model consists 
of 2 classes for representing the change of context, and 2 
classes for representing the relation between observation 
points. Also, the relation between context and observation 
point is represented in order to infer the observation point 
relevant to the current context. This relation is one-to-many 
relation as the one observation point might be relevant to 
many contexts. Moreover, an additional class, ‘Additional 
OP’, is introduced to represent the related multiple 
observation points. The context class is defined with 
contextual factors of baseball play, and the observation point 
class has a weight value and properties used for retrieval of 
detail information. In the context class, contextual factors are 
grouped to be recognized according to the data type property. 
Inning, runner, count, score difference, etc. are groups in 
high level. Inning has inning number and top/bottom as 
lower elements. This ontology model has been modeled in 
the way of contexts that can be specifically represented with 
these grouping elements by using Protégé as shown in Figure 
6. The context with a series of events can be represented 
since the context class contains the relation with the previous 
context. The change in context along with the progress of 
events can be expressed as the sequence, which is controlled 
with ‘previous context number’. The agent can identify the 
contextual change over time according to the representation 
defined in the model. Variety of the observation points might 
have been derived since the change of context over time can 
be expressed and the agent is able to recognize the contextual 
changes. 
 
Figure 5.  Structure of the Contextual Knowledge Model. 
 
Figure 6.  Ontology Modeling of Knowledge Model using Protégé. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION  
A proto-type information service system for providing 
observation points and the relevant information during the 
baseball play has been realized in order to assess the 
usability of the context based information agent. The system 
has been implemented in the server/client structure based on 
internet as shown on Figure 7. The near real-time play event 
on a game in progress and the video stream of the game are 
supplied to the server at the ball park. The observation points 
related to current situation are derived and indexed by the 
agent according to the level of relevance. The observation 
points and related statistics are stored along with the current 
video stream, and these are supplied to the client on request.  
As an example, iPhone has been used as the client device 
for mobile service. A client App has been developed, which 
can supply video stream of the baseball game, observation 
points, game progress information, player information, etc. 
through the user interface as shown on Figure 8. The App 
regularly requests the server for the observation points along 
with the timing of the video streaming of a game. The game 
situation and the player information are supplied only on 
demand from user. 
109
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 7.  Implementation platform for the proto-type information service 
system. 
 
Figure 8.  Examples of baseball information service on the client App. 
Only top three of the suggested observation points are 
displayed at the bottom considering screen size of smart 
phone. Once any of the observation points is selected by the 
user, the relevant data are displayed on the top of the screen. 
The information is overlaid on the video streaming of the 
ball game.  
The system has been applied to the baseball games of 
Korean Series 2010, and evaluated in the aspects of 
usefulness of the service and appropriateness of the 
suggested observation points. The evaluation was carried out 
by using questionnaire survey from 70 university students 
after watching a baseball game through the system. They 
liked baseball game and known baseball knowledge quite 
well. Figure 9 shows the result of evaluation. Almost 90% 
users expressed positive opinions in the usefulness, and over 
80% users thought the suggested observation points were 
helpful to understand the progress of the game. Therefore, it 
is enough to suggest that the information service might be 
enhance the understanding over the progress of the match, 
and increase the interest and immersion in the game.  
However, some users mentioned the lack of the variety of 
observation points, caused by the interface of the proto-type 
application. The interface is designed for display only top 
three observation points because of the small screen of the 
device. Therefore, this issue might be resolved by modifying 
the interface through which the user can search the suggested 
observation points. Personalization of the observation points 
might be another resolution of the issue.  
 
Figure 9.  Evaluation results of the proto-type  information service system 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION 
In this work, an intelligent information service system 
for baseball game has been implemented as a context based 
information service agent. Recording interface for the 
acquisition of the progress information of baseball game and 
for the context modeling has also been designed. An 
ontology model has been structured for being aware of 
contextual change over time. The ontology is also designed 
for parsing data to knowledge and extracting observation 
points. The observation points which is the representation of 
groups of the information appealing to the user at a certain 
context are listed in the order of the relative importance and 
displayed on the mobile device as shown on Figure 8. 
The implemented proto-type system satisfactorily offered 
information at every change of the situation while the system 
was applied to the real match of Korean Baseball League. In 
an actual situation, when runners on the first and third base at 
the out count one, for instance, the system suggested the 
possibility of hit, base steal, and double play. Once the 
possibility of double play was selected, the record of the 
batter on double play against the pitcher during the season 
was displayed with some other information. As the 
observation points were listed first, and the record 
information in detail was supplied only when the observation 
point was selected, the service was appreciated non-invasive 
and timely. The scope of this agent can be expanded to other 
domains like tourism, e-learning, and e-health since the 
ontology can be modified and expanded as required.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Anhalt, et al., “Toward context-aware computing: 
experiences and lessons”, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 16, 
no. 3, pp. 38–46, 2001. 
[2] A. K. Dey, G. D. Abowd, and D. Salber, “Conceptual 
Framework and a Toolkit for Supporting the Rigid 
Prototyping 
of 
Context-Aware 
Applications”, 
Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 16, pp. 97–106, 2001. 
[3] X. Wang, J. S. Dong, and C. Y. Chin, “Semantic space: an 
infrastructure for smart spaces”, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 32-39, 2004. 
[4] H. Chen, et al., “Intelligent agents meet the semantic web in 
smart space”, IEEE Internaet Computing, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 
69–79, 2004. 
[5] O. Brdiczka, J. L. Crowley, and P. Reignier, “Learning 
Situation Models for Providing Context-Aware Services”, 
Proc. HCI 2007, LNCS, vol. 4555, pp. 23-32, 2007. 
110
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

[6] M. Ganzha, et al., “Adaptive Information Provisioning in an 
Agent-Based 
Virtual 
Organization: 
Preliminary 
Considerations”, Proc. the SYNASC Conference, IEEE CS 
Press, pp. 235–241, 2007. 
[7] H. Chang, J. Roh, and S. Cho, “Context based Use Control 
Model for Mobile Device”, Society of Information Science 
Journal, vol. 14, pp. 63-70, 2008. 
[8] A. Marco, et al., “Location-based services for elderly and 
disable people”, Computer Communications, vol. 31, pp. 
1055–1066, 2008. 
[9] F. Bently and M. Groble, “TuVista: Meeting the Multimedia 
Needs of Mobile Sports Fans”, Proc. MM’09 ACM 
Multimedia Conference, pp. 471-480, 2009. 
[10] C. Bettini, O. Brdiczka, and D. Riboni, “A survey of context 
modeling and reasoning techniques”, Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 161-180, 2010. 
[11] D. Riboni and C. Bettini, “COSAR: hybrid reasoning for 
context-aware activity recognition”, Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 15, no. 3, pp 379-395, 2011. 
[12] Major League Baseball (MLB), “Gameday”, http://www.mlb. 
com, 30.07.2011 
 
111
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

