Authentication with Keystroke Dynamics on
Touchscreen Keypads - Effect of different N-Graph
Combinations
Matthias Trojahn
Mobile-Devices & Auto-ID Technologies
Volkswagen AG
Wolfsburg, Germany
matthias.trojahn@volkswagen.de
Florian Arndt
Client Design & Management
Volkswagen AG
Wolfsburg, Germany
ﬂorian.arndt1@volkswagen.de
Frank Ortmeier
Computer Systems in Engineering
Otto-von-Guericke University
Magdeburg, Germany
frank.ortmeier@ovgu.de
Abstract—The security and access protection on mobile de-
vices have become an important topic due to the increasing
amount of personal and sensitive data stored on these devices.
The traditional security techniques based on PIN (Personal
Identiﬁcation Number)-input are insufﬁcient and do not corre-
spond to the present password standards. An authentication
with usage of keystroke behavior could increase the security and
a lot of research has been published based on traditional PC
keypads. Keystroke behavior on touchscreen keypads, as they are
nowadays installed on smartphones, enables adding additional
features for the authentication. For example, pressure, size or
exact coordinates of keystroke can be used. The focus of this
paper is that several time differences (e.g. digraph) are examined
and checked for suitability for a keystroke authentication. For
that, data of 152 subjects were classiﬁed. With additional features
of the touchscreen, an error rate of false rejected persons of only
4.59% and false accepted persons of only 4.19% could be reached.
Keywords—keystroke authentication; n-graph; mobile devices;
capacitive display
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smartphones are not only used to phone or write a SMS
(Short Message Service), especially, with the introduction of
the iPhone in the year 2007. This also increases the number
of security relevant data and information which are stored on
the smartphone or provided through applications. This could
be private online banking data, passwords or conﬁdential com-
pany documents, e.g., extracted from E-Mail attachments [1],
[2]. In addition, personal data (e.g., GPS (Global Positioning
System) data) have an increasingly important signiﬁcance [3].
For this reason, the security on smartphones established
itself as an important topic, especially the access protection [4],
[5]. The challenge is to protect and to avoid economic damage
for the enterprise data and assets [6]. However, traditional PIN
authentication can easily be defeated and does not conform to
present password standards [7]. The standard goes for a two-
factor-authentication. In this case, in addition to the password,
a possession of a person (e.g., bank card, token) [7] are
required.
Greater security can be achieved by another (biometric)
authentication factor, such as keystroke dynamics. Components
are on the one hand an item that the person knows (password)
and on the other an element that is the person himself/herself
(keystroke) [8]. Other biometric methods are possible but are
not discussed in this paper.
Keystroke has the advantage that no additional hardware
is needed because the standard keyboard of the device can be
used. However, special software is required for reading the
typing behavior. This is, in terms of sustainability, an advan-
tage over other authentication methods which need additional
hardware, such as card reader for user ID’s [9]. Furthermore,
by the lack of additional hardware, the ease of use in keystroke
dynamics as an authentication method is less affected [10].
For the optimal case, the user does not notice the procedure
because the password entry and the keystroke is checked
automatically by the software.
Through the use of a biometric modality additional per-
sonal information are stored. Especially, the methods for face
recognition cannot be used every time because of religious or
cultural reasons [11]. A further complication is that the storage
of this data includes an agreement by the user (e.g., German
Federal Privacy Act
4a [12]). Saving the typing behavior is
seen by many people, however, as less critical, which is a
further advantage of the process [1].
In this study, we will discuss keystroke dynamics on
touchscreen devices and examine it by an experiment. It will
be shown which features or feature combination is suitable
for authentication. In addition, we added the pressure and size
during typing to see whether it is improving the authentication.
The pressure is also used in handwriting recognition [13]. For
this purpose, different combinations of properties of typing
habits are selected and examined for their suitability for
authentication.
In this paper, we will ﬁrst describe in Section 2 some
basic backgrounds regarding biometric authentication and then
the hypotheses. In Section 3, the experimental design will be
explained. After this, the results are shown and discussed in
Section 4. In the last Section, we will give a conclusion with
some implications and future work.
II.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
In this section, we will describe some basics about biomet-
ric authentication. Then, we present our hypotheses.
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 1: Events between pressing different keys
A. Biometric Authentication
Keystroke dynamics is a biometric characteristic of a
person which describes the rhythm how a person is typing on
a keyboard [14]. It can be used like other biometric methods
to identify a person. Basically, the rhythm is a characteristic
which can be calculated by different aspects, but, in most cases,
at least the time differences were used [15].
As seen in Figure 1, different time differences can be used
for authentication. In general, two different types of events
can be recorded: The ﬁrst represents the length of time a key
is pressed which is time between pressing and releasing a
key (residence time) (option A). On the other hand, the time
period can be calculated by the striking of keys (the release
is here ignored). The time difference between two keystrokes,
deﬁned by the two press events, is also called movement time
(option B). Both variants of the time period can be called
digraph [16]. Furthermore, combinations of more than two
keystrokes can be used. A time difference between n key events
is called n-graph [15]. In addition to the use of digraphs in
many publications, the combination of three key presses are
also utilized-the trigraph (option C) [17]. In general, all the
values for n > 1 are possible in order to determine the time
differences. The higher the values the smaller the information
which can be extracted by the input because an average over
n events is used.
In this paper, the term digraph is used for a better under-
standing only for the movement time between two keystrokes.
We use the residence time to denote the duration of time a key
is pressed.
All these features are used to determine a person uniquely.
Various classiﬁers are used to compare these characteristics.
As classiﬁers, in most cases, a statistical classiﬁer (such as
distance measures) [18] or neural networks [19], [20] are used.
The authentication process will be measured using different
error rates (mismatches). Two possible errors can be distin-
guished: First, the false acceptance rate (FAR), which indicates
the proportion of falsely accepted people:
FAR =
number of false acceptances
number of impostor identification attempts
(1)
On the other side is the false rejection rate (FRR), which
represents how many users are rejected by the system although
they are the right person:
FRR =
number of false rejections
number of enrollee identification attempts
(2)
The last value is the Equal Error Rate (EER) which
represents the point where FAR and FRR are the same [21].
The keystroke dynamics on conventional keyboards have
been part of numerous scientiﬁc papers. The residence time
[22], [23], [24] as well as the movement time [14], [25], [26]
have been examined as a feature for typing behavior. Besides
these features, the number of input errors can be used as
well [2]. The time characteristics and the error rate are the
most widely used features that can be extracted by computer
keyboards [27].
Even the typing behavior for authentication on mobile
phone keypads has been investigated [1], [2]. Here, devices
were used which have 12 hardware buttons.
In the survey paper of Banerjee [28] a good overview was
given about different experiments and their results. Here, only
a set of these studies will be presented.
Basically, all publications are related to the keyboard of a
computer or to a mobile device with 12 keys. The error rates
are inﬂuenced by the number of subjects, the classiﬁer and the
features. The ﬁrst study about keystroke dynamics on computer
keyboards were done by Umpress et al. (FAR: 11.7%, FRR:
5.8%) [18] and Joyce (FAR: 0.3%, FRR: 16.4% with 33
subjects) [29] and used only digraphs and a statistical classiﬁer.
Later on Ord and Furnell [30] used a neuronal network for 14
subjects and get a result of 9.9% for the FAR and 30.0% for
the FRR.
Also on the mobile device (12-key layout) good results
were published by Clarke et al. [31] with an EER of 15.2% and
Zahid et al. [2] had a FAR of 11% and a FRR of 9.22%. Both
experiments used neuronal network and had 25 respectively
30 subjects.
One of the ﬁrst studies with a touchscreen device was done
by Saevanee [32] who used the pressure of the ﬁngertip. With
the ten subjects he achieved an accuracy rate of 99%.
In addition to the pressure feature, the size of the ﬁngertip
was used by Trojahn and Ortmeier [33]. They analyzed the
typing behavior of 35 subjects (FAR: 9.53%, FRR: 5.88%).
B. Hypotheses
The existing publications are mainly dealing with the
computer or 12-key mobile phone keyboard. On touchscreen
keyboards which are now installed in nearly every smartphone,
besides the well-known features, other possibilities for typing
behavior can be read. Examples for this are the pressure or
the size of the ﬁngertip during typing. These can be used in
combination with the time values for authentication [34].
For this, we want to prove that an authentication with a
touchscreen keyboard is possible. We identiﬁed therefore the
following hypotheses:
H1: If an authentication is done with a touchscreen key-
board using n-graph the same error rates can be achieved
compared with the existing keystroke dynamics studies.
H2: If the model is extended with additional features
(pressure and size of the ﬁnger) the error rates can be reduced.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
The subjects were asked to enter a predeﬁned, 17-digit
passphrase ten times in a row on a smartphone. A Samsung
Galaxy Nexus has been used as a test device. A soft keyboard
was implemented to deactivate uppercase and the alignment
changes. In addition, an application was designed to read the
keystroke. Other descriptive data were also queried about the
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
younger
than 20
20 to 29
30 to 39
40 to 49
older than
49
number of persons 
age in years 
women with experience
women without experience
men with experience
men without experience
Fig. 2: Experience structure in combination with age and sex
self-written application and stored on the mobile device in a
ﬁle.
In the experiment, 101 out of the 152 participants already
had prior experience with a touchscreen keyboard. Out of these
101 persons, 62% had experience with the Android operating
system. On average, the subjects use their smartphone 1.7
hours per day. The experiment lasted 15 to 20 minutes per
subject. More detailed information of the data set can be found
in Figure 2.
In order to avoid the user familiarity with the device affect
the results of the test, the subjects had time to practice with the
equipment and get used to the keyboard. In addition, they had
to enter a test text before the real test started. All ten repetitions
of the password had to be entered correctly. Otherwise, this
entry attempt was rejected and the user had to enter the same
password a second time. Afterwards, the data set was divided
into test and evaluation data. Every third input of a test person
had been assigned to the evaluation data and the remaining part
to the training data. This means that per subject seven inputs
are used for the training data and three were used as evaluation
data. This mutual selection was continued for further inputs
and was done to reduce the fault which is created the rising
learning curve.
The recorded raw data include all interactions (events) with
the keyboard: Press and release buttons and movements on the
screen. For each event, the date and the code of the pressed
key are stored as well.
In the present study, different combinations of button
presses and different n-graph (digraph and trigraph) for their
suitability for authentication are examined. First, the individual
features are calculated and in the later course fused to represent
the ability of combinations (no weights between the features).
Since at each authentication attempt, the tip pattern shows
up slight differences and entry errors are made, it is important
to smooth the differences. Therefore, a classiﬁcation method
(statistical classiﬁer using K-Means) was used with brute force
to ﬁlter the best solutions. Two ﬁlters were implemented in
front of the classiﬁer. At ﬁrst, the data were divided into test
and evaluation data (ratio 7:3). After this, for each feature
the two largest values were extracted and from the rest an
average value was calculated for the model. The individual
evaluation data were compared to this average. The value has
to be within a speciﬁed tolerance of the average. At the end,
it was decided based on the individual values and a predeﬁned
threshold value, whether it is a person or not.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For the ﬁrst evaluation of the recorded data, the single
features have been extracted. In addition, the residence time of
the keystroke, the digraph and trigraph were calculated. The
following ﬁgures show the extracted data for ﬁve randomly
selected subjects for better representation (analogue [35], [31]).
Figure 3 shows the data of the digraph and Figure 4 represents
the data of the retention time.
The amount of data which can be extracted depends on
the number of letters and on which feature is selected. For the
residence time there can be extracted one more than for the
digraph. That means for a 17 letter key phrase 16 values can
be extracted.
In Figure 3 it can be seen that for the randomly selected
subjects the average duration is in most cases more constant
over the time. The same applies for the whole record. However,
there are considerable differences among the people, even in
the general speed and then between single digraphs of one
subject. The differences between individuals can be explained
on the basis of experience. So the ﬁfth person, for example,
has a lot of experience while subject number four has no
experience. This explains also the high values for each digraph
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 3: Digraph for ﬁve different users
for the fourth person. The slight movement time for all subjects
at ﬁfth time event is explained by the fact that the password
has the same letter twice in a row. In this situation the person
does not need to search next letter. The described features of
the typing behavior of the ﬁve randomly chosen test subjects
can be observed in all subjects of the experiment in similar
ways.
The rhythm of the residence time (Figure 4), however, is
less constant between individuals and also between different
attempts by one person. Furthermore, the residence time tends
to be less than the movement time. A person needs more time
to press the next key than to hold a key. Also the differences in
experience of a touchscreen are less noticeable at the residence.
Fig. 4: Residence time for ﬁve different subjects
Table I shows the results of the classiﬁcation as average
values of all 152 subjects with the statistical process with
several different combinations of the extracted features.
To simplify the comparison, the results shown in Table I
are generated by comparing the sum of the error rates for each
feature selection. This approach was already selected to deter-
TABLE I: Results for different feature combinations
FAR (in %)
FRR (in %)
Selection of features
8.03
12.3
residence time
12.66
11.64
digraph (two different keys)
13.63
33.33
trigraph (three different keys)
9.28
6.72
residence time + digraph
10.01
10.98
residence time + trigraph
10.02
13.77
digraph + trigraph
6.61
8.03
residence time + digraph + trigraph
mine the best error ratio for the individual characteristics and
allows obtaining the respective minima. A comparison of the
ﬁrst two lines indicates that the assumption that the residence
time is more suitable than the digraph is correct. With the
feature digraph, for example, one of nine people is incorrectly
accepted and only every 15th attempt to authenticate someone
is falsely rejected. The feature of the trigraph is even less
appropriate and gives worse results than the feature over two
keystrokes.
Better results can be achieved with combinations of fea-
tures. Then the sum of the lowest error rate is achieved with
the combination of residence time digraph. This combination
was, therefore, continued to be used in order to merge with
add-on features.
Very good results have been achieved with the additional
features of the pressure, the size of the key presses, the
exact coordinates while pressing and releasing the ﬁnger. A
combination of residence time and digraph and additional
features (e.g., pressure and size) can provided a FAR of 4.19%
and a FRR of 4.59%. This means that an authentication on
the basis of these characteristics, only every 24th person is
falsely accepted and only every 22th attempt is falsely rejected.
In comparison to the general password approach where each
attempt is successful it is an improvement. Altogether this
means, the traditional feature (duration, digraph and trigraph)
can be improved with the new features.
V.
CONCLUSION
This section will give a summary and will describe some
limitations as well as some future work.
A. Summary and Implications
Due to the increasing number of sensitive, personal in-
formation on mobile devices, the security and access control
settings on these devices are becoming an increasingly impor-
tant issue. A higher security is, however, in accordance with
normal additional hardware less user friendly, for example, by
stringent password standards (more letter or alphanumeric).
Based on the study, it was shown that an authentication
using the keystroke is possible on touchscreens and enhances
the security. Furthermore, the study has shown an attack on
the authentication. Each subject used the same password (so
it was known by everyone) in this situation only the behavior
was important. It showed the same impact as they were already
achieved in previous scientiﬁc publications with conventional
keyboards (see Table 1). By adding further features of the
typing behavior the error ratio can be reduced more.
In most combinations of features the calculated FRR was
smaller than the FAR. In particular, in the best case when using
the pressure and the size of the keystrokes, in addition, the
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

FRR was particularly low. This is desirable in mobile devices,
since the ease of use is desired [36] to ensure acceptance of the
procedure. If the correct user is rejected too often incorrectly,
the method is not usable.
B. Limitation and Future Work
Like most studies, some limitations exist in our study that
should be mentioned at this point.
The experiment was conducted in a controlled environment,
which reduces many outside inﬂuences in the observation.
These include stress and negative emotions to the subject,
during the authentication process on their smartphone, which
may affect the keystroke dynamics [37]. Even movements and
orientation of the phone can affect the typing and should be
observed in further studies [38]. This includes whether the
person is sitting, lying or standing.
The presented method for authentication of mobile devices
can be applied to all devices with a touchscreen. Thereby, it
is possible to use the method for mobile devices such as the
smart grid environment [39], [40]. Examples of this would be
that a technician who is equipped with a mobile device (stores
sensitive data) secures his device against unauthorized access
in case of theft. For this, a two-factor authentication using the
keystroke would be a useful and user-friendly solution that can
be used without any additional hardware and thus lower costs.
Future research could aim to achieve a further reducing
of the error rates by including the factors that the user no
longer perceives the additional authentication. In addition, it
could be tested how much inﬂuence a rhythm during typing has
[41], like using own pauses or music melodies during typing.
This could greatly increase the usability and acceptance of the
process.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Buchoux and N. L. Clarke, “Deployment of keystroke analysis on a
smartphone,” in Proceedings of the 6th Australian Information Security
& Management Conference, 2008.
[2]
S. Zahid, M. Shahzad, S. A. Khayam, and M. Farooq, “Keystroke-
based user identiﬁcation on smart phones,” in Proceedings of the 12th
International Symposium on Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection,
ser. RAID ’09.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 224–
243.
[3]
C. Bettini, X. S. Wang, and S. Jajodia, “Protecting privacy against
location-based personal identiﬁcation,” in In 2nd VLDB Workshop SDM,
2005, pp. 185–199.
[4]
X. Ni, Z. Yang, X. Bai, A. Champion, and D. Xuan, “Diffuser: Dif-
ferentiated user access control on smartphones,” in Mobile Adhoc and
Sensor Systems, 2009. MASS ’09. IEEE 6th International Conference,
2009, pp. 1012–1017.
[5]
I. Muslukhov, “Survey: Data protection in smartphones against physical
threats,” 2012.
[6]
P. M. Milligan and D. Hutcheson, “Business risks and security assess-
ment for mobile devices,” in Proceedings of the 8th Conference on 8th
WSEAS Int. Conference on Mathematics and Computers in Business and
Economics - Volume 8, ser. MCBE’07. Stevens Point, Wisconsin, USA:
World Scientiﬁc and Engineering Academy and Society (WSEAS),
2007, pp. 189–193.
[7]
T.-Y. Chang, C.-J. Tsai, and J.-H. Lin, “A graphical-based password
keystroke dynamic authentication system for touch screen handheld
mobile devices,” in Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 85, no. 5,
2012, pp. 1157–1165.
[8]
C. Vielhauer, Biometric User Authentication for IT Security: From
Fundamentals to Handwriting, ser. Advances in information security.
Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[9]
D. Zissis and D. Lekkas, “Addressing cloud computing security issues,”
in Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 28.
Elsevier Science
Publishers B. V, 2000, pp. 583–592.
[10]
S. Sonkamble, R. Thool, and B. Sonkamble, “Survey of biometric
recognition systems and their applications,” in Journal of Theoretical
and Applied Information Technology, 2010.
[11]
A. Esposito, “Debunking some myths about biometric authentication,”
in arXiv preprint arXiv:1203.0333, 2012.
[12]
S. Simitis, “Bundesdatenschutzgesetz: Bdsg,” Bundesbeauftragte f¨ur
den Datenschutz und die Informationsfreiheit, Baden-Baden, Tech.
Rep., 2011.
[13]
A. Makrushin, T. Scheidat, and C. Vielhauer, “Handwriting biometrics:
feature selection based improvements in authentication and hash gener-
ation accuracy,” in Proceedings of the COST 2101 European conference
on Biometrics and ID management, ser. BioID’11.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 37–48.
[14]
F. Monrose and A. D. Rubin, “Authentication via keystroke dynamics,”
in Proceedings of the 4th ACM conference on Computer and commu-
nications security, ser. CCS ’97.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1997,
pp. 48–56.
[15]
R. Moskovitch, C. Feher, A. Messerman, N. Kirschnick, T. Mustaﬁc,
A. Camtepe, B. L¨ohlein, U. Heister, S. M¨oller, L. Rokach, and
Y. Elovici, “Identity theft, computers and behavioral biometrics,” in
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE international conference on Intelligence
and security informatics, ser. ISI’09.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE
Press, 2009, pp. 155–160.
[16]
C. Epp, M. Lippold, and R. L. Mandryk, “Identifying emotional
states using keystroke dynamics,” in Proceedings of the 2011 annual
conference on Human factors in computing systems, ser. CHI ’11. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 715–724.
[17]
M. Chora´s and P. Mroczkowski, “Keystroke dynamics for biometrics
identiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the 8th international conference on
Adaptive and Natural Computing Algorithms, Part II, ser. ICANNGA
’07.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 424–431.
[18]
D. Umphress and G. Williams, “Identity veriﬁcation through keyboard
characteristics,” in International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
vol. 23, 1985, pp. 263–273.
[19]
F. A. Alsulaiman, J. Cha, and A. Saddik, “User identiﬁcation based
on handwritten signatures with haptic information,” in Proceedings of
the 6th international conference on Haptics: Perception, Devices and
Scenarios, ser. EuroHaptics ’08.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag,
2008, pp. 114–121.
[20]
M. Faundez-zanuy, “Study of a committee of neural networks for
biometric hand-geometry recognition,” in Neural Networks, 2005, pp.
1180 – 1187.
[21]
S. Karatzouni and N. L. Clarke, “Keystroke analysis for thumb-based
keyboards on mobile devices,” in New Approaches for Security, Privacy
and Trust in Complex Environments, Proceedings of the IFIP TC-11
22nd International Information Security Conference (SEC 2007), 14-
16 May 2007, Sandton, South Africa, ser. IFIP, H. S. Venter, M. M.
Eloff, L. Labuschagne, J. H. P. Eloff, and R. v. Solms, Eds., vol. 232.
Springer, 2007, pp. 253–263.
[22]
S. Cho, C. Han, D. H. Han, and H.-I. Kim, “Web-based keystroke
dynamics identity veriﬁcation using neural network,” in Journal of
Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 10, no. 4,
2000, pp. 295–307.
[23]
D.-T. Lin, “Computer-access authentication with neural network based
keystroke identity veriﬁcation,” in Neural Networks,1997., International
Conference on, vol. 1, 1997, pp. 174 –178.
[24]
M. Obaidat and B. Sadoun, “Veriﬁcation of computer users using
keystroke dynamics,” in Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cy-
bernetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 27, no. 2, 1997, pp. 261–269.
[25]
M. Obaidat and D. Macchiarolo, “An online neural network system for
computer access security,” in Industrial Electronics, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 40, no. 2, 1993, pp. 235–242.
[26]
S. Haider, A. Abbas, and A. Zaidi, “A multi-technique approach for
user identiﬁcation through keystroke dynamics,” in Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, 2000 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 2, 2000, pp.
1336 –1341.
[27]
D. Shanmugapriya and G. Padmavathi, “A survey of biometric keystroke
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

dynamics: Approaches, security and challenges,” in International Jour-
nal of Computer Science and Information Security, vol. 5, no. 1, 2009.
[28]
S. Banerjee and D. Woodard, “Biometric authentication and identi-
ﬁcation using keystroke dynamics: A survey,” in Journal of Pattern
Recognition Research, vol. 7, 2012, pp. 116–139.
[29]
R. Joyce and G. Gupta, “Identity authentication based on keystroke
latencies,” in Commun. ACM, vol. 33.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
1990, pp. 168–176.
[30]
T. Ord and S. Furnell, “User authentication for keypad-based devices
using keystroke analysis,” in Proc. 2nd Int’l Network Conf. (INC 2000),
2000, pp. 263–272.
[31]
N. L. Clarke and S. M. Furnell, “Authenticating mobile phone users
using keystroke analysis,” in Int. J. Inf. Secur, vol. 6.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 1–14.
[32]
H. Saevanee and P. Bhattarakosol, “Authenticating user using keystroke
dynamics and ﬁnger pressure,” in Consumer Communications and
Networking Conference, 2009. 6th IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–2.
[33]
M. Trojahn and F. Ortmeier, “Biometric authentication through a
virtual keyboard for smartphones,” in International Journal of Computer
Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT), 2012.
[34]
A. Ross and A. K. Jain, “Information fusion in biometrics,” in Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 24, 2003, pp. 2115–2125.
[35]
E. Lau, X. Liu, C. Xiao, and X. Yu, “Enhanced user authentication
through keystroke biometrics,” in Computer and Network Security,
2004.
[36]
A. Peacock, X. Ke, and M. Wilkerson, “Typing patterns: A key to user
identiﬁcation,” in IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 2, no. 5, 2004, pp.
40–47.
[37]
D. N. Glaser, B. C. Tatum, D. M. Nebeker, R. C. Sorenson, and
J. R. Aiello, “Workload and social support: Effects on performance
and stress,” in Human Performance, vol. 12, no. 2, 1999, pp. 155–176.
[38]
Z. Syed, S. Banerjee, Qi Cheng, and B. Cukic, “Effects of user habit-
uation in keystroke dynamics on password security policy,” in High-
Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), 2011 IEEE 13th International
Symposium on, 2011, pp. 352–359.
[39]
H. Khurana, M. Hadley, Ning Lu, and D. Frincke, “Smart-grid security
issues,” in Security & Privacy, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 1, 2010, pp. 81–85.
[40]
A. Metke and R. Ekl, “Security technology for smart grid networks,”
in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 1, 2010, pp. 99–107.
[41]
S.-s. Hwang, S. Cho, and S. Park, “Keystroke dynamics-based authen-
tication for mobile devices,” in Computers & Security, vol. 28, no. 1–2,
2009, pp. 85–93.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

