Towards a Framework for Designing Secure Mobile Enterprise Applications 
Basel Hasan 
Department of Computing Science 
Oldenburg University  
Oldenburg, Germany 
 basel.hasan@uni-oldenburg.de 
 Jorge Marx Gómez 
Department of Computing Science 
Oldenburg University 
Oldenburg, Germany 
 jorge.marx.gomez@uni-oldenburg.de 
 Joachim Kurzhöfer 
 AS Inpro GmbH  
 Lufthansa Systems 
Oldenburg, Germany 
 joachim.kurzhoefer@lhsystems.com
Abstract— Mobile devices like smartphones and tablets are not 
only designed for private use, but also for business use as well. 
Mobile solutions, such as mobile enterprise resource planning 
and mobile business intelligence, are nowadays becoming more 
common. However, without strong consideration of security, 
especially in mobile devices, these solutions would be very 
risky. Enterprise data are classified in security levels, in which 
security threats and countermeasures are grouped. These lev-
els indicate the fulfillment degree of the security objectives in 
each group. From the enterprise point of view, the boundaries 
between these levels concerning the mobile devices are not 
clear. In this research, risk analysis with focus on mobile de-
vices is conducted and a framework to design secure Mobile 
Enterprise Applications (MEAs) is developed. This framework 
supports developers in the decision making process when de-
signing secure MEAs side by side with promoting the trustwor-
thy usage of mobile devices in business sectors. 
Keywords: Enterprise Mobility; MEAs; Security; Risk 
Analysis; User Acceptance.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobile technologies and applications have been greatly 
improved in the recent few years making the ubiquitous 
communications a growing reality [1, 2]. It comes to the 
enterprise mobility concept when the enterprise integrates 
mobile technologies into its existing IT infrastructure besides 
giving its employees better possibilities to work on the move 
effectively [3]. Nowadays, the talk is about MEAs (e.g., 
Mobility for SAP, which enables mobile access to SAP® 
CRM, SAP® ERP and various SAP® Workflows via 
smartphones and tablets [4]).  
  MEAs are characterized according to A. Giessmann et 
al. [5] as: “[…] applications that are designed for and are 
operated on mobile devices and which facilitate business 
users within core and/or support processes of their enterpris-
es”. They are classified into five categories: mobile broad-
cast, mobile information, mobile transaction, mobile opera-
tion, and mobile collaboration applications [6]. Mobile 
broadcast category facilitates large-scale information broad-
cast, such as advertisement and promotions. Mobile infor-
mation category provides information requested by the mo-
bile user, such as job vacancies and timetables. Mobile trans-
action category eases and executes transactions, such as e-
transactions and the transactions of Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM). Mobile operation category covers 
internal operational aspects of the business, such as invento-
ry management and Supply Chain Management (SCM). 
Finally, mobile collaboration category supports collaboration 
among employees and various functional units. The pro-
posed framework takes these five aforementioned categories 
into consideration.  
Mobility gives enterprises many advantages. It enables 
the ubiquitous real-time access to critical business infor-
mation which supports the managers to meet strategic deci-
sions in shorter time to satisfy their customers’ need [3, 7]. 
Consequently, mobility increases worker productivity and 
reduces business operation costs [7]. Due to these ad-
vantages, enterprises demand mobility and flexibility of their 
workers as inevitable success factors [8]. However, the in-
volvement of mobile technologies and applications has also 
brought new security challenges and risks, particularly on 
mobile devices. 
In this paper, the most relevant definition of information 
security is taken from the ISO/IEC 17799 standard that de-
fined it as follows: “Information security is the protection of 
information from a wide range of threat in order to ensure 
business continuity, minimize business risk, and maximize 
return on investments and business opportunities” [9].  Alt-
hough mobile devices face a wide range of potential security 
threats [8, 10, 11], mobile applications are developed often 
without implementing proper security measures [2]. The 
major security threats related to mobile environments in-
clude, but are not limited to: device loss/theft, data intercep-
tion and tampering, malware, vulnerable applications, com-
promised devices, mobile operation system vulnerability, 
and social engineering. Some of these threats are similar to 
those in a traditional desktop environment. However, the 
more prominent threats in mobile environments are malware, 
data interception and tampering, and device loss or theft [2].  
Due to the small size and high portability of mobile devices, 
they can easily get lost or stolen [12]. According to McAfee 
report, 40% of the surveyed companies had mobile devices 
lost or stolen and half of these lost/stolen devices contained 
critical business data [13]. Consequently, unauthorized third 
parties can make use of these critical data [8]. Moreover, the 
disclosure of such kind of data might have harmful conse-
quences on enterprise like financial loss or even the loss of 
its reputation [10, 14]. 
Integrating mobile devices into enterprises means that 
sensitive business data could be accessed everywhere and 
anytime using mobile devices. Conforming to Bring-Your-
Own-Device (BYOD) trend [15], where mobile workers use 
their personal mobile devices, critical and sensitive business 
information might be located on these personal devices. The 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

more sensitive the data are the higher security level is re-
quired. In general, to achieve a certain level of security, ap-
propriate countermeasures must be applied and that might 
restrict the use of mobile devices. Therefore, mobile workers 
have to accept all the restrictions on their own devices. As a 
result, mobile security solutions must hold a balance between 
the private and business use. 
The key concern in MEAs is the mobile application secu-
rity including information confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability. This comes from the issue that communications 
via mobile networks, in which security threats can take place 
anywhere, are more vulnerable to be attacked than wired 
networks [6]. Kelton Research had shown that 75% of 250 
surveyed companies, which their revenues are up to $100M 
across the United States and United Kingdom, considered 
security the major factor that prevents companies from 
adopting mobile applications [7]. 
The research in this paper focusses on security issues in 
mobile environments with emphasis on MEAs.  It represents 
a work in progress to discuss and investigate new ways to-
wards building a framework for secure MEAs. The rest of 
this paper is structured as follows: Section II presents the 
research problem. Then, the adopted research process is 
presented in Section III.  Section IV proposes and presents 
the details of the secure mobile enterprise applications design 
framework. Related work is then presented in Section V. 
Finally, the paper sums up with a conclusion and future work 
in Section VI. 
II. 
PROBLEM DEFINITION 
Mobile devices are exposed to a wide range of threats 
that have to be countered. The vital point in this regard is 
finding and applying appropriate security countermeasures. 
According to T. Wright et al. [16]: due to the significant 
resource constrains of the mobile devices, many security 
countermeasures from traditional computing domains are not 
translated well to mobile devices. In other words, simply 
porting standard information security tools from stationary 
computers, notebooks, and server domains to mobile devices 
is unlikely to be effective [16–18]. In order to achieve a cer-
tain level of security, the mobile user has to accept some 
restrictions on the features and functions supported by mo-
bile devices. Examples for such restrictions are: specifying 
exactly which applications are permitted to be installed, or 
restricting the types of connections that a third-party applica-
tion can establish. The employee, who wants to access very 
critical information using mobile devices, might accept a 
wide range of limitations. However, these limitations might 
be not accepted in the case that the employee doesn’t need to 
access this critical information. Generally, a high level of 
security might be reached on mobile devices by setting a 
high level of restrictions. On the other hand, this might min-
imize user acceptance and satisfaction factors. Thus, there is 
an opposition between security and usability. A balance be-
tween them should be carefully taken into account [19]. 
Achieving a balance between smart phone effective security 
countermeasures and employee acceptance is a serious di-
lemma for CIOs and security professionals [17]. 
Another important issue to be considered in this context 
is the types of enterprise data. They are normally classified 
into private or public data. The importance of private data 
can be defined by the level of security attached to it [20]. 
Particularly, with regard to the use of MEAs, experts agree 
that the boundaries between security levels are not clear in 
the business sectors. Based on the aforementioned security-
related problems, the research behind this paper tries to an-
swer the following research questions:  
 
To what extent can MEAs be protected? 
 
Which security level can be applied?  
 
Which security countermeasures can achieve the ap-
plied security levels? 
 
Which data, under which conditions, can enterprises 
transfer to mobile devices?  
 
What are the accompanied consequences or re-
strictions? 
 
Will these consequences be accepted by the mobile 
users? 
The following section gives a short overview of the re-
search process followed by this work and briefly explains the 
main outcomes behind the conducted research. 
III. 
RESEARCH PROCESS 
This work follows the Information Systems Research 
Framework that is based on seven guidelines provided by A. 
Hevner et al. [21]. The work began with the business needs, 
to define the problem and to ensure that this research meets 
the goal of relevance. This is achieved by the discussion with 
the experts in the German Lufthansa systems company. The 
discussion revealed that enterprises need to execute business 
processes remotely from the mobile devices in a known level 
of security. The research relies on existing knowledge base 
within two main fields namely information security and en-
terprise mobility. The suitable use of this knowledge ensures 
the rigor of the research. The expected artifact of this re-
search is a generic framework that helps developers to design 
secure MEAs. Based on that, this research mainly aims at 
coming up with a framework to guide developers in design-
ing secure mobile applications. The whole process encom-
passes conducting risk analysis in the mobile environments 
and classifying MEAs in security levels considering the user 
acceptance of the consequences arising in each level. Even-
tually, using this framework will make the boundaries be-
tween these levels as clear as possible. This framework is 
considered as the artifact behind the conducted research. To 
evaluate this artifact, it will be firstly implemented as a proof 
of concept. After that, the resulted prototype will be evaluat-
ed descriptively by constructing detailed scenarios around 
the artifact to demonstrate its utility. 
IV. 
FRAMEWORK TO DESIGN SECURE MOBILE 
 ENTERPRISE APPLICATIONS  
To answer the abovementioned research-related ques-
tions, risk analysis has been conducted to determine the po-
tential mobile security threats and the applicable security 
countermeasures which overcome them. As a method to 
analyze the risks, assessment methodology provided by G. 
Stoneburner et al. [22] is employed, taking into consideration 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

the following three standards: ISO/IEC 27005 [23], BSI-
Standard 100-3 [24] and Risk Management Guide for Infor-
mation Technology Systems [22]. In the proposed frame-
work, each threat defines a mobile security issue that might 
be overcome by applying one or more security countermeas-
ures called “alternatives”. The security issues and their alter-
natives are determined based on literature and best practices. 
The alternatives define a set of reusable decisions made in 
previous projects that concern mobile application develop-
ment. The proposed framework is developed based on Ser-
vice-Oriented Architecture Decision Modeling (SOAD) 
framework [25], which aims at enhancing the SOA’s archi-
tectural style. To reuse the structure of SOAD framework in 
security and enterprise mobility domains, adaptations have to 
be made to come up with a new framework, which introduc-
es a security knowledge base to support developers in de-
signing the Security Concept (SC) of MEAs. 
A. Structure Overview 
The structure consists of three models namely: the guid-
ance model, the decision model and the meta-model. This 
structure is depicted in Fig. 1. The framework’s meta-model 
is instantiated into two models: the guidance model to identi-
fy required decisions and the decision model to log the deci-
sion that had been made [25]. The relations between these 
two models are the tailoring and harvesting decision log. 
These relations are considered similar to those used in the 
SOAD framework. On the one hand, the tailoring relation 
initiates the creation of the decision model. This relation 
represents an activity in which the developer of a MEA se-
lects the relevant security threats and its alternatives (security 
countermeasures) to build a decision model that forms the 
security concept of MEA. On the other hand, the harvesting 
decision log relation is about feeding information regarding 
the decision (or result) made in the decision model back to 
the guidance model to get it refined in the next version. 
B. The Guidance Model 
As illustrated in Fig. 1, this model contains a list of secu-
rity issues that are already identified during the risk analysis 
process. A security issue informs the developer that a partic-
ular security threat exists and a decision is needed. Each 
threat is accompanied with its likelihood of occurrence and 
harm consequences on the enterprise. According to G. 
Stoneburner et al. [22], three likelihood levels: high, medi-
um, and low are defined based on the threat-source motiva-
tion and capability, nature of the vulnerability besides the 
existence and effectiveness of current security countermeas-
ures. Each security issue has a reference to one or more al-
ternatives along with their consequences on the mobile user 
and known uses in the previous mobile applications. The 
mobile user acceptance of those consequences is a very im-
portant factor to be considered during MEAs design. Evi-
dently, it is insufficient to use a strong technical solution that 
enhances the security when such solution doesn’t satisfy the 
user. User acceptance scale can take one of these five values: 
strongly accepted, accepted, neutral, rejected, and strongly 
rejected. This model is enhanced with a security evaluation 
method to classify MEAs in security levels as well. 
Framework’s Meta-model
Guidance Model
Risk Analysis
Mobile Security Issues (Threats)
 (decisions required)
Alternative
 (potential security countermeasures)
Consequences on User
User Acceptance 
Decision Model
(Security Concept)
InstantiatedInto
Implemanted Solution
 (decision made)
Chosen 
Alternatives
Justification
Tailor guidance
 model into 
dicision model
Harvest decision
log for next 
version of 
guidance model
InstantiatedInto
Security Evaluation
Known Uses
Mobile Security Issues (Threat) 
(open and resolved)
Alternative
 (considered security countermeasures)
Consequencen on user
User Acceptance 
Known Uses
Security 
Level
Likelihood 
of Occurrence
Consequences 
on Enterprise 
Likelihood 
of Occurrence
Consequences 
on Enterprise 
Decision loop
Security Level
 
Figure 1.  Structure Overview of the proposed Framework  
(adapted from O. Zimmermann [25]) 
C. The Decision Model 
The decision model is created in a tailoring step, which 
might involve deleting irrelevant security issues, adding new 
issues and enhancing relevant ones. After selecting the rele-
vant security threats and one alternative for each threat, the 
MEAs is evaluated and classified into a specific security 
level. If the resulted security level does not meet the security 
requirements, other alternatives can be selected. Therefore, a 
decision loop is enabled to select other alternatives. Ending 
the loop means that the decision has been made. This deci-
sion (the lower right corner of Fig. 1) contains the chosen 
alternatives along with justification and security level. After 
tailoring the guidance model into a decision model, the deci-
sion model can feed information about the made decision 
(result) back to the guidance model in a formal or informal 
lessons-learned review. The new mobile security issues, 
which were not considered in the guidance model, besides 
the enhanced ones could be harvested and integrated back to 
the guidance model to improve it in the next version. 
D. The Meta-model 
The meta-model of the proposed framework is shown in 
Fig. 2 as a UML class diagram. The determined threats dur-
ing risk analysis are described in the entity Threat and classi-
fied into ThreatGroup.  Each threat is solved by one or more 
alternatives which are described in the entity Alternative. 
 
-id: Integer
-name: String
-description: String
-…
-------------------------
ThreatGroup
-id: Integer
-name: String
-description: String
-userAcceptance: String
-…
-------------------------------
Consequence
isSolvedBy
-id: Integer
-name: String
-securityLevel: String
-description: String
-securityConcept:
 ImplementedSolution
-…
+evaluate(parameters)
+getUserAcceptanceStatus
  (parameters)
-----------------------------------
SecurityEvaluation
-id: Integer
-name: String
-consequenceOnUser:
 Consequence
-…
-----------------------------
-id: Integer
-name: String
-description: String
-consequencesOnEnterprise:
 String
-likelihood: String
-…
-------------------------------------
-id: Integer
-name: String
-threats: Threat[n]
-alternatives: Alternative[0..n]
-…
----------------------------------------
ImplementedSolution
-contains
-has
- overcomes
- classifies
- chooses
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
1
1
1
Alternative
Threat
 
Figure 2.  The Framework’s Meta-model  
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The consequences caused by the alternatives and their 
user acceptance are described in two entities namely: Conse-
quences and UserAcceptance respectively. The selected 
threats and their chosen alternative are grouped in the Im-
plementedSolution entity which represents the security con-
cept of the MEA.  At the end, this security concept is classi-
fied into security levels provided in SecurityLevel entity.   
V. 
RELATED WORK 
Based on an adapted version of SOAD framework, a 
guidance model to architect secure mobile applications has 
been created [12]. This model supports decision making 
process and covers security-related architectural issues dur-
ing architecting mobile applications. However, in that work, 
risk analysis is not conducted and the research behind this 
paper considered such analysis as a vital prerequisite to ad-
dress and understand all security issues in the mobile envi-
ronment. A framework to develop MEAs has been presented 
in [6] to offer a systematic solution for the development and 
maintenance of mobile application, but it has just highlighted 
the security as a major concern for the enterprise in develop-
ing mobile application without providing more in-depth 
analysis about it. With regard to security knowledge in the 
field of software engineering, security patterns are often 
essential. Security patterns are basically built from best prac-
tices and help to solve recurring security problems.  Howev-
er, security patterns don’t support developers in making a 
proper design decision even if the available patterns can 
cover all security-related issues [26]. This work addresses 
such challenge by providing more concrete details about 
each security-related aspect so that the developers will al-
ways have enough arguments to make a proper design deci-
sion while designing their secure MEAs. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the ways towards building a generic 
framework to design secure MEAs. Insights to the internal 
structure of the framework and its building models had been 
detailed as well. This framework is supposed to provide 
enterprises and MEAs developers with a security knowledge 
base needed to comprehend the mobile security issues and 
their accompanied challenges. Furthermore, this framework 
will help developers in making proper decisions and keeping 
a balance between mobile security solutions and user ac-
ceptance. Such comprehension tries to make the mobile se-
curity issues and challenges as transparent as possible to 
promote the trustworthy use of mobile technologies in busi-
ness sectors. The study will be furthered to provide a fully-
fledged framework with step-by-step guidelines to show how 
it works. As a proof of concept, a prototype will be imple-
mented to show the practicability of the overall concept.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Basole and W. Rouse, “Mobile Enterprise Readiness and 
Transformation,” Idea Group Inc. IGI, 2006. 
[2] A. Jain and D. Shanbhag, “Addressing Security and Privacy Risks in 
Mobile Applications,” IT Professional, 2012, pp. 28–33. 
[3] J. Ranjan and V. Bhatnagar, “A holistic framework for mCRM – data 
mining perspective,” Information Management & Computer Security, 
2009, pp. 151–165. 
[4] ISEC7 - Mobility for SAP - Mobile SAP. Available: http://www.isec7 
.com/en/products/mobile-sap, [retrieved: Sep, 2013]. 
[5] A. Giessmann, K. Stanoevska Slabeva, and B. de Visser, “Mobile 
Enterprise Applications--Current State and Future Directions,” 45th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Science (HICSS), 2012, 
pp. 1363–1372. 
[6] B. Unhelkar and S. Murugesan, “The Enterprise Mobile Applications 
Development Framework,” IT Professional, 2010, pp. 33-39. 
[7] H. Hurley, E. Lai, and L. Piquet, Enterprise mobility guide 2011. 
Sybase, 2011. 
[8] K. Detken, G. Diederich, and S. Heuser, “Sichere Plattform zur 
Smartphone-Anbindung auf Basis von TNC,” D.A.CH Security 2011: 
Bestandsaufnahme, Konzepte, Anwendungen und Perspektiven; 
syssec Verlag; Oldenburg, 2011. 
[9] ISO/IEC 17799, Information technology - Security techniques - Code 
of practice for information security management. ISO/IEC, 2005. 
[10] W. Copeland and C. C. Chiang, “Securing Enterprise Mobile 
Information,” Computer, Consumer and Control (IS3C). IEEE, 2012, 
pp. 80–83. 
[11] L. Qing and G. Clark, “Mobile Security: A Look Ahead,” Security & 
Privacy. IEEE, 2013, pp. 78–81. 
[12] W. Schwittek, A. Diermann, and S. Eicker, “A Guidance Model for 
Architecting Secure Mobile Applications,” in 4th International ICST 
Conference on Security and Privacy in Mobile Information and 
Communication Systems, Springer, 2012, pp.12-23. 
[13] R. Power, “Mobility and Security: Dazzling Opportunities, Profound 
Challenges”. Available: http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/ 
rp-cylab-mobile-security.pdf, [retrieved: Sep, 2013].  
[14] BSI, BSI-Standard 100-1: Information Security Management Systems 
(ISMS). Available: https://www.bsi.bund.de/, [retrieved: Sep, 2013]. 
[15] P. Rubens, “4 Steps to Securing Mobile Devices and Apps in the 
Workplace”. 
Available: 
http://www.esecurityplanet.com/mobile-
security/4-steps-to-securing-mobile-devices-and-apps-in-the-
workplace-mdm-byod.html, [retrieved: Sep, 2013]. 
[16] T. Wright and C. Poellabauer, “Improved Mobile Device Security 
through Privacy Risk Assessment and Visualization,” Data 
Engineering 
Workshops 
(ICDEW), 
IEEE 
28th 
International 
Conference on, 2012, pp. 255–258. 
[17] M. Landman, “Managing smart phone security risks,” Information 
Security Curriculum Development Conference, ACM, 2010, pp. 
145‐155. 
[18] J. Oberheide and F. Jahanian, “When mobile is harder than fixed (and 
vice 
versa): 
demystifying 
security 
challenges 
in 
mobile 
environments,” Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Mobile 
Computing Systems & Applications. ACM, 2010, pp. 43‐48. 
[19] N. Daswani, C. Kern, and A. Kesavan, Foundations of security: What 
every programmer needs to know. Apress, 2007. 
[20] A. Tsolkas and K. Schmidt, Rollen und Berechtigungskonzepte: 
Ansätze für das Identity- und Access-Management im Unternehmen, 
1st ed. Wiesbaden: Vieweg + Teubner, 2010. 
[21] A. Hevner, S. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in 
information systems research,” MIS Quarterly, 2004, pp. 75‐105. 
[22] G. Stoneburner, A. Goguen, and A. Feringa, “SP 800-30. Risk 
Management Guide for Information Technology Systems.” Technical 
Report, NIST, 2002. 
[23] S. 
Klipper, 
“ISO/IEC 
27005,” 
Information 
Security 
Risk 
Management. Vieweg+Teubner, 2011, pp. 63–97. 
[24] BSI, BSI-Standard 100-3: Risk analysis based on IT-Grundschutz. 
Available: https://www.bsi.bund.de/, [retrieved: Sep, 2013]. 
[25] O. Zimmermann, “Architectural Decisions as Reusable Design 
Assets,” IEEE Software, 2011, pp. 64–69. 
[26] M. Schumacher, Security engineering with patterns: Origins, 
theoretical models, and new applications. Springer, 2003. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

