Motivation for Collective Action in the Smart Living Business Ecosystem 
 
Fatemeh Nikayin, Mark de Reuver 
Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management 
Technology University of Delft 
Delft, The Netherlands 
{f.a.nikayin; g.a.dereuver}@tudelft.nl 
 
 
Abstract - While smart home services have been on the 
agenda for over three decades, advances in mobile 
technologies and concepts like Internet of things are 
creating a new wave of interest in the market. 
Traditionally, smart home applications were offered in 
stovepipe architectures by individual organizations, 
leading to a plethora of service platforms. Today, smart 
home service providers are increasingly looking to 
collaborate in order to jointly develop and share 
common service platforms. However, collective action 
literature asserts that such collaboration will only take 
place if the motives to collaborate outweigh the hurdles. 
In this paper, we study which motivational drivers lead 
to collective action for smart living services. We do so in 
a survey study among 140 home installation companies 
that are member of 
the major Dutch branch 
organization. We find that the tendency to collaborate is 
mainly driven by motives related to new business 
opportunities, and that more strategic and solidarity 
motives do not play a role.  
Keywords - collective action; business ecosystem; 
motivation; platform; smart living 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Thanks to mobile technologies and concepts like the 
Internet of things, the vision of Smart homes is changing 
from simple home automation systems toward advanced 
smart entertainment, health support and energy management 
services. Obviously, what is  “smart” depends on time [1]. In 
the 1980s, the “smartness” of smart home concepts merely 
involved predefined automation of appliance tasks. Since the 
year 2000, smartness involves much more flexible task 
automation adapting to the situation based on past usage 
data, user preferences and interaction with other devices. In 
addition, the (mobile) Internet make smart home applications 
accessible regardless of the device and location of the user 
[2]. Therefore, the concept of “smart home” no longer fits 
and we coin the notion of “Smart Living” to represent 
bundles of innovative ICT-enabled services that aim to add 
value for home tasks and routines. 
Although smart homes have been on the agenda for over 
three decades, and despite many commercialization attempts 
in different sectors, smart living services typically do not 
make it into the mass market [3]. This might be a result of 
the great fragmentation and complexity in smart living 
service platforms. In an earlier paper, we find that smart 
living service platforms are often based on closed 
architectures and are typically sector specific [4]. Typically, 
functionalities are replicated in the various industry-specific 
service platforms, and they are not being shared or reused. 
Practitioners working in the field of smart home services 
increasingly point to this fragmentation of service platforms 
as one of the major hurdles, which is also clear when 
considering major standardization initiatives like KNX.  
As such, there are opportunities for service providers to 
share such generic functionalities on a common service 
platform to be used in multiple service offerings [4]. Sharing 
service platforms and collaborating across industry sectors 
may not only reduce investment costs, but may also reduce 
complexity and increase flexibility for consumers. Moreover, 
open innovation literature stipulates that sharing platforms 
across company boundaries may increase service innovation 
[5, 6]. As such, collaboration for smart living services may 
lead to new business opportunities. Other motivation for 
open forms of collaboration may come from trends like 
corporate social responsibility and people-planet-profit 
paradigms (i.e., sustainability of natural resources), which 
lead to more altruistic and solidarity types of motives.  
To achieve such vision of common service platform for 
Smart Living services, actors from distinct sectors of 
industry need to work collectively. However, difficulties in 
cooperation specifically when actors are from different 
sectors, may hamper collaboration in this domain. For 
instance, one of the critical issues is that while actors 
cooperate for creating a shared value, they compete over 
having the biggest piece of pie [7]. Accordingly, several 
problems may arise such as conflicts over division of costs, 
revenues and investments between parties as well as the 
division of roles and responsibilities [8]. On the other side, 
increasing dependency between parties may also influence 
the governance mechanisms and raise concerns over trust or 
risk of opportunistic behavior of parties [9, 10]. 
Such issues of cooperation have often looked from the 
perspective of game theory or mechanism design [11] and 
there are relatively less empirical studies have been done in 
this field. While extensive bodies of literature on collective 
action have discussed motivations in different context like 
social and political [12-14], less attention has been paid to 
motivations in high-tech industry, especially to the smart 
living domain. Indeed fostering innovation in high-tech 
69
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

industry like Smart Living is mainly dependent on the 
collaboration between several actors to integrate their 
knowledge and resources. Such open innovation happens 
only when different parties are motivated enough to work 
together. Therefore, to mobilize such cooperation, decision 
makers in high-tech industry need to know how those 
external independent parties may become interested in an 
innovative cooperation [15].  
This paper aims to improve understanding on what drives 
or blocks collaboration in the field of smart living. More 
specifically, we explore which types of motivational sources 
exist in the field of smart living and analyze how those 
sources of motivation in turn affect the tendency to 
collaborate for smart living services. To do so, we develop 
and analyze the results of a survey among 140 installation 
companies that are active in the field of smart living 
services. While doing so, we compare different types of 
smart living services, i.e., energy types of services and 
entertainment and security services.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents 
theoretical background. Section III provides the method. In 
Section IV, we present the results, and finally, in Section V, 
we discuss the results and make recommendation for future 
study. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND RESEARCH MODEL 
Technology-wise, a service platform is an evolving 
system in the form of hardware architecture, an operating 
system or a software framework. A typical service platform 
usually contains several components that are required by the 
services running on that platform, and which those services 
would otherwise need to include themselves [16]. The 
network of service providers and platform providers that are 
working together around a service platform to stimulate 
innovation around it can be viewed as a „business ecosystem‟ 
[17]. One of the important characteristics of business 
ecosystems is the interconnectedness between actors  which 
make it necessary for them to cooperate for a shared fate 
[18]. As such, it is in the interest of most members of a 
business ecosystem to work collectively to develop and 
expand an existing market [19]. However, there may be 
several hurdles that hinder actors to join a business 
ecosystem and cooperate around an innovation. Examples of 
such obstacles are handling conflicts, differing motivations 
and conflicting strategic interests.  
The cooperation within members of a business ecosystem 
can be viewed through the of lens collective action theory. 
Collective action theory is often applied to explain 
phenomena in which heterogeneous actors collaborate in 
order to reach a common goal [20, 21], especially when there 
are sources of conflicts in achieving „common goal‟ through 
individual action [22]. In collective action literature, 
motivation is considered as an enabler for cooperation. On a 
general level, motivation can be viewed as an impetus or 
inspiration that move an individual towards something [23]. 
Such inspiration in collective action is typically toward 
pursuit of a common goal.  
The classical dilemma of collective action  is that 
“rational, self-interested individuals will not act to achieve 
their common or group interests” and they tend to free-ride 
on contributions of others [24]. Such issue of free-riding may 
hinder many actors from entering into a cooperation and lead 
to „start-up dilemma‟ [25]. To solve the free-riding problem 
and to motivate actors for cooperation, Olson [24] argued the 
essence of „selective incentives‟. „Selective incentives‟ can 
be viewed as those private benefits that are provided for 
those individuals who have contributed for provision of 
collective good [26]. Thus, those actors with high interests in 
„selective incentives‟ are more likely to move in a 
cooperation [27]. 
The two terms „motivations‟ and „incentives‟ have been 
used in the literature interchangeably [14, 27]. However, in 
this research we distinguish „motivations‟ from „incentives‟ 
in a way that motivations are intrinsic or extrinsic impetus 
toward achieving common, while incentives are those 
benefits that are provided within a group to stimulate 
cooperation. In this paper, we mainly focus on the 
motivations and how they play roles in starting up 
collaboration.  
Based on the previous discussion, we propose the 
following hypothesis: 
H1. Stronger motivations to be involved in smart living 
projects increase the collective orientation in smart living 
projects  
There are several interpretation of the notion of 
Collective orientation in the literature [28]. Following 
Driskel and Salas [29], we view collective orientation as an 
individual‟s tendency to work collectively rather than alone. 
Several streams of literature have studied motivation for 
collective action in different contexts and proposed different 
categories of motivations [12, 13, 30]. While some studies 
suggests that cooperation between individuals may be 
induced by financial motives [14], others identify other types 
of motives like normative, occupational, lobbying, material, 
social and information-motive [27] that play roles in enabling 
cooperation. In the psychology literature, motivations are 
generally categorized into two types of intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivations. According to [23] intrinsic motivations can be 
defined as “doing the activity for its inherent satisfaction 
rather than for some separable consequence.” An intrinsic 
motivated person, perform an activity because of the fun, 
challenges or the good feeling that the activity entail. In 
compared to intrinsic motivation, [23] define extrinsic 
motivation as an action that is induced by instrumental value 
and is toward achieving „separable outcome‟.  
Similar to humans, companies may also encourage in 
specific activities on the bases of their intrinsic or extrinsic 
motivations. Put this in the context of Smart Living domain, 
there might be several types of intrinsic and/or extrinsic 
motivations for companies to cooperate over a common 
service platform. For instance, one possible intrinsic 
motivation could be to make life easier and more convenient 
for people. However, in competitive business world, 
extrinsic factors tend to be more critical. As such, in this 
paper we focus on exploring the extrinsic motives that lay 
behind cooperation in the smart living domain. 
70
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

One of the obvious forms of extrinsic motivation is the 
business value from cost reduction or more income. For 
instance, platform providers or service providers may invest 
in a common service platform if they expect that they can 
reduce their costs and have more return on their investments. 
Business value can also be achieved by gaining access to 
specific information (e.g., customers, market), innovative 
technology, and/or new market opportunities [15]. We refer 
to these types of motives as „new business‟ motives: 
H1a. Stronger motivations to be involved in smart living 
projects for generating new business opportunities increase 
the tendency to act collectively in smart living projects  
Another less tangible types of extrinsic motivation in the 
smart living domain is networking and building up 
relationship. 
Typically, 
companies 
may 
engage 
in 
cooperation to enlarge their networks, extend business 
opportunities and access more partners and projects. These 
types of motives are mainly cooperation-oriented and their 
values last longer than business values [15]. We generally 
refer to them as „solidarity motives‟: 
H1b. Stronger motivations to be involved in smart living 
projects for solidarity reasons increase the tendency to act 
collectively in smart living projects  
Beside business and solidarity motives, companies may 
participate in a cooperative activity to achieve more high-
level strategic objectives related to their status and reputation 
within a market [31]. For instance, being the first one in 
accessing or using a new technology is important to build up 
status and strategic position in the market. In this paper, we 
refer to these motives as „strategic motives‟: 
H1c. Stronger motivations to be involved in smart living 
projects for strategic reasons increase the tendency to act 
collectively in smart living projects  
We assume that collaboration between actors is needed to 
get smart living projects towards the implementation and 
commercialization stage. Underlying assumptions are that 
sharing of service platforms that provide generic modular 
functions, like identifications, authorization and managed 
data storage, or business functions, like support, management 
and maintenance, will make it easier to develop new services 
for smart living service providers [32]. In addition to that, 
sharing of risks, investment funds and knowledge may 
benefit the smart living projects. To test these conjectures, 
we will test the following hypothesis: 
 H2. The stronger the tendency to act collectively in 
smart living projects, the more likely that the actor is 
involved in smart living projects 
Obviously, there may be a direct effect between 
motivations to be involved in smart living projects and the 
extent to which actors are involved in these projects, without 
the collective orientation mediating that effect. To test for 
such direct effect of motivation on smart living involvement, 
we will also test the following hypothesis.  
H3. The stronger the motivations to be involved in smart 
living projects, the more likely that the actor is involved in 
smart living projects 
Figure 1 visualizes the conceptual model for this paper. 
 
 
III. 
METHOD 
A. Sampling 
We conducted a survey among members of a Dutch 
branch organization that are providing technical and 
installation solutions in the area of Smart Living. The survey 
was conducted through an online questionnaire in January 
2011. While the branch organization has in total 5300 
members subscribed, 1796 of them were invited to 
participate that are already involved in domotics or other 
ICT-enabled solutions. An invitation e-mail was sent through 
the branch organization to which  144 members responded 
(response rate 8%). 66% of them participated after receiving 
the first email and 34% after receiving a reminder. To check 
non-response bias, we compared the means of the first group 
of respondents to the latter group of respondents and found 
no significant differences in overall data [33].  Of the 144 
responses, 133 were valid for analysis. 
Regarding the background of respondents, 70% of 
respondents were the owners of the company, 22% were 
involved in operational management and 8% were project 
managers.  The majority of the participants were involved in 
strategic and policy management (79%). Similar to the 
population of installation companies, most participants work 
at SMEs, as only 14% have more than 100 employees.  
B. Measures and Items in the questionnarie 
The items to measure motivations were largely adapted 
from [27, 34]. Respondents were asked to indicate to what 
extent the statements are important for them, using Likert 
seven-point scales ranged from not important to very 
important. We conduct Exploratory Factor Analysis, using 
principal axis factors with Oblimin Rotation method and 
Kaiser Normalization on all the measurement scales, see 
Table 1. The three extracted factors were consistent with our 
expected motive types, i.e., new business motives, strategic 
motives and solidarity motive. 
The likelihood of engaging in collective action is 
conceptualized as ‘collective orientation’ and the items were 
mainly adapted from [35, 36]. Table 2 shows acceptable 
factor loadings (i.e., > .5) and construct reliability (i.e., > 
.7).  
With regard to the involved actors and their sectors, the 
respondents were asked to indicate to what extent they are 
involved in different field of smart living projects. (7-point 
H2 
H1 
Motives 
Collective 
Orientation 
Actors 
involvement 
H3 
Figure 1. Research Model. 
71
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

Likert scales ranging from not involved at all to is our core 
business). Typically, actors in the smart living domain are 
involved in offering different types of activities. For 
instance, many companies are involved in offering energy 
management solutions as well as security and safety services; 
several companies are providing domotics and home 
automation solutions. Recently, healthcare solutions like 
telecare or telemedicine are also gaining momentum.  
Accordingly, we include measurements items for four 
categories of activities in energy, security, health, 
entertainment and communication fields. These categories 
for the smart living domain have been confirmed by an 
expert in the domain. 
Table 1. Extracted factors for motivation for cooperation (Oblimin 
Rotation- KMO =.94, Bartlett‟s test= 2063.55, p  < .001). 
Our organization 
should participate in 
smart living projects to:  
(7-point scale: Highly 
unimportant – Highly 
important)  
New 
busine
ss 
Motive 
α= .95 
Solidarit
y Motive 
α= .92 
Strategic 
Motive 
α= .92 
Com
mun
alitie
s 
To improve our 
reputation 
 
 
.89 
.89 
To improve our position 
 
 
.77 
.74 
To emphasize our 
mission and objectives 
 
 
.63 
.76 
To experiment with new 
technologies 
,67 
 
 
.77 
To create new market  
.81 
  
 
.74 
To improve our market 
position 
.75 
  
 
.83 
To increase our income 
.88 
  
 
.80 
To gain access to more 
customers 
.80 
  
 
.76 
To have market 
opportunities 
.97 
  
 
.90 
To increase cooperation 
with other companies 
  
.55 
 
.71 
To develop joint smart 
living projects 
  
.84 
 
.82 
To raise funds for smart 
living projects 
  
.86 
 
.77 
To strengthen the 
relationship with other 
organizations 
  
.49 
 
.80 
To help other 
organizations in smart 
living projects 
  
.56 
 
.63 
Table 2. Extracted factor for positive attitute towards cooperation (Oblimin 
Rotation- KMO=.74, Bartlett‟s test= 187.29,  p < .001). 
To what extent do you find 
collaboration necessary for smart 
living services?  
(7-point scale: Highly disagree – 
Highly agree) 
Collective 
orientation 
α= .79 
Commun
alities 
Collaboration leads to problems (R) 
.59 
.35 
The reasons to collaborate are scarce in 
smart living services (R) 
.90 
.81 
Collaboration leads to better services 
.64 
.41 
It‟s belter to deliver smart living services 
alone rather than with others (R) 
.71 
.50 
(R) Reversely coded 
For actors‟ involvement, despite our expectation of the 
four categories of smart living services, only two factors 
were extracted based on a cut-off eigenvalue of 1.00, see 
Table 3. The first factor includes activities in the field of 
energy and the second factor covers other fields like, 
security, health, entertainment and communication. We refer 
to the first factor as ‘energy field’ and the second factor as 
‘other fields’.  
Table 3. Extracted factors for fields of involvement (Oblimin Rotation- 
KMO=.83, Bartlett‟s test= 658.43, p  < .001). 
To what extent is your company 
currently involved in smart 
living projects in the field of:  
(7-point scale: We are totally 
not involved – Is our core 
business) 
Energy 
fields 
α= .83 
Other 
fields 
α= .88 
Commu
nalities 
Energy supply smart grids and 
smart meters 
.57 
 
.53 
Systems for heating and 
ventilations management 
.81 
 
.63 
Applications in the health 
  
.78 
.63 
Applications that improve elderly 
independent living 
  
.83 
.66 
Integrated entertainment and Info. 
communication services 
  
.84 
.65 
Smart security services 
  
.75 
.59 
Smart anywhere any time 
working services 
  
.62 
.53 
Smart climate systems 
.85 
  
.68 
Intelligent water management 
system 
.68 
  
.48 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Correlations 
After extracting factors, in order to test our research 
model, we correlate the extracted factors. (See Table. 4 for 
correlation between the factors)  
Table 4. Correlation between extracted factros (* p < .05, ** p < .01 ). 
 
New 
busine
ss 
Motive 
Solida
rity 
Motiv
e 
Strategi
c Motive 
Collecti
ve 
Orienta
tion 
Other 
fields 
New business 
motive 
1 
 
 
 
 
Solidarity 
Motive 
.70** 
1 
 
 
 
Strategic 
Motive 
.80** 
.72** 
1 
 
 
Collective 
orientation 
.19* 
.12 
.11 
1 
 
Other fields 
.24** 
.30** 
.34** 
-.033 
1 
Energy field 
.11 
.22* 
.22** 
-.058 
.57** 
With regard to our first hypothesis, not surprisingly, there 
is a positive correlation between new business motives and 
collective orientation. However, there is not a significant 
relation between the two other types of motives (i.e., 
solidarity and strategic motives) and collective orientation. 
72
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

This implies that material values play more important role in 
motivating actors to work together in this domain. Still, 
considering the strong correlations between the different 
dimensions of motives, there may indeed be a direct or 
second-order effect of the other motivation types and the 
collective orientation.  
H1 – Partly supported (H1a: Supported; H2b: Rejected; 
H1c : Rejected) 
In our second hypothesis, we assume that collective 
orientation leads to actor‟s involvement in smart living 
project. However, it appeared that actors‟ involvement is not 
related to their collective orientations. Put simply, even if 
actors are involved in the smart living projects, it does not 
mean that they have positive attitude toward cooperation. 
H2 – Rejected  
We also correlate the factors of motives to the factors of 
actors‟ involvement to control for the direct effects between 
them. Apparently, the actors in all fields are generally 
motivated for cooperation. However, their motivation is 
mainly self-centered and toward strategic positioning in the 
market, i.e., towards improving the reputations, status or 
emphasizing their own objectives.  
H3 – Supported  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE 
STUDIES  
The results indicate that the primary motivation for 
cooperation in the smart living domain is to create new 
business opportunities. This result is opposed to our initial 
lessons in our ongoing, qualitative case studies where many 
practitioners refer to solidarity and cooperative-oriented 
motives to be important in this domain. Possibly, there is 
little cooperation going on in this field at this moment and 
mostly actors are still perusing their goal in isolation. 
Despite our expectations, there is not any relation 
between ‘collective orientation’ and the actors‟ current 
involvement in this domain. In other words, collaboration 
between actors is not related to the extent to which they are 
involved in smart living projects. Apparently, collaboration 
is not a prerequisite at this moment for being involved in 
smart living projects. Alternatively, this may imply that 
there might be several issues in collaboration that hinder 
even interested actors to move in this domain. 
With regard to the motivations, there is a stronger relation 
between motivation and involvement in other fields rather 
than the energy field. This is quite in line with our 
observations in the domain where many service providers in 
energy sectors are offering isolated smart metering services 
[4]. However, in both groups, strategic motives are stronger 
than solidarity and business motives. This might be 
explained by the fact that still there is not a dominant actor 
in the smart living domain and actors from distinct sectors 
seek to effectively position themselves in this growing 
market. As such, companies are tapping into each other 
business and trying to prove themselves in this industry. For 
instance, telecom companies are considering to provide 
energy services 
to 
households through their fiber 
infrastructure [37]. This indicates that having a strategic 
position, status and reputation in the smart living domain is 
in the interest of all the involved actors.  
Despite the competition for dominance in this domain, 
literature discusses the importance of inter-organization 
cooperation for the growth of smart living industry [38]. 
The current trends of proprietary service platforms with 
differentiated standards leave no space for cooperation, 
while the promise of a shared service platform highlights the 
growing importance of cooperation between parties around 
the platform, i.e., through open API or open standards, to 
stimulate innovation in the smart living business ecosystem. 
However, the challenge is how to set up such collaboration, 
considering several underlying issues that may hamper 
actors to move in cooperation. 
In this paper, we aimed to answer the questions about 
motivations that lay behind the actors‟ cooperation in the 
smart living domain, though, the questions about „selective 
incentives‟ and their importance in persuading actors for 
cooperation 
remained 
unanswered. 
Furthermore, 
demotivation issues, like conflicting strategic interests, lack 
of trust and disagreement over division of costs and benefits, 
that may hinder cooperation are missing in this study. We 
also didn‟t study the effects of actors‟ performance or the 
level of interdependency among them. We suggest that 
further research include the effects of those issues in their 
studies.  
As in any cross-sectional survey study, a limitation is that 
we measured the independent, mediating and dependent 
construct at the same moment in time. As such, we cannot 
test one of the conditions of causality, that is, time 
difference.  
Regarding the population, this study just includes the 
installation companies and no service providers, network 
providers, or IT vendors. This makes our results stronger in 
terms of internal validity, though, less strong regarding 
external validity. As such, one subject to be explored in the 
future studies is whether the motivations differ when other 
actors are included in the population.  
In this study, we mainly use exploratory data analysis 
techniques to explore the measurement scales and the causal 
model. In subsequent analysis, we will use more 
confirmatory and stringent techniques to test the results. We 
will use confirmatory factor analysis to test the measurement 
model. Moreover, we will use structural regression analysis 
in SEM to more stringently test the mediation effect that the 
collective orientation may have on the relation between 
motivations and involvement in smart living projects.  
Possibly, given the strong correlations between the 
different types of motivations, there may be a multilevel 
structure inherent in the measurement model. A second-order 
construct Motivations that influences the three underlying 
73
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

dimensions explored in this paper may better explain the 
other theoretical constructs. Similarly, the strong correlation 
between the two types of smart living projects may be 
explained by a higher-order factor. We will test for such 
higher-order factors in our subsequent research steps using 
structural equation modeling.  
Reference 
 
1. 
Weiser, M., Open house. Review, the web magazine of the 
Interactive Telecommunications Program of New York 
University, ITP Review, 1996. 2. 
2. 
Rohracher, H., Smart Homes and Energy Efficiency 
Constructive Technology Assessment of ICT Use in 
Sustainable Buildings, in ACEEE. 2002. pp. 241-252. 
3. 
Peine, A., Understanding the dynamics of technological 
configurations: A conceptual framework and the case of 
Smart Homes. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 
2009. 76(3): pp. 396-409. 
4. 
Nikayin, F., D. Skournetou, and M. De Reuver, Establishing a 
Common Service Platform for Smart Living: Challenges and a 
Research Agenda. Toward Useful Services for Elderly and 
People with Disabilities, 2011: pp. 251-255. 
5. 
Eisenmann, T.R., et al., Opening platforms: How, when and 
why? 2008: Harvard Business School. 
6. 
Chesbrough, H.W., Open innovation: The new imperative for 
creating and profiting from technology. 2003: Harvard 
Business Press. 
7. 
Brandenburger, A.M. and B.J. Nalebuff, Co-opetition: A 
revolutionary mindset that combines competition and 
cooperation: The game theory strategy that's changing the 
game of business. 1997: HarperCollinsBusiness. 
8. 
de Reuver, M., H. Bouwman, and T. Haaker, Mobile business 
models: organizational and financial design issues that 
matter. Electronic Markets, 2009. 19(1): pp. 3-13. 
9. 
De Reuver, M., Governing mobile service innovation in co-
evolving value networks, in Faculty of Technology, 
management and policy. 2009, Technology University of 
Delft: Delft. pp. 159. 
10. Williamson, 
O.E., 
Corporate 
finance 
and 
corporate 
governance. The journal of finance, 1988. 43(3): pp. 567-591. 
11. Locher, T., et al., Free riding in BitTorrent is cheap. IRVINE 
IS BURNING, 2006. 300: pp. 85. 
12. Elster, J., The cement of society: A study of social order. 1989: 
Cambridge Univ Pr. 
13. Schlozman, K.L., S. Verba, and H.E. Brady, Participation's 
Not a Paradox: The View from American Activists. British 
Journal of Political Science, 1995. 25(01): pp. 1-36. 
14. Gillinson, S., Why cooperate? A multi-disciplinary study of 
collective action. Overseas Development Institute, 2004. 
15. Boudreau, K.J. and K.R. Lakhani, How to manage outside 
innovation. mIt Sloan management review, 2009. 50(4): pp. 
69-76. 
16. Evans, D., A. Hagiu, and R. Schmalensee, Invisible engines: 
how software platforms drive innovation and transform 
industries. 2006: The MIT Press. 
17. Moore, J., Predators and prey: a new ecology of competition. 
Harvard Business Review, 1993. 71: pp. 75-75. 
18. Iansiti, M. and R. Levien, Strategy as ecology. Harvard 
Business Review, 2004. 82(3): pp. 68-81. 
19. Moore, J.F., Business ecosystems and the view from the firm. 
Antitrust Bull., 2006. 51: pp. 31. 
20. Oliver, P., G. Marwell, and R. Teixeira, A theory of the 
critical mass. I. Interdependence, group heterogeneity, and 
the production of collective action. American Journal of 
Sociology, 1985. 91(3): pp. 522-556. 
21. Poteete, A. and E. Ostrom, Heterogeneity, group size and 
collective action: The role of institutions in forest 
management. Development and change, 2004. 35(3): pp. 435-
461. 
22. Keohane, R.O., Cooperation and International Regimes, in 
After Hegemony. 1984, Princeton University Press: New 
Jersey. 
23. Ryan, R.M. and E.L. Deci, Intrinsic and Extrinsic 
Motivations: Classic Definitions and New Directions* 1. 
Contemporary educational psychology, 2000. 25(1): pp. 54-
67. 
24. Olson, M., The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and 
the 
Theory 
of 
Groups. 
Revised 
edition 
ed. 
1971, 
Massachusett: Harward University Press. 186. 
25. Bina, M. and G.M. Giaglis, Unwired collective action: 
Motivations of wireless community participants. 2006. 
26. Oliver, P., Rewards and punishments as selective incentives 
for collective action: theoretical investigations. American 
Journal of Sociology, 1980. 85(6): pp. 1356-1375. 
27. Knoke, D., Incentives in collective action organizations. 
American Sociological Review, 1988. 53(3): pp. 311-329. 
28. Alavi, S.B. and J. McCormick, A new approach to studying 
collective orientation in team contexts. 
29. Driskell, J.E. and E. Salas, Collective behavior and team 
performance. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 1992. 34(3): pp. 277-288. 
30. King, D.C. and J.L. Walker, The provision of benefits by 
interest groups in the United States. The Journal of Politics, 
1992. 54(02): pp. 394-426. 
31. Lopes, H., A.C. Santos, and N. Teles, The motives for 
cooperation in work organizations. Journal of Institutional 
Economics, 2009. 5(03): pp. 315-338. 
32. Feng, W., Remote service provision for connected homes
 
2010, De Montfort University. pp. 163. 
33. Armstrong, J.S. and T.S. Overton, Estimating nonresponse 
bias in mail surveys. Journal of marketing research, 1977. 
14(3): pp. 396-402. 
34. Sako, M., Suppliers' associations in the Japanese automobile 
industry: 
collective 
action 
for 
technololgy 
diffusion. 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1996. 20(6): pp. 651. 
35. Kelly, C. and S. Breinlinger, Identity and injustice: Exploring 
women's participation in collective action. Journal of 
Community & Applied Social Psychology, 1995. 5(1): pp. 41-
57. 
36. Frege, C., Union membership in post-socialist East Germany: 
who participates in collective action? British Journal of 
Industrial Relations, 1996. 34(3): pp. 387-413. 
37. Jeff St., J., The Telco Home Energy Invasion. 2009, 
GreenTechMedia. 
38. Novais, P., et al., Inter-organization cooperation for ambient 
assisted living. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart 
Environments, 2010. 2(2): pp. 179-195. 
 
 
74
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

