User Acceptance Identification of Restrictions Caused by 
 Mobile Security Countermeasures 
Basel Hasan, Tariq Mahmoud, 
Jorge Marx Gómez 
Department of Computing Science 
Oldenburg University  
Oldenburg, Germany  
{basel.hasan, tariq.mahmoud, 
jorge.marx.gomez}@uni-oldenburg.de 
Reshmi Pramod 
Virtual Global University, Frankfurt  
Frankfurt, Germany 
reshmi.pramod@gmail.com 
 
Joachim Kurzhöfer 
Lufthansa Industry Solutions     
Norderstedt, Germany 
 joachim.kurzhoefer@lhind.dlh.de 
 
 
 
Abstract—The proliferation of mobile devices, especially 
smartphones and tablets, in people’s daily life has motivated 
the enterprises to embrace mobility as an inevitable success 
factor in their business. However, integrating mobile devices 
into enterprises brings new security risks and challenges. 
Hence, security countermeasures must be applied to mobile 
devices to secure corporate data and segregate them from pri-
vate data. Such countermeasures can restrict the usage of mo-
bile devices, and mobile users consequently have to accept the 
restrictions arising by applying such countermeasures. The 
user acceptance of these restrictions must be considered. This 
work derives a set of such restrictions that limit the usage of 
mobile devices. It also presents the results of a questionnaire 
that investigates the user acceptance rate of these restrictions. 
The results of this study might help enterprises in their deci-
sion-making process about selecting proper security counter-
measures by keeping a considerable balance between security 
and usability.  
Keywords-mobile enterprise applications; mobile devices; 
mobile security; user acceptance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW  
Over the past few years, the evolution of mobile technol-
ogies and applications makes the ubiquitous communications 
(anywhere and anytime) a growing reality [1][2]. According 
to [3], mobile broadband connections are forecasted to con-
tinue growing worldwide to 5.3 billion in 2018, moreover, 
mobile users will steadily increase to reach 1.37 billion in 
2017. In this paper, the mobile user refers to the employee 
who uses mobile devices (just smartphones and tablets) at 
work. 
The rapid proliferation of mobile devices in people’s dai-
ly life has triggered enterprises to consider the mobility as an 
inevitable part of their business and IT strategies to derive 
more revenue, enhance customer engagements, and being 
more competitive in the market. Smartphones and tablets 
became more integrated into enterprises’ IT infrastructure. 
This integration solely represents the enterprise mobility 
concept by giving the employees better possibilities to work 
effectively while they are on move [4]. The reasons for this 
include location flexibility, time saving, portability, ease of 
research, etc. For example, sale persons can access their mo-
bile Customer Relationship Management System (mobile 
CRM) to allow them updating their customer details while 
they are away from their offices. 
Many companies provide corporate mobile devices to be 
used by their employees. Such devices can often be moni-
tored and controlled. On the other hand, the employees can 
use their own personal devices for work. This concept is 
considered as a consumerization of IT or Bring Your Own 
Device (BYOD) [5][6]. In this sense, using corporate or per-
sonal mobile devices increases employee productivity and 
reduces business operational costs [7]. 
However, companies that allow using mobile devices for 
work have to pay more attention to the huge amount of new 
risks that differ clearly from Personal Computer (PC) risks. 
Smartphones and tablets are lightweight mobile devices. 
They have low technical capabilities in comparison to PC 
devices. This hiders these mobile devices from porting PC 
security technologies and standards [8][9]. Furthermore, mo-
bile devices are small and portable and therefore, they can 
easily be stolen or lost.  
Because of many different risks and risk sources in mo-
bile environments [10]-[13], companies have to apply proper 
mobile security countermeasures to mitigate such risks. Ap-
plying security countermeasures on mobile devices may re-
strict their usage in a way that affects the mobile users’ flex-
ibility and productivity. This in turn influences the decision 
to use these mobile devices at work. Moreover, this can lead 
to lose the benefits of mobility. Therefore, companies have 
to consider such consequences on mobile users when apply-
ing new security solutions. One of the biggest barriers to 
reach a true mobile security is the user acceptance of corpo-
rate security policies. As enterprises move to mobile devices, 
their IT organizations are trying to keep the right balance 
between user enablement and data security [14]. 
In this paper, the current mobile security countermeas-
ures are defined based on literature and best practices, and 
the user acceptance of the accompanying restrictions is in-
vestigated quantitatively (see Section IV). The work contrib-
utes to the security in mobile applications’ research domain 
in the definition of user acceptance, creation a catalogue/list 
of the investigated restrictions (consequences) and then ana-
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

lyzing them by investigating the relationships between these 
restrictions and the acceptance rate of the enterprises’ users. 
These contributions might be of a great assist for enterprises 
in their decision-making process, especially when they select 
security countermeasures by keeping a considerable balance 
between security and usability. 
This paper focusses on the user acceptance rate of mobile 
security countermeasures in business sectors, where the em-
ployees are allowed to use mobile devices for working pur-
poses. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 
II presents the related work. Then, Section III presents a list 
of security countermeasures along with their possible ac-
companying restrictions on mobile users. Section IV presents 
the results of a conducted questionnaire that measures the 
user acceptance rate of potential restrictions. Finally, the 
paper sums up with a conclusion in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In order to investigate the user acceptance of new tech-
nologies, the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) has 
been often conducted [15]-[17]. This model addresses why 
users accept or reject information systems and how the user 
acceptance can be affected by system design features [18]. 
User technology acceptance broadly refers to an individual’s 
psychological state with regard to her or his voluntary and 
intentional use of a technology. It has been also identified as 
fundamental challenges to organizational technology adop-
tion [15]. In [16], an extended TAM for mobile government 
systems has been proposed. However, in that work, the secu-
rity was not taken as a factor that affects users’ decisions to 
accept using mobile systems.  
Another work that is located in this topic has investigated 
the user acceptance of a Privacy-Enhancing Technology 
(PET) that is called “Attribute-Based Credentials”, or Priva-
cy-ABCs [17]. This work considered the security and priva-
cy as factors that affects the user acceptance of the PET 
without considering mobility.  
In [19], a framework to design secure Mobile Enterprise 
Applications (MEAs) has been presented. That framework 
mainly supports the enterprises in decision-making process 
during designing secure MEAs, side by side in keeping a 
balance between mobile security and user acceptance. It is 
stated in that work that the companies have to check user 
acceptance of security countermeasures even in the design 
phase of adopting mobile applications. This can be deter-
mined through a questionnaire, in which, employees of the 
enterprise can respond about the potential restrictions.  
These related works motivate the objective of this study 
in investigating the user acceptance rate on the restrictions 
that accompany the security countermeasures the enterprises 
enforce while allowing their users to use their mobile devices 
at work. This paper does not introduce a TAM extension. 
Rather it investigates the business user’s acceptance of the 
restrictions that are caused by the applying security counter-
measures on mobile devices. Such investigation has not been 
conducted in the related work in this domain so far.  
III. 
MOBILE SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES AND THEIR 
ACCOMPANYING RESTRICTIONS 
Enterprises need to implement suitable security counter-
measures to mitigate the wide range of threats in the mobile 
environment and achieve a certain level of security on mo-
bile devices. Applying security countermeasures to mobile 
devices can restrict the usability of those devices. In general, 
a high level of security on mobile devices can be achieved by 
setting a high level of restrictions, but on the other hand, this 
will reduce their usability. These restrictions negatively af-
fect the satisfaction factors of the employees who want to use 
mobile devices in business sectors. Therefore, enterprises 
have to balance between the technical view (security solu-
tion) and the user view (user acceptance of the restrictions). 
Hence, a balance between security and usability have to be 
maintained [20]. The rest of this section goes through a 
number of mobile security countermeasures collected from 
literature and best practices. Furthermore, these counter-
measures are classified in groups along with their potential 
restrictions. 
A. Authentication and Authorization  
Authentication involves identifying the mobile user who 
needs to have access on certain corporate data. This is usual-
ly based on one or a combination of the following types of 
credentials: something you have (certificate), something you 
are (fingerprint), something you know (password). In [21], a 
number of authentication methods for mobile devices has 
been presented and classified in groups (knowledge-based 
methods like passwords, Personal Identification Numbers 
(PIN) or pattern locks as well as biometrics methods like 
face recognition and voice recognition). In order to control 
the access to corporate resources, the authenticated mobile 
users should be also authorized through authorization pro-
cess, which grants or denies specific permissions to each 
user. 
In addition, mobile devices can be authenticated through 
continuous touch-based authentication, which continuously 
records touch data from mobile device’s touch screen and 
then exploits user interaction data to authenticate users based 
on the way they perform touch operations [22][23]. Howev-
er, this mechanism is not included in the conducted survey, 
because it is not widely known in the practice so far.    
Consequences on Mobile Users. Strong authentication 
requires a strong password, which enhances the security on 
mobile devices. High restrictions can be applied on mobile 
devices by enforcing long alphanumeric passwords that will 
be required frequently and might lock the user after few 
wrong attempts. Such high restrictions enhance the security, 
but on the other hand, minimize the usability and reduce 
employees’ productivity.  
B. Encryption 
Virtual Private Network (VPN) is one alternative to ena-
ble secure connection between an enterprise’s internal net-
work and mobile applications by installing a VPN client on 
mobile devices [24]. VPN is an alternative to secure sensitive 
business data “in motion” over unsecured network. In addi-
tion, to countermeasure the possible disclosure of sensitive 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

data that stored on mobile devices (data-at-rest), mobile de-
vice’s local storage has to be encrypted. Strong encryption 
mechanisms are used to protect the confidentiality and integ-
rity of communications. By using these encryption and mu-
tual authentication mechanisms, the risk from using unse-
cured mobile networks before transmitting any data can be 
mitigated [25].  
Many mobile users use personal mobile applications 
(e.g., Dropbox, iCloud) to centrally store documents in cloud 
and synchronize them with their multiple computing end-
points. Such mobile applications can take corporate docu-
ments out of IT control if those documents are moved to 
such personal clouds. Therefore, mobility also needs data 
encryption while they are “in use”, which includes maintain-
ing encryption of whatever is being viewed in the file system 
while being used by a mobile application as well as data 
shared via Open In or Copy-Paste to another mobile applica-
tion on the mobile device (i.e., opening an email attachment 
into a document editor) [14].  
Consequences on Mobile Users. Excluding the slower 
performance that might be caused, no major consequences 
on mobile device usage have been found when applying en-
cryption on data-at-rest and data-in-motion. In general, ena-
bling security features affects the performance, regarding 
time and computational power to execute cryptographic al-
gorithms, and users have to find a compromise while choos-
ing ease of use and performance versus security [26].  
Concerning data-in-use encryption, the mobile device’s 
performance will be even slower than the case of encrypting 
data-at-rest and data-on-motion, due to full memory encryp-
tion. Anyway, if the data-in-use encryption is not imple-
mented, the company may disallow their employees from 
using cloud services. This restricts the usage of third mobile 
applications on mobile devices. Otherwise, the company 
should have control on Open In and Copy-Paste functions 
[14].   
C. Mobile Physical Security 
Lost and stolen mobile devices are seen as the greatest 
security concern, due to the risk of compromising their data. 
Hence, mobile device’s physical security should be given 
higher importance. When mobile devices are lost or stolen, 
the enterprises should not lose control on those devices. Such 
control can be done using Mobile Device Management 
(MDM) systems, which enables IT departments to remotely 
lock and reset mobile devices and wipe their data [27]. Fur-
thermore, to mitigate the risk of compromising the data of 
lost or stolen mobile devices, a layered mitigation strategy 
can be conducted [25]. The first layer involves a required 
authentication before gaining access to the mobile device or 
corporate resource. The second layer involves either encrypt-
ing the mobile device’s local storage, or not storing data on 
mobile devices at all (read only). The third layer involves 
mobile user training and awareness, which can reduce the 
frequency of risks related to mobile device’s physical securi-
ty.   
Consequences on Mobile Users. Controlling mobile de-
vices by remotely locking and resting has no consequences 
that can restrict the mobile devices’ usage. However, if the 
layered mitigation strategy is conducted, restrictions can be 
set in the first layer during authentication (see Section III-A). 
In the second layer, the user can experience slow perfor-
mance if the mobile device’s local storage is encrypted (see 
Section III-B). Furthermore, a high level of mobile’s physi-
cal security may require that no data will be allowed to be 
locally stored on mobile devices. Consequently, the user will 
not be able to access corporate documents offline on the mo-
bile device. The third layer concerning the mobile user train-
ing will be presented in Section III-F.  
D. Protection against Untrusted Applications.  
The simplest way to protect mobile devices against un-
trusted third party applications is to enforce a policy that 
prohibits the installation of all third party applications. How-
ever, this way restricts the mobile device’s usage and the 
mobile user’s acceptance rate of such restrictions will be low 
(see Section IV-C). The alternative is the implementation of 
whitelisting to prohibit installation of all unapproved third 
party application. MDM systems utilize the whitelisting for 
allowing or blocking applications running on mobile devices 
[28]. Some enterprises implement a sandbox that isolates the 
corporate date and applications from third party applications 
on the mobile device. An application runs in a sandbox has 
file areas, which can only be accessed by the application 
itself [29]. 
Consequences on Mobile Users.  The mobile user will 
not be able to install third party mobile applications on the 
mobile device if the enterprise applies a policy that prohibits 
the installation of all third party applications. Regarding the 
second alternative, if whitelisting is applied, the user will still 
be able to install third party mobile applications, which are 
approved and included in the whitelist. Finally, if a sandbox 
is implemented, the user should be able to install third party 
mobile applications.  
E. Firewalls and Antivirus Protection.  
To prevent data leakage via malware that is already in-
stalled on mobile devices, firewalls are also implemented on 
mobile devices to block or audit disallowed connections to or 
from mobile devices [30]. In the traditional desktops, fire-
walls can restrict access to system services and prevent ap-
plications on the system from leaking sensitive information 
to third parties. Regarding mobile devices, the firewalls can 
also restrict the network access to data-sensitive applications 
when not using Wi-Fi network. This is because network 
connections using mobile 3G/4G networks are usually either 
expensive or volume restricted [31]. Other way of protection 
is using antivirus software that can be installed on mobile 
device to detect malware.   
Consequences on Mobile Users. Firewalls and antivirus-
es software protection can slow down the entire mobile sys-
tem because these software’s functions are always running in 
the background. The battery consumption can also be a big 
concern. The enterprises must have control on firewalls and 
antivirus software to keep them always enabled. However, 
an enforced firewall policy can affect the mobile users’ satis-
faction. The system slowness and high battery consumption 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

are factors that make the employees avoid using mobile de-
vices for work.   
F. Conducting Security Awareness  
Applying technical security countermeasures to mitigate 
risks can be insufficient as long as employees are not aware 
of potential security risks [32][33]. Furthermore, awareness 
of security risks can improve security countermeasures de-
velopment (design and implementation) and performance 
(reduced deficiencies and greater efficiency) [34]. Hence, 
enterprises have to organize security awareness programs for 
their employees who want to use mobile devices at work.  
Consequences on Mobile Users. Concerning mobile se-
curity awareness programs, which are complementary to the 
technical security solutions, no restrictions on mobile devic-
es’ usage has been found so far. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This part describes the research data, the measurement 
and the methods utilized in the data analysis process. In or-
der to achieve the research objectives and to conduct that in a 
structured way, few research methodologies have been car-
ried out in this research process. The focus of this study is 
mainly finding out the various mobile security countermeas-
ures and their restrictions on the enterprises’ users who use 
their corporate mobile devices. This is besides finding out 
the user acceptance level of these restrictions. For that, a 
quantitative approach is followed to describe and understand 
experiences, ideas, beliefs and values. Quantitative research 
concerns asking people about their opinions in a structured 
way so that facts and statistics can be produced to guide a 
study like the one presented in this paper. Briefly, this study 
analyzes the user acceptance level through observations in 
numerical representations and statistical analysis. 
A. Measurement 
For a quantitative measurement, an online questionnaire 
had been developed to study the perception of users’ ac-
ceptance rate on the security countermeasures applied on 
their corporate mobile devices. The pros and cons as well as 
the reliability of this instrument were also part of the re-
search objectives. The questions were prepared from the 
information collected from the available literature and best 
practices in this domain.  
The circulated questionnaire had been divided into three 
main parts and consisted of 17 questions in total. The initial 
four questions were targeting the mobile device usage at 
work. The following list of questions targeted the mobile 
security awareness of users while using their mobile devices. 
The remaining set of questions were focusing on measuring 
the user acceptance level of the security countermeasures and 
their accompanying potential restrictions maintained by the 
organizations (to protect their data) and applied to the users’ 
mobile devices. 
The questions were distributed to the respondents in form 
of multiple choices questions (using Likert scale items). Us-
ers were given the flexibility to choose more than one an-
swer, and they were given space to add their own options. 
B. Data Collection 
This process focused on collecting the data through dis-
tributing the designed questionnaire on a set of targeted re-
spondents who are using their mobile devices at work. The 
research objectives were achieved from the suggestions of 
users by targeting corporate areas. According to [35], it is 
well noted in the literature that managers would ultimately 
affect firms’ practices. Therefore, middle and top managers 
from information and communication technology domain 
were considered in this study as main targeted respondents. 
The questionnaire was circulated in corporate offices and 
social networking websites. The respondents were given 10 
days to complete the questionnaire. 
Concerning the sample size, 130 potential respondents 
were targeted regardless of their age group. According to 
[36], sample sizes that are greater than 30 and less than 500 
are appropriate for most researches and based on that, the 
selected sample size in this research is considered appropri-
ate. All responses were checked for validity. The incomplete 
responses were considered invalid and had been excluded. 
The response rate was 79%. That makes 103 users who pro-
vided valid responses. Finally, the data were analyzed using 
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) statistics 
software package. Data analysis is explained in the following 
section. 
C. Data Analysis and User Acceptance Rate 
The responses to the provided questions had resulted in 
the following: 
 The initial questions were related to mobile devices’ us-
age at work. Around 30% of the respondents stated in 
this regard that they are allowed to use their mobile de-
vices (own or corporate mobile devices) at work. Only 
13% of the respondents were allowed to use only corpo-
rate mobile devices.   
 Regarding the usage degree of mobile devices for various 
purposes, the respondents were able to use their devices 
for corporate purposes considering security as a major 
concern. The majority of the responses, who were al-
lowed to use mobile devices at work, stated that they 
were using their mobile devices to access corporate 
emails (91%), performing work related tasks (52%), ac-
cess corporate content (70%) and searching for infor-
mation (69%). Each of these percentages was directly re-
lated to a response to a question in the questionnaire. 
 When asked about security awareness of their mobile 
devices, 35% of the respondents had indicated that they 
have medium to no knowledge about mobile security 
concerns. This shows that security awareness, training 
and education were also very important in organizations 
to protect their data.  
 As for dealing with their corporate data, 52% of the re-
spondents answered that they never dealt with their en-
terprises’ data on their mobile devices. Moreover, 30% of 
the respondents answered that they only dealt with non-
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

sensitive corporate data. This comes from several securi-
ty restrictions applied to these data. An employee, who 
has to access sensitive corporate data (e.g., sales data, 
Human Resources (HR) data or policies) using mobile 
devices, might accept a wide range of restrictions. On the 
other hand, these restrictions might be not accepted by an 
employee, who deals only with non-sensitive corporate 
information. 
 Regarding security countermeasures, the majority of re-
spondents, who were allowed to use mobile devices at 
work, were enforced to apply countermeasures on their 
corporate mobile devices. The restrictions that arose from 
applying the aforementioned countermeasures vary from 
enforcing strong passwords to restricting installation and 
usage of third party applications reaching the enforce-
ment of full memory encryption. This latter can result in 
a lower performance of mobile devices. 
The user acceptance rate was analyzed and an excerpt of 
the restrictions are depicted in Figure 1. 
 After listing most of the restrictions the mobile users 
faced when using mobile devices at work, the last part of 
the questionnaire investigated whether the users are com-
fortable with these restrictions or not. Concerning flexi-
bility and productivity, the results (see Figure 2) showed 
that around 43% of the respondents were not satisfied 
with the current security restrictions in their mobile 
working environments. 
D. Recommendations 
The mobile user acceptance of the restrictions is a very 
important factor to be considered during the design phase of 
MEAs. Evidently, using a strong technical solution must not 
be on the costs of user’s satisfaction. Rather, they have to be 
considered side by side.  
As the enterprises data are usually classified into security 
levels, enterprises should carefully define the intended secu-
rity level of their data on mobile devises. The security level 
should be defined to include three points of view, namely, 
business view, user view, technical view as depicted in Fig-
ure 3. These views are explained as follows: Business View. 
The enterprise defines the security requirements as a subset 
of its business requirements. Technical View. The security 
requirements are fulfilled by applying the security counter-
measures. Implementing the technical solution is accompa-
nied with potential restrictions. User View. The user ac-
ceptance of the restrictions should be considered as highly 
important when defining a security level. For instance, there 
are two alternatives to countermeasure the potential threats 
that can be caused by third party applications. The first alter-
native is to disallow the installation of all third party applica-
tions on mobile devices. The second alternative is to apply 
whitelisting. Figure 1 clearly showed that the user accepts 
the second alternative (whitelisting) more than the first one. 
This gives enterprises an indicator that the users will be more 
satisfied with applying whitelisting rather than preventing 
the installation of all third party mobile applications. In addi-
tion, the mobile security countermeasures and restrictions 
must be taken in such a way that it should not restrict the 
flexibility and productivity of users. A balance between mit-
 
Figure 1.  User Acceptance Rate of Restrictions on Mobile Devices' Usage 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Effect of Restrictions on Mobile Devices' Usage 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Security Level on Mobile Devices 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

igating corporate risks and user acceptance has to be taken 
into account as well. In addition, security awareness pro-
grams for employees is a complementary factor for mitigat-
ing risks in the mobile environments.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper, mobile security countermeasures has been 
derived along with their restrictions on mobile devices’ us-
age. Generally, from a technical point of view, a high securi-
ty level on mobile devices can be achieved by setting a high 
level of restrictions. However, this decreases the mobile user 
satisfactions. A questionnaire has also been conducted to 
investigate the mobile user’ acceptance of the potential re-
strictions. The user acceptance rate can affect the user deci-
sion to use mobile devices. If the user acceptance is low, the 
user will not be able to use the mobile device at work. Con-
sequently, the company will lose the advantages gained from 
employing mobility. Having a general overview on the user 
acceptance rate will help the enterprises in selecting the 
needed security countermeasures side by side with keeping a 
balance between security and usability. 
In this paper, the extension of TAM was out of the scope. 
However, the results presented in this paper was part of an 
ongoing research that will proceed to extend the TAM. This 
extension will include the applied mobile security counter-
measures and their consequences as factors that can affect 
the user acceptance of using mobile business applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We gratefully acknowledge that this work is supported 
by fund coming from Lufthansa Industry Solutions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Basole and W. Rouse, “Mobile Enterprise Readiness and 
Transformation,” Idea Group Inc. IGI, 2006. 
[2] A. Jain and D. Shanbhag, “Addressing Security and Privacy 
Risks in Mobile Applications,” IT Professional, vol. 14, no. 5, 
2012, pp. 28-33. 
[3] Internet Society, Global Internet Report 2014. Available: 
http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/files/Global_Inter
net_Report_2014_0.pdf [retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[4] J. Ranjan and V. Bhatnagar, “A holistic framework for 
mCRM – data mining perspective,” Information Management 
& Computer Security, vol. 17, no. 2, 2009, pp. 151-165. 
[5] D. Sangroha and V. Gupta, “Exploring Security Theory 
Approach in BYOD Environment,” in Smart Innovation, 
Systems 
and 
Technologies, 
Advanced 
Computing, 
Networking and Informatics- Volume 2, M. Kumar Kundu, D. 
P. Mohapatra, A. Konar, and A. Chakraborty, Eds, Cham: 
Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 259-266. 
[6] F. P. Seth, O. Taipale, and K. Smolander, “Role of Software 
Product Customer in the Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) 
Trend: 
Empirical 
Observations 
on 
Software 
Quality 
Construction,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Product-Focused 
Software 
Process 
Improvement, 
A. 
Jedlitschka, P. Kuvaja, M. Kuhrmann, T. Männistö, J. Münch, 
and M. Raatikainen, Eds, Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2014, pp. 194-208. 
[7] H. Hurley, E. Lai, and L. Piquet, Enterprise Mobility Guide 
2011. Dublin CA: Sybase, 2011. 
[8] J. H. Park, K. J. Yi, and Y. Jeong, “An enhanced smartphone 
security model based on information security management 
system (ISMS),” Electron Commer Res, vol. 14, no. 3, 2014, 
pp. 321-348. 
[9] T. Wright and C. Poellabauer, “Improved Mobile Device 
Security 
through 
Privacy 
Risk 
Assessment 
and 
Visualization,” in Data Engineering Workshops (ICDEW), 
IEEE 28th International Conference on, 2012, pp. 255-258. 
[10] W. Jeon, J. Kim, Y. Lee, and D. Won, “A Practical Analysis 
of Smartphone Security,” Human Interface and the 
Management of Information. Interacting with Information, pp. 
311-320, 2011. 
[11] M. Becher, F. C. Freiling, J. Hoffmann, T. Holz, S. 
Uellenbeck, and C. Wolf, “Mobile Security Catching Up? 
Revealing the Nuts and Bolts of the Security of Mobile 
Devices,” in Security and Privacy (SP), 2011 IEEE 
Symposium on: IEEE, 2011, pp. 96–111. 
[12] M. Landman, “Managing smart phone security risks,” in 
Information Security Curriculum Development Conference: 
ACM, 2010, pp. 145-155. 
[13] J. Oberheide and F. Jahanian, “When mobile is harder than 
fixed (and vice versa): demystifying security challenges in 
mobile environments,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems & Applications: 
ACM, 2010, pp. 43‐48. 
[14] Good Technology Corporation, Don’t Believe the Hype – All 
Containers are not Equal Protecting the 3 Cs of Se-cure 
Mobility. [White Paper]. Available: http://media.www1.good 
.com/documents/wp-dont-believe-the-hype.pdf 
[retrieved: 
May, 2015] 
[15] C. Lin, P. J. Hu, and H. Chen, “Technology Implementation 
Management in Law Enforcement COPLINK System 
Usability and User Acceptance Evaluations,” Social Science 
Computer Review, vol. 22, no. 1, 2004, pp. 24–36. 
[16] N. B. Osman, “Extending the Technology Acceptance Model 
for Mobile Government Systems,” development, vol. 5, p. 16. 
[17] Z. Benenson, A. Girard, I. Krontiris, V. Liagkou, K. 
Rannenberg, and Y. Stamatiou, “User Acceptance of Privacy-
ABCs: An Exploratory Study,” in Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Human Aspects of Information Security, Privacy, 
and Trust, T. Tryfonas and I. Askoxylakis, Eds.: Springer 
International Pub-lishing, 2014, pp. 375–386. 
[18] F. D. Davis, “User acceptance of information technology: 
system characteristics, user perceptions and behavioral 
impacts,” International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, vol. 
38, no. 3, 1993, pp. 475-487. 
[19] B. Hasan, V. Dmitriyev, J. Marx Gomez, and J. Kurzhoefer, 
“A framework along with guidelines for designing secure 
mobile enterprise applications,” in Security Technology 
(ICCST), 2014 International Carnahan Conference on: IEEE, 
2014, pp. 1-6. 
[20] N. Daswani, C. Kern, and A. Kesavan, Foundations of 
security: What every programmer needs to know: Apress, 
2007. 
[21] M. Rogowski, K. Saeed, M. Rybnik, M. Tabedzki, and M. 
Adamski, “User Authentication for Mobile Devices,” in 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Computer Information 
Systems and Industrial Management, D. Hutchison et al., Eds, 
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 47-
58. 
[22] M. Frank, R. Biedert, E. Ma, I. Martinovic, and D. Song, 
“Touchalytics: On the Applicability of Touchscreen Input as a 
Behavioral Biometric for Continuous Authentication,” IEEE 
Trans.Inform.Forensic Secur, vol. 8, no. 1, 2013, pp. 136-148. 
[23] Z. Cai, C. Shen, M. Wang, Y. Song, and J. Wang, “Mobile 
Authentication through Touch-Behavior Features,” in Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, Biometric Recognition, D. 
Hutchison et al., Eds, Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2013, pp. 386-393. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[24] IBM, IBM Worklight – Mobile Security Measures. Available: 
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/mobile-solutions/worklight 
/features/security/ [retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[25] M. Souppaya and S. Karen, Guidelines for Managing the 
Security of Mobile Devices in the Enterprise. Available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-124r1 
[retrieved: 
May, 2015]. 
[26] S. Aissi, N. Dabbous, and A. Prasad, Security for mobile 
networks and platforms. Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2006. 
[27] N. Leavitt, “Today's Mobile Security Requires a New 
Approach,” Computer, vol. 46, no. 11, 2013, pp. 16-19. 
[28] J. Lee, Y. Lee, and S.-C. Kim, “A White-List Based Security 
Architecture (WLSA) for the Safe Mobile Office in the 
BYOD Era,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Grid and 
Pervasive Computing, D. Hutchison et al., Eds, Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 860-865. 
[29] H. Orman, “Did You Want Privacy With That?: Personal 
Data Protection in Mobile Devices,” Internet Computing, 
IEEE, vol. 17, no. 3, 2013, pp. 83-86. 
[30] A. Shabtai, Y. Fledel, U. Kanonov, Y. Elovici, S. Dolev, and 
C. Glezer, “Google Android: A Comprehensive Security 
Assessment,” Security & Privacy, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 2, 2010, 
pp. 35-44. 
[31] B. Adolphi and H. Langweg, “Security Add-Ons for Mobile 
Platforms,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Secure IT 
Systems, D. Hutchison et al., Eds, Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 17-30. 
[32] B. Lebek, J. Uffen, M. H. Breitner, M. Neumann, and B. 
Hohler, “Employees' Information Security Awareness and 
Behavior: A Literature Review,” in System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on, 
2013, pp. 2978-2987. 
[33] B. Bulgurcu, H. Cavusoglu, and I. Benbasat, “Roles of 
information security awareness and perceived fairness in 
information security policy compliance,” AMCIS 2009 
Proceedings, 2009. 
[34] J. L. Spears and H. Barki, “User participation in information 
systems security risk management,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 34, 
no. 3, 2010, pp. 503–522. 
[35] F. Duarte, “Working with Corporate Social Responsibility in 
Brazilian Companies: The Role of Managers’ Values in the 
Maintenance of CSR Cultures,” J Bus Ethics, vol. 96, no. 3, 
2010, pp. 355-368. 
[36] J. T. Roscoe, Fundamental research statistics for the 
behavioral sciences. Holt, Rinehart and Winston New York. 
1969. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

