Implications of using a Large Initial Congestion
Window to Improve mSCTP Handover Delay
Johan Eklund
Department of Computer Science
Karlstad University
Sweden
Email: johan.eklund@kau.se
Karl-Johan Grinnemo
Department of Computer Science
Karlstad University
Sweden
Email: karl-johan.grinnemo@kau.se
Anna Brunstrom
Department of Computer Science
Karlstad University
Sweden
Email: anna.brunstrom@kau.se
Abstract—The currently rather heterogeneous wireless land-
scape makes handover between different network technologies,
so-called vertical handover, a key to a continued success for
wireless Internet access. Recently, an extension to the Stream
Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) – the Dynamic Address
Reconﬁguration (DAR) extension – was standardized by IETF.
This extension enables the use of SCTP for vertical handover.
Still, the way vertical handover works in SCTP with DAR
makes it less suitable for real-time trafﬁc. Particularly, it takes a
signiﬁcant amount of time for the trafﬁc to ramp up to full
speed on the handover target path. In this paper, we study
the implications of an increased initial congestion window for
real-time trafﬁc on the handover target path when competing
trafﬁc is present. The results clearly show that an increased
initial congestion window could signiﬁcantly reduce the transfer
delay for real-time trafﬁc, provided the fair share of the available
capacity on the handover target path is sufﬁciently higher than
the send rate required by the real-time ﬂow. Additionally, we
notice that this performance gain comes without penalizing the
competing trafﬁc.
Keywords-SCTP; dynamic address reconﬁguration; video; mo-
bility; handover; congestion control; slow start
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless networks comprises a variety of technologies,
e.g., cellular (3G/4G), WiFi, and WiMAX. Additionally, the
number of terminals with multiple wireless interfaces to access
Internet is rapidly increasing. Ubiquitous connectivity is made
possible by the ability for a single device to roam between
heterogeneous networks. The goal for this, so-called, vertical
handover is to be transparent to the end user.
The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [1],
with its multihoming feature, and its extension for Dynamic
Address Reconﬁguration (DAR) [2], a.k.a. mSCTP, has be-
come a promising alternative for vertical handover. The DAR
mechanism enables for SCTP to dynamically add and remove
IP addresses to an ongoing session.
However, to be able to provide a seamless handover, mSCTP
needs to have an efﬁcient handover detection mechanism, par-
ticularly a mechanism that anticipates the loss of connectivity
to the current access point. Furthermore, mSCTP has to start
up swiftly on the handover target path. Although a vertical
handover detection mechanism is indeed important, several
works have already studied this issue. Thus, in this paper it
is assumed that we have an optimized handover mechanism
that contributes marginally to the handover delay. Instead, this
paper focuses on the second issue: the startup on the handover
target path. In fact, earlier studies [3], [4] have shown that even
in a scenario with an ideal handover detection mechanism,
the mobile terminal may experience a non-negligible service
disruption, due to the startup phase on the handover target
path. We have also seen that a way to mitigate this startup
delay after handover could be to increase the initial congestion
window (init cwnd) on the handover target path.
This paper is a continuation of our previous study on
using an increased init cwnd to improve the vertical handover
performance of mSCTP. Particularly, the paper studies the
implications of an increased init cwnd, in terms of latency
and fairness, in a situation with competing trafﬁc. We study
the impact of using an init cwnd for the mSCTP trafﬁc, on
both mSCTP and the competing trafﬁc.
The paper considers the effects on real-time video trafﬁc
(H.264, HQ) in scenarios, which are intended to model a
vertical handover from an arbitrary wireless network to a
cellular 3G or 4G network. The competing trafﬁc on the
handover target path consists of elastic background trafﬁc. In
this case, one or several TCP ﬂows.
The results of our study suggest that an increased init cwnd
could signiﬁcantly reduce the handover delay, provided the
capacity required by the video trafﬁc is signiﬁcantly lower
than its fair share on the handover target path. The results
also suggest that this performance gain has no effect on the
short-time fairness to competing trafﬁc.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II gives an overview of SCTP with a focus on its support
for multihoming. Next, Section III discusses the setup and
methodology used in our experimental study. The results from
the study are presented and discussed in Section IV. Section V
surveys related work. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper
and brieﬂy mentions ongoing and future work.
II. PRELIMINARIES
The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP), origi-
nally developed as a transport protocol to serve telephony call-
control signaling, is today standardized as a general-purpose
transport protocol in RFC 4960 [1]. Still, new developments on
SCTP are being made. Several of the current standardization
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

competing ﬂows, and the hc network experiments with 1,2
and 5 video ﬂows and with 2, 5 and 10 competing ﬂows.
TABLE I
PARAMETERS FOR THE DIFFERENT NETWORK TYPES
lc
hc
Bandwidth (MBps)
6
45
RTT (ms)
300
40
Competing ﬂows
1, 2
2, 5, 10
mSCTP associations
1, 2
1, 2, 5
init cwnd (MSS)
3 (default), 10, 20, NR
3 (default), 10, 20, NR
The Maximum Segment Size (MSS) for a datagram was in
the experiment set to 1500 Bytes. The experiments were run
with an init cwnd of 3 MSS (default), 10 and 20 MSS for
the video trafﬁc. Furthermore, to obtain an appreciation of the
startup performance in a scenario where the init cwnd did not
impose any restriction on the video transfer, we utilized an
init cwnd of 50 KBytes (NR), that is an init cwnd larger than
the maximum number of outstanding packets in any of the
considered experiments. The competing trafﬁc was sent with
the default init cwnd of 3 MSS. Well aware of the ongoing
discussion on the size of the router buffers [18], we conducted
the experiments with a router buffer of one BDP (225 KB)2, a
typical recommendation in the literature. The send and receive
buffers, as well as the maximum ssthresh of the end hosts
were set to large sizes, not to impose any restrictions on the
video transfer.
IV. RESULTS
In every experiment, the transfer times of the individual
messages in the video ﬂow (MTTs) were measured. The
MTT was measured as the time from the generation of a
message by the source application until the message was
received by the destination application. Additionally, in all
experiments we extracted the Maximum MTT (MMTT).
Previous studies [4] suggest that the MMTT is related to the
number of messages being affected by the handover delay. To
be able to analyze whether or not the size of the init cwnd had
any impact on the competing trafﬁc, we monitored the total
throughput of the competing TCP ﬂows. The throughput was
sampled every 5 seconds. Henceforth, we call every sample a
measurement point.
For normality assumptions to apply, we chose to repeat
each experiment 40 times, and from the results we calculated
the average value together with a 95% conﬁdence interval. In
the remainder of this section, the results from the lc and hc
handover experiments are presented.
A. Handover to a low capacity network
The long transfer times, and the restricted bandwidth are
parameters that are crucial for the handover performance in
lc networks. Figure 3 represents a scenario where one video
2The BDP for the lc and the hc networks turned out to be the same, although
the bandwidths and the latencies differed.

measurement point 17. It also follows that the TCP trafﬁc
backed off appropriately to let the arriving video ﬂow have its
fair share of the bandwidth. Moreover, the ﬁgure indicates that
the more aggressive startup, which was a result of an increased
init cwnd, had no signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the
competing trafﬁc.

Similar results were obtained in the experiments where ﬁve
mSCTP ﬂows were handed over to an hc target path with
two competing TCP ﬂows; a startup delay was observed in
those cases the default init cwnd was used, but this delay
disappeared when the init cwnd was increased to 10 segments.
The result for one of the mSCTP ﬂows in the scenario with
5 mSCTP ﬂows being handed over to a target path with 2
competing ﬂows present are seen in Figure 94.

are duplicated, and transmitted on both the handover source
and target paths. Similar to cSCTP, SIGMA uses both the
source and target paths during a handover. The SIGMA archi-
tecture has in a later work called ECHO [28] been improved
to enable QoS-aware handovers.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have studied the impact of an increased
initial congestion window for real-time trafﬁc after a vertical
handover to a target path where competing TCP trafﬁc is
present. The study has been conducted with network parameter
settings intended to be representative of wireless 3G and 4G
cellular networks.
We have seen that the ﬂow or ﬂows handed over to the
target path may signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from an increased initial
congestion window in terms of lower message transfer times.
Since the trafﬁc present on the target path does not always
back off appropriately, the requirement is that the fair share
of the capacity on the target path is far above the capacity
required by the sending application.
Additionally, the results show no negative impact on the
competing TCP ﬂows by an increased initial congestion win-
dow. This fact is important, since a more aggressive startup
mechanism should not penalize other trafﬁc.
The work in this area will proceed by integrating the option
of a larger initial congestion window in an Android platform
of ours, to be able to verify the impact of this altered startup
mechanism in real vertical handover scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work has been supported by grants from VINNOVA,
the Swedish Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Stewart, “Stream Control Transmission Protocol,” RFC 4960, Sep.
2007.
[2] R. Stewart, Q. Xie, M. Tuexen, S. Maruyama, and M. Kozuka, “Stream
Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Dynamic Address Reconﬁgura-
tion,” RFC 5061, Sep. 2007.
[3] J. Eklund, K.-J. Grinnemo, A. Brunstrom, G. Cheimonidis, and Y. Is-
mailov, “Impact of Slow Start on SCTP Handover Performance,” in
Proc. of 20th International Conference on Computer Communications
and Networks (ICCCN), Maui, HI, USA, Aug. 2011, pp. 1–7.
[4] J. Eklund, K.-J. Grinnemo, and A. Brunstrom, “On the Use of an
Increased Initial Congestion Window to Improve mSCTP Handover
Performance,” in Proc. of 26th IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA), Fukuoka,
Japan, Mar. 2012, pp. 1101–1106.
[5] T. Dreibholz, E. Rathgeb, I. Ruengeler, R. Seggelmann, M. Tuexen,
and R. Stewart, “Stream control transmission protocol: Past, current,
and future standardization activities,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 82–88, Apr. 2011.
[6] R. Stewart, M. Ramalho, Q. Xie, M. Tuexen, and P. Conrad, “Stream
control transmission protocol (SCTP) partially reliable extension,” RFC
3758, May 2004.
[7] M. Tuexen, R. Stewart, P. Lei, and E. Rescorla, “Authenticated chunks
for the stream control transmission protocol (SCTP),” RFC 4895, Aug.
2007.
[8] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, and A. Romanov, “TCP selective
acknowledgement options,” RFC 2018, Oct. 1996.
[9] S. J. Koh, H. Y. Jung, and J. H. Min, “Transport layer internet mobility
based on mSCTP,” in IEEE 6th International Conference on Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT), Korea, sep 2004, pp. 329–333.
[10] Y. Kim and S. Lee, “mSCTP-based handover scheme for vehicular
networks,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 828–830,
Aug. 2011.
[11] K. Zheng, M. Liu, Z.-C. Li, and G. Xu, “SHOP: An integrated scheme
for SCTP handover optimization in multihomed environments,” in IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), New Orleans,
Lousiana, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[12] P. Soderman, K.-J. Grinnemo, Cheimonidis, Y. Ismailov, and A. Brun-
strom, “An SCTP-based Mobility Management Framework for Smart-
phones and Tablets,” in Proc. of 26th IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA), Fukuoka,
Japan, Mar. 2012, pp. 1107–1112.
[13] J. Garcia, E. Conchon, T. Perennou, and A. Brunstrom, “KauNet:
Improving Reproducibility for Wireless and Mobile Research,” in Proc.
of 1st international workshop on system evaluation for mobile plat-
forms(MobiEval07), San Juan, Puerto Rico, Jun. 2007, pp. 21–26.
[14] “Dummynet
homepage,”
Jun
2012.
[Online].
Available:
info.iet.unipi.it/luigi/dummynet/
[15] G. V. Auwera, P. T. David, and M. Reisslein, “Trafﬁc and quality
characterization of single-layer video streams encoded with H.264/AVC
advanced video coding standard and scalable video coding extension,”
IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 698–718, 2008.
[16] P. Seeling, M. Reisslein, and B. Kulapala, “Network performance
evaluation using frame size and quality traces of single-layer and two-
layer video: A tutorial,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 58–78, 2004.
[17] “Iperf
homepage,”
Jun
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/iperf/
[18] A. Vishwanath, V. Sivaraman, and M. Thottan, “Perspectives on router
buffer sizing: recent results and open problems,” ACM SIGCOMM
Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 34–39, Mar. 2009.
[19] A. Afanasyev, N. Tilley, P. Reiher, and L. Kleinrock, “Host-to-host
congestion control for tcp,” Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 304–342, 2010.
[20] J. Chu, N. Dukkipati, Y. Cheng, and M. Mathis, “Increasing TCP’s Initial
Window,” IETF Internet draft, work in progress, Oct. 2011.
[21] N. Dukkipati, T. Reﬁce, Y. Cheng, J. J. Chu, T. Herbert, A. Agarwal,
A. A. Jain, and S. Natalia, “An argument for increasing TCP’s initial
congestion window,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Re-
view, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 26–33, 2010.
[22] K. Lee, S. Nam, and B. Mun, “SCTP efﬁcient ﬂow control during
handover,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, Apr. 2006, pp. 69–73.
[23] C. Dovriolis, P. Ramanathan, and D. Moore, “What do packet dis-
persion techniques measure?” in Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), Anchorage, Alaska, USA,
Apr. 2001, pp. 905–914.
[24] K. Lai and M. Baker, “Nettimer: A tool for measuring bottleneck link
bandwidth,” in Proc. USENIX Symposium on Internet Technologies and
Systems, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, Mar. 2001, pp. 123–134.
[25] S. J. Koh, M. J. Chang, and M. Lee, “mSCTP for soft handover in
transport layer,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 189–
191, Mar. 2004.
[26] I. Aydin, W. Seok, and C.-C. Shen, “Cellular SCTP: a transport-layer
approach to Internet mobility,” in The 12th International Conference
on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), Dallas, Texas,
USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 285–290.
[27] S. Fu, L. Ma, M. Atiquzzaman, and Y.-J. Lee, “Architecture and Per-
formance of SIGMA: A Seamless Mobility Architecture for Data Net-
works,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
Seoul, Korea, May 2005, pp. 3249–3253.
[28] J. Fitzpatrick, S. Murphy, M. Atiquzzaman, and J. Murphy, “ECHO: A
quality of service based endpoint centric handover scheme for VoIP,”
in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC).
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA: IEEE, Mar. 2008, pp. 2777–2782.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

