Sensing Learner Access to the Knowledge Spatially Embedded in the World
Masaya Okada
Graduate School of Science and Technology,
Shizuoka University
3-5-1, Jyohoku, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan
email: m.okada@acm.org
Masahiro Tada
ATR Intelligent Robotics and Communication
Laboratories
2-2-2, Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto, Japan
email: mtada@atr.jp
Abstract—Real-world learning is an important application
domain of mobile computing technologies. Real-world learning
offers valuable opportunities for encouraging learners to acquire
knowledge through experience in the world. Formative assess-
ment by constant monitoring of intellectual achievement is an ef-
fective means of providing learners with adaptive support accord-
ing to their situation. However, it is difﬁcult to measure behavior
and knowledge acquired in the real world, and no methodology
has yet been developed to allow a formative assessment of learners
in a real-world learning ﬁeld (e.g., the natural environment). In
this paper, we demonstrate that knowledge is three-dimensionally
embedded in the world, and show a method for estimating
how learners access such real-world knowledge. Our technology
recognizes characteristic stay behavior and the associated body
posture of learners, three-dimensionally estimates the target of
their interest, and identiﬁes the learning situation at any given
time. As main achievements of our data analyses, we found that
real-world knowledge is not only region dependent but also height
dependent. We also showed that the learning topic of interest
can be identiﬁed with wearable sensors (e.g., positioning sensors,
3-axis accelerometers, 3-axis gyroscopes, a barometer). These
results are fundamental for realizing adaptive learning support
based on systematic formative assessment.
Keywords–mobile application; mobile learning; behavior recog-
nition; context-aware service; real-world knowledge
I. INTRODUCTION
The ubiquity of computer technology is changing our daily
activities and creating a next-generation society. Human intel-
lectual activities in such a changing society are becoming more
diverse, and more real-world oriented. To develop engineering
technologies to enhance human activities, it is of fundamental
importance to understand the dynamics of human knowledge
processing. This paper focuses on people who interact with
and learn in the real world, and makes a proposal for un-
derstanding how they access the knowledge that exists in the
world.
A. Learning in and from the world
A cognitive architecture has traditionally been considered to
be a process for forming a structured internal representation of
the cognitive behavior of a person. In contrast, the theory of
situated cognition postulates that a learner’s cognitive process
is embedded in the world, and proposes a cognitive archi-
tecture for acquiring knowledge through human interaction
with the world [1], [2]. Real-world knowledge is embedded in
situations [1], [2], and learners need to interact with the world,
to have diverse experiences, and to autonomously investigate,
ﬁnd, and acquire real-world knowledge. Discovery learning
through bottom-up knowledge acquisition is an important
requirement of real-world learning. Environmental learning
in nature is a typical example of real-world learning, and is
selected as our model case.
B. Formative assessment of real-world learning
Formative assessment by constant monitoring of changes in
learning situations is an essential factor for realizing adaptive
learning support. Periodically testing the achievements of
learners is a conventional method of formative assessment
that is generally used in the case of desktop learning in
a classroom. Learning management systems (LMS) assess
learners’ understanding by analyzing access logs of the LMS,
and reviewing the results of tests and reports [3].
The main difference between desktop learning and real-
world learning is that the effects of real-world learning depend
on the outdoor experience of the learner. However, it is difﬁcult
to measure behavior and knowledge acquired in the real
world, and no conventional research on real-world learning has
proposed a methodology for carrying out a real-time evaluation
of a learning situation that changes from moment to moment.
There are no techniques to assess what real-world knowledge
has been adequately acquired, and whether real-world learners
have carried out meaningful activities for understanding their
surroundings. These are problems that limit the effect of real-
world learning.
The following are goals of the formative assessment method
that we consider in the present research: (1) assessing how
learners expand the areas that they are interested in, (2)
assessing the time-series change in the degree that learners
are occupied in conducting important learning activities, and
(3) assessing the time-series change in the learning topics
that learners are interested in and examine. Such formative
assessment can dynamically provide learners with dedicated
learning support that is well tailored to each individual learner,
and will reﬁne the conventional methodology for supporting
real-world learning.
C. Research objective
Real-world learners interact with the world, select from a
range of possible actions, and then execute an action. The
ﬁnal output of the brain is behavior, and the intellectual state
of real-world learners is to some extent physically reﬂected
by their body. Although it is not possible to directly observe
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

stable
stay
Estimation by signal processing
Estimation by information integration
location
head
posture
body
posture
important
learning
Learning situation
Sensor data
LPS
GPS
Physical activities
place of
interest
barometer
Advanced learning support based on
formative assessment of real-world learning
learning
topic
acceler
-ometer
gyroscope
Utilization as context information
Fig. 1.
Estimating learning situation by sensing physical behavior.
the thinking process of learners, their interaction with the
world can be observed from outside, and can be a clue to
understanding learning situations.
Real-world learners use their body to interact with the
surroundings, and in this way obtain knowledge about the
world. A learner’s body can be considered to be a sensor
for obtaining information about the real world, and also an
actuator for manipulating the world. Therefore, in the present
research, as a fundamental approach for achieving advanced
intellectual support based on systematic formative assessment
of real-world learning, we developed a sensing technology that
can identify the behavior of real-world learners, and estimate
the nature of their intellectual activity in real time. The
system recognizes physical behavior using low-level signal
processing, integrates the recognition results, and thus forms
an understanding of learning situations at a high level of
abstraction (Figure 1).
D. Table of contents
Section II shows our sensing technique to precisely deter-
mine the time series of important learning activities in the
world. Section III focuses on the spatial structure of a real-
world learning ﬁeld, and demonstrates that knowledge is three-
dimensionally embedded in the world. Section IV proposes
our sensing technology to determine the learning topic that a
learner is examining, and to understand how learners access
knowledge that exists in the real world. Section V discusses
our contribution and potential applications. Section VI con-
cludes this paper with a brief summary of our achievements.
II. TIME SERIES OF IMPORTANT LEARNING ACTIVITIES
A. Important learning activities and unimportant activities
Determining how real-world learners carry out important
learning activities is useful for forming an understanding of
how they access knowledge embedded in the world. Based
on past research [4], we can divide environmental learning
activities into two categories: important learning activities and
unimportant activities. We can deﬁne important and unimpor-
tant activities as follows:
• Important learning activities
– Observation: An activity for acquiring knowledge
through interaction with the world (e.g., observation
or survey focusing on a certain target, such as
touching plants and soil, or writing ﬁeld notes while
inspecting an observation target).
– Knowledge exchange: A conversation activity for
interactively solving a problem through externalizing
and exchanging knowledge (e.g., cooperative think-
ing through conversation and discussion). Trivial
chat is not regarded as a knowledge exchange.
– Intellectual investigation: The most important activ-
ity, involving simultaneous observation and knowl-
edge exchange (e.g., cooperative thinking and discus-
sion through a collaborative ﬁeld survey). Physical
and internal experiences mutually inﬂuence each
other. Real-world knowledge embedded in a situation
[1], [2] is maximally utilized by intellectual investi-
gation.
• Unimportant activities
Lack of observation, lack of conversation, idle talk, rest,
and so on.
B. Determining intellectual activity through real-world behav-
ior
The time when a learner carries out a learning activity is
meaningful information for understanding knowledge acquisi-
tion. Although human behavior can be estimated from sensing
data [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], it is conventionally difﬁcult to
estimate the intellectual state of a learner by using sensors. To
begin with, sensors are tools for measuring physical quantities
(e.g., velocity, acceleration, angular velocity, signal strength)
associated with body movement. Conventional research uses
such sensors to recognize human physical behavior. A typical
example is identifying the location of humans at a given time
[5]. Other examples include recognition of daily activities
(e.g., walking, ascending stairs) [6], and abnormal activities
(e.g., slipping on a wet ﬂoor) [7]. This has recently been
extended to the ability to sense human activities using con-
sumer devices such as mobile phones [8], [9]. However, few
studies have attempted to determine the relationship between
the physical behavior and intellectual state of humans. Hence,
even if we measure real-world activities using sensors, it is
quite difﬁcult to infer the internal intellectual state of the
learner. Thus, we conducted ﬁeld surveys to investigate the
relationship between learner behavior and important learning
activities, and obtained the following signiﬁcant results [10].
1) When learners walk carelessly about in an environment,
they rarely have enthusiastic discussions and obtain only
superﬁcial information about the environment.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Sensing of real-world learning
Estimation
Observation
2,539 sec.
(32.60%)
Intellectual
Investigation
4,025 sec.
(51.69%)
Unimportant
Activities
1,001 sec.
(12.86%)
Knowledge
Exchange
222 sec.
(2.85%)
Recognition results
Learners in the state of stable stay
Local Positioning 
System (LPS) 
GPS
receiver
Fig. 2.
Automatic accurate identiﬁcation of important learning activities (precision=87.14%).
2) When learners engage in important learning activities
(i.e., observation, knowledge exchange, intellectual in-
vestigation), they display a characteristic stay behavior.
We call this behavior stable stay. Stable stay is deﬁned
as a condition that extends for Tt [sec] or more, in which
a ﬁxed body posture is adopted (horizontal angular rota-
tion of Tθ [deg/sec] or less) and movement is restricted
to a velocity of Tv [m/sec] or less. Stable stay includes
the state of crouching down. The learners in Figure 2
are exhibiting stable stay behavior.
3) When learners are not focused on a speciﬁc learning
topic and casually look around, their body orientation
in the horizontal plane is not ﬁxed, even if they are not
walking.
C. Recognizing important learning activities by sensing stable
stay conditions
Under stable stay conditions, the possibility that important
learning occurred was found to be 3.12 times higher than
for other conditions [10]. On the grounds that important
learning activities and stable stay conditions frequently co-
occur [10], each learner was given a wearable local positioning
system (LPS) (255 g, 111 x 82 x 39 mm, Figure 2) to be
placed on their lower back in order to determine the time
series of important learning activities. The LPS is a sensor
for recording the local movement and body orientation of a
learner. Important learning activities were identiﬁed based on
the detection of stable stay conditions with three threshold
parameters (Tt = 15.00 [sec], Tv = 0.10 [m/sec], Tθ = 60.00
[deg/sec]). These values were determined by pre-evaluating
sensor data for two experimental learners and inspecting the
data distribution of physical movements associated with both
important learning activities and unimportant activities. The
data for these two learners were not used in the subsequent
experiments for evaluating the recognition accuracy.
We evaluated the accuracy of the recognition method using
ground-truth data for the time series of stable stay conditions
and important learning activities (18,000 sec; data for ﬁve
groups representing 15 learners). As shown in the pie chart in
Figure 2, the recognition results mostly fell into the important
23
34
 6
14
22
33
47
 5
13
32
46
59
 4
12
31
45
58
 3
11
21
44
57
69
 2
10
20
43
56
68
 1
 9
19
30
42
55
67
 8
18
29
41
54
66
76 
 7 
17
28
40
53
65
75
16
27
39
52
64
74
15
26
38
51
63
73
25
37
50
62
72
80
24
36
49
61
71
79
35
48
60
70
78
77
Field area for learning
Fig. 3.
Region map of Kamigamo Experimental Forest, Kyoto University.
learning category. We conﬁrmed that the method could ac-
curately recognize the time when important learning occurred
(precision = 87.14%) by automatically analyzing the LPS data
for the learners.
III. KNOWLEDGE THREE-DIMENSIONALLY EMBEDDED IN
THE WORLD
A. Regional dependence of learning topics
As shown in Figure 2, learners exhibit a wide variety of
behavior such as looking at various parts of the environment,
touching objects at various points with their hands, and observ-
ing objects while crouching down. However, whatever each
learner actually notices, observes or investigates, stable stay
behavior is commonly displayed when important learning ac-
tivities are performed. This is an important ﬁnding concerning
the common structure of diverse learning activities.
Important learning is a learning activity for accessing
knowledge embedded in the real world. By sensing stable
stay conditions, an accurate estimation can be made of how
such important learning occurs in a learning ﬁeld. Moreover,
by tracing the location of learners with a GPS receiver,
both the places of interest and the time spent engaged in
important learning activities can be determined. Although this
is an advanced approach to determining the time sequence of
important learning activities, it is still difﬁcult to estimate what
a learner actually learns.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 4.
Learner behavior in a natural ecosystem with a multi-layered
hierarchy.
By identifying the targets on which important learning
activities are focused, we hope to be able to clarify the
associated content and the knowledge acquisition process.
Here, if “what is learned” is related to “the position of the
learner”, the range of learning topics can be narrowed down
based on location. To determine whether this is the case, we
conducted experiments in a part (130 x 50 m; Figure 3) of
Kamigamo Experimental Forest, Kyoto University, with 15
learners in March, 2010. We found that the learners considered
a total of 142 topics. These included, for example, “the
symbiotic relationship between mushrooms and moss”, and
“the relationship between pinecone features and the growth
environment of pine trees.” We divided the ﬁeld using a
10 x 10 m grid, and deﬁned 80 different regions (Figure
3). We found that the topics that the learners considered
tended to depend on their location. Speciﬁcally, on average,
each topic was considered in 1.71 regions, and 2.16 topics
were considered per region. The topics and the locations are
closely related, which illustrates the uniqueness of the physical
information in each region.
B. Height dependence of learning topics
Based on the regional dependence of the learning top-
ics, two-dimensional (2D) positional information is useful
for narrowing down possible learning topics. However, in
regions where more than one learning topic exists, 2D place
information is insufﬁcient to uniquely identify the topic of
interest. We therefore need to consider additional information
for the determination of learner context. We note that a natural
ecosystem generally has a multi-layered hierarchy. As shown
in Figure 4, learners behave differently even if they stay
in the same place. They sometimes look up and sometimes
crouch down, and their posture changes according to the
learning topics that they consider. We therefore performed a
3D classiﬁcation of the 142 topics learned in the experiment.
We found that the topics were not only region dependent
but also height dependent and could be categorized into the
following three layers:
• Upper layer: Objects above the level of the learners’
heads (e.g., tall trees, branches and leaves, light sources).
The topics in this category are often examined when a
learner is looking up.
• Middle layer: Objects at eye level (e.g., tree trunks,
2-Dimensional estimation
3-Dimensional estimation
Enhancement
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
F
F
G
G
(A-G: learning topics)
Upper layer 
Middle layer 
Lower layer 
Fig. 5.
3D determination of the learning topics that a learner examines.
looking 
straight
head position 1
looking
 up
crouching 
down
head position 2
Fig. 6.
Observation target and posture.
bushes). The topics in this category are often examined
when a learner is looking straight ahead.
• Lower layer: Objects at ground level (e.g., mushrooms,
moss, soil, undergrowth, aerial roots, mountain stream,
pond). The topics in this category are often examined
when a learner is looking down or crouching down.
What a learner examines depends on the region, and each
region offers only a small number of topics. Moreover, this
research also found that each layer of an ecosystem contains
different knowledge, and height is therefore another factor
inﬂuencing the knowledge that a learner can obtain. Even if
more than one topic occurs in the same region, we found that
height information is useful for distinguishing such topics. If
the learning topics cannot be distinguished in a 2D space, it
is possible to distinguish them in a higher 3D space (Figure
5).
IV. DETERMINING THE CURRENTLY EXAMINED TOPIC
Stable stay is a condition that is deﬁned in a horizontal 2D
plane and can be used for robust identiﬁcation of an important
learning activity. As discussed in Subsection III-B, the posture
of learners reﬂects their interests at that time. We therefore
extended the technique for recognizing stable stay behavior
to also identify the posture involved, thus allowing the 3D
position of the topic of interest to be determined.
A. Wearable sensors
Using an eye-mark recorder, it might be feasible to track
the gaze direction of a learner. However, such devices are
currently large and heavy, and restrict the movement of learn-
ers. Furthermore, when learners move, their location and head
direction constantly change without constraint. This makes it
difﬁcult to use data from an eye-mark recorder for automatic
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

x
z
y
x
y
z
(   : gravitational acceleration)
standing upright
bending down
Hybrid sensor with
a 3-axis accelerometer,
a 3-axis gyroscope,
and a barometer
x
z
y
z
y
x
Fig. 7.
Gravitational acceleration and learner’s posture.
determination of what is being observed. On the other hand,
it is known that head direction and gaze direction are closely
related, so that head direction can be substituted for gaze
direction [11]. For example, as shown in Figure 4 and Figure
6, to observe objects at ground level, learners need to crouch
or bend their head down. A learner who is crouching down
has a different head height to one who is standing upright
(Figure 6). Thus, we classiﬁed a learner’s posture (e.g., looking
straight ahead, looking up, looking down, crouching down)
based on head height and body tilt. Each learner was provided
with wearable-type hybrid sensors shown in Figure 7 (head
and body), in addition to a LPS (lower back) and a GPS
(head) for sensing stable stay conditions. The hybrid sensor
(22g, 37 x 46 x 12 mm) has a 3-axis accelerometer (50Hz),
a 3-axis gyroscope (50Hz), and a barometer (25Hz) built
in. The accelerometers are for obtaining 3D tilt information,
and the barometers are for obtaining height information. The
gyroscopes are for obtaining 3D information on the rotation
of a learner’s body and head.
B. Estimating posture
When designing a classiﬁer for recognizing human behavior,
it is ﬁrst necessary to understand the typical characteristics of
sensor data associated with each of the target behaviors. Thus,
we investigated the sensor data obtained in our experiments.
As shown in Figure 7, when a learner stands upright and is
looking straight ahead, the output from the vertical axes of
the accelerometers (i.e., the x-axis of the body sensor, the z-
axis of the head sensor) should almost equal the gravitational
acceleration (1000 mG). On the other hand, when the body
and head of a learner tilts, the accelerometers also tilt. When
the body and head rotate about the y-axis, the gravitational
acceleration is split into two components along the x-axis
and z-axis. For example, as shown in Figure 8, the sensor
output exhibits different characteristics when a learner displays
different target behaviors (e.g., looking up, standing upright,
crouching down). Thus, acceleration data are useful for deter-
mining body posture. Data on air pressure and angular velocity
are also useful for measuring head position and body rotation.
We are currently in the process of implementing such
a body posture identiﬁcation technique. The integration of
multimodal sensor data is carried out using a machine learning
method such as a support vector machine (SVM), which can
achieve a high generalization performance. The non-linear
discrimination function is deﬁned by the below formula.
f(ϕ(x)) =
n
∑
i=1
αiyiK(x, xi) + b
(1)
K(x, xi) is a kernel function, and we used the following
Gaussian kernel:
K(x, xi) = exp (−||x − xi||2
σ2
)
(2)
C is the soft margin parameter, and α are Lagrange multi-
pliers. Machine learning in a feature space is carried out by
solving the following optimization problem under constraints:
max
α
n
∑
i=1
αi − 1
2
n
∑
i,j=1
αiαjyiyjK(xi, xj)
(3)
Subject to
0 ≤ αi ≤ C,
n
∑
i=1
αiyi = 0
(4)
V. DISCUSSION
Our essential interest centers on understanding how knowl-
edge is generated and develops in the real world. The aim
of the present research is to make it possible to observe the
process by which intellectual activities occur and progress
in a real-world learning ﬁeld, and to assess such activities
using an objective standard. Although recognition of physical
behavior can be approached using a machine learning method,
it is conventionally difﬁcult to estimate the corresponding
intellectual state. This is because there is a wall between
understanding superﬁcial-level behavior and the internal-level
learning situation. An essential difﬁculty is that the correlation
between physical behavior and the intellectual state is not
known.
In order to overcome this difﬁculty, we have proposed a new
approach for sensing intellectual behavior by the complemen-
tary use of information on human activity and the spatial struc-
ture of the learning ﬁeld. First, we noted the role of a learner’s
body as an interactive medium for obtaining knowledge from
the surroundings. Thus, we investigated a characteristic stay
behavior that can effectively identify situations during which
a learner is engaged in important learning activity. We also
showed a method for automatically recognizing the occurrence
of such behavior using signal processing.
Second, this research conﬁrmed the 2D regional dependence
of learning topics in a real-world learning ﬁeld, and showed
that each region offers only a small number of topics. The
research also focused on the 3D spatial structure of the ﬁeld,
i.e., the vertical distribution of an ecosystem in a multi-layered
hierarchy. The results indicated that each layer contains differ-
ent knowledge, and height is an important factor inﬂuencing
the knowledge that a learner can obtain. Even if more than
one topic occurs in the same region, we found that height
information can be used to uniquely distinguish the topic being
learned. We also consider the possibility of classifying human
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

13:00:37.501
13:00:38.221
13:00:38.941
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
head (crouching down)
time [hh:mm:ss.xxx]
acceleration [mG]
 
 
x
y
z
13:00:37.501
13:00:38.221
13:00:38.941
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
body (crouching down)
time [hh:mm:ss.xxx]
acceleration [mG]
 
 
x
y
z
13:01:15.001
13:01:16.481
13:01:17.961
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
head (looking up)
time [hh:mm:ss.xxx]
acceleration [mG]
 
 
x
y
z
13:01:15.001
13:01:16.481
13:01:17.961
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
body (looking up)
time [hh:mm:ss.xxx]
acceleration [mG]
 
 
x
y
z
13:08:00.701
13:08:27.741
13:08:54.781
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
head (standing upright)
time [hh:mm:ss.xxx]
acceleration [mG]
 
 
x
y
z
13:08:00.701
13:08:27.741
13:08:54.781
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
body (standing upright)
time [hh:mm:ss.xxx]
acceleration [mG]
 
 
x
y
z
Fig. 8.
Learner acceleration data for different target behaviors.
posture with respect to the vertical direction using a machine
learning technique to three-dimensionally identify the learner’s
topic of interest.
This paper examined relationship among the human body,
intelligence, and the environment by investigating real-world
learning as a model case. Although many studies have been
carried out on groupware, learning support, and ubiquitous
computing, it is an unsolved and important problem to esti-
mate intellectual situations at a high level of abstraction by
integrating the results of low-level signal recognition.
It is hoped that our approach will act as a core for realizing
an advanced service for context-aware learning support. For
example, it could identify learning objects whose existence is
overlooked or whose value is not discovered. This technique
could identify 3D locations where knowledge has not yet been
found, and could selectively encourage a learner to be aware
of potential information. Moreover, numerical indices could
be generated of how diversely and actively a learner studied,
which are useful for assessing intellectual activity in real-world
learning ﬁelds.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To enhance human intellectual activity, it is important to
understand how humans acquire and process knowledge. This
paper focused on people who interact with their surround-
ings and learn from them, and a method was proposed for
understanding how they access knowledge that exists in the
real world. It involves automatically sensing particular stay
behavior that occurs during important learning activities. In
addition to the regional dependence of learning topics, it
also takes into account the spatial structure of the learning
ﬁeld, i.e., the vertical distribution of an ecosystem in a multi-
layered hierarchy. We found that each layer of an ecosystem
contains different knowledge, and height is an important factor
inﬂuencing the knowledge that a learner can obtain. We found
that height information can be used to uniquely distinguish
the topic being learned. We also discussed the possibility of
identifying the learning topic of interest based on the body
posture of the learner. Our challenge is to develop a method
of estimating the intellectual state of the learner at a high level
of abstraction using low-level signal data, and integrating the
recognition results.
The rapid progress being made in engineering technologies
has led to new ways of innovating learning support. Our
intention is not to select engineering technologies that ﬁt
conventional methodologies, nor to replace old educational
tools with new ones. Our challenge is instead to create an
effective method of learning support that can be embodied only
using the innovation of computational power. Our research
is fundamental for achieving a practical understanding of the
dynamics of human knowledge processing and promoting new
intellectual activity in a next-generation ubiquitous society.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the staff at Kamigamo Experimental
Forest, Kyoto University, who supported our experiments. This
research was funded by a Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists
(B) (22700121) of MEXT.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

REFERENCES
[1] J. S. Brown, A. Collins, and P. Duguid, “Situated cognition and the
culture of learning,” Educational Researcher, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 32–42,
1989.
[2] J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Par-
ticipation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
[3] T. Okamoto, N. Nagata, and F. Anma, “The knowledge circulated-
organisational management for accomplishing e-learning,” Knowledge
Management & E-Learning, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 6–17, 2009.
[4] T. Mizukoshi and T. Kihara, Creation of New Environmental Education
(in Japanese).
Kyoto: Minerva Syobou, 1995.
[5] O. T¨urkyilmaz, F. Alag¨oz, G. G¨ur, and T. Tugcu, “Environment-aware
location estimation in cellular networks,” EURASIP Journal on Advances
in Signal Processing, vol. 2008, pp. 139:1–139:9, January 2008.
[6] J. Lester, T. Choudhury, and G. Borriello, “A practical approach to
recognizing physical activities,” PERVASIVE2006, vol. LNCS3968, pp.
1–16, 2006.
[7] J. Yin, Q. Yang, and J. J. Pan, “Sensor-based abnormal human-activity
detection,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1082–1090, August 2008.
[8] N. Gy¨orb´ır´o, A. F´abi´an, and G. Hom´anyi, “An activity recognition
system for mobile phones,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 82–91, February 2009.
[9] A. Kobayashi, S. Muramatsu, D. Kamisaka, T. Watanabe, A. Mi-
namikawa, T. Iwamoto, and H. Yokoyama, “Shaka: User movement es-
timation considering reliability, power saving, and latency using mobile
phone,” IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, vol. E94-D,
no. 6, pp. 1153–1163, 2011.
[10] M. Okada and M. Tada, “Multimodal analysis of spatial characteristics
of a real-world learning ﬁeld,” in Proceedings of 2012 Seventh IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Wireless, Mobile and Ubiquitous Technology
in Education (WMUTE2012).
Kagawa, Japan: IEEE, March 2012, pp.
25–32.
[11] M. Tada, H. Noma, A. Utsumi, M. Okada, and K. Renge, “Automatic
evaluation system of driving skill using wearable sensors for person-
alized safe driving lecture,” in Proceedings of the IADIS International
Conference Mobile Learning 2012, I. A. S´anchez and P. Isa´ıas, Eds.,
Berlin, Germany, March 2012, pp. 173–180.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

