A General System for Self Collecting Individual Data - Application to Medical Data 
Michel Schneider1, Suan Tay1, Chloé Gay2, Marinette Bouet1, Emmanuel Coudeyre2 
michel.schneider@isima.fr, suan.tay@gmail.com, marinette.bouet@uca.fr, {cgay, ecoudeyre}@chu-clermontferrand.fr 
 
1LIMOS, Université Clermont Auvergne, France 
2Service MPR, CHU, Université Clermont Auvergne, France 
 
 
Abstract-In this paper, we propose a system to allow the self-
collection of individual data through digital questionnaires and 
sensors. The self-collecting person uses a tablet or a smart 
phone and wears a watch that contains the sensors. The main 
feature of this system is to memorize in a uniform way the 
answers to the questionnaires and the values of the sensed 
parameters in order to facilitate their joint analysis. The 
system has been developed and tested to monitor osteoarthritis 
patients. It represents an essential element of the control loop: 
elaboration of recommendations – monitoring the execution of 
these recommendations - evaluation and readjustment of these 
recommendations. This system has been implemented in a 
generic form and can be used to monitor any patient at home 
or on the move outside. We explain, also, the extensions we are 
currently making to obtain a general and flexible system. 
 
Keywords-self collection; questionnaire; sensor; mobile device. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The initial motivation for this work resulted from the 
need expressed by the medical profession to have an easy-to-
use system for the self-collection of health data. This 
involves checking that the patient is following the 
recommendations made, measuring the results of these 
recommendations, and then analyzing the results to readjust 
the recommendations. For example, in the case of the 
osteoarthritic patients we studied, it is a question of 
collecting the information relating to physical activity, 
difficulties encountered in performing certain movements, 
taking medicines, etc.. Some information can only be 
collected by questionnaire, but other pieces of information 
can be conveniently collected via sensors (e.g., the number 
of steps performed in a day). There is therefore a real interest 
in associating the self-collection of personal data by digital 
questionnaires and by sensors.  
Self-collection by digital questionnaires has long been 
considered in all areas. Various systems have been suggested 
to create questionnaires and enable online responses. The 
best known are Google Forms and Lime Survey [1]. 
Questionnaire collection raises problems of relevance that 
are discussed in [2]|3][5]. In the medical field, questionnaires 
have been validated to collect various pieces of information 
about a state of health (see, for example, [4] for evaluating 
personality, [6] for evaluating level of anxiety), or a practice 
(see, for example, [7] for evaluating physical activity). 
 Numerous studies have focused on the collection of 
medical data by sensors. There is a wide variety of systems 
and sensors [8][9]. One of the challenges is to capture in a 
reliable and precise way physical activities [10][11] because 
they 
are 
an 
accompaniment 
to 
many 
therapies. 
Our goal was to develop a self-gathering system that 
combines the two modes of collection (questionnaires and 
sensors), and to store data collected in a uniform manner in a 
warehouse so that they can be manipulated jointly. It is thus 
possible to carry out analysis combining the two types of 
data in order to search for correlations or to compute 
indicators which, will serve to improve the recommendations 
for the patients. For example, for osteoarthritis patients, we 
can search correlations between the number of steps per day 
(data coming from sensors) and pain level or difficulty to 
make some movements (data coming from questionnaires).  
Systems combining questionnaires and sensors have 
already 
been 
proposed, 
but 
for 
specific 
purposes 
[12][13][14]. The work of [12] uses questionnaires to collect 
the values of situational variables and wireless sensors to 
collect cardiac activity and physical activity. But, the two 
types of data are stored and processed separately. In [13], 
monitoring physical activity using wireless sensors is 
experienced and discussed. Drawbacks are highlighted and it 
is suggested to combine sensors and questionnaires. The 
work of [14] studies the effects of different treatments on the 
quality of life for adults with diabetes. This study is based on 
data coming from sensors and others coming from 
questionnaires. But, the two types of data are not integrated 
in a same system. To our knowledge, there is no proposition 
for an integrated system able to deal with the two types of 
data. The main advantages of our system are the following: 
uniform and integrated treatment of data coming from 
questionnaires and that coming from sensors, full mobility of 
the patient, management of the system by the medical staff 
itself without the intervention of a specialist, direct 
interoperability with analysis tools. Moreover, the system is 
able to operate in different contexts, including medical and 
non medical domains. 
We explain the functioning of our system through 
Sections II-VI, and then we present, in Section VII, the 
extensions that we are currently carrying out to obtain a 
general and flexible system. 
II. 
OVERVIEW ON THE SYSTEM 
1) General 
specifications. 
The 
proposed 
system 
promotes the collection of health data by the patient himself. 
The location of the patient at home or on the move is 
irrelevant. The only constraint is that the patient has to 
establish an Internet connection at regular intervals (for 
example, every evening). Two modes of collection are 
possible: on one hand, a collection by digital questionnaires 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

via smart phones or tablets, on the other hand, automatic 
collection by using sensors embedded on smart phones or 
connected watches. All data is transmitted to a central server 
in a tabular format (compatible with Excel) for storage and 
subsequent analysis by a software tool, such as SAS 
(Statistical Analysis Software) [18] or R [19]. It must be 
possible to carry out analysis relating to a patient or a group 
of patients.  
The creation of the survey questionnaires is carried out 
by members of the medical staff. A user-friendly interface is 
therefore available to perform this task. It is important that 
this interface can offer a good variety of question types. 
Each patient responds to one or more survey 
questionnaires via the tablet or smart phone according to a 
pre-established timeline. Notifications are generated by the 
system as soon as a questionnaire is open. Physical activity 
(number of steps per hour or per day) is captured via an 
accelerometer installed on the watch. The advantage of the 
automatic capture of the activity results from the observation 
that the survey questionnaires do not allow a reliable 
collection. 
Experiments 
have 
shown 
that 
patients 
systematically 
overestimate 
their 
physical 
activity. 
Tracked data is transmitted from the tablet or smart phone to 
the central server via a certificate-based protocol using a 
patient specific identifier. The exchanges always take place 
on the initiative of the mobile devices.  
It is the members of the medical staff who manage the 
patients (and in particular the assignment of an identifier to 
each patient) via a specific module. 
The system must be simple to use so that its acceptability 
by the users (members of the medical staff on the one hand, 
patients on the other hand) does not pose any problem. 
Mobile devices may be provided by the patient or by the 
medical service. The patient provides the Internet access 
device. 
2) Architecture. The chosen architecture is simple 
(Figure 1). It is based on a central server that hosts the data 
and the questionnaire and the main computer application 
(called the server application thereafter). This server is 
installed in a protected intranet. Each patient has a tablet 
(possibly associated with a watch, or a bracelet, or other 
sensors) that can exchange data with the server via a secure 
Internet protocol. It is the mobile application installed on the 
tablet that initiates all exchanges with the server.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
Figure 1. Architecture of the system 
 
3) Main operations. The main operations permitted by 
the system take place chronologically as indicated below. 
   Creation of questionnaires (actor: medical staff in 
intranet). 
   Creation of patients (actor: medical staff in intranet). 
   Assignment of questionnaires to patients (actor: medical 
staff in intranet). 
   Initialization of the mobile devices (actor: medical staff 
in intranet): The mobile application is installed on the 
patient's tablet and watch. The server connection information 
is initialized on the tablet. The questionnaires are transferred 
to the tablet. 
   Initialization of the tablet connection to the Internet 
network (actor: patient). 
   Response to questionnaires and possible activation of the 
watch (actor: patient): The data is stored temporarily on the 
watch and the tablet. 
  Transmission of data to the server (actor: mobile 
application in the Internet): The data is transmitted to the 
central server as soon as the Internet connection is 
established. 
Connection 
and 
transmission 
are 
fully 
automatic. It is the mobile application that drives the 
exchanges. 
4) Technologies. For the server, we chose a WINDOWS 
technology associated with MYSQL [15] to manage data 
storage. The server application is encoded in Java. For 
mobile devices (tablet or smart phone, watch), we chose an 
Android technology [16] associated with SQLite [17]. The 
advantages of Android are two-fold: great variety of mobile 
devices supported by this system, affordable prices. The 
mobile application is also encoded in Java. The tablet and 
watch are interconnected in Bluetooth mode. Data 
exchanges are carried out by Web services using REST 
(Representational State Transfer) technology [20]. 
III. 
COMPUTER APPLICATION FOR THE SERVER   
1) General interface. The general menu (Figure 2) 
contains tabs for managing medical staff, managing patients, 
managing survey questionnaires, assigning questionnaires to 
patients, initializing collection, reporting about a patient or a 
survey. 
2) Model for questionnaires. As soon as a questionnaire 
is created, a name is assigned to it (this name is used to 
locate it on the tablet's home page). A questionnaire can be 
divided into sections. A section may be submitted to the 
user several times in the form of a series of predetermined 
deadlines or in the form of a regular repetition over time. A 
section can include different types of questions: multiple 
choice questions, cursor questions, grid questions, open-
ended questions. These types correspond to those which are 
most frequently encountered in the medical field. Other 
types can be added with the same specification approach. 
The wording of a question is handled in two formats: a long 
format that is the full text of the question as it is displayed 
on the tablet screen, and a short format that is used to locate 
the question in the result table.  
Final  
users 
Server 
Data base  
Staff 
Tablet or 
Smartphone 
+ Watch 
Sensors 
Secure 
Internet 
protocol 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
Figure 2. Main menu for the server application 
 
Once the creation of the questionnaire is validated, it 
switches to the "finalized" state. This status means that the 
survey is ready to be published to patients. 
3) Assignment of questionnaires to patients. Any 
finalized questionnaire may be associated with patients. The 
"Assignment Survey" tab allows to associate surveys with 
patients. It is possible to specify several associations 
simultaneously. 
4) Initialization of the mobiles devices of a patient. The 
initialization of the mobile devices is obtained by scanning a 
QR (Quick Response) code generated by the server 
application. This QR code consists of the patient id, the 
initialization date, the web service address on the server that 
must be used for the data exchanges. 
5) Results management. We separated the results of the 
surveys and the results of the sensors in two different 
classes: result and sensorResult. The typing of the collected 
data is the same for the two classes and respects the 
following format: 
(patient id, variable name, collected value, date) 
The variable name corresponds to the short label of a 
question or to the label of the parameter collected by a 
sensor. 
6) Reporting about a survey or a patient. The results for 
a survey (all patients combined) or the results for a patient  
(answers to questions and parameter values coming from 
sensors) can be downloaded in a same Excel file. An 
example is given in Figure 3. From this file, we can then 
make ad-hoc reporting or in-depth analysis by using a tool 
such as SAS or R. It is interesting also to note that such a 
file can be seen as the fact table of a warehouse with three 
main dimensions : patients, variable, time. Approaches 
proposed for calculating indicators in data warehouses can 
thus be usefully exploited.  
 
 
Figure 3. Reporting about a patient (excerpt) 
IV. 
COMPUTER APPLICATION FOR THE MOBILE DEVICES  
1) Answering a questionnaire. The names of the 
different surveys associated with the patient are displayed in 
different bannners on the tablet home page (Figure 4). These 
names are those that were specified when creating 
questionnaires. Banners with a gray background correspond 
to surveys that are not due at the time of the consultation 
and are therefore inaccessible. The patient can answer any 
survey accessible by clicking on the corresponding banner. 
The accessibility of a survey is determined in accordance 
with the frequency or timelines specified at the time of its 
creation. 
 
 
      
Figure 4. Accessing surveys from the tablet home page 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
     Figure 5. Answering a question on the tablet (grid question) 
 
Figure 5 shows the presentation of a grid question on the 
tablet screen. 
2) Step counting. The accelerometer of the watch and 
the Google Step component are used to count the steps. A 
higher layer was developed to aggregate the count over each 
60 minutes interval. It is the value of this aggregate that is 
transmitted to the server via the tablet.  
Other medical sensors are embedded on Android supports 
and can be installed on our system. They permit to capture 
parameters such as Temperature, Blood Pressure, Pulse, and 
Heart Rate. 
   3) Data exchanges. The sending and receiving of data 
between the watch and the tablet, on one hand, between the 
tablet and the server, on the other hand, is done 
automatically without user action. A short message is 
displayed at the bottom of the page for a few seconds to 
signal the shipment. The sequence diagram below (Figure 6) 
describes the principle of exchanges between the mobile 
devices and the server. The data of the watch is first stored 
in its internal memory and then transmitted on its initiative 
to the tablet. The data generated at the tablet level (ie the 
answers to the questions) and those recovered from the 
watch are stored in its internal memory and then transmitted 
to the server at its own initiative. Initialization of the 
exchange by the transmitter (watch or tablet) occurs every 
30 minutes if the network is available (Bluetooth for 
communication to tablet, Internet for communication to 
server). The transmitter keeps the data until the receiver has 
returned 
an 
acknowledgment 
of 
receipt. 
If 
this 
acknowledgment fails within 30 minutes, the sender 
attempts a new sending. When the acknowledgment is 
received, the sender removes the data from its internal base. 
    4) Deployment on the playstore. Our mobile application, 
called TimeQuestion, was deployed on the playstore to 
simplify the propagation of updates and initialization. 
TimeQuestion includes the codes to be installed on the 
tablet and the watch. The installation of TimeQuestion is 
done automatically on the tablet and also on the watch, if a 
watch is connected. The application is optimized for a 7-
inch tablet, but it can also be installed on a smart phone. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS 
The system is now fully operational and the server is 
permanently active. Various experiments have been carried 
out with members of the Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation Department of the Clermont-Ferrand Hospital 
(France) and patients of this department in order to evaluate 
the acceptability of the system.   
First, multiple demonstrations were carried out by the 
authors. Once the mobile devices have been initialized, it is 
no longer necessary to worry about them. If they become 
inactive following a discharge of their batteries, simply 
recharge the batteries and restart them. 
Several patients were asked to test the system when they 
were in the PMR (Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation) 
Department. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Data exchanges between the mobile devices and the server 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

One patient was asked to use the system for two weeks. 
The 
PMR 
(Physical 
Medicine 
and 
Rehabilitation) 
Department has put at her disposal a tablet of 7 inches as 
well as an android watch. A survey with 16 questions 
relating to movement difficulties was assigned to her. A 
response was requested every two days. This patient was 
asked to walk 30 to 60 minutes a day. We were able so to 
verify that the data went back to the server on a regular 
basis. Figure 3 illustrates an excerpt of the collected data 
during this experiment.  
All these actors found that the system was very 
convenient to use and very useful. 
We did not have the opportunity to address the 
acceptability of the system by patients with disabilities, such 
as those with hand tremors or those with visual deficiencies. 
We are confident about the efficiency of our system for 
those with hand tremors because tablets with large screen 
sizes can be handled by the system. We have not explored 
solutions for patients with visual deficiencies. For this type 
of handicap, specific solutions need to be studied. 
The MPR department studies the effects of hydrotherapy 
for its osteoarthritis patients. It planned to use the system 
with about ten patients for the next treatment periods.  
VI. 
TOWARDS A MORE GENERAL AND FLEXIBLE SYSTEM 
We explain in this section the extensions we have 
undertaken to make the system more general and more 
flexible. 
1) Separate management of questions. In the current 
version, each question is linked to a questionnaire. 
Experiments have shown that the same question may appear 
in different questionnaires. It is therefore a question of being 
able to specify the questions separately, then to assemble 
them to form the questionnaires. 
2) Semantic standardization of labels. In the current 
version, the wording of the questions and parameters 
captured is left to the free choice of the medical staff. It is 
then difficult to integrate the data coming from different 
services (remember that these labels serve as semantic 
reference for the collected data). Yet, this integration would 
be interesting to deal with more massive data coming from 
different horizons. To facilitate this integration, we propose 
to constrain the choice of labels through a shared ontology 
of the domain. We are adapting the specification of long and 
short labels in order to impose the choice of a term in an 
ontology. 
3) Sensor assisted installation. In the current version, 
each sensor is associated with a specific software 
component which, collects the raw data transmitted, ensures 
their filtering and aggregates this data over the relevant 
period before transmitting them to the tablet. In addition, the 
label of the sensed parameter is hard-coded in the 
component. The extension consists of decomposing this 
component into two parts: a part that remains specific to 
each sensor (this part collects the raw data and performs the 
filtering), a part that ensures the naming of the associated 
parameter and the calculation of the aggregate. The main 
menu of the server application is redesigned to allow the 
choice of the sensor, the choice of the associated label, the 
choice of the type of aggregation to be performed (sum, 
average, etc.), the aggregation time interval. The second part 
of the component can be then automatically generated. The 
installation of a sensor can be so specified directly by a user 
manager without requiring the intervention of a developer. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The initial objective of this work was to design and 
develop a system for the self-collection of medical data. The 
data come from the responses to questionnaires transmitted 
via the tablet, on the one hand, and the parameters collected 
by the watch via sensors, on the other hand. The 
questionnaires are defined by the members of the medical 
staff through a convivial interface and their structures are 
stored on the server in a relational database. They are then 
loaded onto the tablet during an initialization procedure. The 
application allowing the reading of the values of the sensors 
is also automatically installed on the watch during this 
initialization. All data collected from questionnaires and 
sensors are stored in a unified tabular format to facilitate 
their recovery by a spreadsheet in order to activate various 
statistical analyzes or data mining treatments. 
Our system has also other main advantages. It allows full 
mobility of the patient. Its management can be handled by a 
member of the medical staff without the intervention of a 
specialist. Its operation is automatic as soon as the 
initialization of the mobile devices has been carried out. 
We have conducted experiments which have shown that 
the system is well accepted by the patients.  
It is interesting to note that it is possible to incorporate 
other types of data into our warehouse. For example, in the 
medical domain, the fact table could be used to store 
medical analysis results or imaging reports. Technically, we 
need to study the interconnection of our system with the 
other systems used by physicians. 
The data collected, in particular via the sensors, can 
quickly become bulky, and one can wonder about the 
suitability of such a system for handling big data. The main 
problem is the server's storage capacity. A relational table 
under Windows NTFS (New Technology File System) has a 
maximum capacity of 2GB. We can evaluate the length of a 
line in the result table or the sensorResult table to 200 
Bytes. Suppose the server is used by a medical department 
to track 100 patients. It is thus possible to store 200,000 
answers to questions for a single patient and to store the 
number of steps per 60 minutes over 25 years for a patient. 
It is very comfortable. But if we want to integrate data 
coming from several departments into hospitals across the 
country, this capacity may become insufficient and other 
storage technologies should be considered. Today, there are 
technologies for big data that remain compatible with our 
architectural choices and that do not put into question our 
software. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

This system was initially defined on the basis of wishes 
expressed by a hospital department. But it has been 
designed and developed in a generic way and can be used to 
collect any kind of data from an individual or a natural or 
artificial entity. First, it can be used for monitoring 
individuals in various situations: athletes in training, 
workers in the performance of certain tasks, etc. But, it can 
also be used for monitoring any type of non human entity. 
The sensors are then installed on the entity and the 
questionnaires are activated by a human observer of this 
entity. For example, sensors can be used to monitor vegetal 
growth and collect immediate environmental conditions 
(e.g., moisture and temperature for air and soil). 
Questionnaires can collect more environmental information 
(e.g., nature and evolution of the surrounding plantations), 
useful for explaining the vegetal growth. 
This system is currently being extended to make it more 
general and flexible. These extensions mainly concern three 
directions: the separate specification of the questions, the 
semantic standardization of the labels identifying the 
collected data, the assisted installation of a sensor. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Schmitz, “Lime Survey: the free and open source survey software 
tool”, Available on: http://www. limesurvey. org/, Accessed on June, 
12, 2017. 
[2] D. H. Granello and J. E. Wheaton, “Online data collection: Strategies 
for research,” Journal of Counseling & Development, no 82(4), pp. 
387-393, 2004.   
[3] K. B. Wright, “Researching Internet‐based populations: Advantages 
and disadvantages of online survey research, online questionnaire 
authoring software packages, and web survey services,” Journal of 
Computer‐Mediated Communication, no 10(3), 2005. 
[4]  A.Tellegen and N. G. Waller, “Exploring personality through test 
construction: Development of the Multidimensional Personality 
Questionnaire,” The SAGE handbook of personality theory and 
assessment, no 2, pp. 261-292, 2008. 
[5] D. Y. Leung and D. Kember, “Comparability of data gathered from 
evaluation questionnaires on paper and through the Internet,” 
Research in Higher Education, no 46(5), pp. 571-591, 2005. 
 
[6] M. N. van Poppel, M. J. Chinapaw, L. B Mokkink, W. Van Mechelen 
and C. B.  Terwee, “Physical activity questionnaires for adults. Sports 
medicine,” no 40(7), pp. 565-600, 2010. 
[7] K. Kroenke, R. L. Spitzer, J. B., Williams and B. Löwe, “The patient 
health questionnaire somatic, anxiety, and depressive symptom 
scales: a systematic review,” General hospital psychiatry, no 32(4), 
pp. 345-359, 2010. 
[8] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable 
sensor-based systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications 
and Reviews), no 40(1), pp. 1-12, 2010.    
[9] H. Alemdar and C. Ersoy, “Wireless sensor networks for healthcare: 
A survey,” Computer Networks, no 54(15), pp. 2688-2710, 2010. 
[10] J. Parkka, M. Ermes, P. Korpipaa, J. Mantyjarvi, J. Peltola and I. 
Korhonen, “Activity classification using realistic data from wearable 
sensors,” IEEE Transactions on information technology in 
biomedicine, no 10(1),  pp. 119-128, 2006. 
[11] O. D. Lara and M. A. Labrador, “A survey on human activity 
recognition using wearable sensors,” IEEE Communications Surveys 
and Tutorials, no 15(3), pp. 1192-1209, 2013.   
[12] A. Gaggioli, G. Pioggia, G. Tartarisco, G. Baldus, D. Corda, P. 
Cipresso and G. Riva, “A mobile data collection platform for mental 
health research,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, no 17(2), pp. 
241-251, 2013.   
[13] D.R. Bassett Jr, “Validity and reliability issues in objective 
monitoring of physical activity,” Research quarterly for exercise and 
sport, no 71, pp. 30-36, 2000. 
[14] R. Rubin and M. Peyrot, “Treatment satisfaction and quality of life 
for an integrated continuous glucose monitoring/insulin pump system 
compared to self-monitoring plus an insulin pump,” Journal of 
diabetes science and technology, no 3(6), pp. 1402-1410, 2009. 
[15] J. Greenspan and B. Bulger, “MySQL/PHP database applications,” 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001. 
[16] R. R. Lombardo, J. Mednieks and B. Meike, “Android application 
development: Programming with the Google SDK,” O'Reilly Media, 
Inc., 2009. 
[17] M. Owen and G. Allen, “SQLite,” Apress LP, 2010. 
[18] R. C. Littell, ”Sas,”  John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006. 
[19] R, “The R Project for Statistical Computing,” https://www.r-
project.org/, Accessed on June, 12, 2017. 
[20] C. Riva and M. Laitkorpi., "Designing web-based mobile services 
with REST," Service-Oriented Computing ICSOC 2007 Workshops, 
Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

