Self-organizing Mobile Medium Ad hoc Network 
Nada Alsalmi, John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mail: {nada.alsalmi, dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract— MANETs are mobile networks of wireless mobile 
devices capable of communicating with one another without 
any reliance on a fixed infrastructure. A Mobile Medium Ad 
hoc Network (M2ANET) is a set of mobile nodes forming a 
Mobile Medium and functioning as relays for facilitating 
communication between the users of this Mobile Medium. 
Movement of the nodes affects the performance of a M2ANET. 
We propose a scheme for controlling the movement of mobile 
nodes in a M2ANET based on an attraction/repulsion 
paradigm. The new node movement has an advantage over a 
random movement in keeping the nodes in an unbounded 
region in a sufficient density to allow for an efficient transfer of 
data over the Mobile Medium. Simulation results show tripling 
of the delivery ratio in a self-organizing M2ANET compared to 
a mobile network with all nodes moving randomly, in one 
experimental scenario. 
 
Keywords-mobility models; self-organizing mobile network; 
M2ANET; Mobile Medium; MANET; NS-2; AODV 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) is a set of mobile 
devices that cooperate with each other by exchanging 
messages and forwarding data [1][2]. Mobile devices are 
linked together through wireless connections without 
infrastructure and can change locations and reconfigure 
network connections. During the lifetime of the network, 
nodes are free to move around within the network and node 
mobility plays a very important role in mobile ad hoc 
network 
performance. 
Mobility 
of 
mobile 
nodes 
significantly affects the performance of a MANET [2].  
A Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network (M2ANET) is a 
particular configuration of a typical MANET proposed in 
[3], where mobile nodes are divided into two categories: (i) 
the forwarding only nodes (shown in black in Fig. 1) 
forming the so called Mobile Medium, and (ii) the 
communicating nodes (shown in red in Fig. 1), mobile or 
otherwise, that send data and use this Mobile Medium for 
communication. The advantage of this M2ANET model is 
that the performance of such a network is based on how well 
the Mobile Medium can carry the messages between the 
communicating nodes and not based on whether all mobile 
nodes form a fully connected network. An example of a 
M2ANET is a cloud of drones released over an area of 
interest facilitating communication in this area. Recently, a 
number of projects that match the M2ANET model have 
been announced; they include Google Loon stratospheric 
balloons [4] and Facebook high altitude solar powered 
planes [5] for providing Internet services to remote areas, 
and 
the 
Swarming 
Micro 
Air 
Vehicle 
Network 
(SMAVNET)  project where remote controlled planes are 
used for create an emergency network [6]. 
Controlling the movement of all forwarding nodes 
forming a Mobile Medium is a problem in deploying 
M2ANETs in real world scenarios like emergency or 
disaster recovery. While movement of each node is most 
easily directed independently there is a need for keeping the 
nodes in relative proximity to maintain their connectivity 
one with another. In practical terms, the nodes may move on 
closed paths (e.g., circular), or at random. With randomly 
selected trajectories maintaining the nodes in one area 
becomes a problem. 
 
 
Figure 1. ns2 simulation screen of a M2ANET 
 
The problem is simple to handle in MANET simulation: 
simulators typically allow setting the simulation area 
defined as a bounded region which guarantees that the nodes 
do not disperse any further. If any node tries to move too far 
away it hits the boundary and then moves in another 
direction, but still in the same area together with the other 
nodes. The same cannot be said about the real world 
scenarios. 
In this paper, we propose a solution for controlling the 
Mobile Medium nodes for M2ANET deployments in an 
unbounded region. The mechanism is based on an 
attraction/repulsion paradigm for controlling the movement 
of mobile nodes in a region without boundaries while 
providing means for maintaining all nodes in the same area. 
In principle, when a node moves too far away from other 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

nodes it should detect the separation and turn back. While 
the decision making in our simulation is based on the actual 
distance between the nodes, in a practical deployment the 
same can be done based on the radio signal strength.  
In Section II, we present background on MANETs and 
mobility patterns. The new movement pattern based on the 
attraction/repulsion principle for MANETs is discussed in 
Section III. Simulation experiments of this movement under 
different scenarios are in Section IV. Finally, we present the 
experimental results in Section V, followed by the 
conclusion and future work. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A MANET is comprised of interconnected mobile 
nodes, which make use of wireless communication links for 
multi-hop transmission of data. They offer distinct 
advantages over infrastructure based networks and are 
versatile for some particular applications and environments. 
There are no fixed or prerequisite base stations or 
infrastructures; therefore, their set up is not time consuming 
and can be done at any time and in any place. MANETs 
exhibit a fault-resilient nature, given that they are not 
operating a single point of failure and are very flexible. The 
deletion and addition of new nodes, forming new links are a 
normal part of operation of a MANET [1][7][8]. A group of 
nodes can facilitate communication between distant stations 
by forming a Mobile Medium, as introduced in [3].  
Many mobility models have been proposed for 
recreating the real world application scenarios of MANETs. 
A mobility model attempts to mimic the movement of real 
mobile nodes that change speed and direction with time. 
There are two main types of mobility models currently used 
in simulation of MANETs [2][9]: trace and synthetic. A 
trace uses actual node movements that have been observed 
in a real system. In the absence of traces, synthetic mobility 
models can be used. The synthetic models attempt to 
realistically mimic the movements of mobile nodes in 
mobile networks [2]. The categorization of synthetic models 
is based on interactions between the nodes and the 
environment in a mobile network [2]:  we can distinguish 
between individual node movements and group node 
movements. Based on specific mobility characteristics these 
models can be further classified into four categories: models 
with temporal dependency, models with spatial dependency, 
models with geographic restriction, and random models [2]. 
In the mobility model with temporal dependency the 
movement of a mobile node is affected by its movement 
history. A node’s current movement is affected by past 
movement such as in the Gauss Markov Model and the 
Smooth Random Mobility model [2]. In mobility models 
with spatial dependency, the mobile nodes tend to travel 
into a group and are interdependent one on another. The 
movement of a node is affected by surrounding nodes in 
group mobility such as in the Reference Point Group Model 
[2]. Another class is the mobility models with geographic 
restriction. The mobile node movement is limited to certain 
geographical areas such as streets or freeways as for 
example in the Pathway Mobility Model and the Obstacle 
Mobility Model [2].  
In simulation, a random mobility is often used as a 
reference case scenario, mostly because of the relative ease 
of implementing it in a simulator. One of these popular 
models is the Random Way Point (RWP) model available in 
ns2 [10]. Nodes are moved in a piecewise linear fashion, 
with each linear segment pointing to a randomly selected 
destination and the node moving at a constant, but randomly 
selected speed. 
III. 
ATTRACTION/REPULSION MOVEMENT 
One of the most incredible sights in nature happens 
when animals form a group and move together in a flock. 
How exactly do these individuals do it? A group, such as a 
herd of land animals or flock of birds, consists of 
individuals but exhibits some characteristics of team 
collaboration in the population. While it seems that the 
group is under a centralized control, in reality what is 
observed is an aggregated behavioral performance of 
independent individuals, each of which is acting on the basis 
of its own local perception [11]. 
Similar principles can be applied to controlling node 
movement in our self-organizing M2ANET. The objective 
of the proposed approach is to control the collective 
movement of locally interacting nodes similar to the 
behavior observed in ﬂocks of birds or swarms of insects. 
Our goal is to keep randomly moving nodes (similar to 
RWP model) in a limited area without imposing a hard 
constraint of an external boundary. Our approach is based 
on an attraction principle to keep the nodes together in a 
flock (we use the name “flock” or a “cloud” when referring 
to a number of mobile nodes moving together) and on a 
repulsion mechanism to keep them sufficiently far apart so 
that they cover a large area. Though the actual simulation 
we conducted is based on the distance calculation, in 
practice 
the 
attraction/repulsion 
principles 
can 
be 
implemented based on the received signal strength at each 
node.  
A. Attraction 
The main deficiency of the RWP model for controlling 
the movement of nodes in a MANET is that, aside from the 
border effect [12], the nodes tend to fill the entire available 
space. If there is a boundary limiting the node movement, 
like in the case of most simulation environments, ns2 
included, the nodes tend to disperse approximately evenly 
resulting in the node density and the average distance 
between the nodes determined by the available area and the 
number of nodes in the network. The situation becomes 
worse in an environment with no boundaries where nodes 
would disperse completely and lose any connectivity over 
time.  
 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
Figure 2. Attraction keeps nodes in a flock. 
 
Attraction between the nodes, when used in addition to 
the RWP model, can remedy this problem. In our proposed 
approach, nodes normally move following the RWP model, 
but when the distance to the nearest neighbor becomes too 
large they turn towards the nearest neighbor (Fig. 2) rather 
than choosing a random direction.  
B. Repulsion 
While the attraction mechanism would be sufficient for a 
set of randomly moving nodes to form a flock (or a cloud) 
and remain connected and stay over a limited area without 
imposition of a hard boundary, the network coverage could 
be improved with an added mechanism, also based on 
watching the distance to the nearest neighbor. The coverage 
of a M2ANET is where the Mobile Medium nodes are, so 
keeping the nodes apart assures a larger area of coverage by 
preventing the nodes from congregating in only one place.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Repulsion prevents the nodes from collapsing into one point. 
 
In our proposed approach, nodes normally move 
following the RWP model, but when the distance to the 
nearest neighbor becomes too small they move away from 
the nearest neighbor (Fig. 3) rather than choosing a random 
direction. 
C. Implementation 
Nodes normally follow RWP model movement pattern, 
with the next move direction determined by parameters 
stored locally at each node. Attraction and repulsion 
mechanisms can be implemented based on the received 
signal strength at each node. We could assume that each 
node periodically sends a beacon signal (possibly as a part 
of functioning routing mechanism like in the Destination-
Sequenced Distance Routing (DSDV) protocol [13]). The 
received signal strength determines the identity, and 
possibly the direction towards, the nearest neighbor. 
Alternatively, the direction towards the nearest neighbor 
could be determined by querying the nearest neighbour for 
the location information (assuming it has a Global 
Positioning System (GPS), or similar, built in).  
In ns2 simulation, nodes move piecewise linearly with 
each movement of a node specified with the setdest 
command [10]. In our simulation experiments we use the 
distance between the current node and its nearest neighbor 
D and define two thresholds: Th1 to mark when nodes are 
too far apart, and Th2 when nodes are to close. The next 
move is specified:  
 
i. 
towards the nearest node, when D > Th1, 
ii. 
away from the nearest node, when D < Th2, and 
iii. 
in a random direction, when Th1>D>Th2. 
 
The distance covered is chosen randomly (in cases (i) 
and (ii), uniform distribution U(0,D) ), but within the 
bounds of the simulated area. 
D. Simulation environment 
Each simulation of a network consists of a different 
number of nodes roaming in a square 1000 x 1000 meters 
with a reflecting boundary. The transmission range is 250m. 
The link data rate is 1 Mbps. Every packet has a size of 512 
bytes. The buffer size at each node is 50 packets. Data 
packets are generated following a Constant Bit Rate (CBR) 
process [10]. The source and destination nodes are 
stationary and located at coordinates (300, 500) and (700, 
500). The summary of the simulation parameters used in ns2 
is shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Simulator 
NS-2.34 
Channel Type 
Channel / Wireless Channel 
Network Interface Type 
Phy/WirelessPhy 
Mac Type 
Mac/802.11 
Radio-Propagation Type 
Propagation/Two-ray ground 
Interface Queue Type 
Queue/Drop Tail 
Link Layer Type 
LL 
Antenna 
Antenna/Omni Antenna 
Maximum Packet in ifq 
50 
Area (n * n) 
1000 x 1000 
Source Type 
(UDP) CBR 
Simulation Time 
900 sec 
Routing Protocol 
AODV 
 
The forwarding nodes are mobile and move according to 
the attraction/repulsion algorithm. In each experiment, the 
designated source node transmits to one designated 
destination node for 900 seconds. 
V. 
RESULTS 
Four sets of simulation experiments were conducted: one 
set with all forwarding Mobile Medium nodes moving 
randomly, and three sets with the forwarding nodes moving 
based on the attraction/repulsion principle using three 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

different threshold levels:  
 
i. 
Low threshold:  
 
Th1 = 60, Th2 = 30, 
ii. 
Medium threshold:  
Th1 = 120, Th2 = 60, 
iii. 
High threshold:  
 
Th1 = 200, Th2 = 120. 
 
 
In each experiment, data regarding the node location and 
the delivery ratio were collected. 
 
A. Node movement behavior 
Topologically, the purpose of the attraction/repulsion 
mechanism is to keep the nodes together while allowing 
them to move independently. To measure the togetherness of 
the nodes we collected samples of node coordinates (every 
10s) over the duration of each experiment and calculated the 
standard deviation of all X coordinates, for all the samples. 
 
 
Figure 4. Node location standard deviation: X axis 
 
Fig. 4 shows a measure (standard deviation of X 
coordinates of all mobile nodes, sampled every 10 seconds) 
of the spread of all the nodes in four sets of experiments. The 
results show that the lower the threshold the tighter the flock 
(cloud) formed by the mobile nodes. Also, the nodes of the 
proposed self-organizing M2ANET stayed closer together 
than they normally would if all the nodes just moved 
randomly over the 1000 by 1000 m simulation area.   
B. Network delivery ratio 
The main goal of a self-organizing M2ANET is to avoid 
node dispersion and to provide enhanced communication 
over the area covered by the Mobile Medium (forwarding 
nodes). Fig. 5 shows the comparisin between the delivery 
ratios in a self-organizing M2ANET versus a M2ANET 
with Mobile Medium nodes moving randomly over the 
entire simulation area. The graph shows that decreasing the 
treshold values and thus keeping the Mobile Medium nodes 
closer together improves the delivery ratio. In our 
experiments, all self-organizing networks do better than a 
network with nodes moving totally randomly. The 
improvement is most signifincat for experiments with small 
number of nodes: in a M2ANET with only 10 nodes in an 
area 1000 by 1000 m the delivery ratio of 9% for a random 
movement scenario was improved threefold to almost 30% 
in a self-organizing M2ANET when a low threshold settings 
of Th1 = 60, Th2 = 30  were used. 
 
 
Figure 5. Delivery ratio. 
 
The improved performace is due to keeping the nodes 
closer together (Fig. 1), which increases a likelihood of 
forming a route from the source to the destination. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a control paradigm for a self-
organizing MANET network. The approach is particularly 
attractive for M2ANETs where the goal is to create a 
Mobile Medium out of mobile forwarding nodes, and use 
this Mobile Medium to facilitate data communication 
between other users.  
The new mobility control mechanism is based on an 
attraction/repulsion principle: the Mobile Medium nodes 
normally move randomly, but they turn back when they get 
too far from their neighbors. This mechanism keeps all the 
nodes in a “flock”, with the flock (or cloud) density 
controlled by two thresholds, and thus allowing the 
M2ANET creator to control the performance of the Mobile 
Medium: the lower the attraction/repulsion thresholds the 
closer the nodes of the Mobile Medium remain and the 
higher the delivery ration of the resulting M2ANET 
network. 
Based on our results, we suggest further testing self-
organizing M2ANET networks using different routing 
algorithms. Also the role of the lower threshold Th2 needs to 
be investigated: it is not clear which protocols might benefit 
form maintaining the minimum distance between the mobile 
nodes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is sponsored and funded by the Ministry of 
Higher Education of Saudi Arabia through the Saudi 
Arabian Cultural Bureau in Canada. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Basagni, M. Conti, S. Giordano, and  I. Stojmenovic (Eds.), Mobile 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Ad Hoc Networking.  New York: Wiley-IEEE Press. 2001. 
[2] F. Bei and A. Helmy, A survey of mobility models in wireless Ad hoc 
Networks, University of California, USA,2004. 
[3] J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, “M2ANET: a Mobile Medium Ad Hoc 
Network”, Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, WSN 2011, 
Paris, France, Feb. 2011, pp. 1-4.  
[4] H. Hodson, "Google's Project Loon to float the internet on balloons", 
New Scientist, October 2013.  
[5] J. Brustein, “Facebook’s Flying Internet Service, Brought to You by 
Drones”, Bloomberg Businessweek, March 4, 2014. 
[6] A. Jimenez Pacheco, et al., “Implementation of a Wireless Mesh 
Network of Ultra Light MAVs with Dynamic Routing”, IEEE 
GLOBECOM 2012, 3rd International IEEE Workshop on Wireless 
Networking & Control for Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles 2012, 
Anaheim, California, USA, 2012. 
[7] D. P. Agrawal and Q. A. Zeng, Introduction to Wireless and Mobile 
Systems, Thomson Engineering, 2010. 
[8] S. K. Sarkar, T. G. Basavaraju, and C. Puttamadappa,  Ad Hoc Mobile 
Wireless Networks, Principles, Protocols, and Applications, Auerbach 
Publications Taylor & Francis Group, 2007. 
[9]  N. Aschenbruck, E. G. Padilla, and P. Martini, “A survey on mobility 
models for performance analysis in tactical mobile networks”, Journal of 
Telecommunications and Information Technology, vol. 2, 2008, pp. 54-61.   
[10] H. Ekram and T. Issariyakul, Introduction to Network Simulator NS2, 
Springer, 2009. 
[11] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni, “The Ant System: 
Optimization by a colony of cooperating agents”, Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, 26 (1), 1996,  pp. 
29-41. 
[12] R. Alghamdi, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "Avoiding Border Effect in 
Mobile Network Simulation", The Twelfth International Conference on 
Networks ICN 2013, Seville, Spain, Jan 27 -  Feb 1, 2013, pp. 184-189, 
 [13] C. E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, “Highly dynamic destination-
sequenced distance-vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers”, ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, Oxford University Press, 
24(4), 1994, pp. 234-244. 
 
 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

