Towards an Integrated Mobility Simulation for Communications Research
Kamill Panitzek∗, Pascal Weisenburger†, Immanuel Schweizer∗ and Max M¨uhlh¨auser∗
∗Telecooperation Lab, †Department of Computer Science
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
e-mail: {panitzek@tk, pascal w@rbg, schweizer@tk, max@tk}.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de
Abstract—Mobile devices and new communication technolo-
gies gain ever more importance. Evaluating such technologies
for critical domains, like disaster recovery, is a difﬁcult task
and is usually done by using simulations. Until today, research
focused on the impact of mobility patterns on the investigated
communication technology. We argue that the inﬂuence of the
communication technology on the mobility patterns is also im-
portant to produce realistic simulations and meaningful results.
In this paper, we present our agent-based mobility model and
our simulation framework. This framework can be connected to
a network simulator to execute mobility and network simulations
in parallel, thus, inﬂuencing each other. The evaluation of our
mobility model with real world experts in the ﬁeld of disaster
recovery indicated our approach to be accurate and also revealed
potential for improvements.
Keywords—mobility model; behavior-based; software agents;
simulation; integration; disaster recovery
I.
INTRODUCTION
Simulators for mobility and communication are popular
research tools to investigate the applicability of new commu-
nication technologies under dynamic conditions. Especially in
critical domains, like disaster recovery, new communication
technologies can help saving human lives more efﬁciently. For
example, a scalable communication network can be achieved
by interconnecting hand-held mobile devices carried around
by ﬁrst responders to a peer-to-peer like network as proposed
by Bradler et al. [4]. However, testing such prototypes during
real disaster recovery missions is very dangerous and negligent
because, if the prototype fails during the mission, human
lives are threatened. Also, the testing possibilities under real
conditions are very limited and results might not be easily
reproducible due to many factors inﬂuencing the investigations.
Using simulations to investigate new communication technolo-
gies is, therefore, much safer and more convenient.
Until today, the focus in communications research usually
resided on the new communication technology under investi-
gation. Random-based mobility models are commonly used to
produce movement traces [6], [13] in a ﬁrst step. Afterward,
these movement traces are used as input data for network
simulations [1]. We believe this approach to be insufﬁcient, at
least for the scenario of disaster recovery, since communication
between ﬁrst responders directly inﬂuences their movement.
For example, if the network suffers a malfunction and, thus,
new commands from the headquarter cannot be transmitted
to ﬁrst responders in the ﬁeld, they cannot react on these
commands. Conversely, if ﬁrst responders communicate using
wireless network devices, their movement directly inﬂuences
the network since messages cannot be transmitted if ﬁrst
responders move out of each other’s communication range.
We, therefore, propose a framework for mobility simulation
to execute mobility simulations together with network simu-
lations in parallel, enabling them to inﬂuence each other. Our
mobility model is based on software-agents allowing us to
simulate different kinds of scenarios by implementing different
agent types and scenario speciﬁc rule sets. We implemented
rule sets for different disaster relief forces because of our
expert knowledge and experience in this ﬁeld. Our simulation
framework is targeted on interaction between agents and the
environment as well as on communication between agents.
These interactions are inﬂuencing their movement directly. We
evaluated our approach using questionnaires targeted on real
world experts most of which already participated in rescue
missions. Our evaluation showed that, considering the level
of abstraction, most of our assumptions are accurate and our
approach is suitable in general. However, we were able to
identify some weak spots in our mobility model which we ﬁxed
after evaluating the survey. The contributions of this paper are
threefold:
1) we present our mobility and interaction model that gen-
erates realistic movement and communication patterns
for simulations,
2) we describe the general architecture of our framework
for integrated mobility and network simulations, and
3) we discuss the evaluation of our model using question-
naires targeted on real world ﬁrst responders.
Our mobility model and simulation framework enable us to
investigate the inﬂuence of different communication technolo-
gies on the efﬁciency of ﬁrst responders during their missions
in the future.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in
Section II, we discuss the related work on mobility models
and focus on models targeted on disaster recovery in more
detail. We then present our mobility model and our integrated
simulation framework in Section III. The evaluation of our
mobility model is discussed in Section IV and Section V
presents concluding remarks as well as an overview on future
work.
II.
RELATED WORK
To simulate the movement of nodes in a mobile ad-hoc
network (MANET) scenario, many mobility models have been
proposed during the last two decades. In general, mobility
models can be separated into two categories: trace-based mod-
els and synthetic models [6]. In trace-based models, movement
traces are gathered and collected from real world systems.
These traces are then replayed in simulations to correctly
simulate mobility of network nodes. However, they are bound
to the speciﬁc environment where they were gathered. Also,
these models are not ﬂexible enough to simulate variations of
a single scenario.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

To simulate other environments or different variations of a
single scenario, synthetic models can be used. These models
create artiﬁcial movement traces for mobile nodes without
replaying recorded real world movement traces. However,
these models are supposed to create movement traces similar
to real world traces and, thus, simulate realistic movement
patterns. To accomplish this goal the behavior of single nodes
is reproduced in a realistic fashion.
We categorize the approaches for synthetic mobility models
into random mobility models and behavior-based mobility
models.
A. Random Mobility
Until today, many mobility models based on random move-
ment have been proposed. Although these models are rather
simple, they are particularly popular and have been examined
extensively in the past [12]. The three most commonly used
mobility models that generate random movement traces are:
• Random Walk Model [7]. In this model, every node
picks a direction of the interval [0, 2π) at random and
a random velocity. Then, the node moves for a random
time span before it picks a new direction and a new
velocity.
• Random Direction Model [13]. Here, every node picks
a random direction of the interval [0, 2π) and a random
velocity. The node then moves to the border of the
simulation environment where it picks a new direction
and velocity.
• Random Waypoint Model [10]. In this model, every node
picks a random point in the simulation environment as
well as a random velocity. It then moves until the point
is reach and picks a new waypoint and velocity.
Although these simple random mobility models above are
commonly used they have different unexpected properties and
create a behavior that is not usually intended. Yoon et al. [17]
showed that in these models the average movement speed of
nodes decreases over time because slow nodes need more time
to reach their destination than faster nodes. Furthermore, mo-
bility models exist that try to incorporate a behavior oriented
component into the otherwise random models:
• Pursue Model [14]. Using this mobility model, nodes
can be simulated that follow a speciﬁc moving target
deﬁning the movement as: pnew = pold + a(ptarget −
pold) + vrandom. The vector vrandom deﬁnes the in-
ﬂuence of the random number generator on the node
movement. The acceleration a(x) describes the inﬂuence
of the moving target on the node movement.
• Column Model [14]. In this mobility model, nodes move
on predeﬁned lines. These lines move forward toward a
random direction from the interval [0, π) and a random
distance. This model is suited for search-like activities
where nodes move forward forming a front line.
• Reference Point Group Model [9]. This mobility model
arranges nodes into groups. The center of a group
moves on a random path and the group members move
randomly around a predeﬁned reference point which
depends on the logical group center.
A more detailed overview and a simulation based compari-
son of different mobility models can also be found in the work
of Camp et al. [6].
B. Behavior-Based Mobility
Our main goal is to reproduce real world mobility in
a simulated environment. As we look on disaster recovery
missions as a concrete scenario it is clear, that a mobility
model based on random movement cannot reproduce real
world movement and behavior of ﬁrst responders during rescue
missions. Especially the different organizations like police,
ﬁre ﬁghters and paramedics have very speciﬁc roles when
entering a disaster area [12]. Therefore, a mobility model
is needed that incorporates these different roles so that the
nodes move and act according to their speciﬁc behavior. We
now highlight three types of behavior-based mobility models
capable of reproducing real world behavior and movement of
ﬁrst responders.
1) Role-Based Mobility: Nelson et al. describe a generic
event and role-based mobility model [12]. Every node is
assigned a role or a set of roles generating actions the node will
perform on a given event. The entire movement pattern of a
node in disaster recovery is then described by a triple (r, e, a):
role r reacts on an event e by performing the activity a. By
instantiating the triples with the characteristics for different
node types operating in disaster recovery a movement pattern
for the scenario can be generated. This way it is also possible
that a node follows different movement patterns during one
simulation. Four different categories of actions are assumed:
• Repelling: This role is mainly used for civilians during a
disaster. Also, this role can include a property describing
the curiosity of the civilian deﬁning the possibility the
civilian stops at the periphery of a disaster area, thus,
simulating watchers.
• Attracting: This role is typically used for police men and
ﬁre ﬁghters moving fast towards one or more events.
• Oscillating: This role is mainly used to model ambu-
lances moving between the disaster area and hospitals.
The nodes move towards an event and directly after
arriving there they move to a predeﬁned location and
repeat the movement pattern continuously.
• Immobile: This role is used to model naturally static
objects like hospitals. But also nodes that become immo-
bile after an event (e.g. injured persons) can be modeled
with this role.
2) Gravity-Based Mobility: If several independent disaster
areas are simulated, a mobility model based on gravity (pro-
posed by Nelson et al. [12]) can be used to describe how nodes
move towards or away from the individual areas. In this model,
every disaster area is modeled as a gravity source. The force F
a disaster area has on a node can be described by the intensity
I as F = I/d2 with d being the distance between the node
and the disaster area. I also describes whether the node moves
towards a disaster area or away from it. For a particular node,
the force vectors ⃗F from all disaster areas are then combined
to the vector sum ⃗Ftotal describing it’s resulting speed and
direction of movement.
3) Zone-Based Mobility: Aschenbruck et al. [2] describe a
partitioning of the entire disaster area according to handbooks
for ﬁrst responders in Germany [11], [15]. This partitioning
then inﬂuences how nodes move. The disaster area is divided
into four different zones:
• The incident site is the zone where the actual disaster
occurs. In this zone casualties are to be expected and the
effects of the disaster have to be combated (e.g., ﬁre).
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

• In the treatment zone the injured wait for their treatment
after they have been rescued from the incident site.
Paramedics give ﬁrst aid to injured and bring them to
the transport zone. Usually, the treatment zone is close
to the incident site.
• In the transport zone transportation vehicles such as
ambulances and helicopters wait to take injured to the
hospitals.
• The hospitals (or the hospital zone) are typically further
away from the incident site and are not part of the
actual disaster area. Injured are being transported here
via transportation vehicles for further treatment.
In this model, every node belongs to one of the different zones.
Some transportation nodes move between zones, others only
move inside one zone, for instance, ﬁre ﬁghters.
The zone-based mobility model, as well as some of the ran-
dom models described above, are implemented in the software
BonnMotion [1], a rich Java-based software that generates
synthetic movement traces to investigate mobility in different
scenarios. The generated movement traces can also be exported
as input data for several supported network simulators (cmp.
Figure 3a). However, BonnMotion, and also other mobility
simulation frameworks, lack an online interface for network
simulators because they are not intended to be executed with
such simulators in parallel. Also, none of the mobility models
above consider communication between simulated nodes to
inﬂuence the resulting movement.
III.
MOBILITY SIMULATION FRAMEWORK
In the last section, we presented different mobility models
to be used for general purpose and for disaster recovery simu-
lation. In this section, we introduce our approach for integrated
simulation using disaster recovery missions as an example. In
our approach, we focus on a deep interaction between network
simulation and mobility simulation to realistically simulate
complex scenarios where movement of nodes is also based
on communication between them.
We ﬁrst introduce the environment where the simulated
nodes move and operate in. These simulated nodes are imple-
mented as software agents based on rule sets which we present
afterward. Third, we describe the key concept of our approach:
the communication between agents and the interaction of
agents with the environment. Finally, we present the general
system architecture of our simulation framework.
A. Environment Model
The basis for mobility simulation is always formed by
the environment where mobile nodes move in. Typically, this
environment is modeled as a two dimensional plane where
mobile nodes and obstacles are placed on. During the mobility
simulation, the nodes are moved on this plane, thus, generating
movement traces. In many cases, this movement is based on
a random mobility model. However, in realistic scenarios,
like disaster recovery missions, nodes (e.g., ﬁrst responders)
move according to certain properties in their surrounding
environment. First responders use vehicles to move on streets
to, from, and between incident sites, ﬁre ﬁghters extinguish
ﬁres in buildings or in the environment, and so on. Therefore,
information about the environment is essential to disaster
simulation and for realistic movement patterns in general.
Figure 1.
The graphical representation of the environment
For this reason, we use data from the OpenStreetMap
project [8] to generate the environment. This data provides
information about streets, buildings, ﬁelds, woods and other
environmental properties. If nodes move on streets, their
speed can be adapted according to the streets’ speed limit,
for instance. Information about hospitals can be used in the
simulation as targets for ambulances to transport injured to.
This data greatly helps to generate realistic movement traces.
Based on this environmental data, seats of ﬁre can be
placed manually on the map as a starting point for the disaster
simulation. During the simulation, ﬁre spreads with an average
speed of 0.25m2 per minute (according to DIN 18232) or it
gets extinguished by ﬁre ﬁghters. Also, we use the state of
the art work by Aschenbruck et al. [2] to create the three
aforementioned virtual zones incident site (red), treatment zone
(green), and transport zone (blue) surrounding the ﬁre places,
also depicted in Figure 1. The information about hospitals is
used to create the hospital zones (red cross in the top left
corner of Figure 1).
B. Mobility Model
The implementation of our mobility model is based on
the concept of software agents [3]. This means, every node is
represented by a software agent that generates the movement
patterns for that particular node. Agents, on the other hand,
are instances of an agent type. Every agent type contains a set
of rules describing how to react in speciﬁc situations and on
different events. In the case of disaster recovery, agent types
are ﬁre ﬁghter and police car, for example, and the individual
ﬁre ﬁghters or police cars are then instances of the ﬁre ﬁghter
or police car agent types, respectively.
Each agent has limited knowledge about the simulated
world including other agents and the environment. In particu-
lar, the knowledge of each agent consists of the environmental
map, that is the road network and the positions of the associ-
ated institutions such as hospitals or police and ﬁre stations.
At the beginning of each simulation, every ﬁrst responder
agent has initial information about the type and location of the
disaster areas, injured people in these areas, the partitioning
into zones, and the positions of their colleagues. Based on
its current information, every agent chooses speciﬁc targets
in the environment and moves towards them considering the
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Transport patient 
into treatment area
Treat patient
Request ambulance
Transport patient to 
the ambulance
Choose disaster 
area with injured
Choose hospital
Request ambulance
Drive to target with 
ambulance
Walk to target
[injured person 
inside incident site]
[inside disaster area with casualties]
[injured person 
needing first aid]
[no ambulance in 
transport area]
[ambulance ready in 
transport area]
[outside disaster area or no casualties]
[disaster area with 
casualties exists]
[no disaster area 
with casualties exists]
[else]
[closest ambulance 
ready]
[chosen target 
sufficiently near]
Figure 2.
Rule set of a paramedic
available geographical information or retains its position for
a speciﬁed time span. The choice of targets determines the
movement pattern characteristic to that particular agent type.
Our behavior-based mobility model differentiates not only
between the various types of ﬁrst responders such as police
men or ﬁre ﬁghters, but also between the ways of moving such
as by motor vehicle or by foot. Therefore, agents are moving
speciﬁcally to their roles in order to obtain most realistic
behavior-based movement patterns.
The precise movement of the agents roughly follows the
simple high-level actions repelling, attracting, oscillating, and
immobile used in the generic event- and role-based mobility
model described by Nelson et al. [12]. However, targets
selected by the agents will depend on a substantially more ﬁne-
grained behavioral simulation which simulates the performed
tasks, that are speciﬁc for the respective agent type, directly
at the level of the agents. For example, ﬁre ﬁghters have two
primary tasks. First, casualties have to be transported from the
incident site (where other ﬁrst responders cannot operate due
to the dangers) to the treatment zone (where the injured can be
treated by paramedics). The second task is to ﬁght disasters,
for example, to extinguish ﬁre.
The task of medical personnel during rescue missions is to
bring injured people out of danger to the treatment zone, to
treat them there, and then bring them to the transport zone,
where they are picked up and transported to a hospital. For
that, a paramedic is moving together with the injured person
from the treatment zone to the transport zone. This injured
person is then transported to a hospital for further treatments
and the paramedic heads for another injured person in order
to prepare him for transportation. Figure 2 shows an example
rule set for the paramedic agent type.
The police has the task to secure disaster areas. This means
that the trafﬁc hubs (cross roads) need to be secured to prevent
civilians from entering the disaster area. Police ofﬁcers might
have to patrol between several intersections and possibly expel
civilians who are already within the disaster area.
The movement of civilians is based on the physics-based
gravitational mobility model described by Nelson et al. [12],
that allows nodes to respond to the presence of multiple
disaster events. Agents can ﬂee from several independent
disaster events or approach them.
This agent-based concept provides us with the opportunity
to simulate other scenarios as well, for instance, a public
transportation system. Buses or trams and trains in cities can
be modeled using our mobility model by implementing the
rule sets for such transportation agents.
C. Interaction and Communication
The rules above clearly show that the movement as well
as the behavior of agents are directly based on interaction
between agents and with the environment. For example, ﬁre
ﬁghters extinguish ﬁres in the environment (e.g., in buildings)
and paramedics carry injured people to ambulances to be
transported to the hospitals.
Furthermore, ﬁrst responders can send requests to other
rescuers, if they need help or a transportation vehicle. For
example, paramedics request ambulances to allow patients to
be transported to a hospital. An ambulance, that is available
for transportation, can then acknowledge the request and move
to the requested location. The transportation of ﬁrst responders
to the disaster area and back to the headquarters is carried out
in the same manner, as well. Also, ﬁrst responders inform their
colleagues about their new position as soon as they proceed
to a new location. This helps to keep the information on the
colleagues’ positions up to date for all ﬁrst responders. First
responder agents use this information to decide who should be
assigned to which disaster event.
Finally, ﬁrst responders inform their colleagues and the
commander about the progress of the rescue mission. Espe-
cially, if the ﬁre is extinguished, the ﬁre ﬁghter agents inform
their colleagues about the ﬁnished task. Also, paramedics
inform their colleagues about rescued persons. Based on this
information, ﬁrst responders know what tasks are remaining
and who is available for a new task.
This shows how the movement of agents also depends
on the communication between them. Only, if the informa-
tion exchange between ﬁrst responder agents is reliable, the
rescue mission is accomplished successfully and efﬁciently.
Conversely, the communication of the agents also depends on
their movement and the communication technology used. If a
real network based on wireless technology is considered for
message transportation, the agents need to be in transmission
range to each other for messages to arrive at the destination.
Hence, the network simulation cannot be launched after the
mobility simulation, but both simulations have to run together
in parallel to account for the inﬂuence of both simulations.
D. System Architecture
Our simulation framework focuses on these inﬂuences
between mobility and network simulations. It is based on a
discrete event-driven simulation engine. This means, events
occur at deﬁnite points in time during the simulation and
the simulation can be described as a chronological sequence
of events. In a typical state of the art simulation setup, the
mobility simulation is executed ﬁrst, creating movement traces
to be imported into the network simulation afterward (cmp.
Figure 3a). Our system, on the other hand, allows for an
integrated simulation where network and mobility simulations
are executed in parallel, thus, inﬂuencing each other (cmp. Fig-
ure 3b). However, this requires the mobility model to not only
generate basic movement but communication patterns, as well
(as described above). Assuming such a model, this provides the
advantage of simulating communication between nodes more
realistically, since their communication can directly inﬂuence
their movement (e.g., nodes calling for help).
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Integrated Simulation
Network 
Model
Simulation 
Engine
Mobility Model
Network Simulation
Simulation 
Engine
Mobility Simulation
Mobility 
Model
Network 
Model
Simulation 
Engine
Simulation Results
Traces
Events
Events
Environment Model
Simulation Results
Events
Events
Events
Interaction
Interaction
b)
a)
Communication
Movement
Figure 3.
a) Typical simulation setup – b) Integrated simulation framework
To connect our proposed mobility model to a network
simulator, a shared simulation engine is needed to dispatch
mobility and network related events. This does not necessarily
require events to be compatible with both, the network and
the mobility simulators. However, for simplicity the events are
compatible with both simulators in our current implementation.
We connected our framework to the state of the art discrete
event-driven network simulator PeerfactSim.KOM [16]. This
simulator can now be used to simulate different communication
technologies in combination with our mobility model.
In the future, using the disaster recovery example, this
integrated simulation enables us to investigate the inﬂuence of
different modern communication technologies on the works of
ﬁrst responders during their missions. A simulation without a
network simulator is possible, as well. In this case, we assume
that messages are being transmitted immediately and without
any packet loss. This can be used to very basically mimic
traditional radio communication, however, not realistically.
Furthermore, due to the generic design, other event-driven
simulators can be connected to our simulation framework as
well, for instance, a road trafﬁc simulator.
We used our ﬁrst response communication sandbox [5] as a
starting point for the mobility simulation framework. However,
many improvements and changes were necessary to integrate
our new mobility model with the network simulator and the
environment. We implemented a graphical user interface called
DisVis, short for Disaster Visualization, to create and modify
scenarios for simulation and to visualize simulation results
afterward (depicted in Figure 1). In the future, we intend to
investigate different communication technologies for disaster
recovery missions using our integrated simulation framework.
IV.
EVALUATION
To evaluate our mobility model described in the last
Section we have drawn on expert knowledge. We created a
questionnaire targeted at experts from police departments, ﬁre
ﬁghting departments, and medical facilities. With this survey,
we intended to extract different types of information. This
resulted into three similar questionnaires, one for each of the
ﬁrst responder groups listed above. Each questionnaire was
separated in four parts to get information about a) activities
of ﬁrst responders during missions, b) communication between
them, c) details about the works of each group, and d) the four
disaster zones described above.
Our call to ﬁll out the survey was followed by 84 individ-
uals most of which already participated in disaster recovery
missions. This number divides into 44 individuals from med-
ical facilities, 32 individuals from ﬁre ﬁghting departments,
and 8 individuals from police departments. As the number of
participating members from police departments shows, their
role during disaster recovery missions is not as big as that of
the other groups. Usually ﬁre ﬁghters are the ﬁrst to arrive and
take over certain roles associated with the police. The main role
of the police is investigation and criminal prosecution which
usually is a long term activity and starts after the disaster
recovery mission is ﬁnished. This was also reﬂected in the
answers by both, the participants associated with the police
departments as well as the participants associated with the ﬁre
ﬁghting departments.
A. Activities
First, we presented the atomic activities we implemented
in our mobility model to abstract the behavior of the three
ﬁrst responder agent types. The goal was to determine the
priorities and rules for these atomic activities as well as to
identify important but missing activities.
Our assumption about the priorities was accurate in gen-
eral. However, participants emphasized the ﬁrst activity to be
examining the situation on-site. This activity is not explicitly
modeled in our rule set. But, as stated before, the agents know
about the situation in the disaster areas at the beginning of the
simulation and incorporate this knowledge into their decisions
and activities. Therefore, this activity is modeled implicitly in
our rule set.
B. Communication
Second, we checked our assumptions made about the
importance of communication between ﬁrst responders. This
also included the organizational structures. We found that our
assumptions about the highly hierarchical organizational struc-
tures of ﬁrst responders is accurate in general and that commu-
nication is very important in disaster recovery missions. In fact,
most activities are only executed by command. Commands are
either given in a brieﬁng at the beginning of the rescue mission
or during the mission via (radio) communication.
Furthermore, the survey exhibited the explicit importance
of small ﬁrst responder groups. For example, a team of ﬁre
ﬁghters and a ﬁre engine form a group that moves and operates
together. The same applies to police ofﬁcers and paramedics.
This effects the movement of every unit that is part of a
group. It also impacts the communication, which is simulated
hierarchically so that the members of these groups primarily
communicate among themselves and only the group leaders
communicate between different groups. We implemented this
behavior into the rule sets of our mobility model.
C. Details
Third, we intended to get details about typical walking and
driving distances. We also tried to get a rough estimate about
the average time paramedics need to stabilize patients and
about the average time ﬁre ﬁghters need to extinguish a ﬁre in
apartments. In general, these details can only be estimated very
roughly and depend on various factors. However, we found that
typically distances of up to 400 meters are walked by foot.
To stabilize patients paramedics assess 2 to 10 minutes. Fire
ﬁghters asses roughly 30 to 90 minutes to extinguish a ﬁre
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

in apartments, although, the participants explicitly pointed out
that the time is highly situation dependent and cannot be easily
generalized. This also is hard to be mapped to our simulation.
Therefore, ﬁre ﬁghters in our model extinguish ﬁre at a rate
of 1.5m2 burning area per minute.
D. Disaster Zones
Finally, we evaluated the assumptions made about the par-
titioning into different zones and their sizes. The existence of
different zones was conﬁrmed by the participants, as expected.
Usually, ﬁrst responders deﬁne locations and sizes of these
zones before the recovery mission is started. This is also
captured in our simulation model. The size of the incident site
highly depends on the affected region (e.g., 20 to 50 meters or
100 to 150 meters perimeter). In our simulation model we use
20 meters around the affected region, for instance, a building
with a burning apartment.
Usually, the treatment zone is rather small and can be
combined with the transport zone into one zone under some
circumstances. Depending on the situation, the treatment zone
is at most half in size compared to the incident site. The
transport zone, on the other hand, is rather large and can be up
to twice as large as the incident site. Usually, the transport zone
is dependent on qualiﬁed locations for transport vehicles to
access the zone. These locations should be as close as possible
to the treatment zone. In our simulation model we use at least
20 meters for the treatment zone and at least 50 meters for the
transport zone.
Additionally, the initial partitioning of the disaster area into
zones can change over time when disasters are spreading or are
averted. This fact is reﬂected in our simulation model. Details
about the sizes of zones were incorporated after the survey.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an overview of basic and
commonly used methods for mobility simulation in network
simulations as well as in disaster scenario simulations. We
argued that, especially in disaster simulations, the interaction
and communication between the simulated agents are crucial
to the resulting simulation. Both aspects require that mobility
and network simulators are executed together in parallel so
both simulations can inﬂuence each other. We presented our
approach to simulate movement and communication patterns
in disaster recovery missions based on state of the art work
and expert knowledge. Our environment and mobility model
is based on OpenStreetMap data and software agents, re-
spectively. The event-driven mobility simulation framework is
capable of stand alone simulation. But it can also be integrated
with network simulators like PeerfactSim.KOM [16] enriching
the simulation with realistic network models.
We evaluated our mobility model with questionnaires tar-
geted at experts from police departments, ﬁre ﬁghting depart-
ments, and medical facilities. Especially medical personnel and
ﬁre ﬁghters participated in the surveys. The responses gathered
from the surveys allowed us to further improve our rule sets
of the different agent types.
In the future, we plan to evaluate different communication
technologies and mechanisms like routing algorithms in the
ﬁeld of disaster relief. We are especially interested in how
such technologies inﬂuence the works of ﬁrst responders.
Furthermore, we want to enrich our rule set with more detailed
rules from handbooks for ﬁrst responders [11], [15] to further
increase the realism of our simulation. Finally, we also plan to
implement different agent types for other scenarios like public
transportation to analyze communication possibilities between
buses and trains in smart cities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been funded by the DFG as part of the CRC
1053 MAKI and the research unit 733 QuaP2P.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Aschenbruck, R. Ernst, E. Gerhards-Padilla, and M. Schwamborn,
“Bonnmotion: A Mobility Scenario Generation and Analysis Tool,” in
Proceedings of the 3rd International ICST Conference on Simulation
Tools and Techniques , 2010, pp. 1–10.
[2]
N. Aschenbruck, E. Gerhards-Padilla, M. Gerharz, M. Frank, and
P. Martini, “Modelling Mobility in Disaster Area Scenarios,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 10th ACM Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and
Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems, 2007, pp. 4–12.
[3]
M. Balmer, N. Cetin, K. Nagel, and B. Raney, “Towards Truly Agent-
based Trafﬁc and Mobility Simulations,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems , 2004, pp. 60–67.
[4]
D. Bradler, B. Schiller, E. Aitenbichler, and N. Liebau, “Towards a
Distributed Crisis Response Communication System,” in Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis
Response and Management, 2009, pp. 1–9.
[5]
D. Bradler, I. Schweizer, K. Panitzek, and M. M¨uhlh¨auser, “First
Response Communication Sandbox,” in Proceedings of the 11th Com-
munications and Networking Simulation Symposium, 2008, pp. 115–
122.
[6]
T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, “A Survey of Mobility Models
for Ad hoc Network Research,” Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing, vol. 2, no. 5, 2002, pp. 483–502.
[7]
R. A. Gu´erin, “Channel Occupancy Time Distribution in a Cellular
Radio System,” in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol.
36, Issue 3, 1987, pp. 85–97.
[8]
M. Haklay and P. Weber, “Openstreetmap: User-generated street maps,”
IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, 2008, pp. 12–18.
[9]
X. Hong, M. Gerla, G. Pei, and C.-C. Chiang, “A Group Mobility
Model for Ad hoc Wireless Networks,” in Proceedings of the ACM
International Workshop on Modeling and Simulation of Wireless and
Mobile Systems, 1999, pp. 53–60.
[10]
D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic Source Routing in Ad hoc
Wireless Networks,” in Mobile Computing, T. Imielinski and H. Korth,
Eds.
Kluwer Publishing Company, 1996, vol. 353, ch. 5, pp. 153–181.
[11]
T. Mitschke, “Handbook for First Responder Groups (original: Hand-
buch f¨ur Schnell-Einsatz-Gruppen).”
Stumpf & Kossendey, 1994.
[12]
S. C. Nelson, A. F. H. III, and R. Kravets, “Event-driven, Role-based
Mobility in Disaster Recovery Networks,” in Proceedings of the second
ACM Workshop on Challenged Networks, 2007, pp. 27–34.
[13]
E. M. Royer, P. M. Melliar-Smith, and L. E. Moser, “An Analysis of the
Optimum Node Density for Ad hoc Mobile Networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2001, pp.
857–861.
[14]
M. S´anchez and P. Manzoni, “ANEJOS: A Java-based Simulator for Ad
hoc Networks,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 17, no. 5,
2001, pp. 573–583.
[15]
J. Schreiber, “Work Instructions for First Responder Groups of Medical
and Rescue Services (original: Arbeitsanweisungen f¨ur SEGen im
Sanit¨ats- und Rettungsdienst).”
Stumpf & Kossendey, 2000.
[16]
D. Stingl, C. Gross, J. R¨uckert, L. Nobach, A. Kovacevic, and R. Stein-
metz, “PeerfactSim.KOM: A Simulation Framework for Peer-to-peer
Systems,” in International Conference on High Performance Computing
and Simulation , 2011, pp. 577–584.
[17]
J. Yoon, M. Liu, and B. Noble, “Random Waypoint Considered Harm-
ful,” in Proceedings of The 22nd Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies, 2003, pp. 1312–1321.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

