Random Transmission in
Cognitive Uplink Network
S. Barman Roy
School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Email: swagato002@ntu.edu.sg
S. N. Merchant
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Email: merchant@ee.iitb.ac.in
A. S. Madhukumar
School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Email: asmadhukumar@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract—To meet the ever increasing demand for higher
data rate, improving spectral efﬁciency is absolutely essential.
Spectrum sharing between several users has been proposed
for maximum utilisation of available bandwidth. But whenever
multiple users are using the same frequency band and at same
time, they are going to interfere with each other resulting in
poorer performance as compared to single user scenario. This
work proposes a novel scheme for channel capacity improvement
in Multiple Access Systems (Uplink Communication) in cognitive
radio networks and explores the trade offs involved among the
cognitive users and primary user. It is argued that, when the
mobile transmitters lack the channel state information, they
can’t use the broadcast scheduling algorithm to cooperate with
each other. Convex-concave properties of the data rate is used
to ﬁnd the appropriate bounds. The corresponding scenario
with Broadcast Systems (Downlink Communication) is compared
where the transmitter has perfect knowledge of the channel state
information.
Keywords-Broadcast Scheduling; Cognitive Radio; Interference
Channel; MIMO Channel; Multiple Access Interference.
I. INTRODUCTION
The last decade has seen enormous growth of wireless
devices in consumer driven and industrial applications result-
ing in an exponential demand for data rate through wireless
media. Eventually, today’s telecommunication infrastructures
are severely strained to meet this demand. Particularly, radio
frequency is a resource whose availability is limited by physics
and hardware technology. Still, a number of survey results,
including [1] and [2] have shown that the current spectrum
usage is suboptimal from utility point of view. In many cases
(paging and amateur radios, for example), the licensed users
remain silent rendering the dedicated frequency bands idle.
At the same time, the mobile frequency bands are severely
overloaded to serve existing users and to meet the increasing
demand from new users. To meet the discrepancy between
high demand and suboptimal usage, cognitive networking has
been gaining popularity in current research.
Two major approaches proposed in cognitive networking
(both aiming to improve spectral efﬁciency) are spectrum
sensing and spectrum sharing. A practical system can use any
of the approaches or a combination thereof. In the context, a
licensed user is referred as a primary user who got priority
access over a spectrum. In addition to the primary user there
may be one or more secondary (cognitive) users who will use
the spectrum opportunistically.
A spectrum sensing network operates based upon burst na-
ture of primary user transmissions. To ensure that no spectrum
band remains idle, many experts (see [3] for example) have
advocated dynamic spectrum access where the secondary users
will continuously scan for free spectral bands, known as White
Space and use them for transmission. Certainly, it is necessary
to ensure retreat of secondary users once the primary users
resume their transmission. Needless to say, sensing the spectral
range for a White Space and making correct decision about
temporary presence/absence of primary user plays the most
important role.
In the paradigm of spectrum sharing, along with the primary
user, the secondary users will use the spectrum for their own
communication so as to cause minimum degree of interference
to each other. The primary user will deﬁnitely not have an
exclusive right over the spectrum, but cognitive users has to
ensure that their harmful interference is kept below a certain
threshold so that, in an ideal scenario, the primary user is not
even aware of their existence. The description is an extremely
generic one and quantitative analysis of interference between
users will be dependent upon the speciﬁc system itself. In
this work, the focus will be on a cognitive uplink network
described in Section III.
A. Organisation
This work is organised as follows. Section II gives the back-
ground with the current state of the art literature. Section III
describes the system model. In Section IV, the proposed tech-
nique of random transmission is analysed and the simulation
results are given in Section V. Then, Section VI discusses
implications of the results and possible applications.
B. Notations
Capital boldface letters stand for matrices and lowercase
boldface for vectors. ||v|| and ||v||1 give the Euclidean and
L1 norm of a vector v respectively. AH and AT respectively
denote conjugate transpose and transpose of matrix A. u ≻ v
indicates tuple wise inequality between two vectors valid for
each tuple. R and C denote the ﬁelds of real numbers and
complex numbers respectively. E(X) gives expected value of
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

the random number X and P(A) gives probability of an event
A.
II. BACKGROUND WORK
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) systems have long
been proposed as a way to improve capacity of systems.
Effects of multiple antennae (in terms of power allocation and
diversity) have been extensively studied in the general context
of wireless network. In [4], it is shown that capacity increases
linearly with min{M, N} where M and N are respectively
number of transmit and receive antennae. The ﬂexibility of-
fered by MIMO systems makes it an ideal candidate to meet
the challenges of cognitive interference network and various
system models have been evaluated in literature. For example,
the simplest case of two transmit one receive antenna (a MISO
system) has been studied in [5]. A more general approach
of user scheduling in a broadcast channel with an objective
of throughput maximisation has been undertaken in [6]. The
present work concerns with an uplink system model. It will
be shown afterwards, the fundamental differences between
uplink/downlink models in terms of joint versus distributed
receive strategies or centralised power control for downlink
will have important implications on performance.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
When several users spread throughout a coverage area
transmit to a base station, it is called a multiple access channel
(MAC). A standard multiple access system model with a
Fig. 1.
Multiple Access System Model in Presence of Primary User
cognitive base station (having with M antennae), a single
antenna primary base station, K cognitive users and a primary
user (each having a single antenna) is shown in Figure 1. The
M × 1 channel vector from cognitive user k to the cognitive
base station is given by hk,
∀1 ≤ k ≤ K, the channel
from primary user to cognitive base station is another M × 1
channel vector hp. The scalar channels from cognitive user
k and primary user to primary base station are given by gk
and gp respectively. Throughout this work, our assumption is
M ≪ K, implying number of user is much more than number
of antenna. Each cognitive user is transmitting a scalar symbol
sk ∈ C and the primary user is transmitting a symbol sp ∈ C.
It is obvious that power usage of cognitive user k is given by
Pk = |sk|2
T
and that of primary user is Pp = |sp|2
T , where T is
the symbol duration. We assume coherent detection with same
symbol rates at the receivers. Since the users are transmitting
at same frequency and time, there will be interference between
them. Additionally, since the symbol rates are same, the
symbol itself serves as a measure of power ignoring a constant.
So, we will take Pk = |sk|2 and Pp = |sp|2 for brevity.
A. Multiuser Decoding
With the deﬁned notations, the CM×1 vector received at
cognitive base station is
y =
K
X
k=1
hksk + hpsp + η
∈ CM
(1)
and the scalar received at primary base station
yp =
K
X
k=1
gksk + gpsp + η
∈ C
(2)
where η = [η1, η2, . . . , ηM]T is the noise vector with inde-
pendent identically distributed components and η is the scalar
noise at the primary receiver.
For brevity again, η can be assumed to have a covariance
matrix of identity and η also has unit variance. So E(ηηH) =
IM (the M×M identity matrix) and E(ηη∗) = 1. In fact, if the
variances are anything apart from unity, the entire expressions
of 1 and 2 can be divided by the corresponding factor. That will
give rise to the same expression and the constants absorbed in
the channel co-efﬁcients.
For the cognitive base station, which receives the vector y,
since all the antennae are connected to the same radio front
end, joint decoding is possible for each user with a set of K
receive strategies. Optimal receive strategies for each of K
users can be selected independently [7] with an objective to
maximise the individual SINRs. Usually the receive strategy
of user k is just to multiply the received signal with a row
vector fk and the decision statistic is the product fky.
With all the users transmitting simultaneously, the optimal
receive strategy of user k can be found using Wirtinger
derivative of real functions(see [8]) as fk = A−1
k hk where
Ak = IM + hphH
p pp +
K
X
i=1,i̸=k
hihH
i pi
(3)
Since the primary base station has a single antenna and not
connected to the cognitive bases station, its decision statistic
is the received scalar yp. After multiplying with the receive
strategies, we get the following SINR expressions for cognitive
users.
γk =
|f H
k hk|2Pk
f H
k (IM + hphH
p Pp + PK
i=1,i̸=k hihH
i Pi)fk
∀k
(4)
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

and the primary user SINR is given by
γp =
|gp|2Pp
1 + PK
k=1 |gk|2Pk
(5)
Corresponding maximum data rates (channel capacities nor-
malised by the bandwidth) for all the users users are given by
r = log(1 + γ)
Albeit the capacity itself is chieﬂy of theoretical interest,
still the logarithmic variation of data rate with SINR is an
important measure of performance. In Rayleigh fading AWGN
channels, the throughput is closely related to this expres-
sion [9]. Also, it intuitively indicates the diminishing marginal
return from pumping in more power at high SINR low noise
regime and inspires the use of water ﬁlling optimisation with
power constraint.
B. Comparison with Broadcast Channel
An apparently similar system model has been analysed
in [6]. Although the systems are similar in essence, all the
communication links are reversed in direction. For the SISO
primary user system, this is of relatively little consequence. For
the cognitive users, if they have full knowledge of channels
(their owns and also other cognitive users), the orthogonal
user selection algorithm [6] selects the same set of users with
same power to maximise the throughput. The well known rate
duality principle [10], [11] dictates that it is possible to achieve
the same throughput here.
In practice, however, the channel state information is usually
not available at the mobile transmitters. Even if they are avail-
able, limited processing capability at the cognitive terminals
makes it difﬁcult to schedule the transmissions. If we assume
no inter-user point to point communication, the users have
absolutely no way to coordinate their behaviours and schedule
their own transmissions keeping the broad interest of whole
cognitive user group in mind. In Section IV, a novel protocol
has been proposed and analysed to address the multiple access
channel.
IV. RANDOM TRANSMISSION
When there is no coordination among the users, in par-
ticular, each user is not aware of others’ channel condition,
throughput demand or power availability, it is not possible
to schedule transmission from a centralised control. Then,
if all the users transmit continuously, they not only end up
spending a lot of power, at the same time, cause harmful
interference to others. The proposed approach consists of
random transmission from all the cognitive users. Since the
primary user has a single antenna, zero forcing from all K
cognitive users is not possible. So it has to tolerate interference
to some extent. But, usually for the licensed primary users,
the requirement is that the link quality (expressed in terms
of SINR) must be above a certain limit. So, it is possible to
set up a scheme where every cognitive user will transmit in
a particular symbol interval with a probability p ∈ (0, 1] and
stay silent with probability 1 − p.
To put the scenario in more mathematical form, K inde-
pendent identically distributed Bernoulli variables {bk}K
k=1 are
introduced and in a particular symbol interval
bk = 1 ⇔ Cognitive user k has transmitted
Since every user is transmitting on a random basis with
probability p it is obvious that P[bk = 1] = p and P[bk =
0] = 1 − p
∀k ∈ {1, 2, . . ., K}.
It is assumed that the primary user is transmitting and using
its own spectrum range on a continuous basis and there is no
question of probabilistic transmission.
A. Performance Criteria
Since the protocol proposed is not deterministic and there
is a degree of randomness involved in the transmission pro-
cedure, the performance criteria can no longer be evaluated
and/or compared deterministically. From the deﬁnitions of
{bk}K
k=1 we can conclude that from the point of view of k-th
cognitive user, the interference power vector, received at the
base station is
Icognitive
k
= hphH
p Pp +
K
X
i=1,i̸=k
biPihihH
i
(6)
which is easily interpreted as sum of interferences from all
other users (primary and cognitive). Similarly, for the primary
user, the interference power is
Iprimary =
K
X
i=1
biPi|gi|2
(7)
The corresponding data rates are, for cognitive users
rk = log

1 +
|f H
k hk|2bkPk
f H
k

IM + Icognitive
k

fk


(8)
Here the same receive strategy of 4 is used (assuming the
extreme case of all the users transmitting) and the interference
is obtained from 6. For primary user, the rate is
rp = log

1 +
|gp|2Pp
1 + Iprimary

(9)
Since all the rates are random variables (dependent upon
{bk}K
k=1) to ﬁnd the true performance measures, expectation
must be taken over all the independent variables. So for
cognitive users,
E [rk]
= E{bi}K
i=1
"
log
 
1 +
|f H
k hk|2Pkbk
f H
k (IM + Icognitive
k
)fk
!#
(10)
For the primary user, there is no randomness involved in its
own transmission, but the interference is random and we get,
E[rprimary]
= E{bk}K
k=1
"
log
 
1 +
|gp|2Pp
1 + PK
k=1 |gk|2Pkbk
!#
(11)
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

B. Bounds on Rates
For an intuitive idea of how the randomness affects the data
rates, properties of the logarithmic function can be used.
Consider the function f (x, y) = log

and 3 show the average rates of all cognitive users, ﬁrst with
a comparatively low primary user power (Pp), and then with a
high Pp. Figure 4 gives the corresponding variation of primary
user data rate with probability p.
From Figures 2 and 3 it
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Power Consumption(Normalised)
Data Rate (bit/channel use) 
 
 
Secondary data rate with Random Transmission
Secondary Data Rate with Continuous Transmission
Fig. 2.
Average Data Rates of Cognitive Users with Low Primary User
Power
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Power Consumption of Secondary Users
Data Rate (in bit/channel use)
 
 
Continuous Transmission
Random Transmission
Fig. 3.
Average Data Rates of Cognitive Users with High Primary User
Power
is obvious that cognitive users gain in the random transmis-
sion scheme if the primary user power is high compared to
cognitive users. This assumption is often valid, particularly in
wireless sensor networks where sensor motes operating at low
power are used for short range communication. As Figure 4
suggests and already shown in Section IV-B2, primary user
always gains in terms of data rate.
VI. CONCLUSION
The random transmission scheme is able to outperform
the continuous transmission scheme for primary user and
possibly the cognitive users as well for certain cases. As the
ﬁgures demonstrate, tuning the secondary user parameters can
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Power of Secondary Users (Normalised)
Data Rate (bit/channel use)
 
 
Primary Data Rate with Random Transmission from Secondary
Primary Data Rate by Continuous Transmission from Secondary
Fig. 4. Primary User Data Rates with Continuous and Discrete Transmissions
be used to limit the data rate of primary users. In certain
conditions, higher data rate for primary users may be necessary
(with obvious trade-off for cognitive users) and in some other
conditions, the primary user can tolerate higher interference
from cognitive users. It is shown that the cognitive users can
respond to constraints imposed by primary users either by
adjusting the actual power or by adjusting the transmission rate
p. From the design point of view, controlling the probability
p is an easier way than to control the battery power.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Calabrese, “The End of Spectrum ’Scarcity’ : Building on the TV
Bands Database to Access Unused Public Airwaves,” New America
Foundation, 2009.
[2] M. Marcus, J. Burtle, N. Mcneil, A. Lahjouji, and B. Franca, “Report
of the Unlicensed Devices and Experimental Licenses Working Group,”
Federal Communications Commission Spectrum Policy Task Force,
Tech. Rep., 2002.
[3] S. Geirhofer and L. Tong, “Dynamic Spectrum Access in the Time Do-
main : Modeling and Exploiting White Space,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 66–72, 2007.
[4] E. Telatar, “Capacity of Multi-antenna Gaussian Channels,” European
Transactions on Telecommunications, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585–595,
1999.
[5] H. Huang, Z. Zhang, P. Cheng, G. Yu, and P. Qiu, “Throughput
Analysis of Cognitive MIMO System,” in First International Workshop
on Cross Layer Design, Jinan, China, Sep. 2007, pp. 45–49.
[6] K. Hamdi, W. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Opportunistic Spectrum
Sharing in Cognitive MIMO Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 4098–4109, 2009.
[7] M. Schubert and H. Boche, “A Generic Approach to QoS-Based
Transceiver Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1557–1566, 2007.
[8] R. Remmert, Theory of Complex Functions, ser. Graduate Texts in
Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[9] G. Dimic and N. D. Sidiropoulos, “On Downlink Beamforming with
Greedy User Selection: Performance Analysis and a Simple New
Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 53, no. 10,
pp. 3857–3868, 2005.
[10] M. Joham, “MIMO Systems,” Associate Institute for Signal Processing,
Technological University of Munich, Germany, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[11] S. Vishwanath, N. Jindal, and A. Goldsmith, “Duality, Achievable Rates,
and Sum-Rate Capacity of Gaussian MIMO Broadcast Channels,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 2658–2668,
Oct. 2003.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

