An NFC-based Customer Loyalty System
Jef Smets, Glenn Ergeerts, Rud Beyers, Frederik Schrooyen, Marc Ceulemans, Luc Wante, Karel Renckens
Department of Applied Engineering
Artesis University College of Antwerp
Antwerp, Belgium
glenn.ergeerts@artesis.be
Abstract—Customer loyalty systems that use barcode-based
cards have gained a lot of popularity in the last decades, resulting
in customer wallets that are overwhelmed with barcode-based
loyalty cards. In this paper, a solution for this problem is
provided. Based on general and market research of customer
loyalty systems, a customer loyalty system that uses NFC (Near
Field Communication) technology is designed that requires only
one NFC medium (e.g., an NFC-enabled smart card or an NFC-
enabled mobile device) for each customer, which is capable of
holding multiple virtual loyalty cards.
Index Terms—Customer loyalty, NFC, group loyalty, city
loyalty, NFC smart card, mobile NFC.
I. INTRODUCTION
As an old proverb states: the customer is always right, and
nothing is more truthfully nowadays. Due to the current eco-
nomical crisis and the rising expectations of the technology-
enriched customers, the variableness and the switching be-
haviour of customers has increased signiﬁcantly [1]. For this
reason, many companies are forced to turn into customer-
centric companies in order to attract new customers and retain
the existing ones.
In a customer-centric company, the focus lies on the needs
and behaviours of the customers instead of on the companys
internal drivers. One of the key factors of a customer-centric
company is customer loyalty, a very powerful tool for mer-
chants [2]. By rewarding customers for their purchases, cus-
tomers are retained. Furthermore, new and existing customers
are attracted by publicity campaigns, resulting in an increased
turnover. Research [1] has shown a revenue increase of 20%
per customer. Other advantages of a successful loyalty system
are marketing effectiveness, building true loyalty, increased
word of mouth (WoM) marketing, strengthened value and
brand proposition and increased long-term proﬁts.
Existing loyalty systems are in need of improvement [3].
In this paper, a system is described that takes customer
loyalty to a higher level, giving both merchants and customers
new opportunities to enrich their relationship and build true
loyalty. Decreased marketing costs and increased marketing
effectiveness by using real-time sales data are the main beneﬁts
for merchants.
NFC (Near Field Communication) technology is used as
enabler-technology to ensure an efﬁcient and convenient usage
of the system. This very promising and relatively young
technology is slowly penetrating the market and has a number
of advantages over traditional loyalty systems technologies
(e.g., loyalty points on a barcode-based medium and paper
strips for some short-term promotion).
This paper proposes a NFC-based loyalty system which al-
lows the customer to use only one medium containing multiple
virtual loyalty cards. From a merchant point of view the main
advantage the system delivers is the easy implementation and
managing of a loyalty system by joining the platform.
In the following section, we give a description of the
concept of customer loyalty and in Section 3 we give a
brief overview of NFC technology. In Section 4 we discuss
the customer loyalty system. Section 5 handles about the
performed interviews. Future works can be found in Section 6
and ﬁnally, the conclusion of this paper is located in Section
7.
II. CUSTOMER LOYALTY
The main focus of customer loyalty is to retain customers.
In order to achieve customer loyalty, a relationship between
a store or brand and the customer has to be built up. This is
done by rewarding loyal customers. A customer is considered
loyal when the customer actively participates in a loyalty
program. Promotions and other forms of publicity are also
used to increase the retaining rate of customers and to attract
new customers, who, hopefully, will be converted into loyal
customers.
Some examples of loyal customers rewards are a reduction
on the total price, a cash value, a free product, a reduction
on a speciﬁc product, a lottery game ticket (of a lottery game
organised by the store or company), a reduction in another
store or even a reduction in the customers parking ticket price.
A larger reward is likely to retain more customers, but also
decreases the revenue.
Coupons or promotion codes, which a customer can ex-
change for a reward, are also often used for attracting new
customers or for rewarding loyal customers. When the reward
is a free product or reduction, sometimes a catalogue is
available from which customers can choose their free product
or a product with reduction. A membership card is a kind
of loyalty card as the members can be considered as loyal
customers that are entitled to a reward.
A distinction can be made between issuers, who want to
increase the loyalty of their own products or brand, and
merchants, who want to increase the loyalty of their stores,
which offer a wide range of products. In this paper, the focus
7
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

lies on merchants because issuers only distribute coupons, not
loyalty cards.
In order to increase loyalty, customers must be satisﬁed
about the given reward and the received publicity. Because no
customer is the same, there is no one-size-ﬁts-all solution for
delivering rewards and making publicity. Therefore, the con-
cept of customer segmentation, where customers are divided
into groups with each their speciﬁc characteristics regarding
loyalty, is used. In this way, customers are better targeted
by the publicity campaigns and more satisﬁed about the
given rewards, thus increasing the customer loyalty. However,
if the customer segmentation is done badly, customers will
receive rewards and publicity in which they are not interested,
resulting in customer churn. Its therefore important that good
analysis of the customers is performed and optimally used in
order to make a proﬁtable loyalty system.
Research of Accenture [1] summarizes this in a three-step
scheme. The ﬁrst step is about knowing the customer in order
to choose good segmentation criteria. The second step is all
about customer-centric marketing (the actual publicity to lure
customers to the store). The rewarding of loyal customers is
discussed in the third step.
As loyalty can be increased by dividing the customers
into groups, we can state that an optimal loyalty level can
be reached by examining each customer separately. This
approach is called one-to-one marketing [4]. Using one-to-one
marketing, fully customized campaigns can be generated to
reach the customers optimally and to boost loyalty. There can
also be a much faster response to the increasingly switching
behaviour of customers.
In order to measure the success of a loyalty system, so
called loyalty or marketing factors must be carefully chosen
and constantly measured. Those loyalty factors will determine
the success of the chosen rewards and incentives, and the
chosen customer segmentation.
Marketing agents have to keep in mind to make offers
compelling but not too intrusive in order not to spam the
customers. It is after all the customer that decides to opt-in to
the promotions or not. Also, if customers take advantage of
the system and better organise their redemptions, the system
will have less impact [5]. Systems like mFero [6] or Puntavista
[7], which help the customer to choose the best reward, reduce
the complexity of choosing the best reward at the POS (point-
of-sale) and could reduce the impact as well.
Todays younger generation uses smartphones intensively but
good examples of mobile marketing are still hard to ﬁnd.
Research has shown that people care more of losing their cell
phone than their wallet [8] and that 75% of the people take
their cell phone with them everywhere [3]. Keeping that in
mind, it is no surprise that mobile marketing is a hot topic
nowadays. Customers that can be reached everywhere and
at any time, using a different amount of technologies, make
the customers mobile device an ideal marketing medium. The
wide range of technologies that a smartphone offers can be
used to for time based and/or location based loyalty at low
cost.
III. NFC TECHNOLOGY
NFC (Near Field Communication) technology is a close-
range communication technology with a typical operating
distance of approximately 10 cm [9]. Its operating frequency
is 13.56MHz. In 2003, NFC has been approved as ISO/IEC
standard making it a very modern technology.
Next to its shorter distance and other operating frequency,
NFC differs from other technologies such as RFID, Bluetooth,
ZigBee, IrDA and Wi-Fi by a slower data rate [10]. The
maximum data rate of NFC is 424 kB/s. This small data rate is
no problem, as the size of the by NFC transmitted information
is usually small as well.
NFC is, due to its short operating range, said to be very
secure. However, research [11] has proven that some impor-
tant related security issues like eavesdropping, data corrup-
tion, data modiﬁcation, data insertion and man-in-the-middle-
attacks remain. Solutions are available but not always easy to
implement.
Typical NFC applications are smart posters, payment or
ticketing and loyalty. Many different NFC trials in countries
around the world have been held from those applications.
However, during the last years the research about NFC has
focussed primarily on mobile NFC [8]. Mobile NFC is the
integration of NFC in mobile phones whereby mobile payment
systems are primarily very popular nowadays.
IV. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The idea behind the system described in this paper is that
customers can replace all their loyalty cards with one NFC
medium. This medium could be an NFC card or, in the
future, an NFC GSM, which most customers already carry
with them. This should be well accepted by customers since
they are overwhelmed with paper vouchers and plastic loyalty
cards nowadays. Issuers and merchants have lower costs and
are more eco-friendly since theres no need for printing and
distributing paper vouchers or catalogues.
A customer then only needs one NFC medium that is usable
in different stores. Many actions can be automated, reducing
processing time at the terminal. NFC is also said to be faster
since there is no need for searching for a loyalty card in the
customers wallet as this is automatically done by the terminal
[5]. The tap and go functionality of NFC devices allows
the customer to perform more intuitive actions which makes
NFC an easy-to-use technology and results in an increased
impulsive buying behaviour.
Since multiple stores use the same medium, the price can
be split among them. Also, a medium already owned by the
customer could be used, reducing the medium costs to zero. A
disadvantage is that the branding aspect of traditional loyalty
cards is lost, but the customers interface can be used for better,
more personalised publishing resulting in increased customer
loyalty.
A. System, terminals and mediums structure
The system consists of a backend which contains the
webserver and database, terminals which are located at the
8
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

POS (point-of-sale) in the stores, NFC mediums (possessed
by the customers) and a website as an online interface for
both customers and merchants. This is shown in Figure 1.
Fig. 1.
System overview
An online architecture is used, meaning that all data is
stored in the central database and the customers medium
is only used for identiﬁcation. The data is accessible via
the online interface of the customers and merchants in real-
time, which enables real-time monitoring of the customers
(marketing information) on the merchants interface. The online
medium and terminal architecture is needed to ensure this real-
time data on the backend and website.
All operations (processing of the data) are performed on
the backend (alternative is on the terminals) which enables
efﬁcient updating of the software. When implementing a new
condition (see Section 4.3), only the code on the backend
needs to be modiﬁed, all terminals can use the new backend
code without need for updating. Also, when there are multiple
branches of a store, all the data is already centralised; so, no
additional synchronisation is needed (in contrary to when all
or part of the data would be stored at the terminals).
Choosing an online architecture for the medium makes the
system medium independent as only an identiﬁcation number
needs to be saved on the medium and all mediums support
this. The most common NFC mediums are NFC smart cards
and mobile NFC devices, as discussed in the previous Section.
However, mobile NFC devices have not yet penetrated the
market sufﬁciently, but NFC smart cards have (reaching even
95% penetration in Hong Kong) [8]. Therefore, smart cards
are currently the most suited medium to use.
With 2011 that is announced as a promising year for mobile
NFC, the breakthrough of mobile NFC will not last much
longer, so the use of mobile NFC devices is supported by the
loyalty system in order to be future proof. Its a small step
to port NFC cards to mobile NFC devices. The intermediate
solutions towards mobile NFC devices that currently exist,
NFC stickers and NFC MicroSD cards, could also be used
as a solution for the current absence of mobile NFC devices
[12].
Because all data is stored in the database on the backend, an
OTA transaction is required when us ing a mobile NFC device
to consult this data. A semi-ofﬂine mobile NFC medium would
not require an OTA transmission but as the new generation of
smartphones all support mobile internet and the current price
of mobile internet is descending, this should not be a problem.
An online architecture requires no memory storage on the
medium (which is limited in size). This leaves room for other
applications, it enables the possibility to have multiple users
per medium and backups can easily be managed since all data
is centrally available on the backend. A backup could be used
to restore the data of a stolen medium which can be blacklisted
instantly.
The only disadvantage of an online system is that the
terminals require a constant connection with the backend to
access the database. This is more expensive than a non-
constant connection, the used terminals have to support net-
work connections and there is the possibility that the connec-
tion is broken. However, using a buffer, in case of a broken
connection the system can switch to a limited operation mode
where it is still possible for customers to gain loyalty points but
not to redeem them (see Section 4.4). In this way, customers
still have to come back to the store (where loyalty is all about),
so the system is still effective. The connection should be
restored as soon as possible to ensure a full operating system
in which customers can also redeem items so the customers
loyalty experience remains positive.
Considering the terminals, three different terminals were
implemented. Firstly, loyalty functionality was added to an
online mobile terminal, the ACR880 GPRS Portable Smart
Card Terminal. Secondly, an online ﬁxed desktop pay desk
was implemented and extended with an NFC reader, bar-
code reader, eID reader and loyalty functionality. Finally, the
same ﬁxed desktop terminal was implemented and extended
with loyalty functionality to work in a semi-ofﬂine manner,
which means processing the data on the terminal and logging
all resulting data to the backend system at regular times.
Advantages of this approach are no need for a constant
connection with the backend and the ability to use product-
speciﬁc conditions without the need for the product database
to exist on the backend. The data on the backend (and the
interface) is not real-time. Sections 4.3 and 4.4 dont apply to
this terminal type as the data processing and management are
not system-speciﬁc.
B. Support for different kinds of loyalty
Normal loyalty ﬁts the scenario of stores with possible
multiple branches with each one or more terminals per store.
The following kinds are supported as well so more customers
can be reached. All the different kinds of loyalty can be
combined at will.
If a store has already an electronic barcode-based loyalty
system in place, this system can be replaced by storing the
barcode of the current loyalty card of a customer on the
customers medium. An extra module would be needed in the
terminals to support the NFC mediums in the system and to
9
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

log all data to the backend system. The semi-ofﬂine terminal
could be used for this purpose. The advantage of this approach
is obviously the support for existing barcode based loyalty
system, which are very popular nowadays.
Group loyalty ﬁts the scenarios of common loyalty points
for a group of stores with each possible multiple branches and
one or more terminals per store. The problem arises that the
points have a monetary value. For example, customer X gains
499 points in store A after 10 visits, then gains 1 point in store
B (1 visit) and receive a reduction of 5 (promotion says: for
each 500 points, you receive a reduction of 5 ). This would
mean that store B would pay for 1 visit in store B and 10
visits in store A which isnt correct.
This money mismatch requires all transactions to be logged
to make regular money exchanges between all participation
stores possible. Another option is that the stores can buy
and sell the points from and to the system. Points need to
be available on-the-ﬂy and a store should never run out of
points. Due the systems online infrastructure, this could be
implemented without much effort. The monetary value of
points also raises the need for increased security of the system.
Advantages for the participating stores are not only raised
proﬁts due to the increased foot trafﬁc but shared publicity
costs as well.
As an extension of group loyalty, city loyalty additionally
has third-party payment devices in the loyalty environment,
e.g., a parking meter. Cities are found the most suitable places
to perform this kind of loyalty, hence the name, but city loyalty
is not restricted to cities at all, e.g., shopping malls are also
a perfect location. The advantages of group loyalty remain.
In addition, when using this kind of loyalty, customers ﬁnd
themselves in a complete loyalty environment, which they are
yet more likely to return to.
Next to store-speciﬁc loyalty, product-speciﬁc loyalty is also
an option as stated in Section 2. When enough stores use
the system, cross-store product-speciﬁc promotions (branding)
could be organised by the manufacturers, bringing new players
to the loyalty ecosystem.
C. Promotions conﬁguration
A difference is made between receiving points and receiving
a reward (redeeming points). Both are triggered by conditions.
There can be different kinds of conditions implemented.
Examples of receive conditions are: receiving points for each
visit, receiving points as a function of the total price, receiving
points as a function of the price of a speciﬁc product or
receiving a ﬁxed amount of points for each visit. There are
also different kinds of rewards as discussed in Section 2. All
rewards are triggered by an amount of points.
When a promotion is conﬁgured, a merchant chooses which
receive and redeem conditions to use. Minimum one of each is
required but multiple conditions can be combined at will. Each
chosen condition needs to be conﬁgured. The system can eas-
ily be expanded with new conditions, not requiring updating
the terminals due the online architecture as mentioned above.
Multiple promotions are possible on a stores virtual loyalty
card just as this is now the case with traditional loyalty
systems.
D. Use cases
1) Normal ﬂow: The following steps summarise the general
customer ﬂow at the terminal.
1) The cashier enters all products
2) The cashier asks the customer to put the medium on the
reader
3) The cashier asks the customers which promotions and
items of that promotions the customer wants to receive
points for
4) The customers choice is sent to the backend and pro-
cessed, a list of available rewards is returned. If this is
the ﬁrst time a customer uses the loyalty card in that
store, a virtual loyalty card is created automatically. If
this is the ﬁrst time a customer uses the promotion on
the virtual loyalty card of that store, a counter is created
automatically.
5) The cashier asks the customers which rewards the cus-
tomer wants to collect. If a customer doesnt select a
reward, no points are redeemed. This enables a customer
to save for a certain reward, e.g., 100 points give a free
magazine and 200 points give a free book, etc. Another
possibility is that the reward is e.g., a free hamburger
and that the customer already bought food and wants to
postpone the reward to the next visit.
6) The customers choice is sent to the backend and pro-
cessed.
7) Next customer.
Some of the promotion items to receive points and receive
a reward are chosen automatically. This is conﬁgured by the
merchant on the merchants part of the website.
Received points can be added to the points balance before
there is checked if enough points are available to receive a
reward or afterwards. This is also conﬁgured by the merchant
on the merchant part of the website. If afterwards, this means
the customer will have to return to the store in order to retrieve
the award (which is the basic of loyalty, letting customers
return to the store).
2) New customer ﬂow: Customers can start saving points
immediately after receiving their medium in the store and
providing their eID information the ﬁrst time they use their
medium to save points.
The systems goal is to increase loyalty. In order to achieve
this goal, merchants must have access to information of their
customers. This information is obtained when an NFC medium
is used for the ﬁrst time to ensure every new customer provides
this information.
Customers will have the choice between using an eID reader
or handover the eID to the cashier which will enter the data
manually in a form (in order to ensure correct data). The
manual option is for customers who fear their privacy as it
is unclear for the customers which data is obtained from their
eID.
10
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

The advantage of using an eID reader for entering the
customers information is the reduced processing time. Instead
of paper registration forms that need to be processed (manually
entered in a computer system), this is done automatically, the
customers eID data is even available in real-time. In addition,
the entered eID data has a very low error-rate.
Following steps summarise the new customer ﬂow at the
terminal.
1) A new customer asks for and receives an NFC card (or
uses an already owned NFC medium)
2) The cashier enters all products
3) The cashier asks the customer to put the medium on the
reader
4) The cashier asks the customers which promotions and
items of that promotions the customers want to receive
points for
5) The customers choice is sent to the backend and pro-
cessed, a list of available rewards is returned. If this is
the ﬁrst time a customer uses the loyalty card in that
store, a virtual loyalty card is created automatically. If
this is the ﬁrst time a customer uses the promotion on
the virtual loyalty card of that store, a counter is created
automatically.
6) The cashier gets a notiﬁcation that the customer is a
new customer. The customer is asked to handover the
customers eID card.
7) The cashier reads out the eID card or enters the data of
the eID card manually (if preferred so by the customer)
8) The cashier asks the customers which rewards the cus-
tomer wants to collect If a customer doesnt select a
reward, no points are redeemed. This enables a customer
to save for a certain reward, e.g., 100 points give a free
magazine and 200 points give a free book, etc. Another
possibility is that the reward is e.g., a free hamburger
and that the customer already bought food and wants to
postpone the reward to the next visit.
9) The customers choice and eID data is sent to the back-
end and processed. An un-activated customer website
account with the eID data linked to is created at the
backend.
10) The customers registration code is printed on the cash
ticket.
11) Next customer.
After using their medium for the ﬁrst time, customers can
(optionally) register an account on the website interface using
their registration code which is printed on the cash ticket.
E. Customer interface
Customers have an online, browser based interface (website)
on which they can view the stores of which they have a
virtual card and view their points balance and history of each
promotion. In their account settings they can opt-in and opt-out
to various aspects of the system so at any time their privacy
is guaranteed.
All stores that use the system and their promotions can be
viewed. Customers are informed about new promotions and
other news via advertising on the pages. Finally, each store has
also its own information page with the stores address details,
a map, opening hours and other information.
Customers can also add additional proﬁle data using the
website as an extension to the eID data as this data is not
complete (e.g., phone numbers are missing). The customers
email address is retrieved during the registration process.
F. Merchant interface
On the merchant interface (website), merchants can manage
the promotions of their store. Each store has its own space on
the website with information about the store such as the stores
address, opening hours and general information.
Merchants have access to the points balance and history
of their customers, the (relevant) eID information of their
customers and other marketing information of their customers
and promotions which allows them to increase loyalty. Differ-
ent graphs and other tools are available, e.g., a map with all
addresses of their customers in order to view the distance to
the store or a graph that shows the amount of customers that
visited the store during the past week.
V. SECURITY & PRIVACY
Various security levels were implemented in the system.
Firstly, all communication between the backend system and
clients (website users and terminals) is encrypted using SSL.
Secondly, Web pages or web services require authentication
(expect the public pages). Finally, each user or terminal is
restricted to see only the appropriate data. The system should
prohibit data duplication (points). This is obtained by securing
the backend, all data is stored there.
Considering the privacy, access to customers data (personal
data and loyalty data) is restricted to merchants of stores where
customers have a virtual loyalty card. One is considered a
customer of a store if a virtual loyalty card of that store exists.
By visiting a store, a customer opts-in to that store and a virtual
loyalty card is created, giving the merchant of that store access
to that customers proﬁle information.
The eID reader brings privacy issues with it as well. Laws
exist that protect the customers privacy and that should not be
ignored and, as discussed above, an alternative to the eID is
provided by giving the option to let cashier manually insert
the eID data in to the system.
Conﬁdence agreements between merchants and the system
administrators have to be made as well. Those regard the
loyalty and sales data of the stores which should not be sold
to third-party organisations by the systems administrators.
VI. INTERVIEWS
7 interviews were held in 5 different stores, ranging from
small local stores to national stores with multiple branches.
The currently used loyalty mediums vary from none to paper
and barcode cards. Both normal loyalty and group loyalty were
encountered.
The system was well accepted in all stores. The same goes
for the NFC technology. Merchants ﬁnd NFC easy to use and
11
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

faster than traditional loyalty mediums. The possibility to opt-
in to the loyalty system and keep the existing (barcode) loyalty
system was found to be a good alternative.
The opinions about the competition between the stores when
using a shared medium and the loss of the mediums publicity
aspect are divided. However, everyone is enthusiast about the
possibilities of the online platform. The customer interface
and the merchant interface were found well-thought out and
complete.
The layout and usability of the website were rated very
high. None of the interviewees found any missing parts in
the interface pages. We made the suggestion of adding billing
information on the interface but this was found not needed
and to complex and confusing for the customers by the
interviewees.
The interviewees have, as expected, wishes for some spe-
ciﬁc information of the customers regarding their preferences
(store-speciﬁc marketing data). Further, the interviewees liked
that the offers and publicity can be personalised using the
marketing data on the website and noticed this is already
possible with their current loyalty system but not done as it
takes to much effort. Loyalty on product level is a requirement
of the larger stores. The small stores were only interested in
the basic functionality of the system. Social media integration
was also well accepted by all stores. See the next Section for
more information about those items.
The use of an eID reader to collect customer information
was also well accepted. Some of the stores admitted that they
never used the collected paper forms because the processing
took too long while other stores simply dont gather customer
information due the manual processing.
Finally, privacy of the customers was found to be a delicate
subject. The interviewees are very aware of the fact that
customer privacy should not be ignored.
VII. FUTURE WORKS
A. Backend
Barcode replacement, group loyalty, city loyalty, product-
speciﬁc loyalty (branding) and combinations of those, dis-
cussed in Section 4.2 are not implemented yet and can be
added to the system.
Not all conditions, discussed in section 4.3, are implemented
yet. Note that the implementation of product-speciﬁc con-
ditions will require product information to be stored in the
backend database as this data is needed for the processing
of the product-speciﬁc conditions which takes place on the
backend. The product data is also needed on the terminals to
ensure a fast barcode/price lookup. Product-speciﬁc conditions
are currently implemented on the semi-ofﬂine ﬁxed desktop
terminal, avoiding the need for a product database on the
backend.
On the merchant interface managing the advertising (adding
and removing ads), new graphs on the marketing pages and
a marketing data export functionality, to export the marketing
data to a more advanced CRM (customer relationship man-
agement) program, could be implemented. The marketing data
should be usable to segment customer into groups and ideally
to perform one-to-one marketing by generating more person-
alised advertising (on the customer interface), publishing (via
folders and mailings) and promotions based on the customers
preferences. This can already be obtained but is not yet fully
automated which is required in order to provide a full surplus
to the system. When a store has multiple branches, it should
be possible to manage those branches and ﬁlter the marketing
data per branch.
Both on the customer and merchant interface newsletter
functionality and/or a news page per store could be im-
plemented. Also, integration with social media is possible.
Merchants and customers could opt-in to a loyalty system
where the customers social media is used for publishing in
exchange for loyalty points (given to the customers). The
online interface can also be used to provide support towards
the customers and merchants.
The billing part for the merchants needs to be implemented.
A ﬂat fee could be used or the billing could be directly based
on advertising, server space (database space), the number of
terminals, the number of customers the number of website
users, the number of distributed NFC cards and/or NFC GSMs
and/or other parameters.
B. Terminals
The buffer functionality, discussed in section 4.1 is not yet
implemented on some of the terminals. Also, the customer
ﬂow is not fully implemented on the terminals. The selec-
tion of promotion receive and redeem items (including auto
selected items) is not possible.
The customer ﬂow at the terminal and or the website can
be extended to show the rewards a customer may expect
next visit. It should be possible for the cashier to manually
enter a custom amount of loyalty points instead of choosing a
predeﬁned promotion in order to make corrections or to make
a one-time loyalty receive or redeem transaction.
Modifying the eID data should be done via the eID reader
or form on the terminals, instead of via the website, to ensure
correct eID data of the customers. Customers should still be
able to modify the additional customer information via the
website (email address, phone numbers, etc.).
When the system is combined with an NFC payment
system, even faster processing times at the terminals can be
achieved.
C. Mediums
New possibilities arise when an NFC smartphone is used as
medium as discussed in section 4.1. The customers and/or mer-
chants interface can be accessed using a mobile web browser
or a smartphone application. A smartphone application is
preferred due the higher user-friendliness. Such an application
requires OTA application management (downloading, installa-
tion, updating and removal).
It is also possible to perform P2P (peer-to-peer) transactions
using NFC smartphones. This functionality could be used for
exchanging points between customers (if permitted).
12
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

The system can be extended by Smart Posters (only work
with active NFC mediums such as an NFC smartphone) or
Smart Kiosks (also work with passive mediums such as an
NFC smartcard). When using a Smart Poster or Smart Kiosk
a semi-ofﬂine medium is required. Using a mobile NFC device
and an OTA connection with the backend, a semi-ofﬂine
medium could be emulated, enabling the use of a Smart Poster.
Finally, if required, a terminal page on the merchant in-
terface or a terminal smartphone application could be imple-
mented.
VIII. CONCLUSION
After performing extended market research and literature
research an NFC customer loyalty system is developed that
bundles all advantages of NFC technology and traditional
customer loyalty systems.
An online system architecture is found to be the best
choice and an online platform is created. An optimal customer
ﬂow is designed to ensure a convenient and user-friendly
loyalty experience. During the implementation process there
was ensured at any time that the system was as generic as
possible. The system has been tested extensively. Convenience,
speed, security and privacy were fully considered.
Next to normal loyalty, other kinds of loyalty such as group
loyalty and city loyalty are supported. Its also possible to
extend existing loyalty systems to interoperate with the system.
The backend framework, the website (customer, merchant
and public interfaces) and the web services for the terminals
are implemented. The Event Wallet Mifare Desﬁre NFC smart
card is used as medium. Three different kinds of terminals
are implemented. The mediums are portable to mobiles NFC
devices, making the system future proof.
The interviews learn that the choices that were made during
the research and implementation phase are correct. Merchants
are waiting for automated one-to-one marketing and an online
platform is preferred. This customer and merchant interface
is found to be complete and user-friendly, because most users
are familiar with web interfaces.
Considered future works, there are a lot of possibilities to
go from now, also due the generic structure of the system.
REFERENCES
[1] W.
Driggs
and
N.
Kasolowsky,
“Customer
acquisition
and
retention:
Creating
customer
loyalty
a
customer-centric
approach,”
2008,
[accessed
10-July-2011].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture
Creating Customer Loyalty A Customer Centric Approach.pdf
[2] F.
R.
Marc
Hoogenberg
and
S.
Juchnowicz,
“Customer
centric
loyalty
programs
as
key
to
high
performance
retailing,”
2010,
[accessed
10-July-2011].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sylwiajuchnowicz.nl/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/
Customer-Centric-Loyalty-Programs-as-Key-to-High-Performance-Retailing.
pdf
[3] W. Driggs and N. Kasolowsky, “Serving the new mobile consumer -
jumpstarting a new generation of mobile retail solutions.” [Online].
Available: http://wireless.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/
Accenture POV Serving the New Mobile Consumer Web.pdf
[4] D. Klabjan and J. Pei, “In-store one-to-one marketing,” pp. 64–73, 2010.
[5] J. Ondrus and Y. Pigneur, “Coupling mobile payments and crm in the
retail industry,” p. 7, 2004.
[6] R. K. Balan and N. Ramasubbu, “The digital wallet: Opportunities and
prototypes,” p. 2, 2009.
[7] “Puntavista,”
[accessed
10-July-2011].
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.puntavista.be/nl
[8] J. Fischer, “Nfc in cell phones: the new paradigm for an interactive
world,” pp. 22–26, 2009.
[9] K. Grassie, “Easy handling and security make nfc a success,” pp. 12–13,
2007.
[10] S. O. Jr., “Is near-ﬁeld communication close to success,” pp. 18–20,
2006.
[11] E. Haselsteiner and K. Breitfu, “Security in near ﬁeld communication
(nfc),” pp. 4–9.
[12] S. C. Alliance, “Chip-enabled mobile marketing,” 2010, [accessed
10-July-2011]. [Online]. Available: http://www.smartcardalliance.org/
pages/publications-chip-enabled-mobile-marketing
13
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

