Quality of Experience and Human-computer 
Interaction: A Relation Overview 
 
Luis Guillermo Martinez Ballesteros, Zary Segall 
Mobile Services Lab 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Kista, Sweden 
lgmb@kth.se,segall@kth.se 
 
 
Abstract—This paper first traces the historic evolution of the 
Quality of Experience (QoE) concept, and then connects 
common points between the study of user experience as 
practiced 
within 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction 
(HCI) 
disciplines and recent efforts to understand how user 
perception can be incorporated into the definition and 
management of resources in the area of (ICT). After an 
analysis of the history of QoE and an examination of its 
current role in HCI, some research challenges are proposed 
that open doors to future research projects. 
Keywords-Quality 
of 
Experience; 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction; Challenges in mobile environments 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The telecommunications industry has been a fertile area 
for applying user-centred solutions [1] as well as a vital part 
of the economies of all nations, shaping the quality of life of 
people around the world. It is this area where new research 
issues are emerging and changing the way that people 
interact with networks and content. Some of these efforts are 
oriented to technical developments, while others are focused 
on non-technical aspects, and it is in this new environment 
where concepts such as interaction, quality, content, context, 
and perception become more and more important to the 
market through operators, content providers, and handset 
manufacturers for whom the concept of user satisfaction is 
becoming a new competitive factor. A representative case is 
Apple; with the creation and consolidation of devices like the 
iPad and iPhone, this company opened the door to both a 
new market conception oriented to satisfy user needs through 
design and detail, and to a greater use of data networks by 
the same users through increased interest in applications and 
content. As a consequence of this phenomenon, recent years 
have witnessed an increase in the network traffic caused by a 
high demand for content, with users more and more 
interested in the quality of the content, not only from a 
network performance perspective, but also in how this 
content is distributed and consumed, including devices and 
interfaces. The new paradigmatic eco system (user-interface-
network-content) requires novel and disruptive end-to-end 
considerations, in order to enable and sustain the next 
generation of services and user experience. In particular, 
networks are currently agnostic and have no knowledge 
about the type and characteristics of the specific mobile 
services they are providing. Further, there is a knowledge 
separation between service designers/builders, service 
providers, terminals, Operating Systems and networks. These 
facts are producing substantial resource optimization 
deficiencies and discontinuities that affect the user’s level of 
satisfaction. Although Quality of Experience (QoE) has 
made rapid gains as a new metric influencing the success or 
failure of new applications and services by involving the 
user’s perception in the evaluation process, most of the 
methodologies developed to measure it ([2]-[4]) depend 
largely on the end-to-end Quality of Service (QoS) metrics, 
which can be categorized as a techno-centric approach.  
In response to this, a user-centric point of view is getting 
more attention as a new and interesting research topic where 
areas such as human-computer interaction (HCI) have shown 
interest 
in 
developing 
standardized 
assessment 
methodologies, 
optimization 
processes 
and 
metrics 
definitions taking into account concepts like User Experience 
(UX)([5]-[8]). While from a technical approach, user’s 
satisfaction is a result of the adjustment of some network 
parameters, with a user centric point of view; QoE has a 
multidimensional character and can be studied from an 
interdisciplinary 
perspective 
[7]. 
However, 
this 
multidimensional character and pluralism of perspectives 
have naturally contributed to the existence of several 
definitions and approaches to the same concept. This has not 
allowed the emergence of a single definition that 
encompasses within itself the multiplicity of concepts around 
QoE, as well as the options for standardization in the 
methods of evaluation, measurement and improvement of the 
QoE perceived by users. As mentioned by Moor et al. [8] “It 
is rather uncommon to integrate concepts from other fields 
less technical than telecommunications in definitions of 
QoE. A relevant example is the domain of HCI, in which 
concepts such as UX and ”Usability” closely related to QoE 
are very important.” The goal of this paper is to identify 
coincident points between techno-centric and user-centric 
approaches, taking into account a review of their respective 
historical evolution processes that allows one to establish a 
basis for the development of scheme that allocates resources 
in a wireless infrastructure based on the evaluated QoE 
obtained through the implementation of an assessment 
methodology. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II, we present the QoE and the techno-centric approach 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

description, In Section III, the concept of QoE is analysed 
from a user-centric approach remarking the potential 
contribution of HCI to the QoE evaluation. We conclude the 
paper in Section V proposing some future challenges in the 
area and future work.  
II. 
QOE AND THE TECHNO-CENTRIC APPROACH 
From a technical point of view, different QoE definitions 
have been proposed ([9] - [11]). A review of some of these 
definitions allows one to see a gradual evolution since an 
initial idea of Quality of Service (QoS), with a ”rich tradition 
in engineering and developing environments” [12] basically 
oriented to the evaluation and adjustment of some network 
parameters, to a ’semantic variant’ and user-centric approach 
denominated QoE, emerging in the late 90’s, where user’s 
interests and experiences became more important [12]. 
One of the first mentions of the QoS concept can be 
found in [13]. Here, the discussion is focused on describing 
and determining the relationship between telephone circuit 
loads and corresponding delays to traffic, and how these 
delays directly relate to the quality of service. Even though 
QoS is mentioned, there is no definition of the concept. After 
three decades, a new mention of the term QoS appears in 
[14], where the financial influence of the quality of service 
provided by telephone operators is remarked upon. Even if 
the work of Pocock also attempts to open the discussion 
about the importance of the overall quality that user can 
experience, he just focused the results of the research in the 
necessary adjustments of the quality transmission. Pocock 
also tries to show the relation between the user’s 
appreciation and the speed, availability and reliability of a 
service, making explicit, for the first time, the relationship 
between the user’s opinion about a service and the technical 
factors behind its provision. However, there is no mention of 
external factors (i.e., economic, social, etc.) that could affect 
a user’s perception. In the same line of Pocock, different 
research efforts ([15]-[18]) proposed mechanisms to increase 
the reliability, and consequently the QoS, through technical 
modifications in both wired and wireless networks, without 
mentioning mechanisms for QoS evaluation.  
In 1986, Gruber [19] discusses the creation of a QoS 
framework according to the competitive environment that 
appeared on the horizon of the telecommunications sector at 
that time. To Gruber, the possibility of unifying network 
infrastructures to provide a multiplicity of services required 
the implementation of monitoring and surveillance systems 
to manage and automatically control network resources and 
resulting QoS. While the article sees the prospect of a 
competition based on the provision of high QoE, neither the 
assessment methods nor the role that the external factors can 
play were considered. Only with the research results shown 
in [20] is presented the option to involve the user directly in 
the QoS evaluation process. This might be called the first 
attempt to incorporate subjectivity in the QoS assessment.  
With the advent of packet-switching based networks and 
the opportunities given by this technology to provide 
multiple services such as telephony and television within the 
same infrastructure, the QoS concept gained more 
importance due to the need for emulating the performance of 
the classic and reliable telephone and television networks 
using, in the early years, technologies such as the 
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM). In that sense, one of 
the first research efforts oriented to work with the concept of 
QoS focused on broadband networks was developed in the 
NETMAN Project [21]. According to the Brander et.al, QoS 
can be expressed as ”the collective effect of service 
performances, which determine the degree of satisfaction of 
a user of the service.” Here the term ”satisfaction of a user” 
appears in the context of this, until now, technical world. As 
in other cases where the role of the user is considered, until 
that moment there was no specific methodology to obtain 
information about user opinion regarding the QoS level of a 
network. Another important milestone in terms of QoS is 
expressed in [22]. Authors expressed the importance of a 
good end-to-end performance within the networks; first 
considering a clear identification of the QoS parameters to be 
guaranteed in real-time communications, and at the same 
time presented a proposal of a performance reference model 
for real-time packet network analysis and a real-time 
estimation. 
Throughout the 90’s and early twenty-first century, 
various 
studies 
and 
proposals 
for 
the 
evaluation, 
improvement and implementation of QoS-based methods 
were made. The role of the user in the evaluation of QoS was 
incorporated with the development of assessment schemes 
such as Mean Opinion Score (MOS), Perceptual Evaluation 
of Speech Quality (PESQ) and Video Quality Measurement 
(VQM), which attempted to quantify the subjective opinion 
of people, giving greater weight to the evaluation from the 
user. The gradual process of separation between QoS and 
QoE was revealed in the early twentieth century by authors 
such as Anna Bouch, Allan Kuchinsky and Nina Bhatti in 
[23]. According to them, at that moment ”the majority of 
research on QoS is systems oriented, focusing on traffic 
analysis, scheduling, and routing. Relatively minor attention 
has been paid to user-level QoS issues.” With the 
development of the Internet and the growing usage of 
applications and different services there is a need for a new 
approach, where users and their perceptions can get even 
more involved in the final result of a quality evaluation. 
Even though this paper is a first approach to establish a 
mapping between objective and perceived QoS in the context 
of Internet commerce, and the term QoE is not used, it can be 
considered as the first attempt to incorporate a new way to 
evaluate the set of user perceptions regarding new services 
offered by the Internet. After this article, in [24], the QoE is 
defined as ”the totality of the Quality of Service 
mechanisms, provided to ensure smooth transmission of 
audio and video over IP networks,” which highlights the 
interest of the telecommunications sector in multimedia 
content and its effect in a world based on IP networks. 
In the same line of thought, Heddaya [25] presents the 
Internet and its penetration level as the key factors to evolve 
from the old conception of QoS to a new concept, where 
there is a clearer need to separate the internal aspects of the 
network, beyond the control of the user, from the perceptible 
results delivered to the user by the network and its content. 
However, there is no mention of the effect of interfaces and 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

presentation formats on the user’s perception. In 2003, 
different researchers, such as Siller and Woods [26], 
proposed frameworks to evaluate QoE using QoS metrics, 
network feedback and user requirements. At the same time, 
Siller and Wood proposed a definition for QoE where the 
effect of the application/interface layer over the user’s 
perception is remarked: ”QoE is the user’s perceived 
experience of what is being presented by the Application 
Layer, where the application layer acts as a user interface 
front-end that presents the overall result of the individual 
Quality of Services.” In fact, this article states that QoS 
required and perceived by the user can be specified as a 
single parameter: low, fair, good and excellent, while, by 
contrast, the user requirements can also be specified by 
several parameters such as resolution, height, width, colour, 
etc., directly linked to the application layer and the QoE 
evaluation. With this new idea in the air, different 
researchers have tried to establish mechanisms to deepen the 
understanding and evaluation of user’s perception [27], [28]. 
Some others have attempted to adjust technical parameters, 
related to QoS, considering the results generated by 
assessment tests [29]. The impact of the QoE over wireless 
infrastructures has been evaluated ([29]-[31]) while other 
researchers have talked about the growing commercial and 
economic importance of QoE applied in the distribution of 
different types of content.  
As a result of the different research efforts focused on 
QoE, ITU decided, in 2007, to incorporate within the 
recommendation P.10/G.100 [9] a standard definition for 
QoE ”The overall acceptability of an application or service, 
as perceived subjectively by the end-user.” In the same 
recommendation, ITU considers that the overall acceptability 
may be influenced by user expectations and context, and 
includes complete end-to-end system effects (client, 
terminal, network, services infrastructure, etc.). On the other 
hand, when ITU defines QoS in the recommendation E.800 
[10] 
as 
the 
”Totality 
of 
characteristics 
of 
a 
telecommunications service that bear on its ability to satisfy 
stated and implied needs of the user of the service,” claims 
that QoE measures the effect that a service or application has 
in the user, considering the external factors, as well. In 
contrast, QoS, with its point of view focused on the network 
performance is seen as one of the factors, together with the 
Grade of Service (GoS), the environmental aspects, the user 
profile and the Quality of Resilience (QoR), which affects 
the user’s perception assessed in terms of QoE (Figure 1). 
Based on this separation, current research looks for the 
development of a well-defined methodology that allows 
establishing a clearer measurement of the user’s perception 
in order to incorporate these results into the technical 
adjustments related to the network performance, to achieve 
the desired level of user’s satisfaction based on the type of 
infrastructure and the applications running over it. 
Nevertheless, and as mentioned by Moor et al. [7] 
Thakolsri et al. [4] and by Stankiewicz et al. [12], “literature 
on QoE and its related concepts (such as Quality of Service, 
User Experience), is rather fragmented. As a result, it is still 
largely unknown which factors affect the mobile QoE and 
how users’ subjective experiences of such applications and 
services could be adequately identified and optimized.”  
 
  
Figure 1.  Elements influencing QoE [11] 
III. 
QOE AND THE USER-CENTRIC APPROACH 
An attempt to trace out the historical evolution of HCI 
and its relation with the concept of QoE might start by 
mentioning the research done by Card, Moran and Newell’s, 
who in the book ”The Psychology of Human-Computer 
Interaction”(PHCI) [32] proposed an empirically based 
cognitive theory of a skilled HCI and applied it to the 
specific problem of text editing. They discussed the 
processes involved, the techniques to use and the methods to 
follow when human factors research is performed. Finally, 
the Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules model 
(GOMS) is proposed, while exploring ways in which this 
proposal can be extended and used to predict performance in 
other task-related areas. In [33], Newel and Card extended 
the vision proposed in [32], restating the importance of the 
psychological science in the design and development of 
interfaces, but remarking, as well, the need to provide 
engineering tools for this science in order to make less 
marginal its influence in the HCI area. While it is claimed 
that there is a chance to incorporate user’s perception into the 
daily work of HCI, the need for the development of mental 
and cognition models that help to adjust the interfaces design 
is also shown. As a pioneering work on cognitive 
engineering models, Newel and Card’s arguments were not 
without critics. Some authors, such as Newell et al. [34] and 
Carroll et al. [35], remarked on the gaps in the understanding 
of the whole process of interacting with computers. Even if 
the utility of the GOMS model in both initial design, 
evaluation and training is recognized, the lack of a deeper 
description of the user’s context and its effect on the 
implementation of the model in a real design scenario was 
pointed out as its main weakness [36]. Another point of 
discussion was the hard science interpretation of the PHCI 
framework. To Caroll and Campbell, rather than reducing 
 
QoE
QoS
GoS
QoR
Environmental, psychological,
sociological aspects
User profile
Application specific features
Pricing policy
Terminals, codecs, etc.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

everything to a ”monolithic view of conflict between hard 
computer 
science 
and 
soft 
psychology” 
[34], 
an 
interdisciplinary field of HCI was taking form. According to 
their point of view, only a joint effort between science and 
psychology would allow the development of research areas 
like artificial intelligence and rapid prototyping. One of the 
proposed areas of cooperation was the design of interfaces, 
where psychologists would play an effective role addressing 
the questions that designers need answered, and contributing 
to the analysis involved in the design process of new 
products, but without touching the level of numerical 
quantification proposed by Card et.al. Meanwhile, in [37], 
the importance of the a deeper comprehension of the user’s 
understanding process based on the application of cognitive 
theories was remarked by Booth, with the consideration of 
making this new framework more accessible to designers. At 
this moment, while a continuous analysis of the role of HCI 
and the future of this area is under discussion, the potential 
effect of some elements of this area of study in infrastructure 
issues, or content management is not considered or studied. 
 Despite the discussed weaknesses, over the years 
different studies ([38]-[48]) have developed and extended the 
use of GOMS as a cost-effective way of evaluating designs 
without the participation of end users in human-computer 
interaction fields. On the other hand, this evolution led to the 
gradual consolidation of the soft science perspective in the 
PHCI, as mentioned by Holleis et al. [49], where most of the 
papers published in the HCI area from 1990s became more 
oriented to show case study, field experiment or field study 
than research work based on lab experiments. Within this 
new panorama, the input of Norman and Card work is 
reflected in the development of different cognitive modelling 
approaches and the consolidation of a multidisciplinary HCI, 
but without the idea of building a monolithic science with the 
integration of PHCI within an engineering conception. So 
far, only the importance of cognitive processes in the growth 
of HCI has been treated. From here, some similarities 
between the evolution of the QoE techno-centric approach 
and the process described above can be identified. However, 
the 
lack 
of 
multidisciplinary 
work 
enhancing 
the 
development of more complete models to link user 
experience and resource allocation is still evident. Up to 
now, most of the communication network deployments have 
been done taking into account economic, technical and 
ecological considerations with the user’s satisfaction 
regarding content provided through these infrastructures will 
be reached only by having better technology and higher 
bandwidth. Before this fact, HCI and the research about 
user’s comprehension might become a new tool to develop 
infrastructures providing, in a smart and efficient way, 
content and information to a user fulfilling expected levels of 
quality.  
In tune with the evolution of the soft science concept, the 
gradual consolidation of a user-centric approach has allowed 
the growth of new and complimentary areas within HCI such 
as Experience Design (XD) and User Experience (UX), 
which can be considered in the future as providers of 
judgement elements to clarify the QoE concept in the techno-
centric approach. In recent years, users have had more 
chances to choose among multiple options with different 
levels of design, complexity and innovation. This has 
empowered users, who have become more demanding and 
critical, and the HCI field has not been immune to this 
phenomenon. According to Stankiewicz et al. [12], during 
the ’70-’80s, people involved in HCI was focused on 
understanding the way that people thought and processed 
information in order to increase the efficiency and provide 
more functionality in their solutions. However, at this 
moment, the users’ expectations and experiences were not 
considered. Some efforts to involve people in the 
development and design of HCI solutions were done from 
the late 80’s and early 90’s with the origin of participatory 
design and contextual design [12]. But since the late 90’s, 
with the wider presence of computers and technology, more 
importance is given to evaluate how this success of 
technology adoption and diffusion is explained. There were 
efforts to incorporate aspects such as beauty, enjoyment, or 
fun, into HCI in general and usability engineering 
specifically ([50][51]). These approaches have three aspects 
in common: ”a focus on the subjective side of usability, 
namely user perceptions and experiences; on the positive 
sides of using products (instead of simply avoiding usability 
problems), and on human needs as a whole [52]”. At the 
same time, there was an identical shift from a more R&D-
driven ’push’-oriented mentality towards a more (marketing-
driven) ’pull’-oriented stance in which the user became the 
starting point of the technology development [12]. User is 
now the king, and this consumer-oriented mentality as is 
defined by Edwards [7], is orienting the efforts to measure 
the user experience and reflect it in the provision of high 
quality. Under these conditions, the experience of a user 
regarding a device, product or interface gains more 
importance, despite the differences expressed by UX and XD 
experts. In words of Marc Hassenzahl [53], UX is focused on 
usage and only rooted in action, while XD is a way to create 
experiences considering with more interest the history 
behind what the user experience. In certain way, UX has 
seen focused on how a person feels about using a system, 
considering the external things that can affect this experience 
(i.e., brand, cost of the system, image, ease of use, etc) [54], 
but with the introduction of usability in the design process. 
Most of the efforts in the area seems oriented to the design of 
ways to interact with computers, but with a failure to 
understand how information is communicated to a person 
and how they interact with and interpret that information to 
accomplish their goal [55]. 
IV. 
CHALLENGES AND FUTURE WORK 
An attempt to trace out the historical evolution of HCI 
and its relation with the concept of QoE might start by 
mentioning the research done by Card, Moran and Newell’s, 
who, in the book “The Psychology of Human-Computer 
Interaction” (PHCI) [32], proposed an empirically based 
cognitive theory of a skilled HCI and applied it to the 
specific problem of text editing. They discussed the 
processes involved, the techniques to use and the methods to 
follow when human factors research is performed. Finally, 
the Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules model 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

(GOMS) is proposed, while exploring ways in which this 
proposal can be extended and used to predict performance in 
other task-related areas. Technology-centric interpretations 
of QoE go hand-in-hand with the assumption that by 
optimizing the QoS, the end user’s QoE will also increase. 
However, this is not always the case: Even with excellent 
QoS, QoE can be really poor [8]. These gaps are usually 
caused by a lack of insight in the totality of dimensions of a 
customer’s experience, and here is where HCI can offer the 
tools to complete the development of a structured QoE 
system of assessment and implementation where users are 
really involved. Some authors, like Stankiewicz et al. [12], 
claim that it is necessary to involve users in certain stages of 
the development process of a new technology or application, 
but there is no complete clarity about issues like the right 
stage of the process to involve their opinions, and the type of 
users that should be involved, etc. [12]. Another fact to 
mention is pointed out by Stankiewicz et al. [12], when they 
say that QoE ”is usually measured in terms of technical 
metrics (QoS), ignoring the fact that the ultimate goal should 
not be to deliver applications with the most advanced 
features, but to deliver products that will ensure a good 
Quality of Experience.” On the other hand, a challenge for 
HCI is to understand how layers of underlying technological 
infrastructure that may not be designed with the full range of 
human-centred concerns in mind work, and, based on this 
knowledge, adjust to these constraints to maintain the user 
experience at the highest level. Being UX subjective, the 
user is the centre of the whole system, and his/her opinions 
and concepts will determine the adjustment of technical 
features inside the network. However, there is also a need for 
an understanding of those external factors that can influence 
the final perception and experience of the user. Here, is 
where the QoE concept becomes “the picture to measure the 
perceived connection quality in the current context” [54]. 
Considering the multiple aspects that affect the overall 
experience, evaluators need to understand the whole picture 
and identify the reasons behind each good or bad experience. 
About this last point, and how  Edwards [7] expresses 
“experience has a multi-dimensional character, where some 
authors highlight the importance of emotions, expectations, 
and the relationship to other people and the context of use, 
while others remarks the importance of the broader context.” 
The challenge with respect to the QoE area is to look for the 
way to combine both points of view (technical and user-
centric) so that, when seeking the satisfaction of a user with a 
specific content or application, we have a broad 
understanding of how complex human beings are. As 
mentioned by Kellerer et al. [5] “we need to develop 
practices that allow infrastructure and interaction features to 
be co-designed.” But, a challenge for the HCI community is 
to create communication bridges with other disciplines to 
become real a scenario where, effectively, the use of 
technical resources and user satisfaction work hand-in-hand. 
Regarding deployment of mobile networks, recent 
introduction of new generation of wireless infrastructures is 
being accompanied by an increase in both the number of 
users and their interest in multimedia content. This growth 
has been driven in the last decade by the popularity of 
multimedia content (e.g., video-sharing websites, social 
networks, video on demand sites, mobile IPTV, etc.), that 
according to the tendency will generate much of the mobile 
traffic growth through 2016, showing, at the same time, the 
highest growth rate of any mobile application. From this 
point of view, mobile operators have to tackle increasing 
operational costs given by energy consumption due to the 
traffic growth. From the users perspective, it represents the 
need for the development of mechanisms to extend mobile 
terminals life to enjoy during more time multimedia content 
with higher quality level. In that sense, classical approaches 
like deploying additional infrastructure are not likely to be 
economically viable for this challenge. On the other side, 
severe resource limitations in mobile networks can lead to 
dramatic levels of delays and interruptions, which can 
significantly affect user perceived experience (QoE).  In this 
scenario, the need for obtaining improvements in terms of 
the quality perceived by users is more and more important in 
the networks evolution scenario. An alternative way to 
improve the QoE is having networks capable of identifying 
users expectations and using this information to dynamically 
allocate resources adjusted to a semantic model of the mobile 
service requirements while the content is being processed in 
the user terminal. An it is here where a better understanding 
of user’s perceptions might contribute to the creation of 
network infrastructures with better performance based on the 
evaluation of predefined QoE model. 
REFERENCES  
[1] 
E. Israelski and A. M. Lund, “The human-computer interaction 
handbook,” J. A. Jacko and A. Sears, Eds. Hillsdale, NJ, USA: L. 
Erlbaum Associates Inc., 2003, ch. The evolution of human-computer 
interaction during the telecommunications revolution, pp. 772–789. 
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=772072.772121 
[2] 
 G. Aristomenopoulos, T. Kastrinogiannis, V. Kaldanis, G. 
Karantonis, and S. Papavassiliou, “A novel framework for dynamic 
utility-based qoe provisioning in wireless networks,” GLOBECOM 
2010, 2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, pp. 1–6, 
2010. 
[3] 
E. Cerqueira, L. Veloso, M. Curado, and P. M. E. Monteiro, “Quality 
level control for multi-user sessions in future generation networks,” 
Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008. IEEE GLOBECOM 
2008, pp. 1–6, 2008. 
[4] 
S. Thakolsri 
[5] 
, W. Kellerer, and E. Steinbach, “Qoe-based cross-layer optimization 
of wireless video with unperceivable temporal video quality 
fluctuation,” in ”IEEE International Conference on Communications 
(ICC 2011)”, Kyoto, Japan, 2011. 
[6] 
W. K. Edwards, HCI Remixed: Essays on Works That Have 
influenced the HCI Community. The MIT Press, 2008, ch. 
Infrastructure and Its Effect on the Interface, pp. 119–122. 
[7] 
W. K. Edwards, M. Newman, and E. Poole, “The infrastructure 
problem in HCI,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computer Systems (CHI 2010), 2010.  
[8] 
K. De Moor, I. Ketyko, W. Joseph, T. Deryckere, L. De Marez, L. 
Martens, and G. Verleye, “Proposed framework for evaluating quality 
of experience in a mobile, testbed-oriented living lab setting,” Mobile 
Networks 
and 
Applications, 
vol. 
15, 
pp. 
378–391, 
2010, 
10.1007/s11036-010-0223-0. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11036-010-0223-0 
[9] 
K. De Moor, W. Joseph, I. Ketyk´o, E. Tanghe, T. Deryckere, L. 
Martens, and L. De Marez, “Linking users’ subjective qoe evaluation 
to signal strength in an ieee 802.11b/g wireless lan environment,” 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., vol. 2010, pp. 6:1–6:10, Apr. 
2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2010/541568 
[10] “ITU-T recommendation P.10/G.100. Vocabulary and effects of 
transmission parameters on customer opinion of transmission 
quality,”Jul.2008.[Online].Available:http://www.itu.int/itut/recomme
ndations/index.aspx?ser=P 
[11] “ITU-T recommendation E.800. Quality of telecommunication 
services: concepts, models, objectives and dependability planning. 
Terms and definitions related to the quality of telecommunication 
services,” Sep. 2008.  
[12] R. Stankiewicz, P. Cholda, and A. Jajszczyk, “Qox: What is it 
really?” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 148 –
158, april 2011. 
[13] L. De Marez and K. De Moor, “The Challenge of User-And QoE-
Centric Research and Product Development in Today’s ICT-
Environment,” Observatorio (OBS*), vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2007. 
[Online].Available:http://www.obs.obercom.pt/index.php/obs/article/
view/141/101 
[14] F. F. Fowle, “Toll telephone traffic,” American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Transactions of the, vol. XXXIII, no. 2, pp. 1263 –1272, 
june 1914. 
[15] L. Pocock, “A survey of the telephone transmission-rating problem,” 
Electrical Engineers - Part III: Radio and Communication 
Engineering, Journal of the Institution of, vol. 95, no. 36, pp. 253 –
265, july 1948. 
[16] J. Das, “Some effects of bandwidth limitation on p.s.m., p.l.m., and 
p.p.m. signals,” Proceedings of the IEE - Part C: Monographs, 
vol.109, no. 16, pp. 646 –655, september 1962. 
[17] M. Eisen, “On switching problems requiring queuing theory in 
computer-based 
systems,” 
Communications 
Systems, 
IRE 
Transactions on, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 299 –303, september 1962.  
[18] M. Pennotti and M. Schwartz, “Congestion control in store and 
forward tandem links,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 
23, no. 12, pp. 1434 – 1443, dec 1975.  
[19] D. Goodman and C.-E. Sundberg, “Quality of service and bandwidth 
efficiency of cellular mobile radio with variable-bit-rate speech 
transmission,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 1983. 33rd 
IEEE, vol. 33, may 1983, pp. 316 – 321. 
[20] J. Gruber, E. Abdou, P. Richards, and G. Williams, “Quality-of-
service in evolving telecommunications networks,” Selected Areas in 
Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 1084 – 1089, oct 
1986. 
[21] J. Richters and C. Dvorak, “A framework for defining the quality of 
communications services,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 
26, no. 10, pp. 17 –23, oct. 1988.  
[22] H. Brander, J. Howard, G. Menicou, S. Plagemann, E. Protonotarios, 
and 
M. 
Theologou, 
“Quality 
of 
service 
in 
broadband 
communications,” in Integrated Broadband Services and Networks, 
1990., International Conference on, oct 1990, pp. 166 –171.  
[23] Y. B. Kim and A. Vacroux, “Real-time packet network analysis for 
iso/osi performance management,” in Global Telecommunications 
Conference, 1990, and Exhibition. ’Communications: Connecting the 
Future’, GLOBECOM ’90., IEEE, dec 1990, pp. 397 –401 vol.1. 
[24] A. Bouch, A. Kuchinsky, and N. Bhatti, “Quality is in the eye of the 
beholder: meeting users’ requirements for internet quality of service,” 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems, ser. CHI ’00. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2000, 
pp.297–304.[Online].Available: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/332040.332447 
[25] T. O’Neil, “Quality of experience and quality of service for IP video 
conferencing.” Polycom, Tech. Rep., 2002. [Online]. Available: 
http://hive2.hive.packetizer.com/users/h323forum/papers/polycom/ 
QualityOfExperience+ServiceForIPVideo.pdf 
[26] A. Heddaya, “An economically scalable internet,” IEEE Computer, 
vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 93–95, 2002.  
[27] M. Siller and J. Woods, “Qos arbitration for improving the qoe in 
multimedia transmission,” in Visual Information Engineering, 2003. 
VIE 2003. International Conference on, july 2003, pp. 238 – 241.  
[28] A. Perkis, S. Munkeby, and O. Hillestad, “A model for measuring 
quality of experience,” in Signal Processing Symposium, 2006. 
NORSIG 2006. Proceedings of the 7th Nordic, june 2006, pp. 198 –
201.  
[29] E. Gallo, M. Siller, and J. Woods, “An ontology for the quality of 
experience framework,” in Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2007. 
ISIC. IEEE International Conference on, oct. 2007, pp. 1540 –1544. 
[30] D. Soldani, “Means and methods for collecting and analyzing qoe 
measurements in wireless networks,” in World of Wireless, Mobile 
and Multimedia Networks, 2006. WoWMoM 2006. International 
Symposium on a, 0-0 2006, pp. 5 pp. –535. 
[31] O. Bradeanu, D. Munteanu, I. Rincu, and F. Geanta, “Mobile 
multimedia end-user quality of experience modeling,” in Digital 
Telecommunications, , 2006. ICDT ’06. International Conference on, 
aug. 2006, p. 49.  
[32] S. Qiu, H. Rui, and L. Zhang, “No-reference perceptual quality 
assessment for streaming video based on simple end-to-end network 
measures,” in Networking and Services, 2006. ICNS ’06. 
International conference on, july 2006, p. 53. 
[33] S. K. Card, A. Newell, and T. P. Moran, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction. Hillsdale, NJ, USA: L. Erlbaum Associates 
Inc., 1983.  
[34] A. Newell and S. K. Card, “The prospects for psychological science 
in human-computer interaction,” Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 1, no. 
3, pp. 209–242, Sep. 1985. 
[35] J. M. Carroll and R. L. Campbell, “Softening up hard science: Reply 
to newell and card,” SIGCHI Bull., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 74–, Jul. 1987. 
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=28189.1044812 
[36] J. R. Olson and G. M. Olson, “The growth of cognitive modeling in 
human-computer 
interaction 
since 
goms,” 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 221–265, Jun. 1990. 
[37] D. E. Kieras and T. P. Santoro, “Computational goms modeling of a 
complex team task: lessons learned,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, ser. CHI ’04. 
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 97–104.  
[38] P. A. Booth, “Errors and theory in human-computer interaction,” 
Acta Psychologica, vol. 78, no. 13, pp. 69 – 96, 1991. 
[39] J. L. Drury, J. Scholtz, and D. Kieras, “Adapting goms to model 
human-robot interaction,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 
international conference on Human-robot interaction, ser. HRI ’07. 
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 41–48.  
[40] B. E. John and D. E. Kieras, “Using goms for user interface design 
and evaluation: which technique?” ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 287–319, Dec. 1996. 
[41] B. John, A. Vera, M. Matessa, M. Freed, and R. Remington, 
“Automating cpm-goms,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference 
on Human factors in computing systems: Changing our world, 
changing ourselves, ser. CHI ’02. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002, 
pp. 147–154.  
[42] S. Pronovost and R. L. West, “A goms model of virtual 
sociotechnical systems: using video games to build cognitive 
models,” in Proceedings of the 15th European conference on 
Cognitive ergonomics: the ergonomics of cool interaction, ser. ECCE 
’08. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 15:1–15:2.  
[43] D. E. Kieras and T. P. Santoro, “Computational goms modeling of a 
complex team task: lessons learned,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, ser. CHI ’04. 
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 97–104. 
[44] T. Jokela, J. Koivumaa, J. Pirkola, P. Salminen, and N. Kantola, 
“Methods for quantitative usability requirements: a case study on the 
development of the user interface of a mobile phone,” Personal 
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 345–355, Sep. 2006.  
[45] F. Magrabi, “Using cognitive models to evaluate safety-critical 
interfaces in healthcare,” in CHI ’08 extended abstracts on Human 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

factors in computing systems, ser. CHI EA ’08. New York, NY, 
USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 3567–3572.  
[46] C. Haimson and J. Grossman, “A gomsl analysis of semi-automated 
data entry,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI symposium on 
Engineering interactive computing systems, ser. EICS ’09. New 
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 61–66.  
[47] H. Li, Y. Liu, J. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Li, and P.-L. P. Rau, “Extended 
klm for mobile phone interaction: a user study result,” in Proceedings 
of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on 
Human factors in computing systems, ser. CHI EA ’10. New York, 
NY, USA:ACM, 2010, pp. 3517–3522. 
[48] E. Abdulin, “Using the keystroke-level model for designing user  
interface on middle-sized touch screens,” in Proceedings of the 2011 
annual conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing 
systems, ser. CHI EA ’11. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 
673–686. 
[49] P. Holleis, M. Scherr, and G. Broll, “A revised mobile klm for 
interaction with multiple nfc-tags,” in Proceedings of the 13th IFIP 
TC 13 international conference on Human-computer interaction - 
Volume Part IV, ser. INTERACT’11. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2011, pp. 204–221. 
[50] T. Clemmensen, “Whatever happened to the psychology of 
humancomputer interaction?: A biography of the life of a 
psychological framework within a hci journal,” Information 
Technology & People, vol. 19, pp. 121 – 151, 2006. 
[51] S. W. Draper, “Analysing fun as a candidate software requirement, 
”Personal Technology, vol. 3, pp. 117–122, 1999.  
[52] M. Hassenzahl, “The effect of perceived hedonic quality on product 
appealingness,” Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interaction, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 
481–499, 2001.  
[53] ——, “The interplay of beauty, goodness, and usability in interactive  
[54] products,” Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 19, no. 4, Dec. 2008. 
——, User Experience and Experience Design. Aarhus, Denmark: 
The Interaction-Design.org Foundation, 2011. 
[55] M. Fiedler, K. Kilkki, and P. Reichl, “09192 abstracts collection – 
from quality of service to quality of experience,” in From Quality of 
Service to Quality of Experience, ser. Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings,  
[56] M. M. J. Albers, “Human-information interaction,” in Proceedings of 
the 26th annual ACM international conference on Design of  
Communication, ser. SIGDOC ’08. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 
2008, pp. 117–124. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

