User Experience Evaluation in the Creation and Use of Graphical Passwords for 
Authentication in Mobile Devices 
 
Claudia de Andrade Tambascia, Ewerton Martins Menezes, Alexandre Melo Braga, Flávia de Melo Negrão 
CPqD Foundation 
Campinas – SP, Brazil 
{claudiat, emenezes, ambraga, fnegrao}@cpqd.com.br 
 
 
Abstract — This article aims at present the results of a user 
experience evaluation for the creation and use of graphical 
passwords on mobile devices as a way to improve usability and 
security aspects in authentication. The authentication method 
proposed was defined in a project called Multimodal Biometric 
and Graphical Authentication for Mobile Devices. These 
assessments were carried out with thirty users during a period 
of fifteen days using a prototype that offered a repertory of 
eighty icons divided into four categories. All users were able to 
remember their eight-icon password and claimed having a 
good use experience with this authentication method.  
Keywords - User experience; graphical passwords; mobile 
authentication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the main goals of the use of graphical passwords 
in authentication processes is to increase the usability of the 
interaction, facilitating the memorization of passwords for 
users, ensuring a greater retention of information. This 
feature relies on the results of various studies and 
experiments [1][2][3][4] that show the human brain finds it 
easier to recognize and remember visual information 
comparing to textual information.  
As 
a 
recognition-based 
technique, the 
graphical 
authentication with icons demands less cognitive load than 
recall techniques and tends to increase the usability, the 
security and the user performance, besides being especially 
appealing in the mobile context, where pointing to a region 
of the screen tends to be much easier than typing text. 
While some recognition-based systems use faces [5], 
assuming that the brain has got a special ability to recognize 
them, other systems use abstract images [6], which are 
stronger from a security point of view, due to their difficulty 
of describing. Nevertheless, the use of icons brings a better 
compromise between usability and security, once it 
facilitates 
mnemonic 
strategies 
and, 
consequently, 
memorization. 
The security level offered by such systems depends on 
many factors, such as the size of the repository available to 
the user, the password length, the input method, and the 
icons themselves, which must, ideally, present similar 
probabilities of choice avoiding possible attacks. 
This paper will describe the results obtained in the 
evaluation of the quality of user experience in the creation 
and use of graphical passwords for authentication on mobile 
devices. For this evaluation, a prototype was developed to 
allow the experience in a real context of use, considering 
aspects of usability, intelligibility and memorization 
strategies. This prototype is part of Multimodal Biometric 
and 
Graphical 
Authentication 
for 
Mobile 
Devices 
(BIOMODAL) project whose main goal is to develop 
functional prototypes of biometric multimodal authentication 
and graphical authentication for mobile communication 
devices. 
Section two will present a description of the prototype 
that was developed for this evaluation, followed by section 
three that will present the methodology used for the user 
experience evaluation. Section four will present the main 
results observed during the exploration, the creation and the 
strategies of memorization applied followed by section five 
with the analysis of use data for the different groups of users 
and interviews. The section six will present the main 
conclusions and findings related to graphical authentication. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
As a knowledge-based authentication technique, the 
graphical authentication requires the user to enter a shared 
secret as an evidence of their identity. This authentication 
scheme has been proposed as an alternative to text-based 
password for over one decade [7]. Surveys on the field [8][9] 
review some graphical password systems from the usability 
and security perspective, but Robert Biddle’s survey [7] 
provides us with a comprehensive review of the first twelve 
years of published research on graphical password systems. 
According to this study, graphical passwords scheme can be 
classified in three main categories: based on recall, 
recognition and cued-recall. 
Graphical passwords with icons are a type of recognition-
based systems where users are asked to memorize a repertory 
of images during password creation, and then recognize their 
images from among decoys to authenticate. Proposed 
recognition-based systems use various types of images, most 
notably: faces, random art, everyday objects, and icons. 
Renaud [10] discusses some specific security and usability 
considerations, and offers usability design guidelines for 
recognition-based systems. 
In the literature it’s possible to find studies such as 
Antonella [11] that compares the a PIN password against 
three different graphical passwords schemes in two user 
studies with 60 participants and verified that graphical 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

password can be a solution to some problems related to 
knowledge-based authentication, but poor design can 
eliminate pictures superiority effect in memory. 
Darren study [12] evaluated some security and usability 
aspects involved in graphical passwords with icons using 
faces and showed the importance of some rules in the 
password selection in graphical schemes due to the highly 
correlation between race and gender of the user. 
And due to the specially appealing of graphical password 
in the mobile context, where typewritten input is less 
common than pointing at the screen [13] we found studies 
like the Dunphy’s one [14] that evaluate two versions of a 
recognition-based system on mobile devices where the 
images used in the application were provided by the users 
himself. 
Although there are many academicals studies about 
graphical passwords with icons only a few commercial 
products are available in the market such as Passfaces and 
the over take-up is low [14] [15]. 
III. 
PROTOTYPE FOR CREATION OF GRAPHICAL 
PASSWORDS 
The evaluation of user experience with graphical 
passwords was performed by the means of a prototype 
developed and installed in a Samsung Galaxy S smartphone, 
with 4 inches (10 centimeters), resolutions of 480×800 pixels 
and Android operation system version 2.2, as shown in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1 - Prototype installed in a smartphone 
The prototype enabled the evaluation to be conducted in 
real devices, allowing evaluating not only graphical 
authentication parameters but also identifying interaction 
requirements inherent to mobile platform. Users were able to 
create and use graphical passwords in the device that 
automatically registered: time of use, number of page scrolls, 
use of “clear” function and number of authentication 
attempts, which are parameters needed to measure the 
quality of user experience. 
For the creation of the graphical passwords, a repertory 
was produced based on the results presented on [16] that 
adopted mnemonic strategies to favor the use of episodic 
memory in the moment of password creation. The repertory 
was composed of eighty icons, displayed in 4 screens of 
twenty icons each, classified in categories: people, objects, 
means of transportation and context/place, as shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2 - First repertory of icons 
For the usability study it was designed a simple 
prototype, which not bound by strong password policies. 
This design decision allowed the study of users unsafe 
behaviors. A commercial authentication solution based on 
this technology not only must implement stronger passwords 
(longer), but must provide security policies that inhibit the 
passwords considered that would facilitate easy and 
dictionary attacks. Only for an example, a graphical 
password cluttered with 9 icons in a grid of 80 icons is 
equivalent of a password of 8 letters, and a password of nine 
icons arranged in a grid of 57 icons is equivalent of 8 size 
alphanumeric password with uppercase letters, lowercase 
letters, numbers and special characters. 
As well as in the use of alphanumeric passwords, it was 
possible to observe that some of users tried to eliminate 
apparent or implied variables of the repertories to facilitate 
their process of memorization. Thus, to enhance the quality 
of the passwords, besides not allowing choosing repeated 
icons, additional restrictions were imposed in the moment of 
creation: not choosing more than three icons in each screen 
to avoid that all icons are in the same page or belong to the 
same category. 
From the application interface point of view, this 
evaluation sought to identify and validate the adequacy of 
the quantity of icons presented per screen, easy and intuitive 
navigation, and clarity of the actions and feedbacks offered 
to the users. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPE EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 
In order to deeply explore the process of graphical 
password creation, the user sample was divided into three 
groups with distinct methods of creation. The first group was 
able to create the password according to their own personal 
preferences; the second group was suggested a random 
theme (adventure, romance, work, celebration, contretemps, 
tourism, luck and trouble) and the third group received a 
password that was randomly generated by the application 
with two icons in each screen. 
Training is a factor of great influence in the 
memorization and performance of any password. In order to 
understand of the impact of this variable in graphical 
passwords, half of the participants went through a training 
session where they used the password three consecutive 
times right after creating it. 
A total of thirty users representing general population 
participated in the test divided into six groups taking into 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

account the interaction with or without password training, 
user created password with or without a suggested theme and 
the memorization of randomly generated passwords by the 
application and given to the users right before the first 
interaction, as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3 - User distribution according to established groups 
The evaluation consisted of six stages, where some stages 
were common to all groups and others, however, were 
specific to certain groups. The stages considered were: 
• 
Exploration: in this stage users were requested to 
visually explore the repertory of icons displayed in 
the eye tracking device. No interaction with the 
mouse or keyboard was required since the screens 
were presented for a preset time.  
• 
Creation: the creation of the password of eight icons 
was performed in the mobile device instantly after 
the repertory exploration. A total of twenty users 
underwent the process of password creation, and ten 
of them were suggested a theme to help create the 
password.  
• 
Password generation: the password was generated in 
an application developed to randomly choose two 
icons from the repertory in each screen, composing 
an eight icon password presented to the user right 
after exploration. 
• 
Training: consisted of entering the password three 
consecutive times in the mobile device. The user did 
not need to enter the correct password every time, 
but after each interaction the system informed if the 
password was correct or not. 
• 
Password effective use: the graphical password was 
used four times during the evaluation, in increasing 
time intervals from the creation until the last use. 
• 
Interview: it was conducted at the end of the 
evaluation, where some questions were asked to the 
participants to verify their perception regarding the 
interaction with graphical passwords. The following 
aspects were treated: experience, difficulty of use, 
positive and negative issues, tendency to replace 
alphanumeric passwords for graphical, passwords 
created and memorization strategies, category harder 
to recall, category most liked, experience with 
smartphones and the mobile device model owned by 
the participant user.  
To evaluate the performance between different groups of 
users, quantitative and qualitative parameters were collected. 
The quantitative parameters considered the time of creation 
and uses of the passwords, the success and failure rates, the 
number of attempts in each authentication, the use of “clear” 
function, navigation between screens, icons chosen and icons 
looked at. The qualitative parameters, in turn, considered the 
memorization strategies, the evolution of use, the adherence 
of graphical passwords to the suggested theme and the level 
of user satisfaction.  
Users were divided into gender: male and female; and 
age: below thirty years old, between thirty and forty-five 
years old and above forty-five years old, as shown in Figure 
4. Such division was necessary once the memorization factor 
was to be measured, which implied the need of considering 
different age groups. 
 
 
Figure 4 - Test users’ selection 
Since one of the main criteria to be evaluated would be 
the capacity of memorization of passwords after a period of 
time, it was defined that the test would happen during an 
interval of fifteen days according to the schedule presented 
in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5 – Test schedule 
V. 
RESULTS TABULATION 
A. Users behavior during icon exploration 
Initially, before the creation of passwords and beginning 
of the evaluation, the users were submitted to a process of 
exploring the icons from the first repertory in order to 
become acquainted with them, before the creation of the 
password itself. This process was performed for one minute, 
being twenty-five seconds for each category: people, objects, 
means of transportation and context/place. 
With the support of the eye tracking tool it was possible 
to assess the icons that drew more attention during the 
exploratory process and the ones that were practically not 
observed, as shown in Figure 6 for the category “people”. 
The Heat Map, a feature of eye tracking tool, enabled the 
visualization, throughout the variation of shades from green 
to red, of which icons were more observed, where the user 
fixed the attention and the icons that were practically not 
seen. The graph immediately after the Heat Map presents 
how many users choose each icon of the category. The red 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

“X” sign in the icons represents the ones that were not 
selected by the users when creating the password. 
 
 
Figure 6 - Users behavior during the exploration of category "people" 
B. Users behavior during the creation of passwords 
The users selected to create passwords freely presented 
the behavior mapped in Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7 - Users behavior in the creation of free passwords 
According to the Heat Map mapping, it was possible to 
assert that the most observed icons where indeed chosen for 
the users passwords. Some icons had a high degree of choice 
in relation to others due to the easy connection to everyday 
situation and to cultural factors. 
The users that had to choose the icons of the password 
according to a suggested theme also chose them freely and 
were not obliged to follow the theme. Since the test had the 
premise to create passwords that were safer and easier to 
memorize, the themes were intended to work as support in 
the creation of a plot for the composition of the password 
and ease of memorization. Figure 8 presents the passwords 
created with an associated theme and the adherence of each 
one of them to what was suggested. 
From the ten users that participated in this category only 
four sought to use password adherent to the suggested 
themes. 
 
 
Figure 8 - Users behavior in the creation of free passwords with suggested 
theme 
C. Memorization strategies 
Using of a repertory of icons separated into four 
categories, yet allowing for the formation of an episode with 
subject, actions and context, provided a great variety of 
memorization strategies and few participants declared the 
need to write down the password to help retain the icon set 
and at the end of the fourth use all participants were able to 
remember their graphical password in less than three 
attempts. These strategies were obtained by interviewing the 
users of the test after executing all interactions planned. 
For all passwords used in this test, only eight users 
created a plot for the memorization process, six used the 
suggested theme and four affirmed not using any strategy. 
The users that received the system generated passwords 
sought to look only at the icons given and not to the other 
icons in the screen to avoid possible confusions. For these 
users, the creation of a plot demanded a quick creativity 
which was not always possible. 
Fig. 9 presents some passwords created by the users and 
the description of the strategies used, according to what was 
reported during the interviews. 
Regarding password (I), the strategy used by the user was 
selecting icons of sports and food that he liked best. He 
chose the icon “balloon” because he wished to travel in one, 
the icon “airplane” because it was related to holidays and 
places he would like to visit. 
Regarding password (II), the user admitted not using any 
strategy, only the visual memorization and chose the icon 
“calendar” because the date displayed was her husband’s 
birthday. However, this user did not have a satisfactory 
performance during the interactions and made mistakes in 
different attempts.  
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
Figure 9 - Examples of memorization strategies used for some passwords 
created by the user 
Regarding password (III), the user claimed to search for 
icons related to the suggested theme (romance), choosing 
outstanding pictures and remarkable or familiar names. 
Regarding password (IV), the user chose objects he 
identified himself with and places he would like to visit. 
Regarding password (V), the user also did not use any 
strategy, and since the password was provided by the system, 
he considered himself lucky by the presence of the icons 
“ambulance” and “hospital”, in addition to two faces he 
could memorize by the names. 
Regarding password (VI), the user claimed to have 
selected people with familiar names and icons related to two 
categories only (means of transportation and objects), thus 
avoiding confusion. 
VI. 
RESULTS ANALYSIS 
The results obtained in the data analysis, considering the 
performance during system interactions for all participants, 
were compared according to the group they belonged to, as 
follows: 
• 
Participants with “User-Created passwords with No 
Training (UCNT)”; 
• 
Participants with “System-Generated passwords with 
No Training (SGNT)”; 
• 
Participants 
with 
“System-Suggested-Theme 
passwords with No Training (SSTNT)”; 
• 
Participants with “User-Created passwords With 
Training (UCWT)”; 
• 
Participants with “System-Generated passwords 
With Training (SGWT)”; 
• 
Participants 
with 
“System-Suggested-Theme 
passwords With Training (SSTWT)”. 
Figure 10 shows the average time of interaction after the 
first, fifth and ninth days from the creation date of the 
graphical passwords. 
 
Figure 10 - Average time by user groups 
As noted, the best time was achieved by the participants 
that created their own passwords and were trained (UCWT), 
while the worst time was achieved by the users that received 
a theme and were able to practice the password (SSTWT). It 
is possible to declare by the analysis of the graph in Figure 
10 that four of six groups hold their performance close to the 
average, except for the last interaction for groups UCNT and 
TSCT, which is significantly deviated from the curve. It is 
also possible to observe that the groups that were not trained 
performed worse in the first day of use, but after the fifth day 
the performance returned to normal. 
Regarding the creation method and training, a more 
detailed analysis done, to verify the behavior of users during 
the interactions. Figure 11 presents the average time of 
interaction of the participants, comparing passwords that 
were created by the users and the passwords generated by the 
system. 
 
 
Figure 11 - Average performance time of users according to password 
creation method 
The immediate use of system generated passwords had 
greater interaction time, as expected because the password 
was not created by the user and by the need to instantly 
having to create a mental model for its memorization. The 
same behavior was observed on the first day of use, after the 
password creation, where the time periods were considered 
long, and probably motivated by the user’s fear of making 
mistakes in password selection. The behavior on the 
following days was considered better, curiously obtaining 
better performance on the last day for passwords that were 
not created by the user himself. 
Figure 12 presents the behavior of the participants by 
previous training to the use of the created password. The 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

variable related to training was considered for this test as 
means to prove a possible outstanding performance 
regarding users that were not able to be trained.  
 
 
Figure 12 - Average performance of users with and without training 
It was possible to observe in this study that only in the 
first day of interaction there was a significant difference 
between the participants with training and without training 
and, in an unexpected way, the users that were not trained 
had a better performance than the ones that were trained. 
This situation happened because many users did not use 
good memorizing strategies and didn’t invested much time in 
creating the password, which means a lack of care during the 
creation process, making the memorization process difficult. 
Only after the first use that the memorizing strategy was 
created. 
However, in the following days, the average for the 
participants with training and without training remained the 
same, which allows concluding that memorization is not 
directly related to the fact of password being practiced or 
not, but rather to the memorization strategy associated. 
Regarding the experience in using graphical passwords, 
most of the users showed preference for this type of 
authentication, probably motivated by the innovation and 
ludic aspects of this approach. More than eight percent of the 
users considered the experience satisfactory and the 
remaining users since were not able to memorize the 
password in all interactions, eventually did not consider the 
experience as satisfactory. 
It was possible to notice that in the last days, the degree 
of dissatisfaction increased in a significant manner, due to 
the interval between the previous interaction and the moment 
of password creation. Many memorization strategies here 
prove to be inefficient. 
The same analysis was performed for the item related to 
the difficulty of use, where it was possible to observe a 
greater difficulty of the participants in the last day of 
interaction, linked to the time elapsed between the creation 
and penultimate day of use of the password; and also 
regarding to inefficient memorization strategies. 
Since the memorization strategies did not work properly, 
the difficulty and quality of experience were compromised, 
not by the application and the solution itself, but often by the 
participant’s own frustration for not accomplishing the task. 
 Regarding the category that most pleased the users there 
was a balanced result in categories “objects”, “means of 
transportation” and “context/places” in the item most liked 
category. 
The most significant result was related to category 
“people” with a larger number of critics mainly by the 
definition of the faces and confusion among several similar 
features. There were very few indifferent or totally satisfied 
users, not that significant to offset further analysis. Figure 13 
shows the results obtained and the number of users that 
expressed their preference for any of the categories. 
 
Figure 13 - Experience of use of graphical passwords 
Regarding the difficulty of use, it was observed that less 
than ten percent of the users complained having problems 
using the prototype, being that this small percentage was 
composed by users that had no experience with smartphones, 
showing that the level of familiarity with technology created 
one of the main barriers in the usage of the proposed 
solution. 
At last, regarding the tendency to replace alphanumeric 
passwords for graphical passwords, it was possible to 
observe a favorable result towards graphical passwords, but 
it was not so outstanding due to the fact of people being 
culturally adapted and proficient in the use alphanumeric 
passwords. 
Even thou the fact of the experience with graphical 
passwords being interesting, from the tendency point of 
view, there is still some resistance, mainly because some 
considered 
this 
authentication 
method 
slower 
than 
alphanumeric passwords  and identified a significant delay in 
the navigation  between the icon screens. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In the analyzes, it was possible to observe slightly better 
error rates and elimination of degenerated passwords through 
a more efficient repertory of icons with more graphically 
detailed images, greater possibility of creating stories and 
with fewer errors observed. 
Regarding memorization, it was proved a reduction in the 
error rate and the users were surprised with their own 
performance, emphasizing that in the case of the category 
“people”, it was easier to memorize the name of the person 
than the image itself, which many times was easily mistaken 
by the similarities of the faces presented. 
The introduction of the process of training in the 
evaluation did not produced outstanding differences in the 
performance of the participants that had their passwords 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

generated by the system, but it affected in the creation of 
passwords by the users themselves, that obtained similar 
average input time and error rates. 
Thus, the possibility of the creation of a script for 
memorization turns out not to be mandatory, since the less 
chosen icons where the ones with low contrast and difficult 
identification, while the ones most chosen had cultural 
appeal and high contrast. 
From the usability requirements point of view, the 
decision to display icons in touchscreens was a good design 
solution however its performance needs to be improved. On 
the other hand, the feedbacks related to the quantity of icons 
selected and the navigation between screens ware not 
sufficiently clear and generated questions during the 
evaluation. 
The size and quantity of icons available were well 
accepted by the users, requiring improvements in the process 
of cleaning the current selected icon which generated 
confusion and frustration in many users. The addition of an 
initial help mechanism is of extreme importance in a 
graphical authentication process, mainly by the paradigm 
change in authentication.  
There was no correlation found between the most viewed 
icons in the exploration and the most chosen icons in the 
password composition. This suggests that the factors that 
made the icons more visually attractive and draw attention of 
the participants are not necessarily related to the criteria for 
choosing the icons to create stories. 
Fewer users found great difficulties in the use of the 
prototype and the majority claimed to have a satisfactory 
experience of use during the tests. The adoption of this 
technology can be considered high, around sixty percent of 
the participants claimed they would replace their current 
alphanumeric passwords for graphical passwords, mainly for 
convenience of touchscreen and for the ludic experience 
involved. 
The test conducted in the context of this project produced 
an analysis that is contributing for the definition of the 
graphical authentication solution to be used in the 
implementation of a functional prototype of BIOMODAL 
Project. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the financial support given to 
this work, under the project “Biometric Multimodal and 
Graphical 
Authentication 
for 
Mobile 
Devices 
– 
BIOMODAL”, granted by the Fund for Technological 
Development of Telecommunications – FUNTTEL – of the 
Brazilian Ministry of Communications, through Agreement 
Nr. 01.09.0627.00 with the Financier of Studies and Projects 
- FINEP / MCTI. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Kirkpatrick. “An experimental study of memory”. 
Psychological Review, 1894, 1:602-609. 
[2] S. Madigan. “Picture memory”. In J. Yuille, editor, “Imagery, 
Memory, and Cognition: Essays in Honor of Allan Paivio”, 
cap.3, pp.  65-89. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1983. 
[3] A. Paivio, T. Rogers, and P.C. Smythe. “Why are pictures 
easier to recall than words?” Psychonomic Science, 1968, 
11(4):137-138. 
[4] R. Shepard. “Recognition memory for words, sentences, and 
pictures”. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 
1967,  6: pp. 156-163. 
[5] Passfaces Corporation. “The Science Behind Passfaces”. 
Write paper, http://www.realuser.com/enterprise/resources/ 
whitepapers. htm, accessed Sep, 2012. 
[6] R. Dhamija and A. Perrig. “Déjà Vu: A user study using 
imagens for authentication”. In 9th USENIX Security 
Symposium, 2000. Proceeding of the SSYM'00 9th 
conference on USENIX Security Symposium - Volume 9, 
Pages 4 – 4. USENIX Association Berkeley, CA, USA. 
[7] R. Biddle, S. Chiasson, and P.C. Van Oorschot. 2012. 
“Graphical passwords: Learning from the first twelve years”. 
ACM Comput. Surv. 44, 4, Article 19 (September 2012), 41 
pages. 
[8] F. Monrose and M. Reiter. 2005. “Graphical passwords. In 
Security and Usability: Designing Secure Systems That 
People Can Use”. L. Cranor and S. Garfinkel, Eds. O'Reilly 
Media, Stebastopol, CA, Chapter 9, 157-174.  
[9] S. Xiaoyuan, Y. Zhu, and G. Scott. Owen. 2005. “Graphical 
Passwords: A Survey”. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual 
Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC '05). 
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 463-472. 
[10] K. V. Renaud. 2009. “Guidelines for designing graphical 
authentication mechanism interfaces”. Int. J. Inf. Compute 
Security 3, 1 (June 2009), 60-85. 
[11] A. De Angeli, L. Coventry, G. Johnson, and K. Renaud. 2005. 
“Is a picture really worth a thousand words? Exploring the 
feasibility of graphical authentication systems”. Int. J. Hum.-
Comput. Stud. 63, 1-2 (July 2005), 128-152. 
[12] D. Davis, F. Monrose, and M. K. Reiter. 2004. “On user 
choice in graphical password schemes”. In Proceedings of the 
13th conference on USENIX Security Symposium - Volume 
13 (SSYM'04), Vol. 13. USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, 
USA, 11-11. 
[13] C. A. Tambascia, E. M. Menezes, R. E. Duarte. “Usability 
Evaluation 
Using 
Eye 
Tracking 
for 
Iconographic 
Authentication on Mobile Devices”. Mobility 2011, The First 
International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and 
Users. Barcelona, Spain (October 2011), 117-122. 
[14] P. Dunphy, A. P. Heiner, and N. Asokan. 2010. “A closer 
look at recognition-based graphical passwords on mobile 
devices”. In Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable 
Privacy and Security (SOUPS '10). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, , Article 3 , 12 pages. 
[15] Passfaces Corporation. “The science behind Passfaces”. 
White paper, http://www.passfaces.com/enterprise/resources/ 
whitepapers.htm, accessed September 2012. 
[16] I. Avila, E. Menezes, A. Braga. “Memorization Strategy for 
Iconic Passwords”. In: IADIS International Conference 
Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction 2012, Lisboa. 
Proceedings of the IADIS Intl. Conf. Interfaces and Human 
Computer Interaction 2012. Lisboa: IADIS, 2012. v. 1. p. 
123-132. 1. 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

