Scalable Light-Weight Peer-to-Peer Risk Communication Framework for Critical 
Infrastructures Management 
 
Titus Okathe, Khalil El-Khatib, Stephen Marsh and 
Shahram S. Heydari 
Faculty of Business and IT 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology  
Oshawa, Canada 
{Titus.okathe, Khalil.el-khatib,Stephen.marsh, 
shahram.heydari}@uoit.ca 
Tim Storer 
University of Glasgow 
School of Computing Science 
 Glasgow, Scotland 
timothy.storer@glasgow.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Critical infrastructures are growing in scale and 
complexity and are becoming increasingly interdependent on 
one-another.  This paper argues that existing centralized 
methods in monitoring and management are unlikely to be 
sustainable as this trend continues.  To address this challenge, 
this paper presents a complementary model of critical 
infrastructure 
monitoring, 
management 
and 
inter-
infrastructure communication.  The model leverages the 
advantages 
of 
a 
distributed 
peer-to-peer 
method 
of 
communication amongst artifacts within infrastructures to 
provide a scalable, flexible and light-weight means of 
communication, interaction, and awareness. 
Keywords- critical infrastructures; communication model; 
interdependence  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Situational awareness has always proven to be extremely 
important for the management and operation of any system, 
and especially in the case of critical infrastructures (CI) 
[1,2,3,4].  To build this situational awareness, operators of CIs 
collect data from their own systems as well as from other 
system operators.  However, the growing independencies 
between CIs means that their interactions can be characterized 
as that of a system-of-systems in which no one entity has 
overall control or even a global view of the entire system [5].  
As a consequence, each infrastructure owner is dependent on 
peer infrastructures to provide information about the status of 
facilities or services on which it is dependent for successful 
operation. These other operators can be from within the same 
sector, as in the case of the Union for the Co-ordination of 
Transmission of Electricity (UCTE) or from a different sector, 
as is the case with the EDXL [6]. 
Whilst existing frameworks for information exchange can 
assist with providing situational awareness for CI operators, 
there are still some problems that can hinder the task of 
building a more comprehensive picture of situations faced by 
operators. These include: 
1. 
Data exchange between CI operator is always based 
on existing collaboration, and does not allow for 
spontaneous exchange; 
2. 
Data exchange is always carried out at the 
infrastructure level (between command and control 
centers), and invariably does not allow individual 
nodes from one infrastructure to talk to a nodes in 
different infrastructure; 
3. 
Data exchange still involves a human in the loop, 
usually the CI operator, to scan through the collected 
data, who, based on their understanding of the effect 
of the information on other infrastructures, decides 
whether or not to pass on the information to other 
operators; 
4. 
Lack of a simple, common language to express risk or 
status information[7]. 
Critical infrastructures are increasing in scale, complexity 
and interdependence, magnifying these challenges.  As a 
consequence, there is a need to develop flexible, scalable and 
autonomic mechanisms for exchanging information at 
appropriate levels of detail in a timely manner across 
infrastructures.  In this paper we propose a risk/status 
communication framework that abstracts the detailed 
descriptions of pertinent risks as a statement of infrastructure 
artifact comfort.  We explain how this model provides a light-
weight means for effectively communicating risks at an 
appropriate level of abstraction across heterogeneous, legacy 
infrastructures. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
reviews existing work on inter-infrastructure communication 
and coordination.  Section 3 presents the proposed peer-to-
peer model and outlines different models of inter-
infrastructure communication that can be adopted for different 
circumstances.  Section 4 evaluates the proposed model and 
Section 5 draws conclusions and presents the next steps in the 
research. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
There is an extensive literature on the modeling, 
monitoring and management of critical infrastructures [8], 
protection tools, as well as mechanisms for facilitating 
effective information exchange [9]. Fundamentally, the 
purpose 
of 
exchanging 
information 
among 
critical 
infrastructures is to improve their reliability and safety. In 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

light of this there has been research in the area of how to 
quantify risk; how to represent risk across infrastructures; and 
the development of suitable information architecture to 
support these mechanisms amongst heterogeneous systems.  
Hu et al. [10] and Algirdas et al. [11] propose a framework 
for describing risk by looking at the concepts of dependability 
and security. The proposed framework combines the attributes 
of dependability and security and they include: availability, 
reliability, safety, integrity, maintainability, confidentiality, 
authenticity, and non-repudiation.  
MICIE [12] has the objectives of (1) design of CI 
modeling techniques which can help in the modeling of the 
effects of undesired events occurring in a given CI on the 
Quality of Service (QoS) of its services as well as those of 
interdependent CIs, (2) design and implementation of an 
infrastructure for secure cross CI information sharing and 
mediation, and (3) design and implementation of a MICIE on-
line risk prediction tool that encompasses the CI modeling. 
MICIE also uses a Service Quality Descriptor (SQD) data 
structure to exchange information between interdependent 
CI’s [13]. 
Several research groups have investigated techniques for 
modeling infrastructure interdependencies, highlighting the 
challenge of presenting dependencies in a uniform manner. 
Beccuti et al. [14] described the CRUTIAL project which 
employs a Petri-net like approach to modeling systemic 
effects of individual dependency failures in multiple critical 
infrastructures.  Klein [15] and Klein et al. [16] describe the 
Integrated Risk Reduction of Information-based Infrastructure 
Systems (IRRIIS) project, which integrates models from a 
variety of heterogeneous infrastructures in order to analyze 
their interdependencies. Several other techniques have also 
been applied to understanding dpendencies in critical 
infrastructures, such as systems-of-systems modeling [17] and 
agent based simulations [18]. 
Several research efforts are underway to facilitate 
effective and timely information exchange between CIs. The 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Warning 
Information 
Network 
(CIWIN)[19] is part of the effort by the European Union (EU) 
to build a secure network for the exchange of critical 
infrastructure alerts and warnings among EU member states. 
CIWIN “…offers an efficient and rapid alternative to often 
time-consuming methods of searching for information, i.e. 
create a type of "one-stop-system" to obtain all relevant 
information on Critical infrastructures in the EU”[15].   
Additionally, CIWIN “offers the possibility to Member States 
to communicate directly and upload information that they 
deem relevant”. However, there have been concerns as to the 
relevance of such a platform given that many of the member 
states already have Rapid Alert Systems (RAS) of their own 
which can already perform the functions proposed by the 
CIWIN [20]. 
Separately, in [21], Flentge et al. present a language for 
exchanging information across CIs called the “Risk 
Management Language” (RML). RML is developed around 
the idea of analyzing CIs using the Implementation-Service-
Effect Metamodel (ISE)[22]. RML is an XML based and is 
therefore extensible. It divides the messages exchange by CIs 
into three (3) groups:  
− Information messages: used to provide information to 
the service consumer about the possibility of service 
degradations, as well as any time span and their 
location. 
− Negotiation messages: used by the service provider 
and the service consumer to exchange and negotiate 
terms of service delivery. 
− Administrative messages: used to control the message 
exchange. 
RML has been tested within the context of the IRRIIS 
project [23]. Other techniques have also been proposed for 
extending this work to the autonomic management of 
interactions between and within infrastructures.  Gustavsson 
and Ståhl described the work on applying self-healing 
techniques to critical infrastructures in the INTEGRAL 
project [24].  Hall-May et al. [25] and Krrüger et al. [26] have 
separately advocated the use of a service oriented architecture 
approach to integrating infrastructure management systems.  
III. 
PROPOSED MODEL 
This paper proposes a novel approach to critical 
infrastructure 
monitoring, 
management 
and 
inter-
communication.  The proposed model leverages a 
decentralized agent based, peer-to-peer architecture in which 
individual artifacts in different critical infrastructures are able 
to interact directly with others via a variety of communication 
models.  This contrasts with conventional models of critical 
infrastructure inter-management, in which each entire 
infrastructure is treated as an agent, service or other 
computational entity and where communication only occurs 
between centralized control centers. 
In our proposed model, an infrastructure is represented as 
a collection of agents, with each agent representing some 
artifact in an infrastructure.  For example, consider a fictional 
modern city comprising many infrastructures such as: 
• 
An electrical power supply infrastructure consisting 
of electricity consumers, generating facilities, sub-
stations, pylons and cabling. 
• 
The water supply consisting of pipes, reservoirs, 
filtration plants, pumps and water consumers. 
• 
The 
road 
network, 
comprising 
road 
lanes, 
intersections, traffic signals and vehicles. 
• 
The 
telecommunications 
network, 
comprising 
switches, servers, end-user communication devices, 
wireless and mobile network base stations and 
cabling. 
• 
An underground railway network consisting of train 
sets, rail links and stations. 
All of these infrastructures are interdependent on the state 
of each other.  A water pump, for example may depend on 
power supplied by the electricity infrastructure.  On the other 
hand, a nuclear power station may depend on a ready supply 
of water to act as a coolant.  
In the proposed model, each of the artifacts (road lane, 
railway station, vehicle and so on) is represented as an agent. 
Figure 1 illustrates an example of the architecture for three 
infrastructures: power supply, telecommunications and 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

transportation.  Each infrastructure is shown as a circle 
containing a number of artifacts represented as agents. 
 
We anticipate that agents within the same infrastructure 
will be able to communicate with each other directly, using a 
variety of specialized messages and protocols that suit the 
specific needs of the infrastructure.  In particular, we assume 
that most infrastructures will continue to maintain a 
centralized control center that will receive status information 
communicated from infrastructure artifacts, as well as issue 
commands.  However, the arrangement of communication 
between agents within an infrastructure is an infrastructure 
dependent issue and not considered further here.  Each 
infrastructure has very different technical characteristics 
requiring tailored monitoring and management systems. 
Consequently, we presume that each infrastructure owner will 
adopt information and communication technologies for 
infrastructure 
monitoring, 
management 
and 
internal 
communication that suits their own needs.  This allows each 
infrastructure owner to continue to use a heterogeneous range 
of legacy ICTs for infrastructure management as they see fit. 
Separately, inter-infrastructure communication is enabled 
by permitting agents from different infrastructures to also 
communicate 
with 
each 
other. 
 
This 
allows 
the 
communication of information across infrastructure inter-
dependencies directly between relevant infrastructure 
artifacts, rather than via central control centers.  For example, 
a water pump in the water supply infrastructure can be 
informed of a pending shortfall in the power supply by a 
nearby power system artifact, giving it time to either reduce 
the amount of power it requires to operate (by moving to a 
more efficient but less capable mode, for example) or 
transition to a safe state for temporary shut-down. 
A challenge here is the vast array of infrastructure status 
information that may be pertinent to a dependent 
infrastructure artifact.  Deciding which information must be 
communicated and in what format so that it can be understood 
by a peer infrastructure.  This diversity reflects the different 
physical systems that have to be managed in different 
infrastructures, and the priorities for measuring different 
characteristics.  For example, water flow rates, reservoir levels 
and purity may be important characteristics for a water supply 
infrastructure. However, a nuclear power station may only 
need to be alerted if the level of water in its coolant reservoir 
drops below a certain critical minimal level. 
As described in Section 2, several research efforts are 
underway to develop standardized means of communicating 
this information between infrastructures that may be managed 
using a heterogeneous range of ICTs; and  Genc et al. describe 
the application of a service based publish and subscribe 
software architecture to the problem of information 
distribution[27].  However, neither of these approaches 
addresses the general need to provide a holistic over-view of 
the status of a critical infrastructure to peers in a flexible and 
scalable manner. 
  The model proposed in this paper employs a different 
approach, by abstracting the detailed status information that 
is specific to a particular infrastructure artifact as an overall 
sense of comfort in infrastructure artifact.  The concept of 
computational comfort has previously been employed in the 
management of user-personal device interactions in order to 
provide a more flexible and context adaptable security 
environment. [28,29,30]  In this previous work, a personal 
device (such as a smartphone or tablet) would continually 
evaluate its sense of comfort based on a range of factors, such 
as the user’s actions, data accessed, connected services and 
networks, physical location and time.  The device can then 
adjust its security posture as well as deter less desirable 
actions based on its overall sense of comfort.  For example, a 
user accessing personal family photographs at home may 
enhance a device’s sense of comfort (because this is a familiar 
activity).  However, performing the same action in a public 
place or work environment may cause the device comfort 
level to drop. In this situation, the device would begin to resist 
(but not prevent) the users action in order to communicate the 
sense of discomfort as a warning that the actions may be 
inappropriate. 
A range of factors may contribute to the sense of comfort 
of an agent in a critical infrastructure, depending on the nature 
of the underlying artifact.  Some examples are: 
• 
Flow rates on a reservoir supply pipe. 
• 
Power fluctuations on an electrical line. 
• 
Average vehicle speed on a road link. 
• 
Congestion on a road link, or frequency of traffic 
signal changes at an intersection. 
The computation of an individual infrastructure node’s 
comfort is therefore specific to that node.  However, the node 
(agent) can use the computed sense of comfort to 
communicate in an abstract manner about potential problems 
within the infrastructure to dependent artifacts (nodes) in other 
infrastructures. 
Figure 1. Peer to peer model of inter-infrastructure artifact 
communication. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The inter-infrastructure agent communication may occur 
according to several different models of interaction, 
depending on the relationship between the respective 
infrastructure owners and the nature of the underlying 
artifacts.  The different models of communication are shown 
in Figure 1: 
• 
A shared agent, with a presence in both of the 
communicating infrastructures, labeled (a) in Figure 
1.  A shared agent receives communications directly 
from agents in all of the infrastructures it resides in.  
This arrangement reflects a situation where two 
infrastructure owners have a significant amount of 
trust in one another.  The agent’s level of comfort is 
computed from the infrastructure specific factors of 
all the infrastructures it resides in. 
• 
Direct agent to agent communication, labeled (b) in 
Figure 1.  This represents a medium level of trust 
between two infrastructures.  The agents are able to 
inform each other directly about their current level of 
comfort.  This peering between agents represents a 
situation where one agent represents an artifact that is 
dependent on the performance of its peer. 
• 
Communication mediated by an agreed independent 
third party, labeled (c) in Figure 1.  This arrangement 
represents the lowest level of trust between two 
infrastructures.  The agents in the peer infrastructures’ 
communication is mediated by an agreed independent 
third party.  This may be in order to prevent direct 
access between agents, for example, to permit 
anonymous communication of information, or to 
filter messages.  This model is analogous to 
information security coordination centers that have 
been established in several jurisdictions for industry 
specific incident reporting. 
The selection of the appropriate form of inter-agent 
communication is a design decision that will depend on the 
relationship between infrastructure owners and the nature of 
the underlying infrastructures.  The use of shared agents 
between infrastructures allows for a closely integrated sense 
of comfort that allows agents in both infrastructures to 
respond directly to problems.  However, this model assumes 
a willingness of infrastructure providers to ‘share’ control of 
artifacts within their infrastructures and may not be 
appropriate in all cases.  Mediated communication can 
provide for information that is more limited and anonymous, 
but can make this information less useful (an agent may not 
be able to determine which peer is causing the mediator to 
report discomfort).  The middle case provides for a 
compromise situation in which direct communication of 
comfort is permitted between certain peer artifacts in an 
infrastructure. 
A final aspect of the proposed model is that agents in one 
infrastructure may also comprise a number of agents in a 
critical infrastructure themselves.  In this situation, an 
aggregated agent presents an overall comfort level for the 
underlying infrastructure.  In Figure 1, the power station agent 
in the power supply infrastructure could be a large complex 
system, comprising many supporting infrastructure artifacts.  
However, the overall status of the power station can be 
abstracted for the purpose of communication to peer artifacts 
in the power supply infrastructure. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED MODEL 
In the context of disaster management, Genc et al. have 
argued that the challenges in information distribution in 
critical infrastructures include interoperability, timeliness, 
security, flexibility and adaptability, due to the evolutionary 
nature of the set of participants [23].  Considering the 
proposed model against these criteria: 
• 
Interoperability: the model imposes minimal new 
standards on the implementation of CI management 
systems.  Each infrastructure is able to decide for 
itself which artifacts should be enabled to express 
comfort levels to peer artifacts.  In addition, the 
computation of comfort levels for a given artifact is 
left to the infrastructure owner.  This leverages the 
expertise in each infrastructure and minimizes the 
need for cross-infrastructure communication. 
• 
Timeliness: The three models of artifact interaction 
described in Section 3 provide for real time (type a or 
b) or mediated communication (type c) as appropriate 
to the situation between two infrastructures.  In 
addition, the communicated information is abstracted 
away from the details of the infrastructure, enabling 
infrastructure artifacts to respond rapidly to changing 
contextual information. 
• 
Security: The different communication models 
proposed in Figure 1 allow an infrastructure owner to 
customize their interactions with peer infrastructures 
based on perceived security risks.  Mediated 
communication can provide a firewall between 
infrastructures where there is a desire for indirect 
communication (for anonymity or confidentiality 
purposes (for example). 
• 
Flexibility: The proposed model provides for 
considerable variation in adoption for infrastructure 
owners.  A system architect is able to select which 
artifacts in an infrastructure act as agents able to 
express comfort, as well as selecting which agents 
they will communicate with in other infrastructures 
and in what way.  In addition, the hierarchical 
composition of infrastructures allows an  
• 
Adaptability: Depending on the situation, the model 
allows critical infrastructure providers to exchange 
information with whomever they deem important in 
the current situation, and without the need for lengthy 
relationship set-up process. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We present a new, complementary model for the 
communication of infrastructure awareness within and 
between Critical Infrastructures. The model is lightweight, 
and uses the concept of comfort, itself a subjective measure of 
potential security or risk tolerance, to allow individual 
artifacts (nodes) within infrastructures, represented by 
autonomous agents, to make informed, self-aware judgments 
of ongoing real-time situations. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Currently, the model is abstract and has not been fully 
implemented, although we have implementations of 
infrastructure awareness and modeling using Esri’s ArcGIS 
system. It is our intent to take this model and develop it into a 
working system for Critical Infrastructures, and couple it with 
our ongoing work in the area of Infrastructure Awareness and 
Augmentation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Commission of the European Communities: Communication 
from the Commission on a European Programme for Critical 
Infrastructure Protection, COM(2006) 786 final, 2006. 
[2] European Commission Information Society and Media 
Directorate-General: Availability and Robustness of Electronic 
Communications Infrastructures The ARECI Study Final 
report, March 2007. 
[3] J. Yoon, S. Dunlap, J. Butts, M. Rice, and B. Ramsey, 
"Evaluating the readiness of cyber first responders responsible 
for critical infrastructure protection," International Journal of 
Critical Infrastructure Protection, 13 , 2016, pp.19-27. 
[4] A. Farouk "Critical Infrastructure Protection in Developing 
Countries," Handbook of Research on Economic, Financial, 
and Industrial Impacts on Infrastructure Development. IGI 
Global, 2017, pp.23-39. 
[5] J. Boardman and B. Sauser, “System of Systems: The Meaning 
of,” the IEEE/SMC International Conference on System of 
Systems Engineering, 2006, pp. 118-123. 
[6] M. Raymond, S. Webb, and P.I. Aymond, “Emergency Data 
Exchange Language (EDXL) Distribution Element,” v. 1.0 
OASIS Standard EDXL-DE v1.0, 1, May 2006. 
[7] Union for the Co-ordination of Transmission of Electricity 
(UCTE): Final Report, System Disturbance, 2006. 
[8] M. Alam and K.A. Shakil, “A decision matrix and monitoring 
based framework for infrastructure performance enhancement 
in a cloud based environment,” Advances in Engineering and 
Technology Series, Elsevier 7, pp.147-153, 2014. 
[9] J. Parajuli and K. E. Haynes. "Transportation Network 
Analysis in Nepal: A Step toward Critical Infrastructure 
Protection," 2016. 
[10] J. Hu, P. Bertok and Z. Tari, “Taxonomy and Framework for 
Integrating 
Dependability 
and 
Security,” 
Information 
Assurance: Dependability and Security in Networked Systems, 
Elsevier, 2008, pp. 149-170. 
[11] A. Aizienis, J. -C Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landdwehr, 
“Basic Concepts and Taxonomy of Dependable and Secure 
Computing,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure 
Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, 2004, pp. 11-33. 
[12] S. De Porcellinis, G. Oliva, S. Panzieri, and R. Setola, “A 
Holistic-Reductionistic 
Approach 
for 
Modeling 
Interdependencies,” Critical Infrastructure Protection III, C. 
Palmer and S. Shenoi (Eds.), vol. 311, 2009, pp. 215-227, 
Springer AICT. 
[13] M. Aubigny, C. Harped, and M. Castrucci “Risk ontology and 
service quality descriptor shared among interdependent critical 
infrastructures,” Critical Information Infrastructures Security, 
Springer, 2011, pp. 157-160. 
[14] M. Beccuti, G. Franceschinis, M. Kaâniche, and K. Kanoun, 
“Multi-level dependability modeling of interdependencies 
between the Electricity and Information Infrastructures,”  Int. 
Workshop on Critical Information Infrastructures Security 
(CRITIS09), volume 5508 of Springer LNCS, 2008, pp. 48-59, 
Frascati (Rome), Italy. 
[15] R. Klein, “Information Modelling and Simulation in Large 
Dependent Critical Infrastructures. An Overview on the 
European Integrated Project IRRIIS,” the 3rd International 
Workshop on Critical Information Infrastructures Security, 
CRITIS 2008, Rome, Italy, October 2008, LNCS 5508, 
Springer, Berlin. 
[16] R. Klein, E.  Rome, C. Beyel, R. Linnemann, W. Reinhardt, 
and A. Usov, “Information Modelling and Simulation in Large 
Interdependent Critical Infrastructures in IRRIIS,” the 3rd 
International Workshop on Critical Information Infrastructures 
Security, CRITIS 2008, Rome, Italy, October 2008, LNCS 
5508, Springer, Berlin. 
[17] W. Tolone, “Making Sense of Complex Systems Through 
Integrated 
Modeling 
and 
Simulation,” 
Advances 
in 
Information and Intelligent Systems, volume 251 of Studies in 
Computational Intelligence, Springer, 2009. 
[18] E. Casalicchio, E. Galli, and S. Tucci, “Modeling and 
Simulation of Complex Interdependent Systems: A Federated 
Agent-Based Approach,” CRITIS 2008, pp. 72-83. 
[19] Commission of the European Communities, "European 
Commission," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/governance/impact/commission_guideline
s/docs/sec_2008_2701_ia_ciwin_en.pdf. 
[Accessed 
June 
2017]. 
[20] Commission of the European Communities, "CIWIN," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2006:07
86:FIN:EN:PDF. [Accessed June 2017]. 
[21] F. Flentge, C. Beyel and E. Rome, “Towards a standardised 
cross-sector information exchange on present risk factors,” 
Critical Information Infrastructure Security, Springer, 2008, 
pp. 349-360. 
[22] F. Flentge and U. Beyer, “The ISE metamodel for critical 
infrastructure,” Critical Infrastructure Protection, Springer, 
2007, pp. 323-326. 
[23] R. Klein, “The EU FP6 Integrated Project IRRIIS on 
Dependent Critical Infrastructures,” Critical Information 
Infrastructures Security, Springer, 2011, pp. 26-42.  
[24] R. Gustavsson and B. Ståhl “Self-healing and Resilient Critical 
Infrastructures,” Critical Information Infrastructure Security, 
Third International Workshop, CRITIS 2008, Rome, Italy. 
[25] M. 
Hall-May 
and 
M. 
Surridge, 
“Resilient 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Management 
Using 
Service 
Oriented 
Architecture,” 
CISIS 
2010, 
The 
Fourth 
International 
Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive 
Systems. 
[26] I.H. Krrüger, M. Meisinger, M. Menarini, and S. Pasco, “Rapid 
Systems of Systems Integration - Combining an Architecture-
Centric Approach with Enterprise Service Bus Infrastructure.”  
Proc. IRI'06, IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society, 
Sep. 2006, pp. 51-56. 
[27] Z. Genc, F. Heidari, M.A. Oey, S.van Splunter, and F.M.T. 
Brazier, “Agent-Based Information Infrastructure for Disaster 
Management.” Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp.349-355. 
[28] S. Marsh, P. Briggs, K. El-Khatib, B. Esfandiari, and J.A. 
Stewart, “Defining and investigating device comfort.” Journal 
of Information Processing 19, 2011, pp. 231–252. 
[29] S. Marsh, S. No¨el, T. Storer, Y. Wang, P., Briggs, L. Robart, 
J. Stewart, B. Esfandiari, K. El-Khatib, M.V. Bicakci, M.C. 
Dao, M. Cohen, and D.D. Silva, “Non-standards for trust: 
Foreground trust and second thoughts for mobile security.” 
Proceedings STM 2011, Springer. 
[30] T. Okathe, S.S.Heydari, V. Sood, O. Cole, and El-Khatib K, 
"Middleware 
For 
Heterogeneous 
Critical 
Infrastructue 
Networks Intercommunication," International Journal on 
Smart Sensing and Intelligent Systems, vol. 9.3, 2016 , pp. 
1261-1286. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-568-5
MOBILITY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

