 
A Reactive Inter-Domain Routing Protocol for MANETs
Ziane Sara, Mekki Rachida 
dept. Computer Science 
University of Sciences and Technology of Oran 
Oran, Algeria 
e-mail: sara.ziane88@gmail.com / sarah.ziane@univ-
usto.dz, rachida.mekki@univ-usto.dz 
Thomas Kunz 
dept. Systems and Computer Engineering 
University of Carleton 
Ottawa, Canada 
e-mail: tkunz@sce.carleton.ca
 
 
Abstract—Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) were developed 
to support communication in an environment and places where 
the permanent availability of fixed infrastructure who 
maintains communication between different nodes cannot be 
assured. The first interest in mobile ad hoc networks was the 
simple routing between similar nodes. That’s why researchers 
focused more on how to make routing efficient within a single 
domain. In last decade, the heterogeneity of mobile nodes 
increased dramatically and the need of the interconnection 
between MANETs in many situations, such as in battlefields or 
disaster recovery is more important because of diversity of 
“intra-domain” routing protocols in each domain. For this 
purpose, an inter-domain routing protocol was developed to 
support communication across different MANETs. In many 
researches, the mobile agent paradigm was used to perform 
routing in MANET. In this paper, a highlight of the use of 
mobile agents in ad hoc networks, and the application of them 
with bees’ communication to design a reactive inter-domain 
routing protocol for MANETs. Our bees’ communication-
based proposal will helps to enhance the efficiency of the 
routing protocol and to reduce the battery use of the node. 
Keywords-mobile ad hoc networks; inter-domain routing; 
mobile agents; bees communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the twentieth century, the wireless ad hoc networks 
take an emerging aspect. Any fixed infrastructure or central 
administration needs to deploy this kind of networks. Most 
of researches concerning routing in ad hoc networks focused 
on routing in a single domain.  
A research has been performed in the beginning of the 
2007th for routing between heterogeneous domains (different 
routing protocol and different technology of transmission can 
be employed in each domain). The protocol instances issued 
from this research [1][2] run in routers in a distributed 
manner. There are gateways in each domain used for routing 
packets from one domain to another until the destination is 
reached.  
Nowadays, many protocols in the field of inter-domain 
routing in mobile ad hoc networks focused on the semi-
proactive and proactive routing, but did not consider the 
reactive side. In this paper, we introduce a new reactive 
inter-domain routing protocol for ad hoc networks using 
bees’ communication. The natural inspired metaheuristic 
algorithms take advantages on the design of the intra-ad hoc 
routing.  
We present, in this paper, an overview of using mobile 
agents in inter-MANETs, then, their application in the 
context of bees’ communication to design a reactive inter-
domain 
routing 
protocol 
for 
MANETs. 
Bees’ 
communication was introduced and developed for routing in 
a single MANET. Bees’ communication will be a first use in 
the inter-domain routing for ad hoc networks. We use it to 
enhance the efficiency of the inter-domain routing and for 
reducing the battery use. The method used is inspired by the 
bee dance foraging principle to find food.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, an overview of the related works that use swarm 
intelligence is presented. In Section 3, a description of the 
basic inter-domain routing protocol for MANETs. Section 4 
outlines method bees employ to share food among them 
using dance language. Sections 5 and 6 provide details on 
our approach. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The enhancement of routing in MANETs was based on 
swarm intelligence many times. The first routing algorithm 
related to the use of Ants’ communication was the Ant-
Colony based Routing Algorithm (ARA) [3]. The core of the 
algorithm is described in the ant-based routing algorithms 
(AntNet) [4] and (ABC) [5], two swarm intelligence routing 
protocols for fixed networks. Another routing algorithm 
designed for MANETs and based on AntNet (AntHocNet) 
[6], it is a hybrid routing protocol using both a reactive mode 
of operation (on-demand route discovery) and a proactive 
mode of operation (periodic route discovery). However, the 
routing overhead of AntHocNet is a disadvantageous factor 
[7]. The swarm intelligence method based on Ant Colony 
Optimization was also used in the inter-domain routing for 
MANETs. Dressler and Gerla [8] proposed to enhance inter-
domain routing in MANETs, based on virtual cord for 
routing between a set of MANETs, by applying the ACO 
mechanism of the AntHocNet protocol to handle topology 
change. The result of their work showed that the proposed 
combination is efficient and had marginal overhead by 
applying ACO mechanism.  
Bees’ communication was first studied by Karl Von Frish 
in 1911 [9]. He spent his professional life studying the 
comportment of bees and won a Nobel Prize for his research. 
The application of bees’ communication in routing data 
packets so far has only been introduced and developed for 
routing in a single MANET. Farooq et al. developed a 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
protocol called BeeHive for fixed networks [10]. They 
claimed that the study of honey bees has revealed a 
remarkable sophistication of the communication capabilities 
as compared to ants. Their work on BeeHive demonstrated 
that it can be more energy-efficient than AntNet and deliver 
the same or better performance. BeeAdHoc [11] is an 
application of the principle of bees’ communication to route 
packets within a single MANETs and it was proposed by the 
same researchers. BeeAdHoc uses fewer control packets as 
compared to AntNet and AntHocNet, which decreases the 
routing overhead, and distributes traffic to different paths 
proportional to their quality and capacity, which makes it an 
energy-efficient routing protocol. Based on early results, 
BeeAdHoc shows also that packet delay is lower.  
As the use of Bees’ communication shows more 
interesting results than the use of ants’ communication for 
intra-domain routing in ad hoc networks, we will use bees’ 
communication to perform an efficient and reactive inter-
domain routing protocol for MANETs and compare it with 
the existing inter-domain routing protocol for MANETs [8] 
based on ants’ colony optimization. 
III. 
BASIC SCHEME INTERCONNECTING SEVERAL MANETS 
The interconnection between groups of MANETs is 
maintained by gateways belonging to each MANET. When a 
node “a1” from a certain MANET “A” want to reach a node 
“d2” from an another MANET “D”, firstly, it routes packets 
to a reachable internal gateway within MANET “A”, using 
the underlying routing protocol; after that, packets are routed 
to an external gateway within external MANET using inter-
domain routing protocol, and so, until the packets reach 
destination in domain “D”. 
 
Figure 1.  Interconnection of several MANETs. 
The inter-domain routing protocol is proactive; thus, the 
external routing table of each gateway to different domains is 
known by at least all gateways. 
IV. 
HOW BEES SHARE FOOD LOCATION 
Bees are very organized and communicate in a very 
complicated manner through dances. When a food source is 
found by a bee, the other bees reach this location after some 
time; this is done by sharing the way to source using dance 
language done by the first discoverer bee. All information 
that other bees need to find food source are: its distance from 
the hive, its direction, and productivity. The dancing process 
is performed into two dances; see Figures 2 and 3. 
A. Waggle Dance 
This type of dance is performed when food is located at a 
long distance from the hive. At this state and taking as 
reference the direction if the sun, the movement of this dance 
resembles to the number “eight”. In a typical dance, the bee 
moves in a straight line, for a short distance, moving its body 
from side to side approximately 13 to 15 times a second and 
return after to the beginning point from which it starts the 
dance tracing a half-circle. 
 
Figure 2.  Waggle Dance [12]. 
By varying the angle between the waggling run and an 
imaginary line running straight up and down, the bee 
conveys the direction of the food source. If a line is drawn 
which connects the food source and the hive, and another 
line which connects the hive and the spot on the horizon 
immediately below the sun, then the angle formed by the two 
is observed to be the same as that of the angle in the waggle 
dance. 
B. Round Dance 
The round dance is a round movement of the discoverer 
bee, it turns around itself in a quick rhythm of eight to ten 
tour/second then make a half round in the opposite sense. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Round Dance [12]. 
The other bees, while observing this dance, know that 
source of nectar is near close to a radius of 50 meters. 
V. 
EXTENDED APPLCATION OF BEES’ COMMUNICATION 
TO THE INTER-DOMAIN ROUTING FOR MANETS 
Our proposal is to design a reactive inter-domain routing 
protocol for mobile ad hoc networks. As mentioned earlier in 
the beginning of this paper, our idea is based on bees 
foraging principle. For instance, a discoverer bee starts 
searching food place, and when it finds it, it tells other bees 
the location of the food. It launches discovery process and 
when it discover the place, it tells the information about this 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
place to the other bees; (for distance, we use PacketDelay, 
for direction, we use RouteLifeTime (because only nodes 
having a sufficient energy participate in the packets routing) 
and for productivity, we use AvailableBandwidth (the 
quantity of the food transported, is equal to the number of 
packets routed). 
In our case, we use waggle dance since it will be applied 
for large scale interconnected MANETs.  
We will use mobile agents to discover routes to a 
destination, and to transmit back results to the source node 
relying on three metrics, Packet Delay, RouteLifeTime, and 
AvailableBandwidth. 
A. PacketDelay 
It is the end-to-end packet delay for a discovered route 
between source and destination. 
B. RouteLifeTime 
It is the average remained battery of nodes composing a 
route between source and destination 
C. PacketDelay 
The bandwidth is the maximum data transfer rate of a 
network connection. It specifies how much data can be sent 
over a specific connection during amount of time. The 
available bandwidth then is the unused capacity of a network 
connection during a time interval. The available bandwidth 
along a path is the minimum available bandwidth of all 
traversed network connections. 
VI. 
ALGORITHM DEFINITION 
As mentioned in Section 3, a packet from a source S, 
traverses a path of intra-connected and inter-connected 
gateways until reach destination D. We will use three types 
of mobile agents, MA_D, MA_RL, and MA_AB.  
MA_D: is the mobile agent responsible of packet delay 
computation. MA_RL: is the mobile agent responsible of 
RouteLifeTime computation. MA_AB: is the mobile agent 
responsible of available bandwidth computation. 
A. PacketDelay Computation 
From an intra-domain, a node requesting a high quality 
route to another intra-domain node does: 
1) If the domain the source node belongs to uses 
proactive routing protocol then: 
 
The source node creates MA_D mobile agent for 
each gateway having connection to external domain. 
 
The mobile agents store the departure time from 
source node and are sent to the corresponding 
gateways. 
 
When arrival at the gateways nodes, they calculate 
difference between departure time and arrival time 
and store results in variable delay. 
 
After that, at each gateway the mobile agent is 
cloned and broadcasts to another connected gateway 
until the destination is reached. 
2) If the domain the source node belongs to uses 
reactive protocol 
 
The source node launches a discovery process using 
underlying routing protocol. The discovery process 
is ordered to gateways having connection to the 
external domains. 
 
After the source node obtains the list of gateways 
having connection to the external domains, it uses 
the same procedure detailed above to perform 
computation of delay. 
B. RouteLifeTime Computation 
As done for packets delay, a source node creates mobile 
agent for each gateway having connection to the external 
domains and submit them to these gateways. 
When mobile agents arrive to these gateways, they store 
the value of the remained battery energy in a structure 
containing (gatewayID, remainedbattery). 
After that, a mobile agent is broadcasted to an external 
domain. It compares the stored remained battery energy to 
the remained battery energy of the current node.  
 
If the current node energy is less than a certain 
threshold (speed of average consumed energy per a 
degree of amount traffic) then, it returns to the 
source node with routequalityfailed message. 
 
Else, if the current energy is better than the stored 
one, then, the result is stored in the struct. 
When mobile agent arrives to the destination, it 
calculates the average remained battery of the traversed 
path, and the result is send back to the source node. 
C. AvailableBandwidth Computation 
The available bandwidth can be calculated as: the total 
bandwidth of a network connection – consumed bandwidth 
The consumed bandwidth (goodput): average data rate of 
successful data transfer per a slot of time, and can be taken 
by mobile agents from statics of the network device. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Proposed scenario to apply bees’ communication. 
When applying routequality request from node “a” in 
domain A, to node “e” in domain E (see Figure 4), node “a” 
will have routequality of all routes leading to node “e” so 
that it can choose the best one based on “minimum delay, 
maximum bandwidth, and maximum lifetime” 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With the proposed solution, mobile agents can contribute 
to minimise the energy of nodes and when the route quality 
to reach a node will be known, the overhead will be 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
minimized. Future work will be to build the proposed 
solution for a large scale interconnected Mobile AdHoc 
Networks. We will use the network simulator ns-2.32 [13] 
with the integration of the mobile agent framework to 
perform the computation made by each gateway and to 
evaluate the performance and overhead of the given scheme. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A lot of thanks to all the persons who helped us achieve 
this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. K. Chau, J. Crowcroft, K. W. Lee, and  S. H. Y. Wong, 
IDRM: Inter-domain Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks, Technical Report UCAM-CL-TR-708, Computer 
Lab, University of Cambridge, Jan 2008. 
[2] S. H Lee, S. H. Y. Wong, C. K. Chau, K. W. Lee, J. 
Crowcroft, and M. Gerla, “InterMR: Inter-MANET routing in 
heterogeneous MANETs,” Proc. IEEE 7th International 
Conference on Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems, Nov 2010, 
pp. 372-381. 
[3] M. Günes, U. Sorges, and I. Bouazizi, “ARA: The Ant-
Colony Based Routing Algorithm for MANETs,” Proc. IEEE 
International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshop, 
2002, pp.79-85. 
[4] G. Di Caro and M. Dorigo, “AntNet: Distributed Stigmergetic 
Control 
for 
Communication 
Networks,” 
J. 
Artificial 
Intelligence Research, Dec. 2001, pp. 317-365 
[5] R. Schoonderwoerd, O.E. Holland, J.L. Bruten, and L.J.M. 
Rothkrantz, “Ant-based load balancing in telecommunications 
networks,” J. Adaptive Behavior, vol. 5, 1996, pp. 169–207. 
[6] G. Di Caro, F. Ducatelle, and L. M. Gambardella, 
“AntHocNet: An adaptive natureinspired algorithm for 
routing in mobile ad hoc networks,” European Transactions 
on Telecommunications, Special Issue on Self-organization in 
Mobile Networking, 2005, pp. 443-455. 
[7] J. Wang and S. Lee, “A Performance Comparison of Swarm 
Intelligence Inspired Routing Algorithms for MANETs”, 
LNCS. International Conference on Computational Sciences 
and Its Application, vol. 5593, 2009, pp. 432–442. 
[8] Dressler, F and Gerla, M, “A framework for inter-domain 
routing in virtual coordinate based mobile networks,” J. 
Wireless Networks, vol. 19, Oct 2013, pp. 1611-1626. 
[9] K. Von Frisch, The dance and orientation of bees, Belkanp 
Press, Cambridge, 1967, pp. 45-51, pp. 93-96, pp. 137-147. 
[10] H. Wedde and M. Farooq, “BeeHive: Routing Algorithms 
Inspired by Honey Bee Behavior”. KI 19(4): 2005, pp.18-24. 
[11] H.F. Wedde, M. Farooq, and C. Timm, BeeAdHoc:an 
efficient, secure, scalable routing framework for mobile adhoc 
networks. Technical report–PG460, LSIII, School of 
Computer Science, University of Dortmund, 2005. 
[12] H. Yahya, The Miracle of the Honeybee, Global Publishing, 
Dec 2007, pp.86-87. 
[13] http://nsnam.isi.edu/nsnam/index.php/Main_Page. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

