Amazon-on-Earth Library Navigator 
Indoor Navigation Using Un-Augmented Mobile Phones 
 
Amnon Dekel, Scott Kirkpatrick, Niv Noach, Barak Schiller 
The School of Computer Science & Engineering 
The Hebrew University Jerusalem 
Jerusalem, Israel 
[amnoid, kirk] @ cs.huji.ac.il, [nivnoach, bschiller] @gmail.com 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the Amazon-on-Earth project 
that enables users to look for, navigate to and find objects of 
interest inside a physical space. We implemented a working 
prototype system in one of the libraries on our campus and ran 
a user study to see if there was any advantage to using the 
system relative to the existing library information services. 
Results show that subjects using our service were able to find 
information about a book 35% faster and were able to navigate 
to a book 52% faster. We also found that the control group 
made four times as many navigational errors and had to ask 
for help five times more than the experimental group. 
Measuring qualitative variables we found that subjects using 
our system rated the ease of finding the book in the library as 
easier than the control group and felt more positive towards 
the service. The results make it clear that the use of such a 
service can substantially help a user find an object inside a 
space in a faster, easier and more pleasant fashion.  We end the 
paper by pointing out a number of shortcomings of the system 
and how they might be dealt with. 
Keywords- Indoor Navigation; Mobile Phone; QR Code 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For a number of years now, efforts have been made in 
research and product circles to enable digital information 
services within the context of real world scenarios. The 
growing sector of powerful Smartphones with their multiple 
embedded sensors and networking systems have made them 
a prime focus in consumer based location based services. 
These have spawned a number of commercial systems that 
can point out relevant physical services close to a person’s 
current location [3, 6]. Such systems are mostly used while 
driving or walking near or within a shopping area. While our 
system uses location as an important dimension, we focus on 
using indoor navigation to enable users to find objects in the 
physical world and to interact with them. Thus, our “objects” 
do not transmit their existence to the world (there are simply 
too many of them to make this feasible)- but once a user 
using our navigation maps finds them, the system enables a 
number of relevant functions to be enacted in relation to the 
object. 
This paper has the following structure: we start with a 
short section about previous related work. We then describe 
the system we have built and present the empirical study we 
have run to test its effectiveness. We then present the results 
of our study and end with a discussion of shortcomings and 
how the system can be improved. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
1) Mobile Interaction with the Real World 
Smith et al. [15] presented a prototype for mobile retail 
and product annotation services. Their system enabled the 
user to scan the object’s barcode and receive relevant 
information about that object which was found on existing 
web services such as Amazon.com. Their system used a 
special purpose barcode scanner to decode the object’s ID 
for further querying (since then, 1D and 2D visual tag 
decoding software have become available for most 
Smartphone systems). But their system did not help users 
find an object within a physical space, nor to conduct a 
transaction to buy the object if the user wished to. Many 
additional research projects have focused on this space in the 
last few years, i.e., [3][4][7][13].  
Broll et al. [4] present models for tag – service 
interfacing. The physical tag (be it a visual barcode or a Near 
Field Communication (NFC) RFID tag) was used as 
shortcuts to online services. Henze et al. [7] go further by 
showing how the camera can be used not only to decode 
visual tags, but also as a tool to create visual (photo based) 
tags in the real world. Although interesting, these systems 
only focus on linking a physical device to online services 
without exploring navigation per se. 
 
Figure 1: Visual Contextual Bookmarks [6]. 
Rukzio et al. [13] explored different tag based services 
but focused mostly on how tags can be used to enable phone-
based discovery and access to online services. Using NFC 
tags embedded inside public posters, a user can walk up to a 
poster, visually identify the NFC enabled functions as 
landing spots on the poster and activate the services by 
touching their NFC enabled phone to the landing spots.  
More relevant to our work, Serra, Caboni and Marotto 
[14] showed the use of 2d barcodes as part of an initial 
indoor navigation system, but they used barcodes only as 
URL addresses to download maps of an indoor space onto a 
mobile phone.  
14
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

2) Indoor Navigation 
Nokia Research [9] ran a public trial of their Locate 
Sensor system in the Kamppi shopping center in Helsinki in 
2009. The system enables mobiles phones to track and 
present the location of special tags on the phone’s screen. In 
this case the use was mostly for advertising- enabling a 
person to look for a specific store in the shopping center and 
receive promotional coupons relevant to their location. But 
their system relied on the use of special purpose hardware. 
Puikkonen et al. [12] tested a WIFI based indoor 
navigation system in the Kamppi Mall also. Their system 
showed the location of the user on the map, but at very low 
precision (resolution was about 50 meters- meaning that it 
could localize a person to the level of a section of the Mall 
and no more). Although such services show future promise, 
the low resolution exhibited makes them of limited use for 
most cases. 
 
Figure 2: Kamppi Indoor Shopping Service [11]. 
Mulloni et. al. [8] developed and tested the Signpost 
indoor navigation system. After implementation they focused 
on studying end user’s feedback about the ease and 
usefulness of the system. They compared the user ratings for 
a simple 2D map view with no location information in it, a 
more advanced model using discrete point localization (using 
2D barcodes) that shows the location of the last seen marker 
and a third and most sophisticated model using a simulation 
of a real time indoor GPS (using a wizard of Oz approach 
where an operator would walk behind the subjects and 
update the location on the application). They found that 
discrete localization was seen as easier to use and more 
useful than the simple map approach, whereas the real time 
indoor GPS simulation was deemed most useful. Since it is 
not practical to have an operator walk behind every user, the 
most relevant result of their study in our opinion is that they 
show that indoor navigation using 2D barcodes is a realistic 
and useful approach.  
 
Figure 3: Signpost Indoor Navigation System [8]. 
Another point of interest in their system was that they 
kept the camera on at all times and had it continuously 
search for tags in the environment, automatically updating 
the location on the map when a marker was seen. Although 
this seems promising from a user interface point of view, 
they admit that such an approach was deemed impractical in 
their real world tests since it consumed too much power and 
depleted the battery too fast. Additionally, although their 
system could show the last seen marker location on the map, 
their system did not generate navigation paths to a target 
location for the user. 
Nokia research recently [10] showed a prototype of their 
Indoor Navigator system using the Nokia High Accuracy 
Indoor Positioning system. In demos presented at the Nokia 
World Conference in 2010 they seem to show very high 
precision, but we have not seen any research presenting their 
capabilities systematically. Although simpler to install and 
maintain than previously mentioned high precision systems, 
it still needs the installation of special purpose positioning 
equipment. 
III. 
AMAZON-ON_EARTH LIBRARY NAVIGATOR 
Our Amazon on Earth Library Navigator project explores 
a method of enabling map-based navigation inside a physical 
space, but with the added value of being able to show the 
user their last known or current location as well as being able 
to generate a navigation path to a wanted target, all without 
the need for any specialized or expensive localization 
hardware. Our service also offers pre and post object finding 
services. This project is a continuation and improvement of 
our previous work [5]. 
A. Description 
Our project focuses on enabling a person with the 
following main capabilities: 
• 
Search for information about an object they are 
interested in 
• 
Physically find that object in an indoor space via a 
navigation path drawn on a map 
• 
Receive recommendations about relevant alternative 
objects 
• 
Pick-up-n-Go: Pick the object up, purchase the 
object, and carry it out of a store. 
 
1) System Test Location 
We implemented the system in one of the libraries on our 
campus. The reason for this was proximity and ease of 
access, and should not be taken to mean that we are focusing 
only on libraries. The opposite is true - a library to us is a 
representation of a physical retail store. Such a store has 
stock (the books), a physical space to view the stock and 
handle it (the book cases and desks), and a checkout counter 
where people can buy (borrow) the books. To us, such a 
system is conceptually equivalent to retail stores, while 
allowing us to explore and test flows and methods without 
the obvious difficulties involved in using a real store 
location.  
 
15
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

2) Scenarios 
The AoE Library Navigator system enables our users to 
perform the following scenarios:  
a) Finding Information about a book 
Our user is looking for a specific book they need for their 
work. They go to our web site and run a search for the book 
(using key words, author names or ISBN number). They 
receive an information page about the book and can browse 
the information that has been gathered from the Google 
Books and Amazon web sites using their public application 
programming interfaces (API’s). Information about a book 
can also be accessed by scanning the barcode on the book 
with our application. This process returns the ISBN number 
that is then fed into our web-based query system, returning 
the same information page. 
 
Figure 4: AoE Library Navigator Web Site Book Information Screen 
 
Figure 5: AoE Library Navigator Phone Book Information Screen 
 
Figure 6: AoE Library Navigator: Tag Based Information Search: Scanning 
the book barcode initiates a web based search 
b) Adding a book to their personal list 
If they are interested in the book, they can enter it into 
their book list after signing in to the system. They can now 
go to the “store” to view the book, and check it out. 
 
c) Navigating to the book in the library 
Once they arrive at the library, they launch the AoE 
Library Navigator mobile application and select the book 
they are interested in. This brings up a navigation map that 
shows them the path they need to take in order to reach the 
book. If they navigate properly, they will reach the bookcase 
that holds the book they are looking for. If they get lost, they 
can walk to one of a number of public and centrally located 
navigation tags and scan them or alternatively, take any book 
from the shelves and scan its barcode. This will give them a 
new map with an updated path to reaching the bookcase. 
 
Figure 7: AoE Library Navigator: Navigate Screens 
If they find that the book is not there, they can get 
information about additional books that can be relevant for 
them. The other books can be scanned using their bar codes 
and available information can be viewed. 
 
d) Taking the book with them 
Lastly, if the user wants to take the book with them, they 
can select the Check Out option under the book screen and 
receive feedback that the book has been successfully 
checked out and that they can take it with them. 
 
Figure 8: AoE Library Navigator: Check Out Screens 
B. Technical Description 
Figure 4-18 presents the main Amazon-on-Earth Library 
Navigator (AoE) system modules: 
16
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 9: AoE library navigator architecture 
1) External databases 
• 
EXTERNAL COMMENTS DB: Uses Google Book 
information and Amazon’s ratings and opinions. 
Enables us to shows this information for any book in 
the library. 
• 
EXTERNAL BOOKS DB: Use the library’s web site as 
the main search database. Since the library would 
not allow us to interface directly to their internal 
database, we access the book database by sending 
HTTP queries directly through their public web site. 
• 
MAPPING 
SYSTEM: A mapping database that 
interfaces with our Map Middleware and returns 
results as text (may include links to maps stored on 
the web).  
2) Book Comments Database Manager (BCDM) 
An item may have several servers where users’ 
comments are stored. The BCDM layer supplies a 
convenient abstraction for multiplexing comments from and 
to several DBs.  This allows us to present a single interface 
where the user can see comments that were created internally 
by library visitors as well as externally via the Amazon and 
Google books APIs. 
3) Internal comments DB 
Since not all DBs are writeable, this DB is used to store 
local users’ comments.  
4) Users DB 
Stores data regarding users who are eligible to access the 
system (i.e., User names, passwords, and custom data: “My 
Books”, Preferences and user privileges). 
5) Item interface 
This is an interface for generalized access to information 
about an item. The information is separated into 3 sub-
categories: 
• 
INFO: General information for identifying and 
describing the specific item. 
• 
POSITION: Positioning (global and/or local, absolute 
and relative to a given point) 
• 
COMMENTS:  Getting/adding comments capabilities 
(might use the BCDM interface if many sources for 
comments are available). 
6) Mobile Client Application 
The mobile part of the service is enabled via a native 
Android application. The application is responsible for: 
• 
Preserving the internal state of the user’s requests 
• 
Initiating requests to the server(s) based upon 
requests. 
• 
Parsing data returned from server(s) as response to 
requests. 
• 
Displaying the incoming data. 
• 
Interacting with Physical World Objects via the 
Physical World Connectivity Module 
7) The Physical World Connectivity (PWC) Module 
This module is responsible for acquiring and analyzing 
information from the world in the following methods: 
• 
1D/2D barcodes 
• 
Keyboard input 
• 
Optional: RFID and Voice Recognition 
 
Output of this module is unified for all acquisition 
methods. At this point in time only 1D/2D barcodes and 
Keyboard input are supported. Adding RFID and Voice 
recognition is relatively simple. Voice input is already 
available via the Android input method, but the results will 
need to be parsed appropriately for our use. RFID input will 
soon be available via the NFC interfaces that are starting to 
be used in the newest Android phones (i.e., Nexus S in Dec 
2010). 
 
Figure 10: Navigation Tag and Resulting Map 
8) Map Middleware System 
The system includes a Library Map descriptor and 
Location Pattern Convertor (what we call the Map Engine). 
We use the Dijkstra algorithm for finding the shortest path in 
a directed graph between a start location and the target 
location. The system converts any possible location string 
that might be received from an external source (such as web-
sites or similar) to one of the targets in the map. In other 
words, this function connects between any string (from 
decoded Tags) to the set of strings used as location 
names/aliases in the map. 
We developed a Map Builder desktop application that 
makes it easy to insert new maps into the system and then 
connect between a textual target and their symbolic location 
on the map. The result is a database with relations between a 
symbolic code and their symbolic location on the represented 
maps. 
17
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
Figure 11: AoE Library map builder 
 
 
Figure 12: Relating symbolic location to visual map 
 
The Output of the Map Engine is: 
• 
A graphic representation of the Map. Draws a line 
on top of the map to mark the resulting path. 
• 
An ordered list of Edges. Indicating the x,y 
coordinates of the starting and ending points relative 
to the graphics coordinates. 
• 
An ordered list of Strings. These are the textual 
directions relevant to the layer being shown. 
 
We have created some enhancements to the Dijkstra 
algorithm. First is Angle Testing with built in thresholds to 
determine if the instructions should be “Go straight”, “Turn 
Right” or “Turn left”. We then use Edge Grouping to enable 
us to present simpler instructions to the user: instead of [go 
straight to shelf 1àgo straight to shelf 2 à go straight to 
shelf 3] we get [go straight to shelf 3]. 
We initially developed a Java prototype on a Sony 
Feature-phone but later changed to the Android platform.  
 
Figure 13: Android based Aoe library navigator 
The navigation screen presents the navigation broken up 
into floor-sized sections. So if a path necessitates moving 
through more than one floor, the navigation on the first part 
will steer the user to the stairs and tell them to travel to the 
additional floor. The second part of the navigation will 
continue from there. This allows us to break the navigation 
into easier to understand paths for the user and also leaves 
more screen real estate free for showing the largest graphic 
possible.  
 
Figure 14: AoE library navigator: navigation map to the target book 
 
C. Implementation 
We implemented the system using a mixture of web 
based and native mobile technologies. The server modules 
were written in Python, and hosted within an Apache HTTP 
server. The mapping application was implemented in .NET 
and it created an XML map file for the library, above which 
the navigation path was drawn at run time with Python. The 
Databases were implemented in SQL Lite. The check out 
part of the scenario used HTTP POST to write to a Check 
out service on the HTTP server. The checkout station used a 
barcode scanner interfaced to a netbook computer that in turn 
was connected to an Arduino Microcontroller system for 
activating the demagnetizer. The check out system worked 
but because of time and financial constraints was not hooked 
up to a demagnetizing station- so although a book could be 
checked on the phone, and the barcode scanning system 
could check with the service that it was in fact checked out 
and could be taken out, the book had to be manually 
demagnetized. 
IV. 
USER STUDY 
A. Method 
We sent out a call for subjects and recruited students 
from departments at the University that are located on a 
separate campus at the other side of the city. This was to 
ensure that they were not acquainted with the physical 
premises of the library. Subjects were invited at 30-minute 
increments and were tested alone. 
Subjects first read a general explanation about the test 
procedure in which it was made clear to them that there is no 
correct or incorrect performance. We asked them to act as 
naturally as possible and that in the performance of the tasks 
they were given they could ask for help from anyone in the 
building except for the tester. 
1) The Tasks 
18
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

We used a between-groups design. Both groups were 
asked to search for information about a specific book and 
then navigate to and find the physical book in the library.  
CONTROL GROUP: This group used the existing IT 
infrastructure in the library (a number of computer stations 
using a well known library management and search system). 
The subjects walked over to a station and ran a search for the 
book. They then wrote down the library code for the book. 
This was the first variable we measured: time to find 
information about the book.  We then asked them to find the 
physical book. They were told that they could ask for help 
from the librarians or other people in the library. This was 
the second variable we measured: time to find the physical 
book in the library. We also recorded how many navigation 
errors they made and how many times they asked for 
assistance in the process of finding the book. After they 
found the book we asked them a number of qualitative 
questions to gauge how they felt about the system and their 
experience of using it. We then explained the study to them. 
Ten subjects were in this group, 5 of them male and 5 
female.  
EXPERIMENTAL GROUP: This group was given the same 
tasks using our system. The initial information lookup about 
the book was done on a laptop using the web site we created 
for the system. After they found the information about the 
book they were asked to add it to their book list on the 
system (My Books). This was the parallel step of searching 
for and writing the book code information by the control 
group. They were then given a mobile phone (an HTC Nexus 
1) with the AoE Library Navigator application running on it 
and were asked to open the book information in the 
application and tap the Navigate button. This brought up the 
Navigation map to the book. We explained to them how to 
use the application and then told them that they now needed 
to find the physical book in the library using the map. We 
explained that they could ask for help from anyone in the 
library (except for the tester) and also showed him or her 
how to use the built in feature to scan strategically placed 
tags or books in the library if they got lost. They then started 
the search for the book and we timed how long it took them 
to find it, how many navigation errors they made and how 
many times they asked for assistance. After they found the 
book we asked them a number of qualitative questions to 
gauge how they felt about the system and their experience of 
using it. We then explained the study to them. Ten subjects 
were in this group, 5 of them male and 5 female. 
B. Results 
Figure 15 shows the results of the test. As can be seen, 
the two main metrics (time to find information about the 
book and time to navigate to and find the physical book) 
show a clear advantage for the experimental group. The 
average time to find information about the book was 77 
seconds for the control group but only 51 seconds for the 
experimental group (35% faster) (T=1.93, P<0.05). The 
control group then took an average of 287 seconds to find the 
physical book, while the experimental group took only 138 
seconds on average (149 seconds faster- 52% faster) 
(T=5.29, P<0.01). 
 
	  
Figure 15:	  Results of Second Navigation Test (in seconds).	  
 
 
 
Figure 16:	  Navigation Errors and Requests for Help.	  
 
We also analyzed the amount of navigation errors that 
were made by the subjects and how many times they 
requested help in finding the book. We define a navigation 
error as a situation where instead of getting closer to the 
target the user’s navigation at a certain point in time enlarges 
the distance from the book. By Assistance we mean asking 
for help from another person or the librarian or by scanning 
barcodes to request a new map. As can be seen in Figure 16, 
once again the experimental group showed an advantage. 
Whereas the experimental group showed an average of 0.30 
navigational errors per task, the control group made an 
average of more than 4 times as many navigation errors 
(1.30) (T=3.87, P<0.01). The control group also needed 
much more assistance – they asked on average 1.70 times for 
assistance per task, while the experimental group asked for 
assistance only 0.30 times on average per task (more than 5 
times as much). (T=6.33, P<0.01). 
 
Figure 17 shows the qualitative questionnaire results. 
Ease of searching for information about a book:  Both 
groups rated the ease of searching for information about a 
book as “Easy” (Control = 4.6, Experimental group = 4.5).  
19
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
	  
Figure 17: Subjective Feelings towards the systems. 
 
Ease of finding the book in the library: Not 
surprisingly, the experimental group showed an advantage 
here- giving on average the rating of “Easy” (4.2) while the 
control group viewed this on average as neutral (2.9). 
(T=4.99, P<0.01). 
Feelings towards the method: We found a difference in 
how positive or negative the subject’s feelings were towards 
the methods - The experimental group showed positive 
feeling towards the system (average of 4.2) while the control 
subjects showed a neutral feeling towards the system 
(average of 3.2). (T=2.23, P<0.05). 
V. 
GENERAL DISCUSSION 
The results show a very clear advantage for using the 
system. Not only is the time to find a book drastically 
lowered (by 52%), but also the time to find information 
about a book was lowered by 35%. Additionally, the amount 
of navigation errors made while looking for the books was 
lowered substantially, and probably because of that, the need 
to ask for assistance also dropped substantially. Only one of 
the experimental subjects made a real navigation error (they 
went down the wrong set of stairs and found themselves in a 
different part of the library). That subject then used the 
navigation barcodes on one of the walls to get a new map 
generated and was able to reorient themselves and continue 
the search for the book.  
Interestingly, even though the empirical evidence shows 
that using the system for finding information about a book is 
faster with our service, on average, the subjects rated the 
regular library search system to be as easy to use as the 
experimental system. We think that this has to do more with 
familiarity than with usability. Most users know and have 
had experience using the in-library catalog search systems, 
while none of them have used our system before. This 
novelty might cause them to think that the existing system is 
easier to use even while the data shows that it might not be. 
It seems that a 35% reduction in time is not pronounced 
enough to be felt by the users as large enough to warrant 
them to feel that it is better than something they already 
know and feel comfortable with. For that to happen they 
must see a much more pronounce performance change.  
That is precisely what we think has happened when 
subjects rated how easy it was to find the book. As shown in 
the results, the experimental group felt that it was easier to 
find the book using our system relative to the control group. 
So in this case, although they were used to searching for 
books using the standard catalog stations and then physically 
search using the book coding system, the performance 
enhancement offered by our system was pronounced enough 
to make that crossover- and even though it was not familiar 
to them, they rated it higher than the control group. This 
“added value” that they received from the new system seems 
to have caused them to show a general positive feeling 
towards it, while the control group showed a neutral feeling 
towards the system they know so well. We see this as 
meaning that if your system offers enough value to the end 
user, that added value can overcome their built in bias 
towards using something they are familiar with.  
A. Future Improvements 
While building this service and testing it we have found a 
number of things that need to be improved before such a 
service can be used in the real world.  
 
1) User Interface Design 
The interface design we have used can and should be 
improved.  
1. We found that users found it initially difficult to 
understand the map and it was not clear to them 
where the path starts. This can easily be solved by 
adding a START HERE tag and placing it in the 
proper place on the map.  
2. We found that users sometimes missed seeing the 
actual book library code on the map screen- this is 
important information since they need it in order to 
identify the actual book on the shelf. This 
information should be made more pronounced and 
visible on the screen. 
3. The current architecture breaks up the multi- floor 
navigation into multiple screens. This means that 
when the user moves from one floor to the next, they 
need to request the next map from the server by 
tapping the next button. In hindsight we think it will 
be better to download all parts of the navigation into 
one screen and have the user scroll through the 
screen to reach the later parts of the navigation path. 
This also ensures that all the data has been 
downloaded and cached on the phone at the 
beginning of the navigation and potential WIFI or 
Cellular Data weak spots will not disrupt the 
navigation. 
2) Check Out System 
Because of time and financial constraints we did not 
finish the physical demagnetizer station. We built a physical 
and working proof of concept but did not add it to the final 
testing scenario. A system without this feature will still be 
useful, but allowing the full cycle from search, find, pickup 
and go will make this an even better system. 
3) Enhanced Social Input:  
Although the current system can access and show 
comments about a book from Amazon and Google books, its 
built in social features are limited to allowing a user to add 
20
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

their own comments about a book into the system. These 
comments stay in the system and are not published to the 
Amazon or Google books systems. We think that this service 
will be enhanced if its users can add and publish information 
about a book. Thus, users should be able to tweet or publish 
to their Facebook pages that they have checked a book out, 
what they think about a book, and also create socially based 
lists that can help others. This data can then be used as a 
crowd-sourced collaborative filtering service that can offer 
an alternative book to the one being searched. 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
The Amazon on Earth Library Navigator is the first 
system we have built in our efforts to enhance indoor 
navigation. We have developed a system that includes a back 
end and middleware service to map an existing physical 
space and the locations of objects in it. Working at the 
Harman library, we were able to create a system that allows a 
user to search for information about a book, add that book to 
their book list, and then inside the library, use our service to 
receive a personal map showing a navigation map to the 
book. If the user gets disoriented during their walk to the 
book, they can scan preconfigured navigation tags, or 
alternatively, use the barcodes on the books themselves, to 
generate a new map. The new map will show them the path 
from the current location to the book they are looking for. 
We ran a series of tests to explore the utility of the 
system, and after ironing out some initial problems, we show 
that the service in fact has promise: Using our service, 
subjects were able to find information about a book and then 
navigate to that book substantially faster and with less 
mistakes than using the existing method of doing this in the 
library. We found that while users did not feel that the 
service was easier to use for finding information about a 
book, they did feel that it made finding the physical book in 
the library an easier task. 
All this makes us conclude that such a service does in 
fact offer real value for people in such situations. If the 
system makes it easier and faster to find a book, then the 
time saved can be used for other purposes- if to find 
additional books, or to have more time to think about what 
books are relevant to find. But we view this prototype as 
representing a more general model in which such services 
can help people find things within indoor spaces. These 
things can be books, but they can be merchandise in 
commercial settings (i.e., products in a store) or objects 
inside large warehouses. Additionally, such a service can 
also be used by people moving through unfamiliar 
surroundings:  this can be a new worker in a large building- 
the Pentagon for example, or an emergency services worker 
needing to find someone quickly in an unknown building. 
Many additional use cases can be thought of where such a 
system can be useful 
A. Limitations 
Such a system has some very clear limitations. The first 
one is that the system can only work as long as the target 
objects being looked for have a known location and they do 
not move. If an object is moved and its location is not 
updated in the system, then the utility of the system breaks 
down, since the map generated will send a person to the last 
known location of the object. Another limitation is that the 
system does not provide the user with a real time signifier of 
his or her own location within the building. Being able to do 
so will help the end user orient themselves within the space, 
just as a car GPS system shows the location of the car 
relative to the path being taken. These issues are dealt with in 
another project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Balakrishnan, H., Baliga, R., Curtis, D., Goraczko, M., Miu, A., 
Priyantha, N., Smith, A., Steele, K., Teller, S., and Wang, K.. Lessons 
from Developing and Deploying the Cricket Indoor Location System. 
November 2003. Retrieved October 1 2011 
from http://cricket.csail.mit.edu/ 
[2] 
Bandara, U., Hasegawa, M., Inoue, M., Morikawa, H., and Aoyama, 
T.: Design and implementation of a bluetooth signal strength based 
location sensing system. In: Proc. of IEEE Radio and Wireless 
Conference (RAWCON 2004), Atlanta, U.S.A (2004) 
[3] 
Blue Umbrella indoor navigation offers one metre accuracy. 
Retrieved October 2 2011 from http://news.thewherebusiness.com/ 
content/blue-umbrella-indoor-navigation-offers-one- metre-accuracy 
[4] 
Broll, G., Haarlaender, M., Paolucci, M., Wagner, M., Rukzio, E., 
and Schmidt, A. Collect & Drop: A Technique for Physical Mobile 
Interaction. In Advances in Pervasive Computing, Adjunct Proc. of 
the Int. Conference on Pervasive Computing (Pervasive’08), Austrian 
Computer Society (OCG), 103-106, 2008. pp 74-81. 
[5] 
Dekel, A, Noach N, and Schiller, B. (2009). Amazon-on-Earth: 
Wedding Web Based Services with the Real World. MIRW 2009 
Sept 15, Bonn, Germany  
[6] 
Eleven Location Based Applications for your phone. Retrieved 
October 4 2011 from: http://www.leveltendesign.com/ 
blog/colin/11-location-based-applications-your-iphone 
[7] 
N. Henze, R. Reiners, X. Righetti, E. Rukzio, and S. Boll. Services 
Surround You: Physical-Virtual Linkage with Contextual Bookmarks. 
The Visual Computer, 2008. pp 847-855. 
[8] 
Mulloni, A., Wagner, D., Barakonyi, D., and Schmalstieg, I., Indoor 
Positioning and Navigation with Camera Phones. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, 2009, 8(2): pp. 22-31. 
[9] 
Nokia Locate Sensor debuts at CES. Retrieved October 1 2011 from: 
http://conversations.nokia.com/2009/01/12/nokia-locate- sensor-
debuts-at-ces/ 
[10] Nokia Research, 2010: Demo of High Accuracy Indoor Navigation 
System. Retrieved October 4 2011 from: 
http://youtu.be/kWMJ_6rQFGY 
[11] Papliatseyeu, A., Kotilainen, N., Mayora, O., and Osmani, V. FINDR: 
Low-Cost Indoor Positioning Using FM Radio. In Mobile wireless 
Middleware, Operating Systems, And Applications, Lecture Notes of 
the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and 
Telecommunications Engineering, 2009, Volume 7, 15-2. 
[12] Puikkonen, A., Sarjanoja, A., Haveri, M., Huhtala, J., and Häkkilä, J. 
2009. Towards designing better maps for indoor navigation: 
experiences from a case study. In Proceedings of the 8th international 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia  (Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, November 22 - 25, 2009). MUM '09  
[13] Rukzio, E., Müller, M., and Hardy, R., Design, Implementation and 
Evaluation of a Novel Public Display for Pedestrian Navigation: The 
Rotating Compass. In Proceedings of CHI’09, ACM Press 2006, pp. 
113-122. 
[14] Serra, A., Carboni, D., and Marotto, V., 2010. Indoor Pedestrian 
Navigation System Using a Modern Smartphone. In Proceedings of 
the MobileHCI 2010. pp. 397-398.  
[15] Smith, M.A., Davenport, D., Hwa, H., and Turner, T.: Object 
AURAs: A Mobile Retail and Product Annotation System. In: EC 
’04: Proc. of the 5th ACM Conf. on Electronic Commerce, ACM 
Press (2004). pp. 240–241. 
21
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

