On the Forward Path Detection Time Metric for Evaluation of Ad Hoc Routing 
Protocols 
Hanin Almutairi, John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mail: {hanin.almutairi, dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract—When considering the performance of an ad hoc 
network, and the impact of routing protocols on it, one factor 
at play is the time required for setting up the forwarding path. 
This delay can make a significant impact on the estimate of the 
steady 
state 
throughput 
particularly 
when 
the 
data 
transmissions during the performance evaluation are short and 
the routing path changes often. In this short paper, we 
quantify the difference in the forward path detection time for 
two sample routing protocols: one proactive and the other 
reactive. Our results show significantly shorter path set up 
times for the Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) vs 
Destination Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV) protocol. 
 
Keywords-Ad hoc routing; performance metrics; AODV; 
DSDV; MANET; M2ANET. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Multiple factors impact the performance of ad hoc 
networks. Typical metrics used in comparison between 
different configurations include the packet delay and the 
packet delivery ratio [1]. Calculation of these (and other) 
performance metrics can be affected by the time preceding 
the actual transmission, which is needed to set up the 
routing. In our experiments with Mobile Ad hoc Networks 
(MANETs), we noted a significant difference in the network 
performance when switching from one routing protocol to 
another [2]. On a closer inspection, we noted that the actual 
data transmission (as opposed to the exchanges of control 
information between the nodes) did not start immediately in 
some experiments. This set up time, which we call the 
Forward Path Time Detection (FPTD) time, may have a 
significant impact on the interpretation of the results of the 
performance evaluation of an ad hoc network as the actual 
instantaneous throughput may be significantly different 
form the calculated average when a significant delay in 
setting up the routing is not taken into account. 
In Section II, we review the three principal metrics used 
in network simulation and define one secondary metric 
explored in this paper. Section III is the description of the 
experiments where we observed the differences in path set 
up time (FPTD). The analysis of the results is in Section IV 
and the conclusion is in Section V. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A MANET is created from a group of mobile wireless 
nodes exchanging messages with one another [3]. Multi-hop 
transmissions are possible when routing is used to forward 
packets to more distant nodes. A deployment of a MANET 
is characterized by the physical parameters of transceivers at 
each node, the number of nodes used, their movement 
pattern and the routing and transmission protocols used. 
They all impact the performance of the network.  
Given a MANET with its many complicated deployment 
characteristics, simulation can be applied to evaluate its 
performance. In network simulation, and for MANETs in 
particular, different performance metrics are used to 
evaluate the network operation [1]. The communication 
channel throughput, measured as data delivery rate from the 
source to the destination is the obvious principal metric. It 
depends on the physical characteristics of the wireless 
channel between the network nodes, and additionally on the 
network conditions, such as the location and the velocity of 
the nodes, that may vary significantly in a MANET due to 
the mobility of its nodes.  
To account for all kinds of transmission impairments, 
the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) is commonly used. PDR is 
the ratio of the number of packets received by the 
destination to the number of the packets sent by the source 
(or generated by the source agent). PDR is affected by the 
changes (and disconnections) of the forwarding path due to 
the mobility of the MANET nodes. 
End-to-End Delay, or packet delay, is the average 
transmission time for the data packet from when it is sent 
from the source until it reaches the destination. The delay 
time includes any delays caused by routing, buffering, 
queuing, retransmission, or propagation.  
The FPTD time is the set up time between the request to 
send at the source node and the detection of the first 
forwarding path. Due to the highly dynamic nature of 
MANETs, some routing protocols take a longer time than 
other protocols to find the route and forward the packets 
from the source to the destination. This delay in finding the 
first forwarding path may affect other network performance 
measures, in particular the PDR. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS WITH M2ANETS 
Experiments that led us to use the FPTD metric were 
concerned with the performance evaluation of the novel 
configuration of a MANET we called Mobile Medium Ad 
hoc Network (M2ANET). We introduced the concept of a 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-733-7
MOBILITY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Mobile Medium in our seminal paper on M2ANETs in 2011 
[4]. A M2ANET realizes the connection between two hosts 
with the cloud of nodes serving as the data communication 
medium 
(aka 
Mobile 
Medium) 
and 
forming 
the 
communication channel. Any particular connection in the 
Medium does not matter as long as the channel between 
communicating users of the M2ANET can be formed. As a 
consequence, M2ANETs exhibit fault-resilience, given that 
they are not operating with a single point of failure. The 
performance of M2ANETs was evaluated for different node 
densities [4][5], different movement patterns [6][7], with 
self-organizing nodes [2] and in the presence of competing 
flows [8]. Examples of other networks operating on a 
similar principle include the Google Loon project [9], 
Facebook's flying internet service [10] and a swarming 
micro air vehicle network (SMAVNET II) [11]. 
In our typical M2ANET simulation [2][4]-[8], the 
random mobility model was used as a reference case 
scenario, mostly because it is a standard model used in 
network simulation. The model used was the Random Way 
Point (RWP) model available in ns2 [12]. In RWP, nodes 
are moved in a piecewise linear fashion, with each linear 
segment pointing to a randomly selected destination and the 
node moving at a constant, but randomly selected speed. In 
our experiments, the mobile nodes forming the Mobile 
Medium moved at random speeds with an average speed of 
4 m/s within a square area 1000 m by 1000 m. The main 
communicating nodes 0 and 1 were stationary. The source 
and destination nodes were located at (50,400) and 
(950,600) coordinates, respectively. The simulation details 
are summarized in Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Simulator 
ns-2.34 
Channel Type 
Channel / Wireless Channel 
Network Interface Type 
Phy/WirelessPhy 
Mac Type 
Mac/802.11 
Radio-Propagation Type 
Propagation/Two-ray ground 
Interface Queue Type 
Queue/Drop Tail 
Link Layer Type 
LL 
Antenna 
Antenna/Omni Antenna 
Maximum Packet in ifq 
50 
Area (n * n) 
1000 x 1000m 
Source node location 
(50, 400) 
Destination node location 
(950, 600) 
Source Type 
CBR over UDP 
packetSize_ 512 
interval_ 0.05 
Simulation Time 
500 s 
Routing Protocol 
AODV and DSDV 
 
The data traffic for the data flow was modelled with the 
Constant Bit Rate (CBR) traffic generator and sent using 
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) over simulated Mobile 
Medium network with four different node densities from 10 
to 40 nodes. Node density indicates the total number of 
mobile nodes in the 1000 m by 1000 m square region 
modelled in the experiments. Each mobile network scenario 
was simulated three times for a 500 second simulation run 
time and the average results was taken. While, in general, 
the network performance can be characterized using a 
variety of metrics, in this paper we focus solely on FPTD. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
In our analysis here, we focus on the performance of two 
routing protocols: reactive AODV and proactive DSDV 
[13][14].  
In an experiment with a network formed by very few 
nodes (10 nodes), AODV took an average 190 seconds out 
of 500 second simulation run time to detect the first 
forwarding path (Figure 1). However, when the number of 
nodes increased, the FPTD metric dropped significantly: for 
20 nodes the delay to detect the forwarding path was down 
to 25 seconds. In a network with 40 nodes, the delay was 
only 1.2 seconds. Detecting the forwarding paths early 
increases the PDR and the network performance in general. 
 
Figure 1. FPTD for AODV routing 
 
In the experiments with a MANET running DSDV 
routing, due to the proactive nature of DSDV, detecting 
forwarding paths takes a longer time compared with the 
experiments over AODV (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. FPTD for DSDV routing. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-733-7
MOBILITY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

DSDV displays a poor ability to detect the routes quickly 
in highly dynamic mobility networks and it takes more time 
advertising good routes and recovering broken ones. In a 
mobile network with only 10 mobile nodes, DSDV took an 
average of 187 seconds to detect the first forwarding path, 
which is at par with AODV. However, it took as much as 
106 seconds to detect the first forwarding path in 20 mobile 
node density scenario compared with 25 seconds for AODV 
with the same node density. The FPTD for a network with 
40 nodes is 69 seconds for DSDV, which is 50 times more 
than FPTD in AODV experiments. Longer FPTD times 
mean longer period of idling in a network before the first 
packet is sent and consequently less time spent actually 
transmitting data and lower PDR. 
In the two series of experiments, the protocols exhibited 
very long FPTD delays and performed similarly when the 
number of nodes forming the network was very small (10 
nodes). This is likely caused by a very sparse positioning of 
nodes over 1000x1000 m simulation area, with no 
forwarding path existing at all until the mobile nodes get 
into favorable positions making the source to destination 
connection feasible. At higher nodes densities (40 nodes) 
the feasibility of the path is almost certain, and the FPTD 
delay is primarily determined by the performance of the 
routing protocol, with AODV showing clear advantage. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Performance metrics that use averages calculated over 
the experiment simulation time can be skewed by the 
phenomena particular to some ad hoc routing protocols. 
While experimenting with M2ANETs, we observed 
significant differences in the path set up times between 
AODV and DSDV. In a reasonably dense ad hoc network, 
the DSDV set up times were at high multiples of AODV set 
up times: four times larger in a network with 20 nodes vs 50 
times larger in a network with 40 nodes. This difference in 
set up times may need to be taken into consideration when 
comparing performance measures for the networks using 
different classes of protocols: reactive vs proactive. 
In future, we plan to propose different types of 
performance metrics that would better reflect the steady 
state performance of ad hoc networks and that are 
unaffected by the differences in set up times. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  
M. Obaidat, F. Zarai, and P. Nicopolitidis (Eds.), Modeling and 
Simulation of Computer Networks and Systems, Morgan Kaufmann, 
2015. 
[2]  
H. Almutairi, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "Node Movement 
Control Based on Swarm Intelligence for a Mobile Medium Ad hoc 
Network", The Eight International Conference on Advances in 
Future Internet, AFIN2016, July 27, 2016, Nice, France, pp. 1-8. 
[3]  
S. K. Sarkar, T. G. Basavaraju, and C. Puttamadappa,  Ad hoc 
Mobile Wireless Networks, Principles, Protocols, and Applications, 
Auerbach Publications Taylor & Francis Group, 2007. 
[4]  
J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, "M2ANET: a Mobile Medium Ad hoc 
Network", Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, WSN 
2011, Paris, France, Feb. 2011, pp. 1-4.  
[5]  
K. Patel, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "M2ANET Performance 
Under Variable Node Sleep Times", Third International Conference 
on Advances in Future Internet, AFIN2011, Nice, France, Aug. 
2011, pp. 31-34. 
[6]  
M. Alzaylaee, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "Linear Node Movement 
Patterns in MANETS", The Ninth International Conference on 
Wireless and Mobile Communications ICWMC 2013, Nice, France, 
July 21-26, 2013, pp. 162-166. 
[7]  
A. Alshehri, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "The Advantage of 
Moving Nodes in Formations in MANETs and M2ANETs", The 
Ninth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wireless 
and 
Mobile 
Communications ICWMC 2013, Nice, France, July 21-26, 2013, pp. 
228-232. 
[8]  
O. Ayansiji, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "M2ANET Performance 
under 
Multiple 
Competing 
Data 
Flows", 
The 
Thirteenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Systems 
and 
Networks 
Communications, Nice, France, Oct. 14, 2018, pp. 1-4. 
[9]  
H. Hodson, "Google's Project Loon to float the internet on balloons", 
New Scientist, October 2013.  
[10]  J. Brustein, "Facebook’s Flying Internet Service, Brought to You by 
Drones", Bloomberg Businessweek, March 4, 2014. 
[11]  A. J. Pacheco et al., "Implementation of a Wireless Mesh Network of 
Ultra Light MAVs with Dynamic Routing; Proceedings of the IEEE 
Globe Work; Anaheim, CA, USA. 3–7 December 2012, pp. 1591–
1596. 
[12]  H. Ekram and T. Issariyakul, Introduction to Network Simulator ns2, 
Springer, 2009. 
[13]  S. Mohapatra and P. Kanungo, “Performance analysis of AODV, 
DSR, OLSR and DSDV Routing Protocols using ns2 Simulator”, 
Procedia Engineering (International Conference on Communication 
Technology and System Design 2011), v. 30, 2012, pp. 69-76. 
[14]  C. E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, “Highly dynamic destination-
sequenced distance-vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers”, 
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, Oxford 
University Press, 24(4), 1994, pp. 234-244.  
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-733-7
MOBILITY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

