SmartHelm: Design and Implementation of Open
Source based Behavioral Data Repository
Harish Moturu, Johannes Schering, Jorge Marx G´omez
Very Large Business Applications (VLBA),
University of Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany.
emails: {harish.moturu, johannes.schering, jorge.marx.gomez}@uni-oldenburg.de
Abstract—Data is the driving force in the current world of
digitalization for efficient decision making. Data availability plays
a key role in almost every research field for improving data
understanding and knowledge acquisition. There are many ways
in which data can be made available to end users. In some
cases, the user may be required to pay for using the data:
similarly, there are some other data resources available as open
source. In the case of sensitive data such as business related,
personal and bio-physical data, there are certain challenges
in making these kind of data publicly available. This paper
addresses exclusively how an open data portal enables users to
freely access bio-physical data that is developed as part of the
SmartHelm research project. The open data portal SmartHelm
Behavioral Data Repository constitutes of two key components: (1)
a data management platform that organizes and structures the
raw data into a well defined structural form and (2) a RestAPI
server that has the functionality of providing the data in the
desired format to the end user. The first prototypical version of
the data portal constitutes of data obtained from experiments
conducted in the project. These data sources are ElectroEn-
cephaloGraphy (EEG), eye tracking and geographical location/
Global Positioning System (GPS) data. The main advantage of
this data repository is that it facilitates the users to access all
kinds of data without any special limitations such as user account,
subscriptions etc. This bio-physical and mobility data will not
only help other researchers working in this field, but also it will
help municipalities to improve the bicycling infrastructure at the
certain junctions in the city where the cargo bike logistic rider
experiences more stress.
Index Terms—bio-physical-data, EEG, Eye Tracking, data
repository, behavioural data, bicycle data, mobility data, open
data.
I. INTRODUCTION
New bio-physical data may have a positive influence on
different aspects of life. One topic that is often discussed is
livability and sustainability of future cities [1] [2] . Knowledge
about distraction factors in mobility applications could con-
tribute to increase traffic safety and to adjust infrastructures
to the demands of real users. A central problem here is
that related data sets are often not available or at least not
openly available on the Internet. In addition, the combina-
tion of behavioral data and mobility data is hard to find.
One reason is that the behavioral data that is discussed in
this contribution (EEG, Eye Tracking) is often gathered as
part of scientific works under laboratory conditions. Another
factor is that available mobility related data is often not
openly available, but remains inside organizations because of
data privacy or security concerns. To find a solution to this
problem, the University of Oldenburg has developed a new
data repository related to behavioral data. This includes an
open data component to enable a complete open accessibility
to the data sets, a visualization component to display the
results in the form of geographic maps and Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) to make different data sets comparable. In
this contribution, we focus on the aspect of the data portal.
The development and the working steps of the implementation
of the data management system (back-end) and the website
(front-end) will be described in detail. The development and
calculation of KPIs will be discussed in further publications.
This contribution consists of the following individual sections.
Section II is a survey of existing literature in the research
field we are discussing in this contribution. It provides an
overview about existing platforms related to behavioral data
to identify the research gap. As we will see, existing solu-
tions are not totally open, which means that the user has
to register to get access to the data sources. Registration
and reading user instructions takes time and could decrease
user satisfaction. Existing website solutions do not seem to
be very intuitive. It takes time to learn about functionalities
and opportunities of the portals. In addition, mobility data
in combination with behavioural data is not available so far.
Mobility related distraction data could be a useful contribution
to support practical and scientific applications. Section III
gives an overview about the implementation of the behavioural
data management system of the SmartHelm [23] research
project. This includes the working steps of data integration,
data processing, data visualization and publication. Section
IV describes the functions and services of the behavioral
data repository in detail. Section V are summarizing the
preliminary results of the data management and data analysis
in the SmartHelm project. The state of the art which is
presented in the literature review section is compared with
the functionalities of the behavioral data repository in Section
VI. Section VII summarizes the results of the article and gives
an outlook to the future development.
II. RELATED WORK
This next section describes the results of the literature
survey carried out on the current state of the art of relevant
platforms that provide human behavioural data. [3] lists out
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

different online based platforms for sharing and analyzing
behavioural data. It describes in total 20 online platforms
including data sharing, data visualization, offline or online
analysis, and community cooperation. Among them, a few
data repositories are short-listed in our work depending upon
the type of data availability and relevance. Here, the factors
considered for short-listing are if the type of data in the portals
is bio-physical, sensory, mobility data and also the mode of
accessibility of the data to the general public.
The ElectroEncephaloGraphy (EEG) / Event-Related poten-
tials (ERP) based portal EEGbase [25] described in [4] - [6]
is built as an open source web based data platform to store
both raw and meta bio-physical data. This portal combines
Semantic Web architectures such as Resource Description
Framework (RDF) and Ontology Web Language (OWL) with
common data structures. The developing methodology is based
on the standalone relational data models. Although the main
aim of the EEGbase portal is to provide open-source EEG/ERP
data, users need to register and to create an account in order
to access the data sources. This drawback is considered in
our current SmartHelm Behavioural data repository, where
end-users may directly access the data sources without any
limitations. Another data platform referenced in our work
is Neurobot [25] which is discussed in [7]. Neurobot is a
web-based platform to publish neuroscience data for research
and is developed in focus with Study data managers, Re-
searchers, and Platform administrators. This platform does
not only store and share the data, but also allows other
researchers to upload data-sets and to contribute for further
research. The key features of Neurobot [7] are data dictionary,
user management, saved search, data query tool and API
access. These additional features enhance the organization
and increase the searching ability of the platform. Similar
to EEGbase, the platform is not easily accessible because it
requires an user account. Contributions [8] - [10] describe
about the language independent object model Neuroscience
Electrophysiology Objects (Neo). The model Neo [26] pro-
vides common representation of data acquired from elec-
troencephalographic, intracellular or extracellular experimental
recordings, or those that were generated from simulations.
Unlike the platforms described in the previous papers, Neo is
a standlone package developed as an open source software in
Python programming language. The main functionality of Neo
is to read and write different formats of electrophysiological
data into a common representation, which would enhance
interoperability and facilitate data-sharing. Although Neo is
not exclusively a web or software based platform for data
sharing, it indirectly acts as an open source component for
building electrophysiological data sharing platforms. Another
innovative EEG data sharing platform is IEEG-Portal [27] . It
is a cloud based collaborative research platform developed for
sharing, analyzing and visualizing data. [11] - [14] illustrate
the methodology and technology behind the IEEG portal. One
of the most significant features of IEEG portal is that it stores
numerous large sized EEG data-sets based upon google web
toolkit and Amazon S3 service. Due to the cloud feature, this
Fig. 1.
Four layers architecture representing the data flow and their corre-
sponding significance
platform facilitates the storage of data in terms of Terabytes.
A disadvantage is mainly that the data privacy issue is not
well explained. As the data is stored in the cloud, additional
security and privacy measures need to be followed in order not
to have any kind of data breach. Another drawback is that users
need to have an individual account to access the data. Finally,
the last paper in the literature review section is [15]. [15] it
introduces an ontology based application Ontology of Heart
Electrophysiology (OHE) portal for study of heart related
biomedical activities. This ontology based tool provides a web
based application for analyzing and to visualizing using the
data acquired from heart electrophysiology data. This tool is
an advancement in the bio-medicine sector as this type of
ontology portals usually are not publicly available.
III. METHODOLOGY
The principle methodology to develop the SmartHelm open
source based data portal is illustrated in this section. It explains
the related data pipeline or data flow from data collection
and processing to visualizing the results in various forms.
Fig 1 shows the architecture behind the developed platform.
In this section, each layer is explained in a separate paragraph.
In Fig 1, at the bottom is the source layer, where all
relevant data sources are gathered and stored in the raw
form in a project-owned storage server at the University
of Oldenburg. The bio-physical data of the participants is
critical from both ethical and legal perspectives and needs to
be handled carefully. Due to data privacy, this database is not
supposed to be stored in an external cloud server. Therefore,
in the source layer, an open-source based simple storage
solution (S3) client MinIO is deployed on the storage server
to store the raw data on S3-based object storage. This MinIO
client serves as a Data Lake to store the raw data. In principle,
core data contains EEG sensors, eye-tracking, speech input
commands, Global Positioning Systems (GPS) signals, and
distraction marker data streams acquired from a group of
subjects. Additional external mobility data sources for the
data analysis are also integrated in the system depending
upon the requirement. These include weather data [28], open
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

street map and open bicycle data [29], historical accident data
from the city of Oldenburg which details the various types of
accidents happening at different crossings, road-sections and
narrow bicycle lines in Oldenburg. This open bicycle data is
part of an open data portal which contains a comprehensive
set of bicycle data such as bicycle counting, parking and near
accident data. The data warehouse and the related website
were developed as part of a student project Bicycle Data.
On top of the source layer is the second layer known as an
integration layer, which is further described in the following
section.
The Integration-layer serves the purpose of aggregating
all the heterogeneous data sources and storing the data in
a data management system. The process of aggregation of
the data sources is implemented in a number of steps, as
described in the following. The primary step is pre-processing
the raw data sources of the source layer. Individual data
sources are pre-processed to view type, format, variation and
important features lying among the different data sources.
The output from the pre-processing step is selecting the
detailed information individually from all the available data
sources. The next step is designing the schema for the
data management system. For conception of the schema, a
detailed state-of-the-art study was carried out. Among these
are the methods for data warehousing design [16], recent
trends in the conceptual schema design [17], and Extraction
Transformation Loading (ETL) methodologies & [18] and [19]
are considered as reference design architectures. Therefore,
as a benchmark from the reference methodologies, in this
second step, a schema design is developed by considering
the time as the central dimensional parameter in the data
warehouse. Based on the central design parameter described
in the previous step, the third step transformation script is
developed according to the reference ETL methodologies
[18] [19]. The transformation step constitutes each form of
the heterogeneous data according to the schema structure.
The pre-processed data sources are transformed depending on
the steps in a data pipeline. That means that each and every
heterogeneous data source is extracted from the Data Lake
and then transformed separately to fit into the schema. After
the transformation is completed, each data source is uploaded
to fit the individual tables in the schema. Therefore, the last
step in the integration layer is to automate the above three
steps in the loop to populate the data warehouse with all the
available new data sources and to store the data that would
be acquired in future experiments (in real traffic situation).
The data analysis layer can also be called the knowledge
layer. From the variety of data stored in the data warehouse,
different types of analysis can be performed such as attention
modelling with EEG data, detection of Area of Interest (AOI)
of the rider using the eye-tracking data and speech recognition
system modelling. This layer serves the purpose of analysing
the structured data stored in the Data Warehouse depending
upon the goals of the research. Among these, some of the
important methods are application of Machine Learning
algorithms,
implementation
of
Cross
Industry
Standard
Process
for
Data
Mining
(CRISP-DM)
[20],
predictive
analysis, and query based data analysis techniques. In the
current paper, two types of analysis are illustrated. The first is
the theoretical evaluation made on the feedback obtained after
conducting interviews with experts and delivery professionals
in cargo bike logistics and the second is analysing the
data obtained from the experiments described above. As
soon as attention related data from real traffic situations
is available in a later stage of the SmartHelm project, the
corresponding analysis with new Global Positioning Systems
(GPS) routes will be carried out and published as a part of
further publications.
The top most layer in the data flow is called the visualization
layer. The results from our first visualizations are presented in
Section 5. In general, this stage in the data flow and the graphi-
cal representation supports the understanding of the results and
information obtained from the data analysis. The visualization
layer, illustrated in Fig 2, consists of two functionalities a)
publishing the raw data on an open data platform (i.e Data as
a Service DaaS [21] [22]) and b) presentation of the results in
various graphical forms on a dashboard. The implementation
includes the development of a portal to download the raw data
of the experiments and a dashboard for the visualization of the
analysis results as part of the Bicycle Data website that was
described earlier. To connect the data from the data warehouse
to the respective visualization platform a Rest API service is
developed.
IV. FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS OF THE DATA
REPOSITORY
The next section describes the implementation and func-
tional components developed based on the methodology de-
scribed in the previous section. It focuses on the individual
aspects of the portal i.e what kind of data will be made
available on the portal, then how the portal design looks like
and finally explaining in detail what are the functionalities it
provides to the users.
A. Overview of the available data in the Repository
ElectroEncephaloGraphy − data :
As
mentioned
in the previous section, the repository mainly consists
of bio-physical data. Among these, the first data type is
ElectroEncephaloGraphy (EEG) data which is acquired from
a set of participants as part of scientific studies. In principle,
raw EEG data consists of brain signal values obtained from
7 electrodes in the form of impedance. The frequency of
the impedance values is 250 Hz and the data is filtered in
terms of the participant, data and session acquired. Beside
impedance values from 7 electrodes, other parameters such
as timestamps, session and location of experiment and
participant related information are included in the raw data.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Eyetracking − data : The second type of the bio-
physical data as part of the repository is eye tracking data.
It consists of eye gaze values obtained from an Augmented
Reality Glass (Microsoft HoloLens 2). In total, there are six
eye gaze values calculated in x, y and z directions from the
origin and the current position respectively. These eye-gaze
values measure the 3 dimensional distance from the object to
the participant viewing position, which further facilitates in
estimation of the point of vision of the participant during the
course of the experiment. In comparison with the EEG data,
the frequency of data recording for eye-tracking data is less
(around 30 Hz).
Location − data : During the experiment, the Global
Positioning Systems (GPS) coordinates of the participant are
logged while riding a bike using an open-source application
known as OwnTracks [30]. The OwnTracks application logs
the location information with various position based measure-
ments namely altitude, latitude, longitude coordinates, speed
of the rider, radius around the region, and including relevant
metadata information. Here, the measurement frequency of
Global Positioning Systems (GPS) data is significantly lower
than the above two data types, with a rough estimate is
5Hz frequency. This location information along with other
behavioral data is also made available on the open data
platform for the end-user to download. In principle, location
data enables the scope of mobility point of view on the data,
which means behavioural data can be integrated and analyzed
on the basis of location data.
Additional − data − sources : In addition to the above
mentioned data sources, some another potentially relevant
data sources are also prepared to be integrated in the data
management platform. These are primarily mobility data such
traffic volume data collected from various streets in the city
of Oldenburg, which consists of counting information on the
number of different types of transport vehicles crossing a
particular traffic junction on an hourly basis. In addition to
that, other types of behavioral data such as speech events,
user interaction events and attention hot-spots data will also
be integrated in the database.
B. Smarthelm API for data integration
In the methodology, integration layer describes the building
of the data warehouse through integrating all the available
data sources. The main functional component developed to
access the data in the data warehouse is the API which is
required to connect the data warehouse and the visualization
component where the end-users have access to download and
view the results. The API is developed based on the RestAPI
technology using an open source Python web framework
known as FastAPI. In contrast to other API framework
technologies, one of the main advantages of FastAPI is the
generation of automatic API docs depending upon the design
of the download platform. The SmartHelm API doc shown
in Fig 2 illustrates different kinds of accessible data parts
Fig. 2.
An example from SmartAPI doc showing some of the available
endpoints provided by the API where each endpoint serves the purpose of
integrating the platform directly from the back-end
represented as end-points. Here, each end-point indicates
one data element which can be accessed to pull the specific
data queried by the end-user. The SmartHelm API doc
Interface(Fig 2) in general provides the information about
all kinds of data elements that are available for integration.
The key functional utility of SmartHelm-API underlies in
linking the API for other external projects and can be used
as an open source service to integrate the behavioural data
repository with the back-end. For example, if an external
project has the requirement of accessing only the EEG data,
the API facilitates a gateway to pull the specific EEG data.
This end-points format can be obtained from the API doc.
Fig 2 clearly shows a sample end-point on how to obtain the
EEG data for a time interval.
C. SmartHelm Data platform User Interface
The key concept behind the SmartHelm Data Platform User
Interface (UI) is providing intuitive user experience throughout
the portal. Fig 3 and Fig 4 illustrate a quick insight into the
data portal. The design is made using a simplistic approach
with a wider range focus and more intuitive for the general
public. Along with the research community, other stakeholders
such as politicians, municipality officials, city traffic planners,
and the general public can easily understand what kinds of
data are openly available to access and their functionality.
In addition, the other driving force for developing the open
source data platform is to enable data availability in the form
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Fig. 3.
This full size image from the front-end of SmartHelm Behavioural
data Repository presents a complete overview of the portal which shows the
description text and below is the data selection menu along with various
functionality buttons.
Fig. 4. The Fig 4 displays functionality of various buttons below the selection
menu such as generate link on the top and preview of the selected data to
download.
of Data as a Service (DaaS). The UI design in Fig 3 reflects
the sole purpose of the platform and the steps taken to ensure
the goal of providing Data as a Service to the end-user. In
the following, the content and usage of the UI are described
in detail. The header menu explains briefly to the end-user
which different types of data sources are currently available
for download. After the header menu, a quick ’how-to’ steps
menu is integrated to make it more intuitive for the end-user
to understand the various steps involved from the selection of
the data until downloading the data in the desired data. Below
’how-to’ steps menu is the data downloading section. In this
section, different types of drop-down boxes are available for
the user different categories such as type of data, selection of
date interval, type of the data format to be downloaded and
so on.
V. CHALLENGES IN THE DEVELOPMENT
The next section describes the different findings during the
development of the open source platform which constitutes a
blend of data collected from sensors and mobility systems.
The previous sections described technical difficulties for the
implementation. Various challenges regarding data privacy and
security problems have to be addressed before the technical
implementation of the above represented high-level system
architecture can take place. In this section, all the necessary
aspects related to ethical and legal issues are described, which
are taken into consideration before modelling the system. Ethi-
cal and legal issues play an vital role in the SmartHelm project.
Permanent surveillance of the participants during experiments
is not the intention of the project and needs to be avoided
to increase the acceptability of the riders in the future. There
is no kind of real-time data transfer during the experiments
which guarantees that misuse by the intermediate user of the
gathered bio-physical data (EEG, Eye-Tracking, etc.) can be
ruled out. In the methodology section, we explained how
the raw data is stored in the grass root level using the S3-
storage(Data-Lake) technique, but before that step the data
transfer from data collection to landing into our Data Lake
is also a challenging step. Here, certain measures are evident
for a secure data transfer between the two components. To
safeguard this critical problem, dedicated user policies are
created on the Data Lake server to facilitate the data collection
supervisors to upload the data directly on the S3-storage-
server, which bridges the data transfer gap without any external
channel. Here, the policies are confined in such a way that the
users who are uploading the data into the server have minimal
access to the server, which means they do not have rights
to delete or edit the existing data, but only upload new data
sets. The next challenging factor specifically about the data
is time synchronization between different data streams. As
explained, the data is heterogeneous data and obtained from
different sensors and mobile applications. There does not exist
by default by an synchronization in time-steps for all kinds of
data-streams. Maintaining an uniformity is a crucial factor for
further processing.
VI. ADVANTAGES IN COMPARISON WITH OTHER PORTALS
First and foremost, the main advantage of SmartHelm
behavioural data repository is the unique characteristics in
comparison with the other bio-physical data platforms. From
the Section 2 through literature study, it is evident that
compatibility, end-user serviceability and degree of simplicity
of the older bio-physical data platforms are considerably
behind in some key aspects than the SmartHelm data portal.
In this context, primarily comes user accessibility to the
platform in SmartHelm data repository. All external visitors
do not essentially require any kind of user-agreement before
downloading the data as well as a separate user account is not
needed to be registered on the portal. These is one among the
two key entities which differentiate the SmartHelm download
portal from other human bio-physical data portals. In addition,
a few other components which enhance the portals’ wider
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

scope of application are as follows. First comes the degree of
intuitiveness for the user, which is explained in the previous
section. Unlike other portals, the required information for the
end-user is served without any heterogeneity. The next factor
would be the user-acceptance, which means, to increase the
user acceptance, the portal is designed in such a way that the
end user has the complete control to be served by themselves
by interacting with the portal. For example, the advantage of
choosing the specific time interval in order to access the data
represents the kind of options that increase the probability
of user-acceptance. To achieve this, depending upon on the
requirement, a user survey will also be conducted and the
feedback will be considered to enhance the usability of the
portal. The third additional factor would be the preview of
the data before download. Although it is not a standalone
functionality or a modern plugin, this kind of functionality is
not found in other portals and it facilitates the user to obtain
an overview of the data.
VII. CONCLUSION
The availability of mobility data integrated with behavioural
data is a rare combination and very few research works acquire
this kind of data. In addition, accessing such kind of sensible
data through an open source medium would be more versatile.
The SmartHelm behavioral data repository introduced in this
work scientifically illustrated an open source platform con-
sisting of an unique combination of mobility and bio-physical
data. The problem statement i.e., the research gap described
in the introduction section is that there exist few platforms
which provide bio-physical data to the public, but still there are
certain demerits which are clearly explained and the alternative
solution is provided with the data portal developed in this
work. The behavioural and mobility data integrated will be
made accessible to the general public through the SmartHelm
data portal as well as the mCLOUD / Mobilithek portal, which
is provided by the German Ministry of Transport and Digital
Infrastructure (BMDV). Moreover, some other benefits include
the fact that city infrastructure planning of municipalities can
be supported by these data sets during the improvement of
road infrastructures or bike lanes. In the context to the cargo
bike riders, data-driven decision-making probably increases
work efficiency. Therefore, as an end-note to brief the further
steps in the project, a visualization service is well planned in
order to present the data analysis results in various graphical,
visual forms such as heat-maps, digital city map, etc., which
fulfills the main goal of the project to assist cargo bike riders
by reducing the mental and visual stress in everyday parcel
delivery. From a wide range perspective, this open accessible
data to the public and publishing the results obtained from
the overall project will, in return, encourage other major cities
and municipalities in Germany to switch cargo bike logistics,
which would become one of the major contributions to green
logistics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SmartHelm is funded by the German Federal Ministry of
Transport and Digital Infrastructure (BMDV) as part of the
mFUND program (project number 19F2105B) with a funding
amount of around 1.48 Mio. Euro. As part of mFUND, the
BMDV supports research & development projects in the field
of data based and digital mobility innovations. Part of the
project funding is the promotion of networking between the
stakeholders in politics, business, administration and research
as well as the publication of open data on the mCLOUD portal
(which will be superseded by Mobilithek in 2022/23).
REFERENCES
[1] E. Taniguchi, ”Concepts of city logistics for sustainable and liveable
cities.” Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences no. 151, 2014, pp 310-
317
[2] E. Taniguchi, & R. G. Tompson (eds.), ”City Logistics 3: Towards
Sustainable and Liveable Cities.” John Wiley & Sons, 2018.
[3] Y. Chen, W. Zhong-yi, Y. Gang, and H. Lan, ”An overview of online
based platforms for sharing and analyzing electrophysiology data from
big data perspective.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 7, no. 4 2017: e1206.
[4] P. Jeˇzek, and M. Roman, ”EEG/ERP Portal–Semantic Web Extension:
Generating Ontology from Object Oriented Model.” In 2010 Second
WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems, vol. 3, pp. 392-395. IEEE,
2010.
[5] P. Jeˇzek, and M Roman. ”Database of EEG/ERP experiments.” In
HEALTHINF 2010-Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on Health Informatics, pp. 222-227, 2010.
[6] P Br¨uha, and M Roman. ”Portal for research in electrophysiology—Data
integration with neuroscience information framework.” In 2012 5th
International Conference on BioMedical Engineering and Informatics,
pp. 1099-1103. IEEE, 2012.
[7] R. Badia et al., ”INCF Program on Standards for data sharing: new
perspectives on workflows and data management for the analysis of
electrophysiological data.” In Techn. Report https://www.incf. org/about-
us/history/incf-scientific-workshops, 2015.
[8] S. Garcia et al., ”Neo: an object model for handling electrophysiology
data in multiple formats.” Frontiers in neuroinformatics 8 2014: 10.
[9] J. Grewe, T. Wachtler, and J. Benda, ”A bottom-up approach to data
annotation in neurophysiology.” Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 5 2011:
16.
[10] A. Sobolev et al., ”Integrated platform and API for electrophysiological
data.” Frontiers in neuroinformatics 8 2014: p.32.
[11] JB. Wagenaar et al., ”A multimodal platform for cloud-based collabo-
rative research.” In 2013 6th international IEEE/EMBS conference on
neural engineering (NER), pp. 1386-1389. IEEE, 2013.
[12] L G. Kini, A. Davis Kathryn, and B. Wagenaar Joost, ”Data integration:
Combined imaging and electrophysiology data in the cloud.” Neuroim-
age, 124 2016: pp. 1175-1181.
[13] M R. Bower et al., ”Metadata and annotations for multi-scale electro-
physiological data.” In 2009 Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 2811-2814.
IEEE, 2009.
[14] B H.Brinkmann et al., ”Multiscale electrophysiology format: an open-
source electrophysiology format using data compression, encryption, and
cyclic redundancy check.” In 2009 Annual International Conference of
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 7083-7086.
IEEE, 2009.
[15] B. Gonc¸alves, Z. Veruska, G. Giancarlo, and G G.P.F. Jos´e, ”An
ontology-based application in heart electrophysiology: Representation,
reasoning and visualization on the web.” In Proceedings of the 2009
ACM symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 816-820. 2009.
[16] A. Bauer, and G. Holger. Data-Warehouse-System: Architecture, Devel-
opment, Application, dpunkt. verlag, 2013.
[17] P. Vassiliadis, A. Simitsis, L. Liu, and M. ¨Ozsu, Encyclopedia of
Database Systems. New York: Springer, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4899-7993-3 2009, pp.1095-1101.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[18] P. Digra, P. Abrol, and P. Lehana, Design and Development Of Dis-
tributed Image Acquisition and Recording System for Network Based
Appli-cations. In International Journal of Scientific and Technical Ad-
vancements 4, no. 3, 2018, pp.1-8.
[19] A.
Dearmer,
Complete
Guide
to
Database
Schema
Design
https://www.xplenty.com/blog/complete-guide-to-database-schema-
design-guide/ Published:16th of July 2021. Last Access: 29th of
November 2021.
[20] R Wirth, and H. Jochen, ”CRISP-DM: Towards a standard process model
for data mining.” In Proceedings of the 4th international conference on
the practical applications of knowledge discovery and data mining, vol.
1, pp. 29-40. 2000.
[21] Z. Zheng, Z. Jieming, and R. Lyu. Michael. ”Service-generated big
data and big data-as-a-service: an overview.” In 2013 IEEE international
congress on Big Data, pp. 403-410. IEEE, 2013.
[22] X Wang, T. Yang Laurence, L Huazhong, and M. Jamal Deen. ”A big
data-as-a-service framework: State-of-the-art and perspectives.” IEEE
Transactions on Big Data 4, no. 3 2017: pp. 325-340.
[23] Research project SmartHelm official website, funded by German Federal
Ministry for Digital and Transportation; 2022; accessed on 15.March.
2022; website url = https://smart-helm.com/
[24] EEGbase,
RRID:nif-0000-08190;year
2022;
accessed
on
12.March.2022;
URL
=
http://eegdatabase.kiv.zcu.cz/home-
page;jsessionid=10r3hyplemadg?0
[25] International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility (INCF); 2022; ac-
cessed on February 2022; URL = https://www.incf.org/form/neurobot-
user-account
[26] Neo,
2010-2022,
accessed
February
2022;
URL
=
https://neo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/io.html
[27] IEEG
portal,
2022;
accessed
on
February
2022;
URL
=
https://www.ieeg.org/
[28] Visual
Crossing
Corporation,
Visual
crossing
weather
API;
year
2022;
accessed
on
March
2022;
URl=
https://www.visualcrossing.com/weather-api
[29] Project Group Bicyle Data, VLBA, University of Oldeburg; year 2021;
accessed on February 2022; URL= https://www.bicycle-data.de/bicycles-
data/
[30] Owntracks MQTT broker application, year 2022, accessed on Febraury
2022, URL= https://owntracks.org/booklet/tech/json/
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-962-1
MOBILITY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

