 
 
Source Mobility Support for Source Specific Multicast in Satellite Networks
Esua Kinyuy Jaff, Prashant Pillai, Yim Fun Hu 
School of Engineering, Design and Technology, 
University of Bradford 
Bradford, United Kingdom 
ekjaff@student.bradford.ac.uk, p.pillai@bradford.ac.uk, y.f.hu@bradford.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—With increasing human mobility and demand for 
ubiquitous 
communications, 
the 
growth 
for 
satellite 
communications is likely to continue. Recently, IP multicast 
support over satellites has witness significant increases. 
Mobility support for multicast receivers as well as sources 
within a global multi-beam satellite network is very important. 
Not much research has been done on this area compared to IP 
multicast mobility support in the Internet.  In this paper, we 
propose a new mechanism to support multicast source mobility 
for Source-Specific Multicast (SSM) based applications in a 
multi-beam mesh satellite network with receivers both within 
the satellite network and in the Internet. In the proposed 
mechanism, the mobile source remains transparent to the 
various SSM receivers at all times despite the fact that its IP 
address keeps on changing as it changes its point of attachment 
from one satellite gateway (GW) to another. The uniqueness 
about this proposal is the absence of encapsulation (tunnelling) 
and triangular routing paths throughout the system and its 
compliance with DVB-RCS/S2 specifications.  
Keywords-SSM; Mobile Multicast Source; Transparent 
Satellite;  Multi-beam Satellite Interactive Network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
IP multicasting is a technology in which a single copy of 
IP data is sent to a group of interested recipients and the 
routers (or hosts) in the network replicate the data as 
required for delivery until a copy reaches all intended 
downstream group members. In IP multicasting, there may 
be a many sources sending data to a single multicast group 
for example: group voice chat. In source-specific multicast 
(SSM), the group member of such a multicast group, G 
requests to receive traffic only from one specific source, S. 
Hence SSM is usually denoted as (S, G) [1]. 
The handover of a mobile multicast receiver from one 
point of attachment to another has a local and single impact 
on that particular receiver only. However, the handover of a 
mobile source may affect the entire multicast group, thereby 
making it a critical issue. A mobile multicast source faces 
two main problems; transparency and reverse path 
forwarding (RPF).  
In SSM, a receiver subscribes to a multicast channel (S, G) 
[1]. During a handover, as the source moves from one 
network to another, its IP address will change.  When the 
source uses this new IP address i.e., care-of address (CoA) 
[2, 3] as source address to send traffic, the multicast router 
in the foreign network cannot forward the multicast packets 
until a receiver explicitly subscribes to this new channel 
(CoA, G). This is known as the transparency problem.  
A multicast source-specific tree is associated to source 
location i.e., the source is always at the root of the source-
specific tree.  The RPF check compares the packet’s source 
address against the interface upon which the packet is 
received.  During handover, the location of the source will 
change (and consequently its IP address), thus invalidating 
the source-specific tree due to the RPF check test. Hence, 
the RPF problem relates to the fact that the mobile source 
cannot use its home address in the foreign network as the 
source address to send packets as this will result in a failure 
of the RPF mechanism and the ingress filtering [2]. 
IP multicast over satellites can be used to communicate 
important service information like the weather conditions, 
on-going disaster zones and information, route updates, etc. 
in long haul flights, global maritime vessels and continental 
trains. Multicasting this information to all the interested 
parties rather than individually informing them (i.e., unicast) 
would save a lot of satellite bandwidth resources. 
II. 
PREVIOUS STUDIES ON SSM  
A few mobile source support techniques for SSM have 
been proposed for terrestrial Internet. These are far from 
being applicable in a satellite scenario. Due to the problems 
of transparency and RPF, remote subscription [2, 3, 4] 
cannot be applied to mobile multicast sources for SSM.  
Home subscription [2, 3, 4] in terrestrial Internet on the 
other hand, can support both mobile receivers and sources 
(including SSM senders) by use of bi-directional tunnelling 
through home agent without the problems of transparency 
and RPF. As shown in Figure 1, once the mobile source 
leaves its home gateway (GW), it must release the resources 
in its home GW as it acquires new set of resources in the 
new GW during the GW handover (GWH) [5]. Following 
the home subscription mechanism, if bi-directional 
tunnelling between the home GW and the target GW is used 
to maintain source identity, the mesh communication 
concept (i.e., a single hop over the satellite) will be lost and 
could also results in RPF issues. More so, it is practically 
impossible for the mobile source to make use of resources 
under its home GW after handover to a new GW [5]. This 
implies that bi-directional tunnelling through home agent as 
mobility support technique for a mobile source in a mesh 
transparent multi-beam satellite scenario is also not suitable. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
 In [6] and [7], the authors using the shared tree 
approach proposed  ―Mobility-aware Rendezvous Points‖ 
(MRPs), which in effect replace the home agents in their 
role as mobility anchors. There is at least one MRP per 
domain. The MRPs rely on triangular routing and tunnelling 
to fulfil their role as mobility anchors during inter-domain 
tree setup and also re-introduce rendezvous points, which 
are not native to SSM routing. The introduction of new 
entities/messages for example, the MRP, new registration 
message (of mobile sources to MRPs whenever they move 
into a new domain), MRP Peer-to-peer Source Active (SA) 
and keep-alive messages (required to track the source's 
MRP attachment point changes) during inter-domain 
multicasting, coupled with the modification of the standard 
Multicast Forwarding Table (referenced by the two 
addresses home address and CoA instead of a unique IP 
address) make this approach very complicated. Also, large 
number of signalling messages as proposed in this 
mechanism is not good for satellite networks as they 
consume the scarce and expensive satellite bandwidth. 
Authors in [8] and [9] introduced Tree Morphing and 
Enhanced Tree Morphing (ETM) respectively, which are 
routing protocol adaptive to SSM source mobility. The 
concept of the source tree extension or elongation as the 
source moves from the previous designated multicast router 
(pDR) to new designated router (nDR) is not applicable in 
satellite scenario because the delivery tree rooted at the 
source in one GW cannot be extended to that same source 
when it moves to a different GW. This makes the 
fundamental design concept of these extensions not 
consistent with the nature of satellite networks. 
SSM source handover notification approach proposed by 
authors in [10] suggested adding a new sub-option in the 
standard IPv6 destination binding option known as SSM 
source handover notification. During handover, the source 
after acquiring new IP address will notify receivers to 
subscribe to the new channel. The problems here are the 
large amount of signalling traffic over satellite air interface 
and the fact that some receivers may be unsynchronized to 
source handovers, leading to severe packet loss. 
A mobile multicast source support for SSM in proxy 
mobile IPv6 domain has been proposed by authors in [11]. 
One of the drawbacks here is that there are no mechanisms 
to supress upstream forwarding to Local Mobility Anchor 
(LMA) [12] even when there are no receivers. Triangular 
routing is also a problem here when a mobile receiver and a 
source, all having different LMAs are attached to the same 
Mobility Access Gateway (MAG) [12]. In such a situation, 
the MAG has to forward traffic upstream to the 
corresponding LMA of the mobile source, which will tunnel 
the traffic to the corresponding LMA of the mobile receiver 
which then tunnels the traffic back to the same MAG for 
delivery to mobile receiver, causing waste of network 
resources in the whole domain. The fact that in proxy 
mobile IPv6 domain, the LMA is the topological anchor 
point for the addresses assigned to mobile nodes within the 
domain (i.e., packets with those addresses as destination are 
routed to the LMA), the role of the LMA and MAG does 
not fit well into a global interactive multi-beam satellite 
network with many Transparent/Regenerative Satellite 
Gateways [13], each having different IP addressing space. 
This paper proposes a new solution consistent with the 
DVB–RCS/S2 satellite network specifications that supports 
SSM source mobility within the satellite network. The 
provision of solution to the problems of transparency and 
RPF without creating triangular routing paths and making 
use of encapsulation (tunnelling) are what make this 
approach unique. The solution is divided into two parts; 
support for receivers within the satellite network and those 
in terrestrial Internet. 
III. 
PROPOSED MULTICAST SOURCE MOBILITY 
MECHANISM FOR SSM IN SATELLITE NETWORK 
A. Network Architecture 
Figure 1 shows the network architecture, where a mobile 
multicast source is present in beam 1 and the receivers are in 
beams 1, 2, 3 and 6. GW_A1 serves beams 1 and 2, GW_A2 
and GW_A3 serve beams 3 and 4, respectively and GW_A4 
serves beams 5 and 6.  
 
NCC
Satellite A
GW_A2
GW_A3
GW_A4
Internet
Mobile Source
BH
GWH
GWH
GWH
BH – Beam Handover
GWH – Gateway Handover
BH
Multicast Receiver 2
Multicast Receiver 1
RCST1
RCST2
RCST3
RCST4
Beam 1
Beam 2
Beam 3
Beam 4
Beam 5
Beam 6
GW_A1
 
Figure 1.  Mobile Source at Home Network (GW_A1) 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
 
NCC
Satellite A
GW_A1
GW_A2
GW_A3
GW_A4
Internet
Mobile Source
BH
GWH
GWH
GWH
BH – Beam Handover
GWH – Gateway Handover
BH
Multicast Receiver 2
Multicast Receiver 1
RCST1
RCST2
RCST3
RCST4
Beam 1
Beam 2
Beam 3
Beam 4
Beam 5
Beam 6
 
Figure 2.  Mobile Source at Foreign Network (GW_A2) 
The multicast receivers in the terrestrial network are 
connected through GW_A1. The mobile source sends out 
four identical streams of multicast traffic, each for one of 
the four beams that has interested receivers. This is because 
the satellite is a transparent one with no IP layer 3 
capabilities on-board the satellite to replicate multicast 
traffic.  
Figure 2 shows the mobile source now in beam 3 after 
successful handover. Here, the terrestrial SSM receivers are 
now connected through GW_A2 which is the serving 
gateway to the mobile source in beam 3. This illustrates how 
the multicast delivery tree to the terrestrial receivers 
changes whenever the mobile source changes its point of 
attachment to the satellite network from one satellite 
gateway to another. 
B. Source Adressing scheme 
According to the DVB specifications each GW has its 
own IP addressing space different from every other. This 
proposal leverages on the fact that each mobile Return 
Channel Satellite Terminal (mRCST), can be reserved a 
specific IP address under each GW. It is proposed that the 
IP addresses of the mRCST (in this case, mobile source) 
under various GWs are made known to the listening 
RCSTs/GWs as soon as they subscribe to the SSM. This can 
be made possible by associating the mRCST physical 
(MAC) address to a specific IP address as illustrated in 
Table 1.  
TABLE I.  MOBILE SOURCE IP ADDRESS UNDER EACH GATEWAY 
Mobile 
RCST(Source) 
Mac 
Address 
IP Unicast Address 
 
 
GW1 
GW2 
GW3 
GW4 
mRCST1 
 mac 1 
a 11 
a 12 
a 13 
a 14 
mRCST2 
 mac 2 
a 21 
a 22 
a 23 
a 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mRCSTn 
 mac n 
a n1 
 a n2 
a n3 
a n4 
It is assumed here for simplicity that there are 4 
gateways under the control of the Network Control Centre 
(NCC). However, this can be easily extended. If this 
allocation can be pre-assigned by the NCC at the time of 
joining the multicast group, then this would remove the 
need for the use of tunnelling between GWs. Instead, native 
forwarding 
along 
the 
source-specific 
delivery 
tree 
throughout the network can be supported.  
C. Support for multicast receivers within the Satellite 
Network 
It is assumed here that:  
 The transparent satellite has on-board multiplexing 
capability to provide connectivity between different 
beams provided at the physical layer and mainly 
responsible for forwarding MF-TDMA carriers or 
groups of carriers in an uplink beam to different 
downlinks beams. 
 Each mRCST knows all its IP addresses under various 
GWs as described in the previous section.  
 The NCC will act as the the Internet Group Management 
Protocol (IGMP) querier for the satellite network [13] 
and contains IP addresses of all mRCSTs under each 
GW in addition to its normal functionalities 
 The NCC enables the establishment of point-to-
multipoint connection between source and listening 
RCSTs/GWs. 
The NCC acting as satellite IGMP querier keeps control 
of the multicast groups and also builds the SSM tree based 
on on-board connectivity between different beams. 
Periodically, the NCC sends out the Multicast Map Table 
(MMT) [14] to all multicast receivers. The MMT which 
contains the list of IP multicast addresses each associated 
with a specific Program Identifier (PID) enables listening 
RCSTs/GWs to receive multicast traffic from groups which 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
they are members of. When the NCC receives an IGMP join 
report for SSM, it checks the source-list and if some sources 
are identified as mRCSTs, it will immediately respond with 
a unicast message to the RCST/GW which requested 
listening by stating that the multicast source is a mobile 
source, as well as giving out the source IP addresses under 
each GW (e.g., Mobile source; IP addresses: a11, a12, a13, 
a14). This message prepares the receiver to expect multicast 
traffic from any of these IP addresses knowing that it is 
coming from the same source, thus, solving the problem of 
transparency. For receivers on LAN behind RCSTs [14], the 
RCST acting as an IGMP Router and Querier on its user 
interface (i.e., interface towards the internal LAN) and an 
IGMP Host on the satellite interface, after receiving the 
mobile source details, will take up the role of notifying any 
interested user terminal in its LAN of the multiple IP 
addresses of the mobile source. The listening RCSTs’ user 
interface delivers the traffic according to channel 
subscription (S, G) to user terminals. 
D. Support for multicast Receivers on the Internet  
It is proposed that all GWs in the Interactive Satellite 
Network (ISN) should be equipped with a new Multicast 
Mobility Management Unit (M3U) that is responsible for 
control plane signalling to provide support for mobility for 
multicast sources.  This new M3U entity contains the 
following: 
 A database of information regarding all mRCSTs in the 
entire ISN, each identified by its physical (MAC) 
address and the fixed IP addresses it has under each GW 
as shown in Table 1.  
 A message chamber which can generate three new types 
of messages shown in Table II.  
TABLE II.  
PROPOSED NEW MESSAGES 
Message 
Name 
Interface state 
message 
Target GW 
message 
Channel update 
message 
Type 
Unicast 
Unicast 
Multicast 
Source 
Serving GW 
Target GW 
Serving GW 
Destination 
Neighbouring 
GWs 
Serving GW 
All SSM 
Receivers in the 
Internet 
Content 
SSM reception 
interface state 
i.e., Multicast 
addresses, 
filtering mode 
and source list. 
IP address of 
the Target GW 
IP address of 
mobile source in 
target GW. 
Instruction to 
update channel 
subscription to 
new mobile 
source IP 
address 
Purpose 
To identify the 
mobile source 
in preparation 
for GW 
handover 
To notify 
serving GW 
which 
neighbouring 
GW will be the 
target GW 
For the Internet 
receivers to start 
building the 
new delivery 
tree to the target 
GW 
When a GW receives the first IGMP join report for 
SSM, a service interface (socket; interface; multicast 
address; filter-mode; source-list) [15] is created against the 
interface that received the join report. While forwarding this 
join report to the NCC, the M3U as shown in Figure 3, 
checks the multicast source-list in the report against the data 
base containing the list of all mRCSTs. If some sources on 
the source-list are identified as mRCSTs, then the M3U of 
the serving GW will send the new proposed Interface State 
Message (ISM) to all neighbouring GWs. The neighbouring 
GWs extract the mobile sources (mRCSTs) from the source 
list after consulting the database in their M3U. 
When the mobile source moves and a handover 
procedure is initiated by the NCC by sending the SNMP 
Set-Request message to the target GW, the target GW issues 
the new proposed Target GW Message (TGM) to the 
serving GW. The TGM enables the serving GW to identify 
which of its neighbouring GWs will be the target GW for 
the mobile source.With the knowledge of the target GW 
identity and upon consulting its database, the serving GW 
will then issue the Channel Update Message (CUM) to all 
SSM receivers in Internet/LAN.  
It should be noted here that only the serving GW can 
reach all SSM receivers in the Internet since it is located at 
the root of the SSM delivery tree to the Internet. Upon 
reception of CUM by SSM receivers in the Internet, a new 
SSM delivery tree construction to the target GW is triggered 
as shown in Figure 2. Target GW issues IGMP join report to 
NCC as soon as it gets the updated channel subscription 
request (PIM Join) from Internet and at the same time, its 
M3U will issue ISM to all GWs neighbouring target GW in 
preparation for the next GWH. The target GW now becomes 
part of the mesh receivers within the satellite network 
described in section IIIC above as it assumes the 
responsibility of serving receivers in the Internet. This 
therefore makes the IP address changes during a GW 
handover transparent to all SSM recipients. Eventually, the 
old tree to old GW will be torn down as it becomes inactive 
(no traffic).  
 
  
Is source 
IP addrs
= 
mRCST
IP addrs
Yes
No
Gateway
From/To 
Internet 
M3U
Data 
Base
To 
Satellite
Sat air Interface
IGMP 
Join Report
IGMP 
Join 
Report
PIM (S,G)
Join MSG2 
Checking 
source-list
MSG1 + MSG3
MSG 1: Interface State Message :Unicast
From Serving GW to Neighbouring GWs
Interface state (mcast-addrs, f-mode, src-list)
MSG 2:Target GW Message: Unicast
From Target GW to Serving GW
Target GW for mobile source mRCST1
MSG 3:Channel Update Message : Multicast
From Serving GW
to
all SSM Receivers in
Internet
Mobile source IP address in target GW +
instruction for channel subscription update
Messages
Message 
Chamber
 
Figure 3.  Multicast Mobility Management Unit (M3U) 
E. Message sequence for multicast source mobility  
Figure 4 shows the signalling sequence during GW 
handover.  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
 
Internet
2. Sync RL with HO 
recommendation
3. SNMP Set-Request:Set SI tables + Routing Update Information (RUI) of mobile RCST
Mobile Source
RCST/Aircraft)
GW_A1
(Serving GW)
NCC
GW_A2
(Target GW)
Multicast Traffic
Multicast Traffic
6. SNMP Set-Response: Set SI tables after allocating BW resources to RCST + IP address activation
7. SNMP Set-Request: Set SI 
tables + RCST Identity
10. SNMP Set-Response: 
Set SI tables
11. TIMu (F/L) received in old beam, 
retuned to target beam & switched to 
new link
12. SI tables (TBTP, SCT, FCT, 
TCT, MMT) issued in target beam
13. ACQ (R/L)
14. CMT (R/L)
Multicast Traffic
Satellite Communication
Terrestrial Communication
MER
MER
1. Interface State Message
4. Target GW Message
5. Channel Update Message  
8. PIM-SSM (a12, G) Join
Multicast Traffic
PIM-SSM (a11, G) Join
IGMP (a11, G) Join
15. IGMP (a12, G) Join
a11- mobile source IP address under GW_A1                                              a12 – mobile source IP address under GW_A2
IGMP (a11, G) Join
9. IGMP (a12, G) Join
 
Figure 4.  Signalling sequence at gateway handover 
 
This signalling sequence contains the proposed new 
messages integrated into the standard GW handover 
signalling sequence given in [5]. Figure 4 is the detailed 
illustration of what is described in section IIID. From the 
signalling sequences in Figure 4, the sizes of the signalling 
messages determine the total time required to complete a 
GWH.  
IV. 
GW HANDOVER PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The messages sizes used in table III are derived from 
[16, 17] and [18]. It is assumed that the routing update 
information table (RUI) contains at least 100 bytes of 
routing data. 
TABLE III.  
GW HANDOVER SIGNALLING MESSAGES SIZES 
Messages 
Packet Length 
(in Bytes) 
Message 1 ( containing at least 3 sources)  
45 
Synchronisation (SYNC) Burst  
16 
SNMP Set-Request: set SI tables + RUI   
736 
Message 2  
28 
Message 3  
28 
SNMP Set-Response: set SI tables 
636 
SNMP Set-Request: set SI tables + RCST Identity 
640 
PIM-SM Join 
64 
SNMP Set-Response: set SI tables + RCST Identity 
640 
TIM (Terminal Information Message) 
35 
SI Tables (TBTP, SCT, FCT, TCT, MMT) 
152 
ACQ (Acquisition Burst) 
12 
CMT (Correction Message Table) 
30 
IGMP Join  
64 
 
The time taken to transmit a single message between two 
relevant network entities over any given link under ideal 
conditions i.e., lossless conditions is given by (1) and the 
time required to send a message during handover relevant 
signalling entities under lossy conditions is given by (2). 
proc
prop
trans
lossless
T
T
T
T



  
 
 
(1) 


INT
w
lossless
lossless
total
T
q
q
T
T
T
T










1
 
(2) 
Where, 
 Ttrans = transmission delay = message size ÷ link bit 
rate. 
 TProc = average processing time at any node. This is 
assumed to be 5 ms [18] for all nodes. 
 Tprop = propagation delay due to the communication 
link.  




INT
wired
prop
wireless
prop
prop
T
T
T
T
_
_
  
 
(3) 
- Tprop_wireless = propagation delay due to wireless link  
- Tprop_wired = propagation delay due to wired link  
-  TINT = propagation in the Internet. Since it is 
impossible to know the rout taken by the packet 
in the Internet with certainty,   it is assumed to 
be 8 ms as suggested in [18]. 
 
q = probability of a failure transmission over satellite. 
The data rate in the satellite link is assumed to be 
144Kbps [18] and the gateways are assumed to be using 100 
Base-T Ethernet supporting a data rate of 100Mbps. The 
propagation speed in LAN Ethernet is assumed to be 2/3 the 
speed of light i.e., 2 x108m/s [18]. The distance between the 
gateway and the multicast edge router MER is assumed to 
be 4m. 
Figure 5 shows that the total time required to complete 
GWH and to reconstruct the SSM delivery tree to target GW 
increases with increasing probabilities of failure. It should 
be noted that the new SSM tree construction starts when any 
receiver in the Internet issues the first IGMP/PIM –SSM 
join message to the target GW upon reception of channel 
subscription update message. It can be deduced from Figure 
5 that for probabilities of failure 0% - 10%, the average time 
taken to complete: 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
 
GWH with only mesh multicast support is 2.83 
seconds 
 
GWH with mesh and terrestrial (internet) multicast 
support is 3.22 seconds 
 
New SSM delivery tree construction to target GW 
and the first IGMP reaching the NCC is 1.85 
seconds. 
 
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total Time (second)
Probability of Failure (%)
GW Handover with Mesh and Terrestrial (Internet) Multicast Support
GW Handover with only Mesh  Multicast Support
Time required for new SSM tree construction to target GW+1st IGMP reaching NCC
 
Figure 5.  GW handover time delay at probabilities of failure 0% – 10% 
Note should be taken of the fact in this proposal, no 
additional time delay (compared to the standard in [5]) is 
incurred for source mobility support for mesh receivers 
during GWH and that the actual time between switching 
links from serving GW to target GW is very small compared 
to the total GWH time shown above 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
IP multicast based applications are very important for 
satellite networks in order to share vital information 
between various receivers without the wastage of expensive 
satellite resources. Multicast sources that may move from 
one point of attachment to another will result in the 
breakage of the multicast tree. While some solutions to 
support multicast source mobility have been proposed for 
the internet, it was seen that these are not very suitable in a 
satellite network. This paper proposes a suitable solution for 
multicast source mobility in a multi-beam satellite network. 
It presents the network architecture and the proposed 
address management scheme. A new Multicast Mobility 
Management Unit (M3U) has been proposed within the GW 
along with three new control messages that provide support 
for mobility for multicast sources. The proposed solution 
has made it possible to solve the mobile multicast source 
transparency and RPF problems. Time delay analysis was 
carried out in order to evaluate the performance during the 
gateway handover. The results obtained from GWH 
performance evaluation above show that source mobility 
support for SSM has very little or no impact on handover 
latency on receivers within the satellite network. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Holbrook, B. Cain, and B. Haberman, ―Using Internet 
Group Management Protocol Version 3 (IGMPv3) and 
Multicast Listener Discovery Protocol Version 2 (MLDv2) 
for Source-Specific Multicast,‖ RFC 4604, IETF, August 
2006.  
[2] I. Romdhani, M. Kellil, H. Lach, A. Bouabdallah, and H. 
Bettahar, ―IP Mobile Multicast: Challenges and Solutions,‖ 
IEEE Communications Survey & Tutorials, vol.6, First 
Quarter 2004, pp. 18 - 41.  
[3] T. Nguyen, ―IP Mobile Multicast: Problems and Solutions,‖ 
Ph.D. Dissertation, EURECOM, France, March 2011. 
[4]  G. Xylomenos and G.C Polyzos, ―IP multicast for mobile 
hosts,‖ IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 35, January 
1997,     pp. 54 – 58. 
[5] ETSI TR 102 768, ―Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); 
Interaction channel for Satellite Distribution Systems; 
Guidelines for the use of EN 301 790 in mobile scenarios,‖ 
vol.1.1.1, April 2009.  
[6] I. Romdhani, H. Bettahar, and A. Bouabdallah, ―Transparent 
handover for mobile multicast sources,‖ in proceedings of the 
International Conference on Networking, International 
Conference on Systems and International Conference on 
Mobile Communications and Learning Technologies, April 
2006, pp 145. 
[7] B. Fenner, M. Handley, H. Holbrook, and I. Kouvelas, 
―Protocol independent multicast—sparse mode (PIM-SM): 
protocol specification (Revised),‖ RFC 4601, IETF, August 
2006. 
[8] T. C. Schmidt and M. Wählisch, ―Extending SSM to 
MIPv6—problems, solutions and improvements,‖  in selected 
papers 
from 
TERENA 
Networking 
Conference, 
Computational Methods in Science and Technology, Poznań, 
May 2005, pp. 147 – 152. 
[9] T. C. Schmidt,  M. Wählisch, and M. Wodarz, ―Fast adaptive 
routing supporting mobile senders in Source Specific 
Multicast,‖ Springer Telecommunication Systems, Vol 43, 
February 2010, pp. 95 – 108.  
[10] C. Jelger andT. Noel, ―Supporting Mobile SSM Sources for 
IPv6,‖ in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference 
(GLOBECOM), vol. 2, November 2002, pp. 1693 - 1697. 
[11] T C. Schmidt, S. Gao, H. Zhang, and M. Waehlisch, ―Mobile 
Multicast Sender Support in Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) 
Domains. draft-ietf-multimob-pmipv6-source-03,‖ Internet-
Draft, MULTIMOB Group, IETF  February , 2013. 
[12] S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and 
B. Patil, ―Proxy Mobile IPv6,‖. RFC 5213, IETF, August 
2008. 
[13] ETSI TR 102 603, ―Satellite Earth Stations and Systems 
(SES); Broadband Satellite Multimedia (BSM); Connection 
Control 
Protocol 
(C2P) 
for 
DVB-RCS; 
Background 
Information,‖ vol. 1.1.1, January 2009. 
[14] ETSI TS 102 429-2, ―Satellite Earth Stations and Systems 
(SES); Broadband Satellite Multimedia (BSM); Regenerative 
Satellite Mesh - B (RSM-B); DVB-S/DVB-RCS family for 
regenerative satellites; Part 2: Satellite Link Control layer,‖ 
vol. 1.1.1,  October 2006. 
[15] B. Cain, S. Deering, I. Kouvelas, B. Fenner, and A. 
Thyagarajan, ―Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 
3,‖ RFC 3376, IETF, October 2002.  
[16] G. 
Maral, 
M. 
Bousquet, 
and  
Z. Sun, 
―Satellite 
Communications 
Systems: 
Systems, 
Techniques 
and 
Technology‖, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2009.  
[17] ETSI EN 301 790, ―Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); 
Interaction channel for satellite distribution systems,‖ vol. 
1.5.1, May 2009. 
[18] P.M.L. Chan, R.E. Sheriff, Y.F. Hu, P. Conforto, and C. 
Tocci, ―Design and evaluation of signaling protocols for 
mobility management in an integrated IP environment,‖ 
Computer Networks: The International Journal of Computer 
and Telecommunications Networking , Vol 38,  March 2002, 
pp. 517 - 530.  
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

