Revisiting Mobility, Devices and Business Models 
A user-centric perspective 
 
Yan Cimon 
CIRRELT 
Université Laval 
Quebec City, Canada 
e-mail: yan.cimon@fsa.ulaval.ca 
 
 
Abstract— Given the array of devices now available to users, 
how can one make sense of the evolution of user-side mobility?  
The purpose of this paper is to revisit mobility from a user-
centric perspective.  We use a mixed methods approach based 
on action research and case studies.  We find that mobility’s 
pervasiveness leads to changes in habits that have a profound 
effect on devices and business models.  We conclude by looking 
into possible directions for new advances in light of the present 
research and recent trends in the IT industry. 
Keywords-User-centric mobility; devices; business model; 
user-centric design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Given the array of devices now available to users, how 
can one make sense of the evolution of user-side mobility?  
Mobile devices are now ubiquitous in everyday life and they 
are seldom noticed anymore [1].  Furthermore, in recent 
years, consumers have faced an increasing array of devices 
that are very eclectic as exemplified by the vastly different 
characteristics and capabilities of tablets, handsets, e-readers 
and others.  At the same time, the characteristics and 
enablers of mobility are present in ever-increasing settings.  
These may be related 1) to how the user experiences 
connectedness, or 2) to the device itself.  This is especially 
important, yet often overlooked, because it has been known 
for a while that information and perception are intertwined 
[2].  
Whatever the design process, whether from groups of 
designers to the consumer-market or from co-creation by 
consumers and designers, a user-centric approach is 
necessary as consumers are ever more demanding when it 
comes to mobile devices or mobility in general [3].  This has 
seemingly led to a paradox where one expressed need for 
mobility yields to a fragmented market of devices that allow 
mobility.  This entails a simultaneous convergence and 
divergence in the types of devices that are available.  At one 
end of the spectrum, users acquire different devices for 
different uses, while, at the other end, other users seek use 
only one sort of device, for all their needs.  Along the same 
lines, users exhibit various learning patterns [4] and some 
(in)ability to adapt to change when switching devices.  Some 
are tinkerers and like to exploit and configure any possibility 
afforded by their device while a significant segment could be 
termed a plug-and-play crowd happy with general default 
settings. This explains why understanding mobility, devices 
and design from a user-centric side and examining business 
models remain relevant for users and businesses alike.    
 
This paper is structured as follows.  First, some related 
work is examined.  Second, in the problem statement section, 
the general issue being researched is explained.  Third, a 
user-centric view of mobility is put forth.  On one hand, the 
user-side of mobility is examined.  On the other hand, issues 
pertaining to attributes of mobile devices are discussed.  
Fourth, an overview of the methods used is provided.  Fifth, 
some contemporary business models are discussed in light of 
the evolution of mobility through mobile devices.  Finally, 
some implications for this work and a way forward for 
research are presented. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Related work gives partial insight on how mobility, 
devices and business models intersect from a user-centric 
perspective.  First, past research on mobility has examined 
issues related to architecture [5], [6] and awareness 
management in networks [7].  Furthermore, cloud computing 
is presented as an option to deal with mobility issues [8]. 
Second, a strand of literature on devices examines 
application mobility for cross-network roaming through 
multiple devices [9] as well as in heterogeneous network 
environments [10].  Other recent work on devices shows an  
increased interest for semantic solutions that makes the 
device a privileged nexus between users and services [11]. 
Third, while research on business models per se 
historically focused on value creation [12] business models 
that may be harnessed and their design [13].  Other work 
ventured toward mobile payment adoption [14] or demand-
related variables [15].  However, cultural factors also affect 
mobility [16] and users put a high premium on the quality of 
their experience as evidenced by research on mobile TV[17]. 
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
As previous research rarely examined mobility-enabling 
technology, devices, and business models from a user-centric 
perspective, the present research makes a contribution by 
looking at these factors simultaneously.  Indeed, making 
sense of the new trends in devices, platforms and available 
content, software and applications from the consumer side is 
increasingly difficult given their diversity.  It is not clear yet 
whether there is a growing convergence or a competitive co-
existence of available devices centered on a variety of user 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

needs.  While other studies have focused on specific user 
behaviour issues from a very technical and quantitative 
perspective [18], this research contributes a different user-
centric way of tackling some challenges associated with 
mobility while looking at devices, users and some trends as 
well as business models that may be harnessed. 
IV. 
USER-CENTRIC VIEW MOBILITY AND CONNECTEDNESS 
Mobility is of an increasing value for users living a 
connected life.  They also wish to remain connected for 
longer parts of the day.  One factor behind this desire is 
partly explained by the “Fear of Missing Out” (FOMO), or 
the fear of missing something important to them – or their 
social circle – should they not be connected [19].  Another 
factor may be linked to the emotional response related to 
higher levels of connectedness.  Beyond the sense of 
belonging or security that is attached to connectedness [20], 
users also find comfort in the fact that being connected via a 
device is a reassurance.  Thus, it is possible to map the sense 
of belonging on a spectrum that puts peace of mind at the 
lowest end and active engagement at the highest end.  A 
third factor to consider is that mobile devices are ideal to 
fulfill certain types of tasks or for personal distraction 
during micro breaks [21], whether on the move or not. 
A. User-related considerations 
1) Some 
psychological 
considerations: 
Many 
psychological factors may be associated with mobility.  The 
feeling of convenience that comes with increased mobility 
may bring a higher level of psychological comfort, even in 
users whose lifestyle does not require a high level of 
mobility.  As such, mobile devices may be construed as 
extensions of the self or as influencing it [22].  Different 
devices broadcast different messages.  As Apple’s product 
appeals more to emotion and a desire to be part of a certain 
“in” crowd, MS Surface tries to cater to “cool” business 
users that seek to interface their device in a familiar 
Microsoft Office environment, Samsung counts on the 
pervasiveness of Android and some “fun” characteristics 
associated to its products.  Finally, there is a level of status 
that is associated with the type of device one uses and its 
level of customization. 
2) Anchoring: Another consideration is the need for an 
anchor that users have.  Traditionally, this anchor was in a 
physical space, such as a home for example.  This provided 
a sense of place in the world and an emotional anchor that 
too made this sense of belonging important [23].  As users 
lead increasingly dynamic lives, where geography is losing 
ground to information technologies, the traditional need for 
physical/geographic anchoring has morphed into one for 
digital anchoring as it remains now the “constant” in many 
users lives.  A direct implication is that one may expect 
users to develop an emotional attachment to their devices 
and that this will impact the physical characteristics that 
they will want in a mobile device as this will become a 
reflection of their identity. 
B. The device side 
Many conditions exist to enable mobility in the 
consumer’s mind when it comes to devices.  
1) Physical attributes: First of all, the physical attributes 
of a device matter much for adoption and for its intended 
usage patterns.  The first factor that matters here is purely 
physical.  The devices weight and their ease of manipulation 
matter.  They are the crux of physical characteristics (Palm 
CEO famously carried a wooden replica of a device in his 
pocket to find an optimal design [24]).  There is a trend 
toward more embeddedness of mobility in objects that are 
beyond the realm of classical mobile devices, as evidenced 
in 
the 
automotive 
industry 
(Hyundai 
BlueLink, 
MyFordTouch, etc.), but this embeddedness brings 
challenges in terms of obsolescence and updating needs.  As 
in the car industry where embedded electronics become 
obsolete faster than the engine or mechanical parts. 
2) Connectedness: Second, connectedness matters a lot 
too.  3G and 4G connectivity on a wide range of carriers are 
important to ensure mobility over large areas as evidenced 
in the USA by the wars between Verizon, AT&T and Sprint 
over coverage and speed.  Furthermore, more and more 
consumers expect fast and easy WiFi connectedness in 
tablets and phones (which is fairly standard nowadays) but 
also in a range of other devices. 
3) Software: Third, the issue of software that is not 
platform dependent, many would say “cloud ready”, is a 
very important desirable characteristic.  Information access 
and manipulation are cornerstones of the perceived value of 
mobility.  The ability to manage structured information and 
unstructured information is very important but often 
overlooked.  For instance, software that allows for 
unstructured or fuzzy queries close to natural language 
queries is also a desirable characteristic to find specific 
information on the device.  It is important that queries 
beyond simple keywords be supported.  Furthermore, social 
possibilities afforded by the device, i.e., easy connection to 
social media [25] and social networks are another element 
that needs to be factored in (Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest, 
Reddit, etc.) 
V. 
METHODS 
This research uses a mixed methods approach to serve its 
exploratory nature.  The combination of methodologies is 
felt to allow better insights into the complexity and richness 
of the subject matter in order to move beyond purely 
technical challenges. 
The first method used is that of action research [26] of an 
inductive nature.  Over a full year, mobile devices were used 
in three different countries (Canada, USA and Switzerland) 
on major commercial platforms (BlackBerry, Android, and 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

iOS) linked to major national providers (Bell, Verizon, and 
Swisscom).   
The second method used is case study research [27].  The 
cases were selected for the breath of insight they could 
provide and their diversity (for-profit, non-profit, maker of 
devices and software).  The cases were examined through 
secondary data sources (newspaper articles, video interviews 
by third parties, etc) that would shed light on both the user 
experience and devices. 
Important elements like validity, does the research 
measure what it claims to be measuring, and reliability, does 
it measure it in a consistent matter, were taken into account 
[28].  Care was taken to control for biases [29] by adopting a 
comparative perspective.  There are no conflicts of interest to 
declare with regards to the cases discussed in this paper. 
VI. 
PERSPECTIVES ON MOBILITY’S EVOLUTION AND SOME 
CONTEMPORARY BUSINESS MODELS  
A. Consumer-side mobility  
Consumer-side mobility has evolved in cycles.  In the 
1990’s, mobility from the user side essentially came in the 
form of mobile phones, or mobile handsets and bulky laptops 
with mobile radios being phased out.  In the 2000’s, it 
became a defining characteristic of many devices (PDAs, 
mp3 players, etc.) that saw their functions converge into 
“smart” phones and eventually became a noted feature of a 
range of devices (tablets, e-readers, etc).  That trend is 
morphing into embedded mobility (in cars, public spaces, in 
airplanes, etc), with the next step likely being improved 
wearability of devices (Google glasses or intelligent 
clothing).  While wearable computing has been around for a 
long time, the next generation may prove better adopted as 
users become used to well-designed I/O apparatus that will 
make this sort of mobility both sensible and natural.  
B. Business models 
These changes in consumer-side mobility have a great 
impact on business models.  For wireless carriers, it means 
more devices are connected to their networks and thus a rise 
in their traditional businesses of carrying voice and data.  But 
this also implies new value streams that come from a 
different way/process of interacting with users: different fee 
schedules to fit different uses and devices and different ways 
of modulating the contracting agreements.  Device makers 
can now make money on the physical devices themselves, 
but also derive advantages from sharing platforms/OS.  
Applications (apps) and software developers, also have new 
possibilities to maximize downloads and adjust payment 
possibilities by moving from free to fee-based models.  Last, 
but not least, ancillary material and peripheral makers also 
have more devices to cater to and are able to better take 
advantage of consumers’ need for personalizing their 
devices. 
C. Cases 
Three cases were examined in light of the research 
question:  Major League Baseball, OneBusAway, and 
BlackBerry.   
1) Major League Baseball: A first case is that of  Major 
League Baseball (MLB).  Traditionally, the league made a 
lot of revenue from TV broadcasting rights.  But as 
consumers migrate from – or increasingly use other 
platforms than – TV, the league created MLB Advanced 
Media (BAM) to distribute content on a variety of devices.  
This means that BAM is able to create value by leveraging 
apps, providing a lot of content that allows for a great 
interactive experience (videos, etc.) beyond the traditional 
statistics baseball fans love [30], [31].  In doing so, they also 
take time to better understand users to better cater to their 
interests.  For example, their data showed them that 
different devices were associated with different user 
behaviours and thus different needs: e.g., users with mobile 
phones did not have the same usage patterns as those with 
tablets or laptops [32]. 
2) OneBusAway: A second case is that of OneBusAway 
[33], a non-profit that developed the eponymous app that 
provides real-time transit information.  Transit schedules are 
often complicated for users to understand, especially in 
large cities that have a denser transit network.  A wide range 
of users, from daily commuters to tourists, need to plan their 
journeys.  With the strong penetration of mobile devices in 
major American metropolitan areas, it made sense to 
develop an easy-to-use app that would assist users in 
planning their trips in a real-time manner.  The app was 
developed for the Puget Sound area and now covers Atlanta, 
New York and Tampa. 
3) BlackBerry: A third and last case is that of 
BlackBerry [34].  Better known for its handsets, it also 
ventured in the tablet market, but users did not follow.  
After market share losses and devices that were not 
appealing to younger generations, it remained popular with 
business users.  It reinvented its handsets including 
touchscreens and getting rid of their trackpad.  It proposed a 
model with a keyboard (Q10), another one without (Z10) 
and a third at a lower price point (Q5) [35].  It fielded a new 
OS that allows multitasking, provided a secure workspace 
that can operate with other OS’ than BB10.  It provided a 
better app ecosystem for example adding Skype and the new 
BlackBerry Messenger for real-time communications.  It did 
try to cater better to user needs and habits.  The market will 
tell if it is valued by consumers [36] underlying the fact that 
reality is the ultimate test. 
D. Premilinary findings 
The cases that were examined seem to confirm two 
general trends.  First, there appears to be a heavy and cross-
platform adoption of intuitive user-centric mobility by 
consumers.  Second, firms do alter significantly or create 
entire business models based on this shift instead of just 
paying lip service to this trend.   These models create value 
beyond simple micropayments. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
These 
cases 
are 
revealing 
because 
they 
are 
simultaneously enabled by and enablers of mobility.  This 
self-reinforcing mechanism has many implications for 
business, academics and future research efforts.   
A. Implications for business 
Better configured business models taking a user-centric 
perspective are bound to maximize value creation.  Fee 
structures and modulations along each segment of the value 
chain will enable better decision-making on hardware, on 
software, and on ancillary services and apps from the 
ecosystem surrounding each device.  User-centricity also 
matters a great deal when it comes to critical decision 
making [37], especially when mobile devices are involved. 
B. Implications for academics 
Academics need to help industry better bridge the gap 
between the device, the user and their perceptions, the 
ecosystem that surrounds them, and business models.  This 
research constitutes a step in this direction.  Furthermore, 
since devices – and the software that they run – are 
produced in complex networks of firms that collaborate, 
then working from a common user-centric perspective may 
in the end reduce the conflicts arising from these firms’ 
asymmetries [38] and lead to a more coherent, yet highly 
value added, ecosystem of devices, applications and more. 
C. Future research 
In conclusion, developing a user-centric view of 
mobility that simultaneously takes into account users and 
devices is useful to understand how mobility and business 
models that underpin it may deliver more value for 
specialized applications like the Physical Internet [39]. 
Thus, a user-centric perspective in coming research will 
be paramount to finding new ways of harnessing important 
contemporary trends such as 1) Bring Your Own Devices 
(BYOD) [40] to work environments, 2) An increasing 
pervasiveness  of mobility and information combined [41],  
and 3) challenges brought by the Internet of things [42]. 
These will force a dramatic rethinking of business 
models around value creation from intangibles [43] that are 
focused on user habit "dynamics", i.e., how user habits and 
preferences change over time.  Another relevant dimension 
will be a careful examination of the interaction between 
mobility and contents access, especially since a very real 
possibility of commoditization of "smart" devices may 
occur.  Finally, the interaction of mobility and potentially 
disruptive technologies like 3D printing and high precision 
distributed manufacturing may also prove to be a game 
changer. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to thank the Fonds de recherche 
québécois – société et culture (FRQSC), the Soutien à la 
Recherche fund from Université Laval for funding that 
enabled portions of this research.  Some of this research was 
carried out while the author held the Fulbright Visiting Chair 
in Innovation at the University of Washington (Seattle) and 
visited McGill and EPFL. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
V. Oksman and P. Rautiainen, "Perhaps it is a Body Part: How the 
Mobile Phone Became an Organic Part of the Everyday Lives of 
Finnish Children and Teenagers," Machines that become us: The 
social context of communication technology, 2003, pp. 293-308. 
[2] 
J. E. Cutting, "Perception and Information," Annual Review of 
Psychology, vol. 38, 1987, pp. 61-90. 
[3] 
Y. Cimon, F. Z. Barrane, and P. Diane, "Meeting the Challenge of 
Global Mobile Phone Usability: Design and practices," in 
Proceedings - MOBILITY 2011, Barcelona, 2011, pp. 123-126. 
[4] 
R. Wang, R. Wiesemes, and C. Gibbons, "Developing digital fluency 
through ubiquitous mobile devices: Findings from a small-scale 
study," Computers & Education, vol. 58, 2012, pp. 570-578. 
[5] 
Q. Wei and Z. Jin, "Service discovery for internet of things: a context-
awareness perspective," Proceedings of the Fourth Asia-Pacific 
Symposium on Internetware, 2012, pp. 1-6. 
[6] 
S. Malek, G. Edwards, Y. Brun, H. Tajalli, J. Garcia, et al., "An 
architecture-driven software mobility framework," Journal of Systems 
and Software, vol. 83, 2010, pp. 972-989. 
[7] 
J. W. Mwangoka, P. Marques, and J. Rodriguez, "Cognitive mobility 
management in heterogeneous networks," Proceedings of the 8th 
ACM international workshop on Mobility management and wireless 
access, 2010, pp. 37-44. 
[8] 
N. Fernando, S. W. Loke, and W. Rahayu, "Mobile cloud computing: 
A survey," Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 29, 2013, pp. 
84-106. 
[9] 
A. Ahlund, K. Mitra, D. Johansson, C. Ahlund, and A. Zaslavsky, 
"Context-aware application mobility support in pervasive computing 
environments," Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Mobile Technology, Application & Systems, 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[10] J. Flinn, T. J. Giuli, B. Higgins, B. Noble, A. Reda, et al., "The case 
for intentional networking," Proceedings of the 10th workshop on 
Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[11] A. Toninelli, A. Corradi, and R. Montanari, "Semantic-based 
discovery to support mobile context-aware service access," Computer 
Communications, vol. 31, 2008, pp. 935-949. 
[12] R. Amit and C. Zott, "Creating Value Through Business Model 
Innovation," MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 53, Spring2012 
2012, pp. 41-49. 
[13] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, "Designing Business Models and 
Similar Strategic Objects: The Contribution of IS," Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, vol. 14, 2013, pp. 237-244. 
[14] C. Kim, M. Mirusmonov, and I. Lee, "An empirical examination of 
factors influencing the intention to use mobile payment," Computers 
in Human Behavior, vol. 26, 2010, pp. 310-322. 
[15] J. Iden and L. B. Methlie, "The drivers of services on next-generation 
networks," Telematics and Informatics, vol. 29, 2012, pp. 137-155. 
[16] J. Blom, J. Chipchase, and J. Lehikoinen, "Contextual and cultural 
challenges for user mobility research," Commun. ACM, vol. 48, 
2005, pp. 37-41. 
[17] S. Buchinger, S. Kriglstein, S. Brandt, and H. Hlavacs, "A survey on 
user studies and technical aspects of mobile multimedia applications," 
Entertainment Computing, vol. 2, 2011, pp. 175-190. 
[18] M. Vojnovic, "On Mobile User Behaviour Patterns," Microsoft 
Research - Technical Report MSR-TR-2008-08, 2008, p. 5. 
[19] J. J. Kandell, "Internet addiction on campus: The vulnerability of 
college students," CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 1, 1998, pp. 11-
17. 
[20] R. Wei and V.-H. Lo, "Staying connected while on the move Cell 
phone use and social connectedness," New Media & Society, vol. 8, 
2006, pp. 53-72. 
[21] Y. Cui and V. Roto, "How people use the web on mobile devices," in 
Proceedings of the 17th international conference on World Wide 
Web, 2008, pp. 905-914. 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[22] L. A. Jackson, A. von Eye, H. E. Fitzgerald, Y. Zhao, and E. A. Witt, 
"Self-concept, self-esteem, gender, race and information technology 
use," Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, 2010, pp. 323-328. 
[23] A. Williams, K. Anderson, and P. Dourish, "Anchored mobilities: 
mobile technology and transnational migration," in Proceedings of the 
7th ACM conference on Designing interactive systems, 2008, pp. 
323-332. 
[24] K. J. Vicente, The Human Factor: Revolutionizing the Way People 
Live with Technology: Taylor & Francis, 2013. 
[25] Y. Cui and M. Honkala, "A novel mobile device user interface with 
integrated social networking services," International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 71, 2013, pp. 919-932. 
[26] M. Brydon-Miller, D. Greenwood, and P. Maguire, "Why action 
research?," Action research, vol. 1, 2003, pp. 9-28. 
[27] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods: SAGE 
Publications, 2009. 
[28] E. G. Carmines and R. A. Zeller, Reliability and Validity Assessment: 
SAGE Publications, 1979. 
[29] N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln, The SAGE handbook of qualitative 
research: Sage, 2011. 
[30] M. Ozanian. (2013, May 26th) Baseball's Next Home Run: Chatting 
Cage. 
Forbes.com. 
Available: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/mikeozanian/2013/05/26/baseballs-next-
home-run-chatting-cage/ [retrieved: June, 2013] 
[31] C. Salter. (2012, March 19th) MLB Advanced Media's Bob Bowman 
is playing digital hardball.  And he's winning. Fast Company. 
Available: 
http://www.fastcompany.com/1822802/mlb-advanced-
medias-bob-bowman-playing-digital-hardball-and-hes-winning 
[retrieved: May, 2013] 
[32] "Charlie Rose: A conversation with Bob Bowman," ed. NYC: PBS, 
Jul 4th, 2013. 
[33] OneBusAway. Available: http://onebusaway.org/ [retrieved: March, 
2013]  
[34] BlackBerry. 
Available: 
http://global.blackberry.com/sites.html 
[retrieved: June, 2013] 
[35] R. Cheng. (2013, May 18th) How BlackBerry is fixing its once 
'broken' brand. CNET. Available: http://news.cnet.com/8301-1035_3-
57585099-94/how-blackberry-is-fixing-its-once-broken-brand/ 
[retrieved: June, 2013] 
[36] H. Miller and M. McMahon. (2013, Jul 1st) BlackBerry Shares 
Plunge After Touch-Screen Model Flops. Bloomberg. Available: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-07-01/blackberry-shares-
plunge-after-touch-screen-model-flops.html [retrieved: July, 2013] 
[37] S. Veronneau and Y. Cimon, "Maintaining robust decision 
capabilities: An integrative human-systems approach," Decision 
Support Systems, vol. 43, 2007, pp. 127-140. 
[38] Y. Cimon, "Knowledge-related asymmetries in strategic alliances," 
Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 8, 2004, pp. 17-30. 
[39] B. Montreuil, J.-F. Rougès, Y. Cimon, and D. Poulin, "The Physical 
Internet and Business Model Innovation," Technology Innovation 
Management Review, 2012, pp. 32-37. 
[40] K. W. Miller, J. Voas, and G. F. Hurlburt, "BYOD: Security and 
privacy considerations," IT Professional, vol. 14, 2012, pp. 53-55. 
[41] D. Saha and A. Mukherjee, "Pervasive computing: a paradigm for the 
21st century," Computer, vol. 36, 2003, pp. 25-31. 
[42] M. Zorzi, A. Gluhak, S. Lange, and A. Bassi, "From today's intranet 
of things to a future internet of things: a wireless-and mobility-related 
view," Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 17, 2010, pp. 44-51. 
[43] A. Lapointe and Y. Cimon, "Leveraging intangibles: how firms can 
create lasting value," Journal of Business Strategy, vol. 30, 2009, pp. 
40 - 48. 
 
 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

