Internationalization Testing for a Multilingual Based Wireless Response System:    
A Case Study 
Abduladim Ali  
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, United Kingdom 
Email: Abuladim.ali@gmail.Com  
Joan Lu  
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, United Kingdom 
Email: j.lu@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Recently, wireless technologies have had a 
tremendous influence on various advanced technology areas 
through e-learning environments such as the use of smart 
devices to engage learners and encourage them to interact 
effectively. Wireless communication technologies are being 
widely adopted within the education sector in order to deliver 
the best education support both virtually and globally. Today, 
introducing a multilingual Wireless Response System (WRS) 
application is not only an enormous challenge but also a 
complex one. The aim of this paper is to implement an 
internationalization-testing strategy using a WRS case study 
for multilingual speakers of Arabic, Chinese, French, German, 
Romanian, Spanish and Turkish. It also aims to evaluate the 
internationalization testing results as well as localization and 
cultural testing impacts. This paper also attempts to identify 
the 
various 
challenges 
that 
are 
associated 
with 
internationalization and localization testing based on smart 
devices, as well as introducing a globalization testing model for 
a multilingual system that includes each language’s specific 
features, for instance: the direction of writing for some 
languages such as right language (Arabic and Urdu), and word 
spaces translating.  
 
Keywords— Mobile learning; WRS; Internationalization; 
Globalization Testing; Usability testing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, there has been continuous growth of 
mobile applications in various areas, from leisure to 
providing business needs. This is due to the tremendous 
growth in the diversity of smart devices. Therefore, 
advanced mobile application response systems have grown 
rapidly and this has led to intense attention on these 
applications by researchers and developers. In fact, various 
advanced technologies have been introduced for the users to 
facilitate and improve the effectiveness of teaching and 
learning [1]. The extensive everyday use of these 
applications has led to higher demands when it comes to 
quality and stability. Specifically, users of smart devices are 
more interested in utilizing easily accessible applications. 
These applications are required to be more scalable and to 
support various languages that is, they are supposed to be 
multilingual. 
According 
to 
John 
[2] 
fixing 
internationalization bugs costs 30 times more than  other 
issues. 
Mobile Learning (M-Learning) has had a significant 
impact on teaching and education sectors where M-learning 
is defined as learning across multiple contexts, through 
social and content interaction, using personal electronic 
devices [4]. One such benefit has been that students are 
more attracted to expanding the boundaries of higher 
education into an ―anytime/anywhere‖ experience [3].  
Therefore, a WRS in M-learning is necessary for students 
and teachers to interact with each other. The WRS as an M-
learning application based on multilingual use has been 
developed by the XML Database and Information Retrieval 
(XDIR) research group at the University of Huddersfield in 
the UK [4]. WRS enables students and teachers to 
collaborate with each other by means of smart devices.  
The WRS like many M-learning applications is based on 
advanced technology in order to operate on smart devices 
across a wide range of platforms [5] including: PCs, laptops, 
tablets, and smart phones.  
This paper attempts to highlight several challenges , which 
are associated with the internationalization testing of mobile 
applications. This paper will also describe the effectiveness 
of the test strategy to evaluate the  localization  process 
testing with the help of a WRS mobile app case study. The 
internationalization testing was conducted for multilingual 
use in Arabic, Chinese, French, German, Romanian, Spanish 
and Turkish. 
Though sample sizes larger than 30 and less than 500 are 
appropriate for most research studies [6], throughout this 
study a relatively small sample size has been considered as 
this parameter is not as significant compared with the 
respondents‘ interface and interaction with the investigated 
system. Thus, when a user with a particular language 
employs this system, he/she may find that customized text 
space is insufficient; this would of course be the result for 
all respondents in this language [7].    
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the 
internationalization background of mobile applications. 
Section 3 presents works related to globalization testing. 
Section 4 presents the experimental methods of WRS. 
Section 5 presents the discussion and evaluation of the 
experiment result with statistical results for each language. 
Finally, conclusions and suggestions for future work are 
given. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

II. 
BACKGROUND 
This section highlights issues such as the state of 
worldwide 
mobile 
applications 
including 
the 
internationalization testing process, internationalization 
testing challenges, globalization testing, the definition of 
GUI testing, and cultural testing.   
A. The state of worldwide mobile applications  
According to Sandrini [8] and Buck et al. [9], in 2013 
alone, twenty one billion mobile apps were downloaded 
globally. The profits through the sale of mobile applications 
are expected to be more than $330 billion by 2015 [10].  
Therefore, every year the usage of mobile applications is 
rapidly increasing. Lu [11] stated that more than 15% of 
global internet traffic is expected to be from mobile users by 
2015 as compared to desktop users. Hence, wireless smart 
devices play a key role in accessing a wide range of services 
and becoming an essential part of users‘ daily lives for 
banking, shopping, healthcare, education and games.  
B. Globalization Testing 
Internationalization and localization are subsets of 
globalization (abbreviated g11n). Globalization testing is the 
process of assessing the mobile application in order to 
identify the application‘s performance within specific 
culture and language input and output conditions [4]. As 
depicted in Figure 1, globalization has been categorized into 
three phases including: feature to be tested, localization 
testing, and local awareness testing [12].  
 
 
Figure 1. Globalization Testing Sub-tree 
 
a) Internationalization Testing  
Internationalization (abbreviated ―i18n‖) organizes smart 
apps 
to 
make 
them 
easier 
for 
localization. 
Internationalization testing on the other hand is the process 
of evaluation for a single country, local, language, or culture 
[2]. 
i. 
Internationalization Testing Challenges  
The internationalization testing challenges consist of 
issues and concerns related to the native users in different 
countries.  Theses are in terms of language and culture 
specifications as depicted in table 1.  
 
TABLE I.   GLOBALIZATION TESTING ATTRIBUTES AND 
CHALLENGES. 
Attributes 
Challenges 
Screen Size 
Limitation  
Flexible layout to avoid expansion and 
contraction of text.  
Screen Direction 
Layout 
(RTL) and vertical text direction e.g. for 
Hebrew, Arabic, or Persian 
Platform 
Different OS IOS and Android 
Context and Special 
Characters 
The characters, symbols, labels, icons and 
buttons from language to language e.g., 
English to Chinese. 
Data Handling 
How the app handles data, warring messages 
and navigation 
Regional Standards 
Date, month and time e.g. Arabic or USA 
format (    ٤  يناثلا نوناك     ). 
Text Translation and 
Abbreviation  
Space handling, e.g. content translated into 
German can take up to 30% more space than 
English 
Culture Specification 
Colour and image according to culture 
specifications. 
 
ii. 
Internationalization Testing Process 
The internationalization testing process consists of 
globalization testing with feature based testing, localization 
testing and local awareness testing as depicted in Figure 1. 
 
iii. 
Feature Based Testing 
Feature based testing is a process used to identify features 
of a product available in specific languages that have 
different content as compared to other languages and 
cultures. In fact, it is important to ensure that these features 
are turned on or off as required while switching locales [13]. 
b) Localization Testing 
Localization testing is language verification testing, 
which is mainly focused on the appropriateness of the 
translation [14]. It is a process of asset verification within 
the application‘s user interface for the specific language 
contents and for the functionality state of the application, 
including: keyboard and mouse events, different GUI 
components e.g., menu bars, toolbars, dialogs, buttons, edit 
fields, and  rich text [15]. In fact, 80% to 90% of 
localization issues are based on text translation quality 
issues, for example grammar mistakes, spellings, syntax, 
corrupted text, wrongly translated text, wrong language, and 
missing audio/text [16]. Moreover, linguistic accuracy is 
essential in globalization testing in order to identify those 
issues that have been introduced during the localization 
process. 
c) Local Awareness 
Local awareness testing is the process of detecting the 
translating formats of specific languages and cultures, for 
instance 
Arabic 
formats 
from 
right 
to 
left 
(e.g, 
          ٤         ), as well as date, month, year, and time 
(e.g,     ٤  يناثلا  نوناك    ). In fact, it is essential for each 
global mobile application to consider storing and retrieving 
documents containing locale-sensitive data such as changing 
the logic of all the formatting functions such as: date, time, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

currency, numeric, etc. It must also follow the language 
specification formats in terms of text, number and image 
formats [17].  
III. 
 RELATED WORK 
Many studies have examined several factors of 
internationalization testing such John [2], Meng and Lu [3], 
Lu [5], and Sekaran [6] though each of the studies has it is 
own contributions and limitations. Since 2007 when the first 
mobile application was released in app stores [6], countless 
technologies have been introduced to facilitate and improve 
the effectiveness of wireless response systems. Therefore, 
the internationalization of M-learning apps is essential for 
students and teachers to collaborate with each other, and to 
remotely enhance students‘ performance. Simkova et al. 
cited in Bastien [18] emphasized that M-Learning is certainly 
an interesting approach to learning, but is unfortunately still 
an unknown concept in many countries where it has not yet 
caught on.  
Web course (WebCT) is an M-learning application which 
was criticized by Haller  [19] due to the complexity of the 
application, which was contributed to by its complex 
architecture.  Another example of an app that is challenging 
to use is the IELTS exam. This app has several individual 
applications as depicted in Figure 2, which consist of: the 
IELTS Reading app, IELTS Writing app, IELTS Speaking 
app and IELTS Grammar app. However, the individual apps 
are not useable by students. Because the apps are not all 
integrated into one application, students have to download 
each part of the English exam individually. In fact, these 
apps are suffering from a lack of a responsive approach.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 IELTS Exam Mobile Application adopted from  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  IELTS Exam Mobile Application adopted from [7] 
Moreover, Dhingra, cited in Haller [19] discussed various 
challenges that are associated with the localization and 
testing of mobile applications. He also described several 
elements and recommended that each element should be 
equipped with an effective test strategy for localization 
testing. He also stated that mobile localization should not just 
include translation, but should also include the user interface, 
and an adaptation of graphics based on locale or culture 
differences.  [20]. 
IV. 
WRS METHOD OF EXPERIMENT  
The proposed method for this research is based on the 
WRS case study and the eight identified attributes of 
internationalization testing requirements. It also takes into 
consideration several challenges of each attribute within each 
individual language that have been utilized in the WRS 
application. Translating the terms of the WRS application 
was based on an independent professional translating firm as 
professional translators.  
The translated terms of every language were applied to 
localise the application by using Adobe Flex Builder 4.6 for 
the teacher phase, and Adobe Action Script® for the student 
phase. The WRS app was programmed in PHP and MySQL 
was used to retrieve the data.   
For each language, there were 10 participants who carried 
out the globalization testing to evaluate the application based 
on their language attributes. The WRS testing was divided 
into two phases: student testing was the first phase, and the 
second phase assessed the teacher interface. Then the teacher 
and students interfaces were evaluated to understand how 
they experienced this application. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION 
Internationalization testing for the WRS was carried out 
for seven languages: Arabic, Chinese, French, German, 
Romanian, Spanish, and Turkish. The calculation method for 
each language was:  a number of questions were asked and 
the participants‘ answers were based on five evaluation 
matrices: excellent, poor, above average, below average, and 
average. 
 
Figure 3.  WRS Internationalization Test attribute for Arabic language 
According to the test results, the internationalization 
testing for the Arabic language as depicted in Figure 3 
highlights that 6 participants evaluated the WRS app as 
excellent for platform scalability, whereas 4 participants 
evaluated the app as above average in terms of text 
translation. 5 participants evaluated the WRS app as above 
average in terms of regional standards, data handling, and 
screen direction. 4 participants evaluated the app as average 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

as compared to only 2 participants who evaluated the app as 
below average.  
The Chinese language was the second to undergo 
internationalization testing of the WRS as depicted in Figure 
4. 5 participants evaluated the WRS app as excellent for 
platform scalability, whereas 4 participants evaluated the app 
as average in terms of culture specification and regional 
standard. In addition, 3 participants evaluated the app as 
above average compared to only 2 participants who 
evaluated the app as below average in terms of context and 
special characters.  1 participant evaluated the WRS app as 
poor in terms of text translation, context and special 
characters. 
 
Figure 4.  WRS internationalization Test attributes for Chinese language 
The third language to undergo internationalization testing 
was the French language as depicted in Figure 5. Here, 7 
participants evaluated the WRS app as above average for 
platform scalability, whereas 5 participants evaluated the app 
as excellent in terms of screen size limitation.  
 
Figure 5.  WRS Internationalization Test Attributes for French Language 
4 participants evaluated the app as above average as 
compared to only 1 participant who evaluated the app as 
below average. Only 1 participant evaluated the WRS app 
as below average in terms of context and special characters. 
Internationalization testing has also been carried out for 
the German language as depicted in Figure 6.  
In this test, 6 participants evaluated the WRS app as 
above average for platform scalability, whereas 6 
participants evaluated the app as above average in terms of 
culture specification. 
4 participants evaluated the app as above average, as 
compared to only 2 participants who evaluated the app as 
below average in terms of context and special characters. 
Only 1 participant evaluated the WRS app as poor in terms 
of text translation, context and special characters. 
 
Figure 6.  WRS Internationalization Test Attributes for German Language 
The fifth internationalization testing was carried out for 
the Romanian language as depicted in Figure 7.   
 
Figure 7. WRS Internationalization Test Attributes for Romanian Language 
 
The majority of the participants evaluated the WRS app 
as excellent in terms of screen direction and culture 
specification; whereas 4 participants evaluated the app as 
above average in terms of text translation, context and 
special characters. 4 participants evaluated the app as 
excellent, 5 participants evaluated the app as above average, 
and only 1 participant evaluated the WRS app as average in 
terms of data handling. 
The internationalization testing was carried out for the 
Spanish language as depicted in Figure 8.  
 
 
Figure 8.  WRS Internationalization Test Attributes for Spanish Language 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

6 participants rated the WRS as excellent in terms of 
platform scalability. Whereas 5 participants evaluated the 
WRS app as above average in terms of context, special 
characters and screen direction layout. 4 participants 
evaluated the WRS app as excellent in terms of data 
handling, as compared to the other 4 participants who 
evaluated the WRS app as below average for context, 
special characters, text translation and culture specification.   
The Turkish language has also been tested as depicted in 
Figure 9.  6 participants evaluated the WRS app as excellent 
in terms of platform scalability, and 5 participants evaluated 
the WRS as excellent for the screen limitation, screen 
direction and culture specification.  
 
Figure 9.  WRS Internationalization Test Attributes for Turkish Language 
4 participants evaluated the WRS as average for regional 
standard, 3 participants evaluated the WRS as below 
average scale for context, special characters and text 
translation. 
From the above analysis it is clear that the researcher 
dealt with 70 participants through seven different languages; 
the ratio of trust these participants gave to the application 
according to the offered attributes is depicted in the table 
below. 
From the below table it is clear that the attributes that best 
won the confidence of the participants and were above 
average are Platform (70.8%), followed by Screen Direction 
Layout (70.3%) and Data Handling (70.3%), respectively.   
 
TABLE II. THE RATIO OF TRUST GIVEN TO THE APPLICATION 
BY THE PARTICIPANTS, ACCORDING TO THE SPECIFIED 
ATTRIBUTES. 
The Attributes 
Average % 
Total 
(N) 
Screen Size Limitation  
60.7 
N = 70 
Screen Direction Layout  
70.3 
Platform 
70.8 
Context and Special Characters 
40.6 
Data Handling 
70.3 
Regional  Standards  
60.7 
Text Translation and Abbreviation  
40.5 
Culture Specification 
70.0 
 
However, Context and Special Characters (40.6%) were 
below average. This is perhaps due to the difference in the 
size of the words and the number of characters per word for 
each 
language. 
Additionally, 
Text 
Translation 
and 
Abbreviation (40.5%) was lower than the average, this has 
been attributed to the translators failing to arrive at a precise 
and uniform translation for some of the terms, this is 
because each languages‘ words carry many meanings, and 
the translators can detect errors only when the application is 
used. 
The ratio of trust that the participants gave to the 
application according to each language is in the following 
table: 
TABLE III., THE RATIO OF TRUST GIVEN TO THE APPLICATION 
BY THE PARTICIPANTS ACCORDING TO EACH LANGUAGE. 
The Languages 
Average % 
Total (N) 
Arabic 
70.1 
N = 10 
for each 
Language 
Chinese 
50.9 
French 
60.0 
German 
60.4 
Romanian 
70.3 
Spanish 
60.6 
Turkish 
60.3 
 
From the above table it is clear that the best languages 
that won the confidence of the participants and performed 
above average were the Romanian language which achieved 
(70.3%), followed by Arabic (70.1%), Spanish (60.6%) and 
German (60.4%). The French Language (60.0 %) and 
Chinese language (50.9%) came in last, possibly due to the 
same reasons mentioned above. 
 
 
Figure 10.  WRS Internationalization Test Attributes For All Languages 
      From figure 10 above, it is clear that there are some 
problems in the attributes (Context and Special Characters) 
as well as Text Translation and Abbreviation. The causes of 
these problems have been explained previously in the 
second and third tables. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The aim of this research was to investigate two areas: 
firstly, 
it 
demonstrated 
the 
concept 
of 
the 
internationalization testing process, and secondly, it 
established a comprehensive method for internationalization 
testing techniques for a Wireless Response System (WRS) 
application in multilingual use. However, based on our 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

literature study we can highlight that international testing is 
a challenging task for mobile applications because it has a 
great impact on the quality of the mobile application in 
terms of globalization attributes. Our experiments were 
based on a holistic view of how to influence the WRS 
testing strategy for multilingual apps by identifying the 
challenges. In addition to this, we identified some of the key 
attributes and demonstrated the careful design of an 
internationalization testing strategy to overcome these 
challenges and develop solutions for performing localization 
testing of mobile applications. 
In this paper we presented the globalization testing 
techniques 
including 
the 
internationalization 
and 
localization testing for the WRS case study evaluating 
globalization-testing issues, specifically within WRS apps. 
Our aim was to discover issues and errors in the selected 
languages. We also intended to focus on the key attributes 
for each language. Each language‘s attributes have been 
tested by native speakers of the selected languages in order 
to identify and highlight the drawbacks of WRS, as well as 
to help conduct different approaches for target audiences 
with varied cultures, regions, or screen direction. 
For future work, we will attempt to use the 
internationalization testing approach in further validation 
experiments for more languages, followed by comparing the 
internationalization attributes in each of the languages in 
terms of complexity.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Banks, Audience Response Systems in Higher Education: 
Applications and Cases: Applications and Cases: IGI Global, 
2006. 
[2] S. K. T. John. Localisation Testing, Build a Great Team. Available: 
http://www.ministryoftesting.com/2014/08/localisation-testing-
build-great-team/,  2014 
[3]  Z. Meng and J. Lu, "‗Implementing the Emerging Mobile Technologies 
in Facilitating Mobile Exam System," in 2011 2nd International 
Conference on Networking and Information Technology, 
IPCSIT, pp. 80-88 2011, 
[4] J. Lu, R. P. Pein, G. Hansen, K. L. Nielsen, and J. B. Stav, "User 
Centred Mobile Aided Learning System: Student Response 
System (SRS)," in Computer and Information Technology 
(CIT), 2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on, pp. 2970-
2975. 2010, 
[5] Lu, Zhongyu Joan, ed. "Learning with Mobile Technologies, Handheld 
Devices, and Smart Phones: Innovative Methods: Innovative 
Methods." IGI Global, 2012. 
[6] U. Sekaran, "Research methods for business: a skill building approach," 
Journal of Education for Business, vol. 68, pp. 316-317, 2003. 
[7] B. Esselink, A practical guide to localization vol. 4: John Benjamins 
Publishing, 2000. 
[8] P. Sandrini, "Website localization and translation," in EU-High-Level 
Scientific Conference Series MuTra, 2005. 
[9] C. Buck, C. Horbel, T. Kessler, and C. Christian, "Mobile Consumer 
Apps: Big Data Brother is Watching You," Marketing Review 
St.Gallen, vol. 31, pp. 26-35, 2014. 
[10] J. Gao, X. Bai, W.-T. Tsai, and T. Uehara, "Mobile Application 
Testing: A Tutorial," Computer, vol. 47, pp. 46-55, 2014. 
[11] J. Lu, "Student Response System (SRS)/Wireless Response System 
(WRS)–a Next-Generation Student Response System for 
Academia and Industry," 2011. 
[12] B. Amen, M. Sardasht, and J. Lu. "Mobile    Application Testing 
Matrix and Challenges", in Fifth International conference on 
Computer Science and Information Technology  Sydney, 
Australia, 2015 pp. 27-40 
[13] M. Kompf, "Usability and internationalization of information 
technology," Education and Information Technologies, vol. 11, 
pp. 187-189, 2006. 
[14] M. Fetaji and Z. Dika, "Usability testing and evaluation of a mobile 
software solution: a case study," in 30th International 
Conference on Information Technology Interfaces, 2008 ,pp. 
501-506,  
[15] V. Rajappa, A. Biradar, and S. Panda. "Efficient software test case 
generation using genetic algorithm based graph theory." 2008 
First International Conference on Emerging Trends in 
Engineering and Technology, July 2008, pp. 298-303. 
[16]Bernal-Merino, Miguel Á. "Globalization and Co-Creation: Trends in 
International Game Production" in A. Esser, M. Á. Bernal 
Merino and I.R. Smith Media Across Borders: Localising TV, 
Film and Video Games , 2016 
[17] N. Albalooshi, N. Mohamed, and J. Al-Jaroodi, "The challenges of 
Arabic language use on the Internet" in 2011 International 
Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions 
(ICITST), , 2011, pp. 378-382. 
[18] J. C. Bastien, "Usability testing: a review of some methodological and 
technical aspects of the method," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 79, pp. e18-e23, 2010. 
[19] K. Haller, "Mobile Testing," ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering 
Notes, vol. 38, pp. 1-8, 2013. 
[20] J. Lei and J. Zhang, "Challenges and Future Directions in Sinic 
Education," in Y. Zhao (ed) Handbook of Asian Education: A 
Cultural Perspective, p. 134-156, 2010. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-479-4
MOBILITY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

