AutoDrone - Use of Autonomously Operated Drone Technology in Forest Inventory 
An Approach Realized on Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Robert Richter, Christopher Dunkel, Oliver Michler 
Technische Universität Dresden, “Friedrich List” Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences, Chair of Transport Systems 
Information Technology 
Dresden, Germany 
email: robert.richter@tu-dresden.de 
email: christopher.dunkel@tu-dresden.de 
email: oliver.michler@tu-dresden.de 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the engineering solution of a 
system control technology for drones with the goal of 
autonomous drone flight on or over machine trails, skid trails, 
forest roads and similar line-like path in forest stands. The 
overall non-functional requirement here is for non-satellite 
positioning of the drone in real time based on a radio sensor 
network. The available open space above the line structures 
under the canopy of trees is used as the flight envelope. The 
problems of inaccurate satellite-based positioning inside the 
forestry environment are compensated primarily by the use of 
Wireless Sensor Networks for positioning. The goal is a valid 
recording of tree parameters and the creation of a digital map 
within the tree population. The control system of the drone is 
based on fused data from Wireless Sensor Networks, intertial 
sensors, satellite-based systems and visual position estimation. 
Our drone is thus able to automatically fly over freely 
selectable areas within the path without satellite-based 
positioning and thus fulfills the prerequisite for recording the 
tree parameters using suitable sensors. The practical 
application of this approach in the forest is presented and 
discussed.  
Keywords-Forest Inventory Monitoring; Wireless Sensor 
Network; Ultrawideband; GNSS Independent Localization; 
Drone 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For sustainable forest management, a solid data basis on 
the current stocking is absolutely necessary. In today's 
standard sampling method, trees in defined sampling circles 
are measured by terrestrial walking on the basis of a 
homogeneous, usually permanently established sampling 
grid. These data are stratified according to statistical 
procedures, aggregated and further processed for the 
calculation of forestry-relevant indicators. The current work 
process is becoming increasingly difficult for the following 
reasons:  
 
In the course of ecological forest conversion, mixed 
forests are aimed at that are rich in structure. This is 
associated with a highly developed vegetation layer 
near the ground, which makes accessibility and 
visibility extremely difficult for terrestrial methods. 
 
The sampling method used today is based on a 
personnel-intensive, time-consuming work process 
with a high cost burden for the forest enterprises. 
Although it is possible to reduce the costs associated 
with the surveys by means of the grids of the survey 
network, this is at the expense of the validity or 
statistical reliability of the results.  
 
With regard to accuracy, it must also be taken into 
account that manual measurement methods have a, 
high measurement error. Here, the error rate and 
measurement inaccuracies can be significantly 
reduced with the help of modern recording 
technologies.  
 
The process chains in forest management are for the 
most part still very extensive and decoupled. 
Automated 
data 
acquisition 
and 
subsequent 
automated data preparation allow the personnel and 
technical focus to be placed on data analysis and 
evaluations in the subsequent processing steps. Thus, 
the expertise is directed to the central tasks of 
silvicultural and forestry planning for the forest 
enterprise.  
Against this background, the approach realized the use of 
an autonomously moving drone technology in forest 
inventory and operational planning is to be the basis for a 
later practicable, technologically mature procedure for the 
automated recording of individual tree parameters and the 
generation of population parameters relevant to planning and 
management. The focus of the work is on the technological 
innovation and implementation, the development of a control 
technology for drones with the goal of autonomous drone 
flight on or above machine trails, skid trails, forest roads and 
similar line structures within forest stands. Thereby, the 
available free space profile above the line structures is used 
as flight space. An appropriate flight altitude neglects the 
edges of the paths near the ground, which are covered by 
structures and which prevent a valid recording of the tree 
parameters inside the stand due to the obstructed view in 
terrestrial methods. The control system of the drone is based 
on fused data from radio sensor networks, inertial sensors, 
satellite-based systems and visual position estimation. A 
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor performs 
object avoidance. Our Drone is thus able to automatically fly 
over freely selectable areas within the path without global 
satellite-based (GNSS) positioning and thus fulfills the 
prerequisite for recording the tree parameters using suitable 
sensors. The specific tasks for this implementation were: 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Compensation of weak or non-existent GNSS 
signals in a forest environment through the use of 
range-capable Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). 
 
Automatic flight stabilization with respect to altitude 
and required lateral positioning over the forest floor 
 
Multisensor data fusion and position filtering 
algorithms for autonomous flight primarily based on 
a WSN and secondarily based on an imaging 
(visioning) position module 
 
Application of a Wireless Sensor System for 
communication, 
localization 
and 
environment 
detection of drones 
 
Adaptation / further development of visioning 
position modules for the forest environment with 
regard to obstacle detection of trees, branches, 
bushes and segmentation of the forest floor as well 
as a constant flight altitude 
 
Implementation of a Simultaneous Localization And 
Mapping (SLAM) algorithm for autonomous flight 
within a geofender of the back alley  
 
Figure 1 shows the system approach in this respect. 
 
Figure 1.  System approach for the use of drones in a forest environment. 
 
The paper is structured as follows. After this introduction to 
the topic, which describes the problems and the boundary 
conditions for the use of autonomous drones in a forest 
environment, the state of the art in science and technology 
regarding drones and position technologies described in 
Section II. Section III gives an overview about the 
technological process flow for realizing a GNSS independent 
drone flight on the back alley in the forest. The test of the 
whole system setup and first flights on a test field are shown 
in Section IV. Section V addresses the evaluation of recorded 
measurement results of the performed test flights in a forest 
environment. In this regard, the results and resulting 
problems are discussed. The paper ends with a summary and 
an outlook on further work to solve the problems presented 
before. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Smaller drones or multicopters are relevant for the 
intended use in the forest on skid trails under the leaf canopy 
at a height of about 2 to 3 meters. This is due to the intended 
area of application of the drones, which are to fly 
autonomously under the treetops up to three meters above 
the forest floor, specifically in the area of skid trails. This 
eliminates large and heavy devices from the selection. 
Nowadays, drones can be used for very many disciplines in 
science and research due to their small design, improved 
control technology and falling prices. They open up entirely 
new perspectives for ecological research and environmental 
protection. For example, drones are already being used to 
map landscapes that are difficult to access or to take stock of 
endangered animal species. Today, drones already offer an 
efficient way to collect, aggregate and store or transmit data 
for scientific purposes using appropriately equipped sensor 
technology. 
A. Overview of relevant Drone Technologies 
A special focus is navigation in visual flight or with 
difficult or no GNSS reception. In principle, GNSS-based 
systems (mostly GPS and GLONASS) can currently achieve 
resolutions of barely more than three meters [1], which is 
sufficient for uninhabited landscapes - but not for urban 
areas or use inside buildings or in the forest on skid trails. In 
this regard, heavily attenuated or scattered GNSS signals 
under 
the 
treetops 
make 
autonomous 
drone 
flight 
enormously difficult to the point of impossible feasibility. 
Furthermore, they have to permanently avoid smaller and 
larger tree trunks, branches, smaller trees from the tree 
regeneration and shrubs. This requires a complex camera 
system, gyroscopes, accelerometers and ultrasonic sensors. 
This is the only way the aircraft can find out where it is and 
if there are any obstacles in its way. The state of the art is far 
advanced in this respect. Using so-called intelligent flight 
modes, the visual, inertial, ultrasonic and GNSS data are 
combined in a multi-sensor data fusion. This enables an 
assisted flight depending on the environment. 
 
B. Introduction of Wireless Sensor Networks for Drone 
Positioning and Navigation in a Forestry Environment 
In order to ensure autonomous flight in the forest 
environment, a WSN is adapted for positioning and applied 
to drones. Technical basis for this was the recent increased 
miniaturization as well as the advancing development of 
microsystem technology for the design of highly complex 
sensor nodes, which are combined as individual systems in 
an infrastructure-free and self-configuring WSN. In contrast 
to wired configurations, particular importance is attached to 
the radio-based transmission of information within the WSN 
and to a central coordination unit. The main task of these 
networks is the monitoring of extensive and usually difficult 
to access areas or extensive process chains, which can only 
be 
monitored 
by 
conventional 
systems 
with 
disproportionately high and uneconomical effort. The totality 
of all sensor nodes thus forms an information source with 
significant spatial extent, high flexibility and an almost 
unrestricted scaling behavior. Sensor nodes are generally 
highly complex individual systems consisting of a 
microcontroller, sensors or actuators, a memory, the 
communication unit and a power source. Thus, sensor nodes 
are basically capable of describing relationships with the 
environment, 
such 
as 
topological 
and 
geometrical 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

information. The measured distance of sensor nodes to each 
other is, besides angular or simple presence information, the 
most commonly used form of neighborhood information and 
forms the data basis required for positioning and 
environment recognition methods. Broadband radio systems 
are used, which provide the required distance relations in the 
form of distance and angle measurements in corresponding 
real-time performance on the basis of the licensed Ultra-
Wideband Spectrum (UWB). Within a WSN with a 
minimum of four fixed anchor nodes, a suitably equipped 
drone can fly autonomously along path on a forestry skid 
trail. The anchor nodes are static fixed in pairs on the trees. 
In principle, the anchor nodes can be attached to forestry 
vehicles, trees and other "static" points. The mobile nodes 
can be integrated, for example, in the clothing of forest 
workers or directly on mobile devices such as drones, 
chainsaws. Operationally and algorithmically, static and 
mobile nodes can switch properties [2]. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL PROCESS FLOW 
OF THE RADIO SENSOR NETWORK BASED DRONE FLIGHT IN 
THE FOREST ENVIRONMENT 
First of all, the realized process flow is described. At 
least four anchor nodes are placed in the forest along the skid 
alley for Wireless Sensor Network-based tracking by a 
forestry employee. The anchor nodes are attached to trees at 
a height of 1 to 2 m with the antenna pointing towards the 
skid alley (see Figure 2) 
 
 
Figure 2.  Pinned anchor node on a tree [3]. 
 
This focuses the radio channel on the area of interest for 
the positioning within the skid alley (see red marked area in 
Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Skidding trail for wood harvesting (a), area of interest for 
autonomous drone flight marked in red (b). 
A. Technologies Used on the Drone 
The corresponding wireless sensor for positioning 
determination is additionally attached and integrated as a so-
called node on the drone control unit. In this regard, the 
connection was realized via different interfaces like 
Universal Asynchronous Receiver / Transmitter (UART) and 
Controller Area Network (CAN). By calibrating the initial 
anchor into a geodetic reference system, especially a World 
Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84) coordinate and determining 
the angular offset to the north, the coordinate transformation 
into global coordinates then takes place. The novelty now is 
that the drone's determined relative position within the WSN 
is converted to a global coordinate and provided to the drone 
controller as a fake National Marine Electronics Association 
standardized position data exchange (NMEA) message. 
Missing NMEA parameters are simulated or replaced. The 
drone does not recognize any difference between converted 
or simulated and real GNSS environment. In this context, the 
interconnection of the system components required for this 
purpose is shown in the following Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Interconnection between system components regarding the 
WSN and the drone, especially the flight controller and the integrated 
mobile node. 
 
In the left part of the figure, the possibilities for drone 
control are shown. The control unit with the Mission Planner 
is a software for planning flight missions. It is used to plan 
the flight trajectory on the skid trail in prior, which the drone 
will then fly autonomously with the help of the WSN. 
Physically, the control unit is part of the so-called Ground 
Station (GS) and is equipped with a 433 MHz transceiver 
and connected to a computer running the planning software 
(see Figure 5). The trajectory planned on the computer is 
finally transferred via the telemetry channel to the drone and 
saved as a flight mission. Until now, the GS software used 
has been Mission Planner (MP) and QGroundControl 
(QGC). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Ground Station system architecture. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

The other remote control shown in Figure 4 serves as a 
fallback level to switch from autonomous flight to manual 
control. This is a commercially available programmable 
remote control (FrSky Taranis / Herelink Transceiver), 
which is connected to the drone with 2.4 GHz for pure flight 
control. This is only used in an emergency if problems are 
detected in autonomous flight. 
The heart of the drone is the flight controller. This is 
where all sensor data ultimately converge. From this, the 
flight parameters are calculated and the corresponding rotors 
are controlled, for example, to execute the uploaded mission 
plan. The flight controller in this case is based on ArduPilot, 
an open source software for unmanned vehicles and the de 
facto standard for autonomous control of multicopters, fixed 
wing/Vertical Take Off and Landing (VTOL) gliders, 
helicopters, submarines and land vehicles. The FW variant 
for multicopters is called ArduCopter and is customizable. 
The configuration of the Firmware to the respective 
properties of the copter as well as its sensors is done via 
parameters. If changes to the FW are necessary, or if new 
modules not previously available, but have to be added such 
as positioning by using an extended Kalman filter (version 2 
or 3), this can be implemented using the corresponding 
environment dependencies. To clarify this, the system 
architecture of the FW shown in Figure 6 is used with 
examples of the connection of further components. Via a 
companion computer (e.g., Arduino or Raspberry Pi on the 
drone) with the ground station, data of the copter can be 
retrieved, configured or changed. MAVLink (Micro Air 
Vehicle Link) is the protocol for communication between the 
components. The actual ArduPilot firmware is described in 
the Flight Code part. In this regard the flight controller, is a 
Cube Orange. It works according to the open Pixhawk 
standard, which defines guidelines for the implementation of 
the hardware (e.g., interfaces, voltage levels, etc.). The 
superordinate operating system is the RTOS (Real Time 
Operating System) ChibiOS. In normal operation, access to a 
large part of these components is not possible or not 
necessary, since the entire configuration of the system is 
done via the parameters [4]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  ArduPilot system architecture [4]. 
Finally, this section will look at the drone as itself. The 
drone is an PM Q685 Quadcopter and has the following 
technologies relevant to this particular system approach: 
 
 
Real Time Kinematic GNSS Positioning Modul 
 
Cube Orange Flight Controller 
 
HereLink Transceiver 
 
ArduPilot flight stack 
 
Ultrawideband sensor node (Pozyx) with 
Arduino Uno 
 
The following Figure 7 illustrates the connection of the 
UWB sensor to the flight control of the drone. The Arduino 
Uno is responsible for the calculation of the positions to the 
individual anchors (PA1...PA4) as well as for the coordinate 
transformation. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Integration of the UWB-based sensor node into the flight 
controller [4]. 
 
Finally, Figure 8 shows the operational drone modified 
for the goal of autonomous flight over a skid trail under the 
leaf canopy of trees in a forest environment. This fulfills the 
requirements for GNSS independent and sufficiently precise 
positioning with the use of a WSN distributed within the 
forest. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Operational ready drone at the launch point in the forestry 
environment at the skid trail.  
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

B. Flight Mission Procedure 
The preparation of the flight mission, i.e., the trajectory 
to be flying on the skid trails follows the sequence diagram 
below (Figure 9). As a result, the flight trajectory is 
transferred to the drone as a flight mission. At this point, in 
principle the drone is ready itself for fly. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Sequence diagram for flight mission preparing. 
 
In order for the drone to fly the trajectory autonomously 
in the forest environment, the following preparations must be 
fulfilled on site (see sequence diagram Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 10.  Sequence diagram for flight mission on site. 
 
After this sequence diagram is completed, GNSS is 
deactivated and the drone flies the programmed route from 
the start and back again. During the flight all sensor data 
arriving at the flight controller are logged. 
 
IV. 
TEST OF THE WHOLE SYSTEM SETUP AND FIRST 
FLIGHTS ON A TEST FIELD 
The first flight tests and measurements were carried out 
on a test field. Here, the pilot still retained control of the 
drone. All process sequences were optimized and an artificial 
return path created on the test field was successfully flown 
autonomously in the end. For this purpose, a best-case 
scenario was designed and implemented. This included no 
sources of interference from the real environment such as 
trees, i.e., no or hardly any signal attenuation and multipath. 
The following figure 11 shows the test field and the flight 
area equipped with a WSN (marked in red).  
 
 
Figure 11.  Overview about the test field as a surveyed map (a) and a 
satellite based view (b). The WSN area for flights is marked in red in each 
case. 
 
The first interesting measurements are related to the 
distances between the anchors and the mobile node on the 
drone (see Figure 12). The symmetrical overlap of the 
distance measurements of all anchors at two points 
(outbound and return flight to the starting point) can be seen. 
There are minimal deviations in the 10 cm range of the 
distances during the entire flight. In summary, the distances 
are not very noisy and without detected outliers for this case. 
A comparison with the flight behavior confirmed this 
measurement. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Anchor-Tag distance measurements during a flight in a radio 
sense optimal environment on a testfield. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Another important aspect of the investigation relates to 
the in-flight altitude measurement in the radio sensor 
network (see Figure 13). An optimization in terms of height 
measurement is the use of an ultrasonic sensor instead of the 
WSN. This type of sensor currently works more accurately 
due to the technical structure.  
 
 
Figure 13.  Flight altitude measurements during an autonomous flight on 
the test field. 
 
The maximum height measurement ends at 7 meters, which 
is more than sufficient for our application. In the diagram 
you can see some outliers, which should not have been there 
due to a flight observation. A sudden drift of the drone in 
altitude could not be observed with the deviating altitude 
measurements (deviations at 15 s and 26 s). Since these 
deviations were short-lived, the Extended Kalman filter used 
compensated for them. 
 
V. 
EVALUATION OF RECORDED MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
OF THE PERFORMED TEST FLIGHTS IN A FOREST 
ENVIRONMENT 
The extensive test flights carried out in the forest 
confirmed the measurements on the test field. As results its 
presented here two interesting figures. Figure 14 shows the 
positioning of the drone with the mobile node/tag during the 
flight along the back road in the forest based only on the 
distance measurements of the WSN. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Positioning of the drone based on raw distance measurements. 
 
It can be clearly seen that the positioning based on the raw 
data measurement of the distances varies with a deviation in 
the decimeter range. Thus, theoretically, no continuous 
smooth flight trajectory is possible on the sole basis of 
positioning in a WSN. Only by using the other onboard 
drone sensors, a smooth continuous flight trajectory becomes 
possible through a multi-sensor data fusion in the used 
Extended Kalman Filter (see Figure 15). 
 
 
Figure 15.  Data fused global positioning of the drone in the forestry 
environment. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
In this paper we have shown, that a GNSS-based 
positioning of a drone can be substituted by a local WSN for 
positioning. In this context, an already implemented 
solution of an autonomous drone flight within a skid trail 
was presented and discussed regarding its results (e.g., 
position accuracy, measurement setup). Further work relates 
to the objectives described in the introduction with respect 
to individual tree-to-tree mapping and radar-based tree 
condition detection. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Agency for Renewable 
Resources (Fachagentur Nachwachsende Rohstoffe e. V. - 
FNR) as project sponsor of the Federal Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (BMEL) [5]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Mansfeld, Werner, satellite positioning and navigation - 
basics and application of global satellite navigation systems. 
vol. 2, Wiesbaden, 2004 
[2] A. Born, Algorithms for position determination and their 
accuracies in Wireless Sensor Networks, PhD thesis, 
München 2011 
[3] Pozyx. 
2021, 
Pozyx.io. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://pozyx.io/products-and-services/creator 2022.06.25 
[4] Ardupilot, 2022, ardupilot.org. [Online] Available from: 
https://ardupilot.org/dev/docs/apmcopter-code-overview.html 
2022.06.25 
[5] BMEL 
2022, 
fnr.org. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.fnr.de/fnr-struktur-aufgaben-lage/fachagentur-
nachwachsende-rohstoffe-fnr.html 2022.06.25 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

