User-centered Data Driven Approach to Enhance
Information Exploration, Communication and
Traceability in a Complex Systems Engineering
Environment
Fahim A. Salim
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: fahim.a.salim@usn.no
Haytham B. Ali
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: haytham.ali@usn.no
Gerrit Muller
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: gerrit.muller@gmail.com
Kristin Falk
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: kristin.falk@usn.no
Abstract—Organizations
working
on
complex
engineering
projects have data scattered across many different systems. The
data is often disconnected, and its potential remain largely
untapped. Enterprises large and small find it difficult to explore
the information cluttered around different systems. A major
factor in this difficulty is a lack of the user perspective in complex
engineering environments. The presented research focused on a
case study of information exploration needs of engineers testing
sub-sea equipment. The case study observed that enterprise
software tools in complex systems engineering environment are
often designed for the content producer and not the consumer.
Which makes these tools difficult, and time consuming to use
and discourage their adoption. By utilizing user-centered design
and co-creation, the experience and needs of users is identified
to design, a data driven approach for enhance information
exploration. The proposed design has the potential to make
modifications to existing information systems, that would create
a large impact in information exploration, data utilization and
would provide a better experience for engineers, management
and other stakeholders and enhance the productivity of teams,
equipment testing and design.
Index Terms—User-centred Design; Participatory Design; Big
data; Early Phase Decisions;
I. INTRODUCTION
Most
organizations
working
on
complex
engineering
projects, generate a large amount of document centred data
during the project’s life cycle [1] [2]. The data is usually scat-
tered around many different often disconnected systems where
it is not easily explorable [1] [3]. Organizations understand
the need of getting more value out of their data to improve
their routine operations. However, its potential remains largely
untapped [4].
There are many factors identified by researchers, which
limits the utilization of available data in a complex systems en-
gineering environment to enhance operations. These includes
among others, a lack of common language among engineers
and interdisciplinary teams, ineffective knowledge sharing,
finding system information and ineffective communication
among stakeholders [1] [5]–[8].
The presented work focuses on the issue of data dispersed
around different systems and is not easily searchable by users.
As a case study, we focused on test engineers testing sub-sea
oil drilling equipment at our partner organization, which is a
multinational corporation that provides complete project life
cycle services for the energy industry.
The problem is not exclusive for our case study. Orga-
nization such as enterprises large and small find it difficult
to explore the information cluttered around different system
which may or may not be connected to each other [4] [7] [9].
One solution to this problem is to use a model base system
engineering approaches and store data in central repository [2],
[10]. However, it is not very likely as complex engineering
projects involve different companies such as vendors, other
contractors, separate subsidiaries, and different departments
geographically dispersed with their own workflows and Stan-
dard Operating Procedures (SOP). Therefore, the data is bound
to end up in silos and would require exploration through
multiple systems.
A major factor in this difficulty is a lack of the user
perspective in complex systems engineering environments [1]
[3] [11]. In a recent survey, Qlik and Accenture [4] found that
only 21% engineers reported to have access to dashboard style
exploration system suitable for their job roles while 18% said
that the systems were appropriate for their skill level.
Researchers have found that while employees are regarded
as crucial in utilizing big data systems, they are very often
neglected in the design process [12]. The needs of user control
is important in the data exploration process [13] [14] and also
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

there is a need to take in multiple perspectives in a soft systems
context [11].
Building upon previous work [3], It is our contention that
designing a data driven methodology to enable end users
to explore the content in an efficient manner in a complex
systems engineering environment would help users in utilizing
the available data in efficient manner to enhance operations
and make data driven early phase decisions.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section II
describes the related work. The case study and proposed
approach is described in Section III. Which is followed by
a discussion in Section IV and finally Section V contains the
concluding remarks and some plans for the future.
II. RELATED WORK
Dashboard style systems are used extensively to explore
data [15]. They often use semantic and video data [16]–[18].
Dashboard style systems often follow a familiar pattern of
providing detail on demand access to multimodal information
based on an issued query. Research is also done on novel
visualization to give quick insights for further exploration [19]
[20], and on new ways of querying large data sets [21].
In their recent survey regarding the utilization of big data
in enterprise environments, Qlik and Accenture [4] found
that about 21% of engineers have access to dashboard style
exploration systems which are designed to be suitable for
their needs and 18% believe that the tools are designed in
accordance to their skill level. Disparate data silos across
multiple systems and technical capabilities are regarded as
major obstacles [9].
Researchers have long identified the need for more user
control in exploration of data [13] and need for taking multiple
perspective when designing data exploration in a soft systems
context [11]. General purpose commercially available data
exploration and document retrieval tools have limitations [2]
[7] [22].
Co-creation [23] and user centred design (UCD) [24]–[26]
are often utilized to understand the user techniques to design
systems which are suitable for evolving user needs. Haesen
et al. use a user centred design approach and semi-structured
interviews to perform a qualitative analysis of the information
exploration needs of professional video searchers [25]. Similar
approach is utilized by Gravier et al. [24] in which authors
utilized mockups and non-functional prototypes to understand
the information exploration needs of different users to come up
with design solutions. Their analysis concluded that different
users may have different needs in terms of desired features in
exploration systems. Salim et al. [26] extend this approach
and use semi-functional prototypes, screen capturing, think
out loud and questionnaires to understand the user journeys
in engaging exploration of content. Similar techniques with
additional semi-structured interviews is used by Koesten et
al. [27] to understand users sense making with data-sets for
recommending design of tools and documentation practices to
allow data reuse.
To allow engineers to explore content beyond simple docu-
ment retrieval, researchers have proposed solutions like social
network systems specifically designed for engineering design
communication and project management [22] model based
system engineering (MBSE) approaches to model central
repositories to allow engineers and other stakeholders access
to relevant information [2].
Currently, there is a lack of taking in the user perspective
in designing exploration systems [12]. There exist a need
for considering the multiple user perspectives and user needs
while designing exploration systems [3] [11] [28].
III. CASE STUDY AND PROPOSED DESIGN
The presented research is utilizing Industry as a Laboratory
[29] , user-centered design [28] and Human Media Interaction
[14] [26] methodologies to focus on the issue of data dispersed
around different systems and is not easily searchable by users.
As a case study we focused on test engineers at our part-
ner organization. The partner organization is a multinational
corporation that provides life cycle services for the energy
industry. We conducted multiple workshops, observation ses-
sions and semi-structure interviews to understand the real-
life context of the company(team) of interest in a complex
engineering project. While the sessions overall focused on
the holistic view of the early phase activities of company of
interest in acquiring and developing/executing projects (subject
of future publications). The current paper is focused on the
information needs of test engineers.
A. Information Needs of Test Engineers
Test engineers need to access information during their
routine operations. The current case study focuses on test en-
gineers running different test on sub-sea oil drilling equipment
at their workshop. They require access to information about
the equipment they are testing. The information they require
about different parts may include:
• The project specification.
• The design specification of parts.
• The provider or designer of the part (i.e., the supplier).
• Product responsible department or person at that depart-
ment or supplier organization.
• The maintenance history of the part.
• The information about any modification done to the part
and its history.
During the different tests they run, e.g., System Integration
Test (SIT) where a combination of different part is tested to
see if the parts are performing as per the specifications. In
case of an unexpected event such as equipment not performing
as expected or has a fault or have a part missing or have
any other problem. It is logged in an event log. The event
contains information such as data about the equipment and its
serial number, etc. along with the description of the problem.
The log also contains information about the project such as
work package and product responsible department or supplier
and other project specific information. Currently those logs
are kept in excel sheets files which are project specific, and
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

the company does not do any analysis on the logs. They have
logs going back more than 10 years.
The test engineers at SIT, do know the value of data analysis
in terms adding value to their operations. They require the
following:
• Ability to log information centrally and follow up (can
be achieved by any online system).
• Traceability (of the equipment and reports):
– Keep track of reported errors.
– Keep track of equipment and its maintenance history.
• Trends: see what patterns or lack of them appears in the
event logs. Natural Language Processing (NLP) analysis
of the event logs shared with us has similarities with other
partners case studies [5]).
B. Proposed Approach Design
Figure 1 shows the component diagrams of the current
environment with our proposed components. In the first step a
prototype system is developed for them to log the unexpected
events and related data in a convenient manner i.e., enhance
their ability to log information centrally.
In terms of trends, basic NLP analysis of the event logs is
performed, and the functionality is added to the prototype.
In terms of traceability, the testing engineers need to be
able to keep track of the progress on the reported problems
by product responsible departments or suppliers. For this,
the researchers suggest a semantic ontology driven equipment
register based on the Digital Design Basis initiative to quickly
search the product related information and to update the event
log with relevant data, instead of current manual look up at
different systems, which is time consuming and cumbersome.
Testing engineers and other departments require traceability
of their equipment. The problem is that the equipment may be
at different departments or at different subsidiaries which are
dispersed all over the globe. Apart from that, the equipment
may have gone through maintenance-based changes and may
have alter in specification as the years have gone by. The
ontology base register has the potential to streamline the
process of crawling through different systems and find a match
of equipment based on the ontology properties [30]–[32]. Con-
nected to the event log system it could also help test engineers
in quickly finding the specification and functionality of the
different equipment and see product relevant information in
a dynamic manner, i.e., due to the machine-readable nature
of the data it can be used to transform the information to
be curated in any UI design, e.g., an excel style sheet or a
graphical representation of the equipment with overlapping
information i.e. (digital twins of various fidelities).
C. Description of prototype and interviews with test engineers
To facilitate the understanding of the information needs
of maintenance engineers. We developed a semi-functional
prototype and use this to conduct interviews with SIT test
engineering team. During our sessions we identified three basic
requirements of SIT engineers namely logging, traceability and
identifying trends (see Section III-A for details).
For event logging we propose an online system which shows
the event logs in a grid (see Figure 2). The reason behind is
that it is similar to an excel file so that, the engineers are
comfortable using it as they are very used to, using excel
files. In addition to centrally log all the events the users have
functionalities like sorting and filtering. They can also have
additional controls on updating the values of certain fields so,
for example, only a test manager could edit certain values (see
Figure 2).
For identifying trends, the prototype allows users to perform
analytics on the event logs, e.g., identify what equipment
or tag number is appearing most in the logs indicating a
trend of equipment which causes errors. Additionally, it also
lets user do NLP analysis of the event logs, e.g., to identify
repeatedly appearing phrases such as “need to be calibrated”
to identify trends and to communicate them with product
designers and other responsible parties (see Figure 3). Details
of the NLP analysis of the event logs are the subject of another
publication.
For traceability, the test engineers require information from
different systems. The information they usually require are
product specification, and equipment maintenance history and
location etc. currently engineers have to search for this in-
formation in several different systems and it is a very time
consuming and a tedious task. In the prototype we suggested
connections with those systems and to allow the engineers to
get that information from within the prototype.
The prototype also showed some alternative ways of rep-
resenting information to engineers, e.g., graphical represen-
tation of the equipment with equipment specific information
overlayed in a detailed-on demand manner. The idea is that
user could switch between excel like list and other represen-
tations to better suite their exploration and communication
needs. E.g., communicating an error with equipment image
and overlayed information to provide a richer experience
when communicating events with different departments and
stakeholders (see Figure 4).
The prototype was well received. Participants really liked
the concept. During our sessions and discussions, users wanted
to centrally view the events and the required information.
They really liked the simplicity of the concept. Interview
participants also liked the analytics features and saw a lot
of potential in the NLP analysis of the logs and the ability
to identify the trends and patterns occurring during different
equipment testing.
Participants reiterated our observations from our co-creation
sessions and observation of the team meetings, that looking
for information in different systems is indeed a very time-
consuming task and a drag to their productivity and user
experience. They really liked the idea of linking the different
information and presenting it in one interface. They also saw
the potential of using digital twin representation of different
fidelity and product specific information overlayed, instead of
simply linking to the product documentation.
When asked about what is missing in the prototype and what
functionality would further enhance their experience: the reply
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure. 1: Components Diagram overall approach (proposed).
Figure. 2: Viewing and updating event logs prototype.
was that they would prefer to have the information in different
layers i.e., they wanted better control on the amount of detail
they get about the equipment. It was also mentioned that
different stakeholder may need access to different information
and the need to control who can edit and view the information.
Finally, the need to have easy to use system was reiterated
and a need to standardized way to enter and edit the logs
consistently across different teams and projects.
IV. DISCUSSION
The co-creation sessions and interviews demonstrated the
need for considering the user perspective to allow users to eas-
ily explore the information in a complex systems engineering
environments. The case study shows that in large organizations
despite having most of the infrastructure in place, users in
Figure. 3: Trend identification by NLP analysis.
Figure. 4: alternative representation of equipment information.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

certain functions still end up using sub-optimal exploration
tools during their routine operations. This creates a big drag
on their productivity. It is the sentiment expressed by the test
engineers during our sessions.
Test engineers require a central place to search for the
required information and the ability to make changes in a user-
friendly manner. They also desire more control in viewing and
editing of certain data and the amount of detail they get when
looking at information i.e., detail on demand representation.
Linking information from different systems and representing
to them in easy to view manner is helpful for them. They
also require standardized way to log information that can be
achieve by implementing controlled vocabularies in the input
interfaces.
The key takeaway from our sessions is that in complex
systems engineering environments; the software tools are often
designed for the content producers and not for the different
users (consumers) of that information. There are also not easy
to user for non-daily users to explore the available information.
It makes it difficult for them to use, as it becomes time
consuming for them to perform their routine tasks. It leads
users to stick to old tools like excel files and not being able
to utilize the benefits of technological developments.
V. CONCLUSION
The presented case study demonstrated that while large
enterprises have many different systems to collect information
and generate documentation and they may also have the
necessary infrastructure to allow efficient use of the data. Users
still end up not having a good experience with such tools and
it creates hurdles in accessing the required information in an
efficient manner. It discourages the adaptation of new systems
and causes lost opportunities in terms of learning insights from
the available information which could enhance daily operation
or allow design decisions to avoid problems occurring in the
future.
The case study demonstrates that by understanding the
user needs, minor modifications to existing infrastructure can
create a large impact in information exploration and utilization
and a better experience for engineers, management and other
stakeholders and enhance the productivity of teams, equipment
testing and design.
In the future, we aim to extend the study to other teams
at the partner organization to understand the similarities in
information needs of different users in a complex systems
engineering environment. We also aim to extend this to other
partner organizations of the H-SEIF21. consortium to come up
with a design specification which could help in creating better
interactive systems for enterprise users.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is part of the H-SEIF 2 project and is funded
by the Research Council of Norway through the innovation
project (IPN project no.: 317862).
1https://www.usn.no/hseif last accessed on 20-06-2022
REFERENCES
[1] S. Engen, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “The need for systems awareness
to support early-phase decision-making—a study from the norwegian
energy industry,” Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, 2021.
[2] H. Kannan, “Formal reasoning of knowledge in systems engineering
through epistemic modal logic,” Systems Engineering, vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 3–16, 2021.
[3] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, and K. Falk, “Towards a Data Processing
Framework for Enhanced User Centric System Engineering ,” in PRO-
CEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, Workshop
on Smart Pervasive Computing, 2021, pp. 15–18.
[4] Qlik
and
Accenture,
“The
Human
Impact
of
Data
Literacy,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact
[5] H. B. Ali and F. A. Salim, “Transferring Tacit Knowledge into Explicit:
A Case Study in a Fully (Semi) Automated Parking Garage,” in
PROCEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, 2021,
pp. 11–14.
[6] B. A. Delicado, A. Salado, and R. Momp´o, “Conceptualization of a T-
Shaped engineering competency model in collaborative organizational
settings: Problem and status in the Spanish aircraft industry,” Systems
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 534–554, 2018.
[7] K. Falk, A. K. Kamara, E. P. Brathen, K. Helle, P. T. Moe, and
S. Kokkula, “Digitizing the Maintenance Documentation; A System of
Systems in Oil and Gas Industry,” SOSE 2020 - IEEE 15th International
Conference of System of Systems Engineering, Proceedings, pp. 493–
499, 2020.
[8] Juzgado P.D. Borches, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for effective
communication in product evolution,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, 2010.
[9] R. Technology, “AI / ML Annual Research Report 2022,” 2022.
[10] J. Bickford, D. L. Van Bossuyt, P. Beery, and A. Pollman, “Operational-
izing digital twins through model-based systems engineering methods,”
Systems Engineering, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 724–750, 2020.
[11] M. Kjørstad, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “Exploring a Co-Creative Problem
Solving Toolbox in the Context of Norwegian High-Tech Industry,”
IEEE Systems, pp. 1–11, 2020.
[12] D. H. Shin, “Demystifying big data: Anatomy of big data developmental
process,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 837–854, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2015.03.007
[13] C. Cobˆarzan, K. Schoeffmann, W. Bailer, W. H¨urst, A. Blaˇzek, J. Lokoˇc,
S. Vrochidis, K. U. Barthel, and L. Rossetto, “Interactive video search
tools: a detailed analysis of the video browser showdown 2015,” Multi-
media Tools and Applications, vol. 76, no. 4, pp. 5539–5571, 2017.
[14] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, S. Luz, and O. Conlan, “Automatic transformation
of a video using multimodal information for an engaging exploration
experience,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.
[15] A. Jackson, J. Lin, I. Milligan, and N. Ruest, “Desiderata for exploratory
search interfaces to Web archives in support of scholarly activities,”
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries,
vol. 2016-Septe, pp. 103–106, 2016.
[16] J. Moreno-Schneider, A. Srivastava, P. Bourgonje, D. Wabnitz, and
G. Rehm, “Semantic Storytelling, Cross-lingual Event Detection and
other Semantic Services for a Newsroom Content Curation Dashboard,”
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)., pp. 68–73, 2018.
[17] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, D. Postma, R. van Delden, D. Reidsma, S. Luz,
and B.-J. van Beijnum, “Towards Automatic Modeling of Volleyball
Players’ Behavior for Analysis, Feedback, and Hybrid Training,” Journal
for the Measurement of Physical Behaviour, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 323–330,
2020.
[18] B. Yousuf and O. Conlan, “VisEN: Motivating learner engagement
through explorable visual narratives,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 9307, pp. 367–380, 2015.
[19] C. Perin, R. Vuillemot, C. D. Stolper, J. T. Stasko, J. Wood, and
S. Carpendale, “State of the Art of Sports Data Visualization,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 663–686, 2018.
[20] T. Polk, J. Yang, Y. Hu, and Y. Zhao, “TenniVis: Visualization for tennis
match analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2339–2348, 2014.
[21] L. Shao, D. Sacha, B. Neldner, M. Stein, and T. Schreck, “Visual-
interactive search for soccer trajectories to identify interesting game
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

situations,” IS and T International Symposium on Electronic Imaging
Science and Technology, vol. 0, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[22] J. A. Gopsill, H. C. McAlpine, and B. J. Hicks, “Supporting
engineering
design
communication
using
a
custom-built
social
media
tool
-
PartBook,”
Advanced
Engineering
Informatics,
vol.
29,
no.
3,
pp.
523–548,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2015.04.008
[23] M. Guntveit, M. Kjrstad, and B. Sevaldson, “Early Validation of Stake-
holder Needs by Applying Co-creation Sessions,” INCOSE International
Symposium, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1398–1415, 2020.
[24] G. Gravier, M. Ragot, A. Laurent, R. Bois, G. Jadi, E. Jamet,
and L. Monceaux, “Shaping-Up Multimedia Analytics: Needs and
Expectations of Media Professionals,” in The 22nd International
Conference on Multimedia Modelling, vol. 9516, Miami, 2016, pp.
303–314. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-
319-27671-7
[25] M. Haesen, J. Meskens, K. Luyten, K. Coninx, J. H. Becker, T. Tuyte-
laars, G. J. Poulisse, P. T. Pham, and M. F. Moens, “Finding a needle
in a haystack: An interactive video archive explorer for professional
video searchers,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 63, no. 2, pp.
331–356, 2013.
[26] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, O. Conlan, and S. Luz, “An approach
for exploring a video via multimodal feature extraction and user
interactions,” Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, no. October 2017,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s12193-018-
0268-0
[27] L. Koesten, K. Gregory, P. Groth, and E. Simperl, “Talking datasets
– Understanding data sensemaking behaviours,” International Journal
of Human Computer Studies, vol. 146, no. October 2020, p. 102562,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102562
[28] J. Pinto, K. Falk, and M. Kjørstad, “Inclusion of human values in
the specification of systems: bridging design and systems engineering,”
INCOSE International Symposium, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 284–300, 2019.
[29] C. Potts, “Software-engineering research revisited,” IEEE Software,
vol. 10, pp. 19–28, 1993.
[30] Y. A. Akter and M. A. Rahman, “Extracting RDF Triples from Raw
Text,” 1st International Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering
and Robotics Technology 2019, ICASERT 2019, vol. 2019, no. Icasert,
pp. 31–34, 2019.
[31] W. Baes, F. Portet, H. Mirisaee, and C. Labb´e, “RDF triples extraction
from company web pages: Comparison of state-of-the-art deep models,”
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2708, 2020.
[32] P. Exner and P. Nugues, “Entity extraction: From unstructured text to
dbpedia rdf triples,” CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 906, pp. 58–69,
2012.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

