Preventing E-Government Tragedy Of The Clouds
Using System Thinking Methods
1st Geoffrey Lichtenheim
School of Systems & Enterprises
Stevens Institue of Technology
Hoboken, USA
email:glichten@stevens.edu
2nd Mo Mansouri
School of Systems & Enterprises
Stevens Institue of Technology
Hoboken, USA
email:mmansour@stevens.edu
Abstract—The purpose of this study is to propose the use of
system thinking methods in E-Government systems and system of
systems to drive greater efﬁciencies in the deployment of public
cloud services. Qualitative methods such as a systemigram, causal
loop analysis, as well as a novel cloud cost reduction model is
used to map complexity, display the multidimensional nature of
the system, as well as formulate an ontology. The ”tragedy of
the commons” economic concept is used to orient our research
towards the sustainable consumption of digital resources for
government agencies. Business and system dynamics concepts are
used to both discover as well as propose solutions for the research
problem, which is identiﬁed as E-Government cloud services
efﬁciency and cost optimization. We conclude with additional
ideas to further this research through the use of triangulation
and additional quantitative research methods.
Keywords—E-Government, E-Governance, Systems thinking,
Systems Dynamics, Public cloud.
I. INTRODUCTION
State and local governments continue to embrace digital
transformation initiatives that provide services and accessibil-
ity for both citizens as well as business in their respective ju-
risdictions. The emergence of E-Government, which is deﬁned
as the use of information and communications technology
(ICT) to provide public services for government to government
(G2G), government to citizen (G2C), and government to
business (G2B) has become a shaping force for the use of
cloud services [1] [2] [3]. Cloud computing, deﬁned by NIST
is ”a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with
minimal management effort or service provider interaction”.
This new technical consumption model operates similar to a
public utility where resources are charged based on the amount
of resources used by the agent. As E-governments continue
to expand, so does their requirement for cloud computing
services to host infrastructure platforms, applications, data
repositories, as well as network interfaces [4] [5] [6]. This
resource need, however creates a challenge as programs and
projects for E-services grow so does the respective budget
and spending. Government agencies now see value in digital
services and choose to leverage them to deliver positive
outcomes for constituents and businesses. This situation of
competing priorities as well as consumption can create a
modern-day ”tragedy of the commons”, which is the potential
rapid deterioration or complete elimination of a resource due
to overly aggressive demand without limitations or constraints
[7] [8].
A.
Research Questions
Research questions we aspire to answer are, ﬁrstly how do
we represent the complexity and boundary of the system, its
stakeholder interests, as well as multiple interconnections and
dimensions? Secondly, how do we deﬁne causal relationships
of the system to understand both virtuous, vicious, as well
as balancing cycles and the effect of time delay. Finally, how
can a cloud efﬁciency model applied to these public cloud
resources limit the potential for budgetary overruns and ensure
a resilient and sustainable E-Government service?
B.
Methods
We leverage a qualitative system thinking method known as
a systemigram to represent complexity and system boundaries
as well as a causal loop analysis to display the effect system
elements have on each other, both reinforcing as well as
balancing [9] [10]. Finally, we address governance and the
important role it will play in system dynamics to set thresholds
and limits by using a novel cost reduction model.
C.
Structure
A foundational conceptual understanding of cloud comput-
ing is provided in the primer section, followed by a view
of the complex E-Government system of interest using a
systemigram. Economics of cloud describes how this new
computing utility is ﬁnancially structured, and the unique ways
that stakeholders and consumers can interact and consume the
vast amount of technical resources. A new model developed
for E-Government, provides high-level guidance in the form
of capabilities, solutions, and respective outcomes, which we
call the ”cloud efﬁciency model” [11]. A Causal loop analysis
is an instrument out of system dynamics and is used to display
reinforcing behaviors, such as cloud spend and vendor revenue
generation as well as balancing factors, such as budgetary
constraints. The conclusion discusses ideas to enhance and
extend this research effort.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

II. CLOUD COMPUTING PRIMER
Today there are multiple large public cloud technology
providers and services used extensively by both private as
well as public sector customers [12] [13]. We list three
major cloud providers, also known as ”hyperscalers”, as
well as some of the most widely used services they host.
Public Cloud providers
• Amazon Web Services (AWS)
• Microsoft Azure Cloud (Azure)
• Google Cloud Platform (GCP)
Public Cloud Prominent Services
• AWS Services
1) Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
2) Relational Database Service (RDS)
3) Elastic Container Service (ECS)
• Microsoft Azure Services
1) Azure Active Directory (AD)
2) Azure Content Delivery Network (CDN)
3) Azure Data Factory
• Google Cloud Platform Services
1) Database Services
2) Big Data Services
3) Machine Learning Services
III. E-GOVERNMENT SYSTEM COMPLEXITY
Using a systemigram, we can see in Figure 1 how the
mainstay represented in yellow displays primary system nodes,
which include government services, operations, employees,
and citizens, which are both important and relevant to our
narrative. Branching off in red are public cloud services that
connect to elements, such as third-party vendors, as well as the
information system (IS) budget, which has multiple outﬂows
and only a single inﬂow.
Fig. 1. Systemigram.
In the blue-colored section, we show the interconnections
of the federal government, revenue, as well as digital security
which in this environment is paramount to the success of the
system. As we can see from Figure 1, E-government’s use of
cloud computing has an inherent complexity in its mission to
provide secure, scalable, and resilient E-services to its citizens
[14] [15].
IV. ECONOMICS OF CLOUD
The concept of cloud computing is to provide a simpliﬁed
and consolidated platform hosted off-site that removes much
of the operational overhead of traditional private cloud data
center technologies. Many private and public sector IS teams
are adopting this cloud-hosted model as it allows them to
focus on the higher layer applications and remove the need
to spend resource cycles with physical equipment maintenance
and upgrade processes. This shifting of data center operations,
in many cases, removes the need for dedicated operational
staff; therefore operational expenditure budgets can be re-
appropriated towards greater consumption of compute re-
sources [16].
There are two ways to consume cloud-based services, the
ﬁrst is direct from the cloud provider, and the second is
indirect via a third-party integrator. Entities that consume
cloud services do so via a subscription that involves a legal
contract or ”terms of service” (TOS) that stipulates the rules
and guidelines for the consumer. Vendors have multiple ways
of selling cloud services, and one of the most popular is
under a consumption plan agreement that deﬁne how much
of a resource will be consumed over a certain period of time.
An example is a government organization that signs a three-
year multi-million dollar contract with a cloud vendor to use
services such as email for their staff. The government agency
beneﬁts from the use of this highly scalable email system for
its employees, and the cloud vendor receives revenue which
is assumed to be allocated to fund ongoing research and
development operations, ﬁnance, HR, as well as enhancing
shareholder value due to its favorable earnings projections.
While this cloud-hosted IS strategy seems to be an advan-
tageous relationship for all parties, there are some caveats to
consider. One of the issues with the cloud is its seemingly
endless supply of resources for end users of its services. The
reality is that physical data centers with compute, network, and
storage equipment are still required to host the infrastructure
required to deliver cloud services. This means that there is
a ﬁnite amount of resources from any cloud vendor, some
customers have experienced hitting these limits when provi-
sioning additional capacity. This was recently experienced due
to pandemic-related supply chain shortages in microprocessors
and hardware needed to expand hosted environments [4]. In
addition to the constraints possible by cloud providers, govern-
ment agencies have ﬁxed budgets, and these can shift based on
a multitude of factors such as government revenue or alternate
priorities. A possible scenario could be the case where a
government entity wants to expand its cloud services but
cannot due to the hosting costs being greater than the allocated
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

budget. The entity could request a budget enhancement or one-
time over allocation however, this may take time to obtain
requisite approvals or authorization, causing a potential delay
[17].
As we have seen in the research, this issue of cloud eco-
nomics, such as the panacea of cloud, requires careful planning
and proper allocation of funds and resources to ensure the
long-term effective use of the resources. Shaping forces are all
around to turn a well-run environment into a security breach or
system down emergency, negatively impacting mission-critical
systems [18].
V. CLOUD EFFICIENCY MODEL
With the goal of ensuring the prolonged efﬁcient use of
cloud computing resources in E-Government, a novel model is
created in Figure 2, which addresses the technical capabilities
desired, solutions which can be employed, as well as positive
outcomes which help in the conservation of budget. Based on
the E-Government service being delivered, one or many of
these solutions can be adopted, leading to outcomes that are
oriented towards sustainability [19]. The technical capabilities
are broad, high level domains spanning the most commonly
requested infrastructure components and services. The solu-
tion for each respective capability provides more conceptual
guidance as opposed to speciﬁc solutions. This is due to a
rapidly changing landscape of technical solutions constantly
entering and leaving the market.
Technical 
Capability
Data Storage 
Compute
Cloud Services
Platform Operations
Solution
Local and alternate 
repositories
Hyper Converged 
Infrastructure (HCI)
Multi-Cloud Architecture
Technical Enablement
Outcome
Reduce cost by leveraging 
several landing zones 
Move workloads to cost-
effective compute platform
Use multi-cloud services to 
avoid vendor lock-in
Maintain in-house technical 
expertise
Fig. 2. Cloud Efﬁciency Model.
The outcome maps to business value and is intended to
validate the goal of adopting the solution. Each outcome is di-
rected towards cost efﬁciency, sustainability, and preservation
of resources which can be technological, human, or monetary.
VI. CAUSAL LOOP ANALYSIS
To obtain a graphical representation of how E-government
spending on cloud computing affects other elements such as
cloud vendor revenue, a causal loop diagram is developed
[20] [21]. As we see in Figure 3, a reinforcing loop is
established by E-government consumption of cloud resources
which increases their digital service catalog and offerings.
Similarly, as the cloud vendor providing services continues
to grow, their offerings and revenue increases in another
reinforcing loop. The balancing portion of this analysis comes
via the ﬁnite E-Government budget that constrains both what
is consumed as well as what is offered.
Fig. 3. Causal Loop Analysis.
There is a delay factor which in some cases could prove
problematic if the consumption exceeds the budget or if the
budget gets cut without timely notice to the operations team,
which is provisioning new services. This situation could prove
harmful if a sustainable resource management system was not
planned for and executed. Also, having proper visibility to the
cost of cloud services and discounted rates can help ensure
continuity [22] [23].
VII. CONCLUSION
System thinking methods were employed in this study to
analyze how cloud computing impacts E-Government services.
First, we utilized the systemigram to map the complex re-
lationship between E-Government agents, vendors, citizens,
and the federal government [24]. This revealed different
stakeholder interactions and provided insight into possible
shaping forces that may impact how these digital services
are fulﬁlled, operated, and delivered. Next, a novel model for
E-Government cloud cost reduction was proposed to provide
technical leadership with solutions and respective outcomes
based on the capability being considered. Leveraged properly
and given due consideration, these solutions may have a
lasting impact on future costs associated with consumption of
cloud services. Finally a causal loop analysis was developed
to show the interconnections between E-Government use of
cloud, reinforcing vendor revenue streams, as well as how
budget constraints become balancing factors in this ﬂow of
resource and funds. This study lacks a complete quantitative
analysis component with data that would have enhanced our
models, speciﬁcally our causal loop. An idea for further study
and enhancement of the contribution would be to gather data
related to government spending on cloud computing platforms
and use mathematical models as a triangulation technique
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

to complement the qualitative components. Cloud technology
will continue to grow in government, therefore, being able to
ﬁnd sustainable and responsible ways to ensure its prolonged
use would provide value to those who are tasked with its
operation [3].
REFERENCES
[1] F. M. Al-Balushi, M. Bahari, and A. A. Rahman, “Deﬁning e-
Government integration and its objective: A systematic literature review,”
2016 3rd International Conference on Computer and Information Sci-
ences, ICCOINS 2016 - Proceedings, pp. 13–18, 2016.
[2] V. R. Prybutok, X. Zhang, and S. D. Ryan, “Evaluating leadership, IT
quality, and net beneﬁts in an e-government environment,” Information
and Management, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 143–152, 2008.
[3] J. Sangki, “Vision of future e-government via new e-government
maturity
model:
Based
on
Korea’s
e-government
practices,”
Telecommunications Policy, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 860–871, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2017.12.002
[4] H. Zhang, “Analysis of the impact of cloud computing technology
to e-government performance evaluation,” Proceedings - 2nd IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Cloud Computing, Services, and
Engineering, MobileCloud 2014, pp. 295–298, 2014.
[5] A. M. Al Khouri, “An Innovative Approach for E-Government Transfor-
mation,” International Journal of Managing Value and Supply Chains,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 22–43, 2011.
[6] P.
L.
Sun,
C.
Y.
Ku,
and
D.
H.
Shih,
“An
implementation
framework
for
E-Government
2.0,”
Telematics
and
Informatics,
vol.
32,
no.
3,
pp.
504–520,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2014.12.003
[7] E. P. Purnomo and K. Hubacek, “Management of commons with a
proper way: A critical review Hardin’s essay on the tragedy of com-
mons,” ICEEA 2010 - 2010 International Conference on Environmental
Engineering and Applications, Proceedings, no. Iceea, pp. 4–7, 2010.
[8] M. J. Ahn and S. Bretschneider, “Politics of E-Government: E-
Government and the Political Control of Bureaucracy,” Public Adminis-
tration Review, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 414–424, 2011.
[9] M. Mansouri and A. Mostashari, “A systemic approach to governance
in extended enterprise systems,” 2010 IEEE International Systems Con-
ference Proceedings, SysCon 2010, pp. 311–316, 2010.
[10] R. Cloutier, B. Sauser, M. Bone, and A. Taylor, “Transitioning systems
thinking to model-based systems engineering: Systemigrams to SysML
models,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems,
vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 662–674, 2015.
[11] S. D. Ryan, X. Zhang, V. R. Prybutok, and J. H. Sharp, “Leadership and
Knowledge Management in an E-Government Environment,” Adminis-
trative Sciences, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 63–81, 2012.
[12] W. Zhang and Q. Chen, “From E-government to C-government via cloud
computing,” Proceedings of the International Conference on E-Business
and E-Government, ICEE 2010, pp. 679–682, 2010.
[13] A. A. Memon, C. Wang, M. R. Naeem, M. Aamir, and M. Ayoob, “Cloud
government-a proposed solution to better serve the nation,” Proceedings
of 2014 International Conference on Cloud Computing and Internet of
Things, CCIOT 2014, no. Cciot, pp. 39–44, 2014.
[14] T. McDermott, M. Nadolski, and L. Sheppard, “Use of systemigrams
to identify emergence in complex adaptive systems,” 9th Annual IEEE
International Systems Conference, SysCon 2015 - Proceedings, pp. 778–
784, 2015.
[15] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri, and M. Omer, “Using Systemigrams in Prob-
lem Deﬁnition: A Case Study in Maritime Resilience for Homeland
Security,” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2020.
[16] Y. Alghofaili, A. Albattah, N. Alrajeh, M. A. Rassam, and B. A. S.
Al-Rimy, “Secure cloud infrastructure: A survey on issues, current
solutions, and open challenges,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 11,
no. 19, 2021.
[17] D. Sagarik, P. Chansukree, W. Cho, and E. Berman, “E-government 4.0
in Thailand: The role of central agencies,” Information Polity, vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 343–353, 2018.
[18] S. Woodruff, T. K. BenDor, and A. L. Strong, “Fighting the inevitable:
infrastructure investment and coastal community adaptation to sea level
rise,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 34, no. 1-2, pp. 48–77, 2018.
[19] E. J. Ng’Eno, “Embracing e-Government in service delivery and busi-
ness to people through libraries: A case for Kenya,” 2010 IST-Africa,
pp. 1–9, 2010.
[20] J. Homer, “Best practices in system dynamics modeling, revisited: a
practitioner’s view,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 177–
181, 2019.
[21] M. Saeri, M. M. Lotﬁ, and M. R. Mazidi, “A Causal Loop Diagram to
Analyze Various Long-Term Effects of PV Integration into Power Sys-
tems,” ICEE 2019 - 27th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering,
pp. 852–855, 2019.
[22] G. Haghighat and N. Hosseinichimeh, “Why Organizations Fail to Re-
ﬂect on Experiences: Insights from a Causal Loop Diagram of Reﬂection
on Experience,” IEEE Engineering Management Review, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 81–96, 2021.
[23] N. Ghaffarzadegan and R. C. Larson, “SD meets OR: a new synergy
to address policy problems,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 34, no. 1-2,
pp. 327–353, 2018.
[24] M. Mansouri, B. Sauser, and J. Boardman Dr., “Applications of systems
thinking for resilience study in maritime transportation system of sys-
tems,” 2009 IEEE International Systems Conference Proceedings, pp.
211–217, 2009.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

