 
Applying Conceptual Modeling and Failure Data Analysis for "Actual Need" 
Exploration 
Case Study for an Automated Parking System 
 
Haytham B. Ali  
University of South-Eastern Norway  
Kongsberg, Norway 
haytham.ali@usn.no  
 
Gerrit Muller 
University of South-Eastern Norway  
Kongsberg, Norway  
gerrit.muller@usn.no  
 
Fahim A. Salim 
University of South-Eastern Norway  
Kongsberg, Norway 
fahim.a.salim@usn.no  
 
 
Abstract— In complex sociotechnical research, organizations 
tend to plan to implement new technologies or solutions which 
may not fully address the actual need. This study demonstrates 
the use of conceptual modeling to explore an industry's "actual 
need" through a case study for a medium-sized company that 
delivers Automated Parking System (APS). Company plans the 
introduction 
of 
Condition-Based 
Maintenance 
(CBM). 
Conceptual modeling facilitated the exploration of the 
Company's actual need behind the plan, which is increasing 
APS reliability. We collected failure data to understand APS 
reliability in this context. We find that the combination of 
conceptual modeling and data analysis facilitates exploring and 
understanding the Company's actual need. The conceptual 
modeling supports communication and understanding, while 
the data analysis guides the modeling. This study concludes with 
suggestions regarding using a combination of data analysis and 
conceptual modeling as a short-term vision to increase the 
system’s reliability. On the other hand, this short-term vision 
may support the CBM as a long-term vision. 
Keywords— Conceptual modeling; failure data analysis; case 
study; actual need; value proposition.  
I. INTRODUCTION  
This paper investigates an Automated Parking System 
(APS) as our System-Of-Interest (SOI). APSs operate mainly 
in urban centers. There is a need for APSs, especially in 
metropolitan areas, due to land scarcity, increasing numbers 
of vehicles, and urban mobility [1]. Shoup [2] states that 
between 1927 and 2001, studies show that finding a parking 
lot in a metropolitan city consumed between 3.5 and 14 
minutes. The paper further mentions that research indicates 
that 8%–74% of traffic in urban areas was due to finding a 
parking for the car. Thus, APSs are needed to ease urban 
mobility. Internationally, there is a significantly increasing 
demand for semi-automated parking systems (garages). The 
value of APSs globally was 1.23 billion USD in 2019 and is 
expected to increase at a compound annual growth rate of 
almost 11% from 2020 to 2027 [3]. 
However, the SOI suffers from a variety of problems. 
These problems include end-user (car owner) mistakes, such 
as pushing or forgetting to push a button, which causes 
freezing of the SOI. In other words, end-users who are 
unfamiliar with the SOI can cause SOI failures. Furthermore, 
the SOI sometimes retrieves the wrong car, takes a long time 
to retrieve the vehicle, or does not retrieve the vehicle, 
especially during high-volume usage. In addition, there are 
mechanical failures related to the design of the SOI. These 
failures decrease the SOI's availability and increase downtime. 
Downtime increases costs. These costs include, but are not 
limited to, repair parts, and the fee for alternative conventional 
parking [4][5]. 
A. Introduction to the Case Study 
The Company we use as a case study in this paper is a 
medium-sized enterprise that delivers APSs, including 
maintenance. The Company delivers fully and semi-
automated parking systems. The Company starts its 
involvement before building. Nowadays, the Company is 
transitioning from only selling to developing, producing, and 
marketing APSs. The main customers for the Company are 
building owners and land developers. The main stakeholders 
to the case study are Company management, maintenance 
personnel, and car owners (end-users). The Company 
participates in a sociotechnical research project called H-SEIF 
2. H-SEIF stands for "Harvesting value from Big data and 
Digitalization through a Human Systems-Engineering 
Innovation Framework." This project aims at enabling data-
driven decision-making within the early design phase of the 
new product development (NPD) process. There are nine 
companies and two university partners within the research 
project. The company of interest in this case study came with 
a Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM) proposal as a case 
within the research project. 
B. Conceptual Modeling 
We use conceptual modeling to assist with the complexity 
of analyzing the Company's proposed CBM as a case study. 
Conceptual models are simple enough to share and 
communicate the understanding of needs, concepts, 
technologies, etc. These models are sufficiently detailed and 
realistic to guide system development. Conceptual modeling 
plays a vital role within various disciplines, such as 
simulations in the computer science domain, soft systems 
methodology (SSM), and systems engineering. Various types 
of conceptual modeling are in use, such as visualization and 
graphing of mathematical models (formulas), simulation 
models, and systems architecting models [6]. 
This study illustrates the use of conceptual modeling to 
explore CBM. Conceptual modeling is a way to find not 
obvious or "hidden" need of the Company; that is the actual 
problem that triggered the CBM. In other words, the employed 
conceptual modeling aids in communicating and sharing a 
common understanding of the Company's "actual need" and 
provides an overview of the case study. In addition, we 
support the conceptual model's discoveries with failure data 
analysis. Conceptual modeling, failure data analysis, and 
research data collected from interviews, observations, and 
workshops permit data triangulation in case study and thus 
increase the robustness of the results [7]. The research process 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

aided in exploring how increasing the SOI's reliability is the 
actual need, while the CBM is an envisioned solution to 
address this need. The company sees CBM as the first step 
toward a digital twin for the SOI. The data analysis results can 
be used as feedback into the early design phase of the NPD 
process.  
The research questions that the paper addresses are the 
following: 
RQ1: How can conceptual models help the different 
stakeholders within a sociotechnical research project to 
formulate a shared understating of the Company's request and 
its consequences? 
RQ2: How can shared understanding support reasoning 
and decision-making about options for solving the actual 
problem? 
RQ3: How can data support common understanding, 
reasoning, communicating, and decision-making for the actual 
problem? 
The reminder of the paper is as follows: Section II 
provides an informal literature review regarding conceptual 
modeling and reliability engineering. It continues with Section 
III that illustrates the case study. The case study section 
includes a description of the SOI and conceptual models from 
the case study. After the discussion in Section IV, the paper 
ends with a conclusion and suggestions for future work in 
Section V. 
II. LITERATURE 
This section discusses literature regarding conceptual 
models and reliability engineering. 
A. Conceptual Models 
Conceptual models have several definitions and origins. 
These origins include physics, simulations, tools for co-
creation or collaborative sessions, and tools that aid 
conceptual design in systems engineering. The common 
aspect among these origins is that conceptual models aid in 
sharing and communicating common understanding and ways 
of thinking.  
Co-creation sessions use conceptual models in several 
areas, such as design thinking, by focusing on human 
interactions [8]. Gigamapping, from system-oriented design, 
enhances communication and relates strongly to design 
thinking in its style [9]. Neely et al. [10] suggest a workshop 
for co-creation sessions for interdisciplinary teams; the 
workshop is similar to gigamapping.  
The scientific simulation field includes several definitions 
of conceptual models. Sargent [11] defines conceptual models 
as follows: "the mathematical/logical/graphical representation 
(mimic) of the problem entity developed for a particular 
study." Many other authors link the use of conceptual models 
to simulation, such as [12]–[14]. Robinson states that 
conceptual models are an essential aspect of simulation 
projects and mentions that conceptual models are more art 
than science [12][15]. 
Systems engineering uses various types of conceptual 
models. 
This 
variety 
results 
from 
interdisciplinary 
engineering wherein each engineering field uses its domain-
specific conceptual models [6]. For instance, Blanchard [16] 
uses several variations of conceptual models. Tomita et al. 
[17] consider conceptual system design and suggest using a 
systems thinking application to raise the consideration from 
the data and information level to the knowledge and wisdom 
level. Montevechi  and Friend [14] put forward the use of an 
SSM to develop conceptual models. Using the SSM in this 
case study, part of a complex sociotechnical research project, 
makes sense; this research project aims to bridge soft aspects 
(including knowledge and wisdom) with hard aspects (data 
and information). Systems thinking plays a vital role in the 
development of conceptual models. For instance, Jackson [18] 
connects systems thinking to label complex problems. In 
another example, Sauser et al. [19] apply systems thinking to 
define a complex problem within a case study.  
Muller's work illustrates bridging conceptual models with 
first principal and empirical models [20]. Empirical models 
aid in expressing what we measure and observe without the 
necessity of understanding what we observe. First principal 
models use theoretical science principles. These models are 
often mathematical formulas and equations. Conceptual 
models use a selection of first principles that explain 
measurements and observations. Conceptual models are a 
combination of empirical and first-principle models. This 
paper emphasizes that conceptual models need to be simple 
enough to reason and understand the case study. 
Simultaneously, conceptual models need to be realistic 
enough to make sense. This latter description of conceptual 
models emphasizes the need to balance between the simple, 
making sense, and the practical aspect when developing 
conceptual models.  
B. Reliability Engineering 
Reliability engineering is essential in systems engineering 
and quality management [21]. The main objective of 
reliability engineering is to prevent system failure. O'Connor 
and Kleyner [22] define reliability as "The probability that an 
item will perform a required function without failure under 
stated conditions for a stated period of time." This 
conventional definition of reliability emphasizes two aspects 
(scientific topics): statistics and engineering. The word 
"probability" emphasizes the mathematics and statistics 
aspects, whereas the phrase "required function, stated 
conditions, and period of time" emphasizes the engineering 
aspect. 
One of the statistical methods within reliability 
engineering is determining the Mean Time Between Failures 
(MTBF). MTBF is the inverse of the failure rate: MTBF = 
(total system(s) operation time) / (total number of failures). 
MTBF can be used to measure a system's reliability by 
showing how long the system operates before it needs 
maintenance [23][24]. 
Developing a reliability program plan is a crucial within 
engineering aspect. This plan includes activities for reliability 
engineering and aids in determining which activities to 
perform. These activities depend on factors such as system 
complexity, life cycle stage, failure impact, etc. The Systems 
Engineering Handbook includes guidelines for developing a 
reliability program plan [25]. There are also reliability 
program standards, such as ANSI/GEIA-STD-0009. This 
latter standard supports the system lifecycle for reliability 
engineering. It includes three crucial elements: (1) 
understanding system-level operation and environmental and 
resulting loads, and understanding the stresses throughout the 
structure of the system; (2) identification of the failure modes 
and mechanisms; and (3) mitigation of surfaced failure modes 
[26]. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

There are also two types of reliability engineering: 
proactive and reactive. Proactive reliability engineering 
occurs during design and development, emphasizing failure 
prevention. In contrast, reactive reliability engineering 
happens during production, especially during maintenance 
and operations, emphasizing failure management [27][28]. 
Figure 1 visualizes these two types of reliability engineering: 
proactive and reactive reliability engineering. Figure 1 also 
depicts the development process. This process is an iterative 
one. It indicates that reliability engineering is also iterative in 
its nature. Systems engineering integrates reliability within the 
processes. Verification occurs before production proceeds and 
consists mainly of analysis, testing, inspection, and 
demonstration [27]. 
 
Figure 1. Proactive and reactive reliability engineering within the product 
lifecycle, including the new product development (NPD) process, redrawn 
from [27]. 
Shortly after reliability engineering was founded in 1957, 
Hollis stated a need for conventional statistical reliability. 
However, Hollis also emphasized that the statistical aspect is 
insufficient. There is also a need for other reliability activities 
or techniques to improve the feasibility and robustness of the 
designed system(s). In other words, statistical and engineering 
aspects complement each other [29][30]. Reliability 
influences other dependability attributes of the system, such 
as maintainability and availability. Thus, reliability affects 
return on investment, market share, and competitiveness. In 
other words, a reliable system provides a competitive 
advantage and increases market share by having a proven field 
design (good system reputation).  
Reliability engineering includes different data sources 
[31]. These sources include the following: 
1. data from the design synthesis, 
2. testing and analysis from the verification process, 
3. published information (literature), 
4. expert opinion, 
5. system operation data, and 
6. failure data. 
Failure data may come from maintenance record data or 
service-log data. Failure data analysis plays a vital role in 
increasing the system's reliability, due to the following 
reasons [31]: 
1. increases knowledge regarding the system's design 
and manufacturing deficiencies; 
2. estimates the reliability, availability, MTBF, and 
system failure rate; 
3. improves 
reliability 
through 
design 
change 
recommendations; 
4. aids data-driven decision-making through design 
reviews; 
5. determining systems' maintenance needs and their 
parts; and 
6. conducting reliability and life cycle cost trade-off 
studies. 
In this study, we focus on closing the feedback loop from 
back-end data, represented by failure data, into the early 
design phase of the NPD process. Thus, it is also crucial to 
properly report and document the data, including failure data. 
III. APPLYING CONCEPTUAL MODELING AND DATA 
ANALYSIS 
This section starts by describing the SOI to give a 
contextual understanding for the case study. Further, the 
section illustrates the conceptual model application through 
the case study before it ends by analyzing failure data.  
A. Description of the System 
Figure 2 portrays the SOI: the semi-automated parking 
system and its configuration. Figure 2 visualizes a drive-in 
indication. The figure also visualizes a variety of SOI 
configurations. These configurations vary from 11 × 2 × 3 to 
4 × 2 × 2 and 9 × 1 × 3. The first number is the width, the 
second is the depth, and the third is the height. Depending on 
the building architecture, the car entrance can be a 
straightforward or inclined plane, as with the SOI's 
configurations. 
 
Figure 2. The System-Of-Interest (SOI): semi-automated parking system 
(left) and its configurations (right). 
The SOI consists of numerous hardware parts. We 
mention here some of the main parts to give a better 
understanding of the SOI. We visualize these parts in Figure 
3, which contains the following: 
• 
The gate is the entrance and exit before and after 
parking. 
• 
The control unit is a touch screen with operating 
instructions, including a key switch and emergency 
stop. The control is connected to the power unit 
through cables and fixed on a wall. 
• 
The platform carries the car to the correct position. 
• 
The wedge helps the driver position the car at the 
correct position.  
Figure 4 and Figure 5 visualize the workflow from the user 
perspective for car entry and retrieval for the SOI, 
respectively.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Figure 3. System-Of-Interest’s main parts. 
Figure 4. Workflow for car entry to the SOI. 
Figure 5. Workflow for car retrieval from the SOI. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

B. Applying Conceptual Models Through Case Study 
We applied conceptual modeling using multiple views on 
the SOI, the requested CBM, and its context to understand, 
reason, make decisions on, and communicate the system's 
specification and design [32]. This application ensures the 
Company's need fulfillment through eliciting customer value 
and business value propositions. These propositions drive the 
system's requirements, which further drive the system design. 
On the other hand, design and system requirements enable 
customer and business value propositions [33].  
We used core principles, objectives, and recommendations 
in applying conceptual modeling. The main principles we 
applied are using feedback and being explicit. Using feedback 
indicated whether we moved in the right direction by moving 
back and forth from the problem domain and solution domain, 
as well as indicated whether our solution solved the problem. 
These principles facilitated reaching our objectives. In turn, 
the objectives were to establish understanding, insight, and 
overview, support communication and decision-making, as 
well as facilitate reasoning [34]. The main principles and 
objectives translate into ten main recommendations:  
1. Timeboxing: We used timeboxing for developing 
several models. The timeboxing varies from 1 hour 
to days.  
2. Iteration: We iterated using feedback from expert 
input. The experts included domain scholars and 
industry practitioners. 
3. Early quantification: We translated the principle of 
being 
explicit 
into 
quantifying 
early. 
This 
quantification aids at being explicit and sharpening 
discussions through numbers. However, these 
numbers can evolve, as we conducted quantification 
at an early phase, and more confidence through 
validation may be needed.  
4. Measurement and validation: We calculated and 
measured numbers for the proposed system: CBM 
and SOI, for the early quantification. We validated 
these numbers through evidence and arguments from 
the literature and the Company. 
5. Applying multiple levels of abstraction: We 
considered the size and complexity within these 
levels of abstraction. We aimed at connecting a high 
level of abstraction to a lower level to achieve 
concrete guidance.  
6. Using simple mathematical models: We used simple 
models to be explicit and understand the problem and 
solution domain. These models aimed at capturing 
the relation between the parts and components for the 
Company's proposed system, to be able to reason 
these relations. 
7. Analysis of credibility and accuracy: We made 
ourselves and the Company aware of the numbers in 
such a way that these numbers were an early 
quantification that needed to be further verified and 
validated within more extended iterations. 
8. Conducting multi-view: We applied six main 
(different) views. These views are customer 
objectives ("what" for the customer), application 
("how" for the customer), functional view ("what" of 
the Company's proposed systems: black-box view 
the CBM), conceptual view, and realization view. 
The conceptual and realization views describe the 
"how" of the Company's proposed system (CBM). 
Figure 6. A3A0 shows the most significant results from applying conceptual modeling through the case study. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

These six views include more relevant views. Muller 
[20] describes these views accompanied by a 
collection of sub-methods. We iterated over these 
views by using different abstraction levels. 
9. Understanding the system in its context: We 
conducted several research data collection methods, 
including workshops, participant observation, and 
interviews, to understand the SOI context. We also 
conducted a literature review to understand the 
Company's proposed system (CBM) context. We 
needed to understand the SOI, CBM context for 
reasoning.  
10. Visualizing: We used visualization to develop all the 
figures (models) conducting the multi-view. The 
visualization facilitated communicating common 
understanding, reasoning, decision-making, and 
stimulating discussions among the domain experts: 
scholars and the Company [35]–[38].  
A3 Architecture Overview (A3AO) is an effective tool for 
communication [39]–[41]. Figure 6 visualizes the most 
significant results from applying conceptual modeling through 
the case study within an A3A0. The A3A0 (figure) content 
includes seven parts marked with a red numbered cycle in the 
figure. These parts are the following: 1) SOI; 2) functional 
model for the CBM system; 3) concepts for different 
maintenance systems, with a description. These systems 
include predictive maintenance, CBM, planned maintenance, 
and condition-based with planned maintenance; 4) CBM 
system context; 5) a prototype dashboard visualizing the CBM 
system functionality. This visualization includes traffic light 
color code indicating the condition for the different parts of 
the SOI; 6) key performance parameters for the CBM system; 
and ultimately 7) conclusion and recommendations. The 
conclusion and recommendations include the customer value 
proposition, business proposition, system requirements, and 
system design and technology for the Company's proposed 
system (CBM system). The lines between these parts illustrate 
the enables and drives among them. 
C. Failure Data Analysis 
This subsection illustrates the failure data analysis and its 
results. The failure data (also called maintenance record data) 
are unstructured. The maintenance personnel manually log 
failure events, using excel. In the excel file, there are several 
sheets. Each sheet belongs to a specific semi-automated car 
parking garage system. Each sheet's content includes the 
following columns, also called parameters: date (for a 
maintenance event), time, telephone number (for the 
maintenance personnel who investigated the failure event), 
place number (for which parking lot the failure event 
occurred), reason (possible reasons for the failure event), and 
reinvoiced yes/no (if the failure event is reinvoiced as it is not 
included within the maintenance agreement with the 
Company, or not). The main parameter within the failure data 
is the description of the failure event. The description includes 
data about what part of the SOI failed, possible reasons, and 
maintenance actions to fix the failure event. 
The excel file contains several sheets. Most of the sheets 
belong to private semi-automated car parking systems, 
whereas others belong to a public car parking system. The 
main difference between the private and the public is that in 
the public parking system the users get different parking plot 
in the system each time they use the system, while in the 
private the users have their permeant parking lot each time. 
However, for both the private and public parking, the users are 
permanent users. The raw dataset for the public parking 
system is larger than that for the private ones. The period for 
the failure events varies from one parking garage to another. 
Most of the sheets contain data for the previous 6 years (2016-
2021). Since the failure data are manually logged and include 
descriptions, especially the failure events, we employed an 
introductory natural language processing (NLP) method to 
analyze them.  
NLP is a well-known method for analyzing text entry 
fields, such as the description field within the Company's 
failure data [42]. Manual pre-processing is necessary for data 
analysis and data quality. Here, pre-processing consumed 
approximately 80% of the data analysis. Figure 7 visualizes 
the data analysis results for the public parking system as a use 
case for the analysis results. (The most-repeated words are 
translated from Norwegian to English.) Figure 7 shows the 
frequency of the most-repeated words for failure events. 
"Gate" constituted approximately 50% of the failure events.  
We dug deeper into the most frequently mentioned part: 
the gate. Figure 8 depicts the MTBF for the gate which is the 
inverse of the failure rate. We calculated MTBF per year for 6 
years. The MTBF average is approximately 80 hours for the 
gate. Moreover, we analyzed and visualized the gate with 
other field data or parameters. The parameters included both 
date and time. However, we show here only the time bar chart 
as it makes most sense. It indicates that most failure events 
involving the gate occur at 07:00 and 15 to 18:00 h, which are 
the rush hours (see Figure 9). The other parameters need more 
investigation, and other data source integration.  
We used Python for a customized code to analyze the 
failure data. We started by finding the most repetitive word in 
the description text entry field. Further, we compared and 
linked the "most failed" part of the SOI with the other 
parameters (columns) and conducted some analysis and 
calculations such as failure rate and MTBF. Then, we 
discussed the results with the Company to determine whether 
the data analysis and results made sense.  
IV. DISCUSSION 
Applying conceptual modeling through a case study 
facilitates communication, understanding, and decision-
making for a real industry problem within an early design 
phase of an industry–academia research project. A 
Figure 7. Percentages for most-repeated words for failure events. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

collaborative industry–academia project includes different 
stakeholders from industry and academia. Industry is more 
oriented toward "how" and developing their projects and 
systems. By contrast, academia is more oriented toward 
"what" and "why" with academic rigor, to understand, 
explore, and realize the problem. 
Conceptual models aid in explaining the value proposition 
for the Company's proposed system (solution) that touch the 
surface of the problem for the case study and further explore 
the actual problem. However, there are several conceptual 
models that can be applied using multi-views and different 
levels of abstraction. The challenge is to develop the optimal 
number of conceptual models that gives a full and sufficiently 
realistic picture for the case study but does not overwhelm the 
researchers implementing the conceptual models. In this 
context, we found that following the principles, objectives, 
and recommendations mentioned in subsection B (under 
section III) aid early validation [34].  
In addition, communicating the most critical results for the 
Company, including Company management, delivered 
effectively the full and detailed picture for the proposed 
system as part of a feasibility study. The company 
management gave feedback that they could see all the aspects 
for their proposed system as a case study (CBM) by using the 
A3A0 [39]–[41]. 
Collecting and analyzing failure data supported the 
conceptual model discoveries regarding the actual need that 
triggered the proposed system. The actual need was to 
increase the system's reliability, and the CBM was a solution 
to solve the Company's problem. The failure data analysis 
showed that the APS fails mostly during rush hours and due 
to the users' lack of familiarity with the system. This data 
analysis exploration concurs with state-of-the-art [4][5]. 
Failure data are one type of feedback data from the operation 
for the early design phase of the NPD process. We aim to 
investigate other data, such as the system's operation data, 
weather data, and so forth. This investigation aims to find a 
correlation to understand the data and their analysis in a way 
that makes sense. 
Industry members tend to jump to the solution they believe 
can solve the problem, whereas academia tends to explore and 
understand the problem more in-depth. Conceptual modeling 
facilitates balancing between these two perspectives by 
jumping to the solution, back to the problem through several 
iterations, zooming in and out, and using different timeboxing 
and multiple levels of abstraction. However, the case study's 
(research) context plays a vital role in both the number of the 
conceptual models needed and time to develop and conduct 
them. Thus, domain (context) knowledge facilitates 
conceptual modeling implementation. In this context, being an 
employee in the Company aided conceptual model 
implementation. However, the main author used several data 
collection methods, including participant observation, 
interviewing, and workshops. This data collection helped 
implement conceptual models and collect the failure data. The 
collected research data supported the conceptual models and 
failure data analysis results. This support allows for data 
triangulation and increases the robustness of the results and 
evidence validity [7].  
V. CONCLUSION 
The combination of conceptual modeling and failure data 
analysis facilitated exploring and understanding 
the 
Company's actual need as a case study within an industry–
academia, sociotechnical, systems engineering–focused, data-
oriented research project. The conceptual modeling lifts 
customer value and business value on the one hand. On the 
other hand, conceptual modeling implementation encourages 
concrete, 
specific 
solutions 
and technologies. 
Here, 
conceptual modeling aided in communicating and sharing 
understanding of analysis of the value proposition of the 
Company's proposed system, CBM, which is formulated as a 
need. The Company's feedback indicated that they were able 
to see all aspects within feasibility study of implementing the 
CBM as a system for their SOI—also CBM as a system-of-
system (SOS).  
We also discovered that the Company's "actual need" 
(actual or real problem) relates to the inferior reliability of the 
SOI. This actual need is the key driver beyond the CBM, as is 
increasing market share and scaling up the operation 24/7. 
Applying conceptual modeling triggered this actual need 
discovery, alongside data collection including participant and 
direct observation, interviews, and workshops. In addition, we 
collected and analyzed failure data. The data analysis 
supported our discovery. We proceed with a feasibility study 
of the CBM as a long-term vision for the Company, using the 
most critical part (gate) as a use case. In addition, we 
supported the Company by enabling data-driven decisions 
through data analysis as a primary short-term vision. These 
decisions aid the early design phase in NPD and maintenance 
processes. For further work, we plan to include external data 
such as environmental data, mainly weather data to investigate 
Figure 8. Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) for 6 years period for the 
gate. 
Figure 9. Gate failure events versus time of day (hour). 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

any correlation between the failure events and environmental 
parameters such as humidity. We believe such further 
investigation would aid at facilitating decision making within 
the early phase in NPD and maintenance process, as well as, 
conducting new iterations with the conceptual modeling.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This research is part of a larger research project, the second 
iteration of the Human Systems Engineering Innovation 
Framework (HSEIF-2), funded by The Research Council of 
Norway (Project number 317862).  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Nourinejad, S. Bahrami, and M. J. Roorda, “Designing parking 
facilities for autonomous vehicles,” Trans. Research Part B: 
Methodological, vol. 109, pp. 110–127, 2018. 
[2] D. C. Shoup, “Cruising for parking,” Transport Policy, vol. 13, no. 6, 
pp. 479–486, 2006. 
[3] Grand View Research, “Automated parking systems market size report, 
2020-2027.” Available: https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-
analysis/automated-parking-systems-market (accessed June. 17, 2022). 
[4] G. Cudney, “Parking Today | Articles - Automated Parking: Is It Right 
for 
You?” 
Available: 
https://www.parkingtoday.com/articledetails.php?id=181&t=automate
d-parking-is-it-right-for-you (accessed June. 17, 2022). 
[5] F. Robles, “Road to Robotic Parking Is Littered With Faulty Projects,” 
The New York Times, Nov. 28, 2015. Accessed: June. 17, 2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/28/us/road-to-
robotic-parking-islittered-with-faulty-projects.html 
[6] G. Muller, “Applying Roadmapping and Conceptual Modeling to the 
Energy Transition: A Local Case Study,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 7, 
p. 3683, 2021. 
[7] M. Duneier and O. Carter, Sidewalk. Macmillan, 1999. 
[8] H. Plattner, C. Meinel, and L. Leifer, Design Thinking Research: 
Making Design Thinking Foundational. Springer, 2015. 
[9] Wettre, A. Sevaldson, B. & Dudani P. “Bridging silos: A new 
workshop method for bridging silos,”. In proceedings of Relating 
Systems Thinking and Design (RSD8) Symposium, 2019. 
[10] K. Neely, M. Bortz, and S. Bice, “Using collaborative conceptual 
modelling as a tool for transdisciplinarity,” Evidence & Policy, vol. 17, 
no. 1, pp. 161–172, 2021, doi: 10.1332/174426419X15468578119304. 
[11] R. G. Sargent, “Verification and validation of simulation models,” J. 
Simulation : JOS, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 12–24, 2013, doi: 
10.1057/jos.2012.20. 
[12] S. Robinson, “Conceptual modelling for simulation Part I: definition 
and requirements,” J. Operational Research Society, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 
278–290, 2008. 
[13] O. Balci, J. D. Arthur, and R. E. Nance, “Accomplishing reuse with a 
simulation conceptual model,” in 2008 Winter Simulation Conf., pp. 
959–965. 
[14] J. A. B. Montevechi and J. D. Friend, “Using a soft systems 
methodology framework to guide the conceptual modeling process in 
discrete event simulation,” in Proc. of the 2012 Winter Simulation 
Conf. (WSC), pp. 1–12. 
[15] S. Robinson, “Conceptual modelling for simulation Part II: A 
framework for conceptual modelling,” J. Operational Research 
Society, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 291–304, 2008. 
[16] B. S. Blanchard, Systems Engineering and Analysis, 5th ed. Boston: 
Pearson, 2011. 
[17] Y. Tomita, K. Watanabe, S. Shirasaka, and T. Maeno, “Applying 
design thinking in systems engineering process as an extended version 
of DIKW model,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 2017, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 858–
870. 
[18] M. C. Jackson, Critical systems thinking and the management of 
complexity: Responsible Leadership for a Complex World, 1st ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2019. 
[19] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri, and M. Omer, “Using systemigrams in 
problem definition: A case study in maritime resilience for homeland 
security,” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 
Vol. 
8 
(Issue 
1), 
pp. 
0000102202154773551773. 
https://doi.org/10.2202/1547-7355.1773, 2011. 
[20] G. Muller, “CAFCR: A multi-view method for embedded systems 
architecting,” Balancing Genericity and Specificity, 2004. 
[21] H. N. Hosseini and T. Welo, “A framework for integrating reliability 
and systems engineering: proof-of-concept experiences,” in INCOSE 
Int. Symp., 2016, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1059–1073. 
[22] P. O’Connor and A. Kleyner, Practical Reliability Engineering. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2012. 
[23] M. Krasich, “How to estimate and use MTTF/MTBF would the real 
MTBF please stand up?,” in 2009 Annu. Reliability and 
Maintainability Symp., pp. 353–359. 
[24] Ridgway, M., Baretich, M. F., Clark, M., Grimes, S., Iduri, B., Lane, 
M. W., ... & Lum, N. “A Rational Approach to Efficient Equipment 
Maintenance, Part 2: A Comprehensive AEM Program,” Biomed. 
Instrum. & Technol., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 350–356, 2018. 
[25] D. D. Walden, G. J. Roedler, K. Forsberg, R. D. Hamelin, and T. M. 
Shortell, Systems engineering handbook: A guide For system life cycle 
processes And activities. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[26] E. A. Long and D. Tananko, “Best practices methods for robust design 
for reliability with parametric cost estimates,” in 2011 Proc. Annu. 
Reliability and Maintainability Symp., pp. 1–6. 
[27] R. W. A. Barnard, “3.2. 2 What is wrong with Reliability 
Engineering?,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 2008, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 357–
365. 
[28] A. Barnard, “Reliability engineering: Value, waste, and costs,” in 
INCOSE Int. Symp., 2016, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 2041–2054. 
[29] R. Hollis, “Put engineering Efforts Back in Reliability Techniques,” 
IEEE Trans. on Parts, Mater. & Packag., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 297–302, 
1965. 
[30] A. Coppola, “Reliability engineering of electronic equipment a 
historical perspective,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 29–35, 
1984. 
[31] B. S. Dhillon, Robot System Reliability and Safety: A Modern 
Approach. CRC Press, 2015. 
[32] G. Muller, “System and context modeling—The Role of Time-Boxing 
and Multi-View Iteration,” in Systems Research Forum, 2009, vol. 3, 
no. 2, pp. 139–152. 
[33] G. Muller, “Teaching conceptual modeling at multiple system levels 
using multiple views,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 21, pp. 58–63, 2014. 
[34] G. Muller, “Challenges in teaching conceptual modeling for systems 
architecting,” in Int. Conf. on Conceptual Modeling, 2015, pp. 317–
326. 
[35] E. Engebakken, G. Muller, and M. Pennott, “Supporting the system 
architect: model-assisted communication,” in Systems Research 
Forum, 2010, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 173–188. 
[36] Rypdal, Muller, G., & Pennotti, M. Developing the Modeling 
Recommendation Matrix: Model-Assisted Communication at Volvo 
Aero. INCOSE International Symposium, 22(1), 2012, 1870–1883. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2334-5837.2012.tb01443.x. 
[37] E. Polanscak, G. A. N. AS, and G. Muller, “Supporting product 
development: A3-assisted communication and documentation,” 
unpublished master project paper at Buskerud Uni. Col., 2011. 
[38] Stalsberg, & Muller, G. (2014). 8.3.1 Increasing the value of model-
assisted communication: Modeling for understanding, exploration and 
verification in production line design projects. INCOSE International 
Symposium, 
24(1), 
827–842. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2334-
5837.2014.tb03184.x. 
[39] W. Pesselse, T. Hofman, M. Simons, and G. Muller, “Applying and 
analyzing A3 Architecture Overviews in a complex and dynamic 
engineering environment,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 2019, vol. 29, no. 
1, pp. 952–970. 
[40] P. D. Borches Juzgado, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for 
effective communication in product evolution,” 2010. 
[41] G. Muller, D. Wee, and M. Moberg, “Creating an A3 architecture 
overview; A case study in subSea Systems,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 
2015, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 448–462. 
[42] C. Stenström, M. Al-Jumaili, and A. Parida, “Natural language 
processing of maintenance records data,” Int. J. COMADEM, vol. 18, 
no. 2, pp. 33–37, 2015. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

