 
Antifragile Cities – Decision Support Tools to Support the Implementation of the 
Climate-neutral and Smart Cities  
 
Alan Martin Redmond  
CSTB 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
 email: alan.redmond@cstb.fr 
Konstandinos Grizos 
Rhoé 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
email: k.grizos@rhoe.gr 
Theocharis Vlachopanagiotis 
Rhoé 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
email: t.vlachopanagiotis@rhoe.gr 
Evangelos Manthos 
AUTH · Division of Transportation and 
Project Management 
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
email: emanthos@civil.auth.gr
 Katerina Moschopoulou 
Rhoé 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
email: k.moschopoulou@rhoe.gr 
Yacine Rezgui 
School of Engineering 
Cardiff University 
 Cardif, Wales (UK) 
email: RezguiY@cardiff.ac.uk 
Abstract—Urban systems and cities are complex ecosystems 
continuously challenged by a wide range of environmental, 
health, social and economic stressors. This paper will identify an 
ensemble of models, methods, tools, and a framework that gives 
a geographically and operationally diverse set of data and 
information to cities, when they need it, and the intelligence to 
anticipate potential stressors and inform decision-making, to 
help them learn and capitalize on emergent situations and 
implement new mobility measures. The paper will present an 
innovative framework that: a) Recognizes when an event may 
disrupt the existing urban equilibrium; b) Manages the short-
term effects of the mobility disruption to maintain safety, 
innovation, and city operations; c) Examines and simulates 
potential scenarios for future growth while adhering to the EU 
sustainability and CO2 reduction targets; d) Proposes an 
optimal new path forward that optimizes the improvements in 
the urban mobility landscape, while ensuring public acceptance 
and rapid adoption. The implementation of the methodology 
will result in improved urban space utilization, elevated quality 
of life, and enhanced sustainability and resilience in long-term 
urban development plans. This research acknowledges the 
necessity for robust decision support tools in realizing Climate-
neutral and Smart Cities, making the AntifragiCity Framework 
an essential instrument in urban resilience management. 
Keywords— 
Mobility 
and 
transportation, 
antifragile, 
homeostasis, black swans, decision-support systems  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Crises can have long-lasting and sometimes irreversible 
effects with local and/or global impacts. Most importantly, 
cities transitioning out of these crises struggle to recover their 
state of equilibrium, exacerbated by a sense and perception of 
uncertainty. This paper introduces the AntifragiCity 
Framework, a strategy that not only aims for resilience but 
goes a step further to seek enhancement from adversity, by 
treating cities as adaptive systems rather than static entities. 
However, they also note that the infinite variety of future 
threats cannot be adequately predicted and measured [1]. In 
recognition of measures, Gallotti et al. emphasized that 
attributes relating “to health and wellbeing of communities to 
urban structure and function, from traffic congestion to 
distinct types of pollution, can be better understood 
considering a city as a multiscale and multilayer complex 
system. The solution is to Rethink Cities that involve citizens 
in codesigning the city where widespread adoption of good 
practices leading to emergent effects with collective benefits, 
which can be directly measured” [2]. In the midst of this 
uncertainty, cities face a mobility reorganization – Electric 
Vehicles (EV) and their relevant infrastructure, teleworking 
growth, and a massive energy crisis are all contributing 
factors. Challenges of Urban Mobility (UM), such as the 
growing motorization in our cities has led to an increase in 
traffic congestion, noise, carbon emissions and concerns about 
road safety, resulting in social, environmental, and economic 
consequences. Black swans (“A black swan is a highly 
improbable event with three principal characteristics: It is 
unpredictable; it carries a massive impact; and, after the fact, 
we concoct an explanation that makes it appear less random, 
and more predictable, than it was” [3]) has disrupted the   
operational hypotheses and status quo (business as usual 
scenarios) for resilience thinking. This paper’s core concept 
Antifragility is beyond resilience as the “resilient resists 
shocks and stays the same; however, the antifragile gets 
better” [4]. Drawing from this concept, the AntifragiCity 
Framework seeks to fortify cities by giving them the tools they 
need to anticipate potential stressors, learn from emergent 
situations, and implement new mobility measures that are not 
only environmentally sustainable, but also promote social 
equity and economic viability. The paper will create an 
ensemble of models, methods, tools, and a framework that 
gives cities the data and information they need, when they 
need it, as well as the intelligence to anticipate potential 
stressors, and inform decision-making, to help them learn and 
capitalize on emergent situations and implement new mobility 
measures. In section 2 objectives and ambitions are fully 
discussed. 
II. 
DESIGNING INCLUSIVE, SAFE, AFFORDABLE, AND 
SUSTAINABLE URBAN MOBILITY OF USE 
Within this article, we discuss the AntifragiCity 
framework, a strategy that uses antifragile principles to 
mitigate the impacts of mobility disruption, ensure safety, 
foster innovation, and improve urban mobility landscapes 
over time. AntifragiCity’s overall aim is to pave the way to a 
new UM governance approach that enables cities to 
understand their business-as-usual modus-operandi (defined 
hereafter as their state of equilibrium) and to monitor (near) 
real-time continuous stressors and deviations from this state, 
assess potential implications through a simulation and 
prediction capability, inform adapted decision making to 
mitigate their consequences, while continuously enhancing 
their overall sustainability and resilience. 
A. Objectives and ambition 
The overarching aim of this potential decision support 
tool translates into the following 4 objectives formulated 
alongside the framework as shown in Figure 1. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

 
Figure 1. AntifragiCity Conceptual Framework. 
 
OBJ1: Specify, assemble, and deliver a simulation, 
prediction, and decision-making environment, namely 
Simulator for Urban Mobility Antifragility (SUMA), 
Platform as a Service (PaaS), dedicated to UM management, 
while factoring in wider environmental, social, and urban 
planning considerations. The main goals of the Platform are 
to model the urban environment, the flow of different modes 
of transport, users’ behavior, and incorporate them to tackle 
the UM problems. 
OBJ2: Create an event ontology, including a 
taxonomy, to characterize (near) real-time endemic and acute 
events and their associated risks in an urban and wider 
regional landscape. The ontology will provide context to 
sensory data and social media information acquired across 
urban areas, and will serve as a basis to simulate, predict, and 
inform decision-making. 
OBJ3: Develop a (near) real-time response capability 
to sense deviations from the urban equilibrium state and 
propose mitigation measures to counter potential risks, using 
the concept of mobility triage to enhance resilience. 
OBJ4: Deploy the proposed AntifragiCity models, 
methods, and tools (i.e., SUMA) across selected unsafe 
areas and assess their progress beyond the current business-
as-usual modus-operandi, using adapted Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs). 
Table 1 explains the various techniques that will be 
applied to each objective and its evaluation defined through 
measurement. “Measurement supports realistic planning, 
provides insight into actual performance, and facilitates 
assessment of suitable actions” [5]. 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  METHODS & MEASUREMENTS 
OBJ 
Methods 
Measurement 
 OBJ 1: 
SUMP 
Devise innovative, reliable, 
and efficient solutions  
for the movement of 
people by taking different 
user profiles and their 
behavior into account; 
Deploying the models, 
methods, and tools, 
developed as part of 
SUMA across the 
demonstration projects 
Develop decision-making 
mechanism with dynamic 
risk-based prediction 
incorporating cutting-edge 
forecasting models 
continuously augmented 
with real data 
OBJ 2: 
Ontology 
Corroborate and make 
sense of sensory and social 
media data and information 
real-time, using a 
combination of machine 
learning and natural 
language processing 
algorithms; 
Rely on the AntifragiCity 
ontology that elaborates on 
potential risks based on 
historical information and 
state-of-the-art literature. 
Develop forecasting 
models that leverage 
sensory and social media 
data and information; 
Develop forecasting risk 
models that leverage 
sensory and social media 
data and information. 
OBJ3: 
Real-time 
senses 
Improve road 
infrastructure safety by 
redesigning the hierarchy 
of road system based on 
the need of speed limit. 
Appropriate measurement 
of data of traffic volumes 
and modes that are 
important 
Re-assess and re-design 
road infrastructure system. 
Share of micro-mobility 
vehicle parking in 
dedicated parking areas 
(e.g. micro-mobility-hubs). 
OBJ4: 
Models 
The methods used for the 
environmental assessment 
are based on the 
performance approach 
(versus means approach) to 
 In situ sensors, to “reduce 
air pollutant emissions” 
and “decrease noise 
hindrance”. • Dynamic 
Life Cycle Assessment 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

OBJ 
Methods 
Measurement 
cover the goals of the 
climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, the 
biodiversity preservation, 
and no net land take. Thus, 
the environmental 
performance of 
implemented solutions 
(e.g., increase the green 
area and bike lines, better 
communication, etc.), will 
be assessed  
(DLCA) method, to 
“Reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions”. • Biotope Area 
Ratio/Factor (BAR/BAF) 
method to “reduce impacts 
on global biodiversity & 
enhance local/in-situ 
biodiversity” and 
“Optimise the urban 
area/land use: contribute to 
the no net land take goal”. 
 
B. The scope and requirements 
AntifragiCity Framework adopts a socio-technical 
approach where citizens, including transport users and 
commuters, are active, as opposed to passive, agents in the 
UM landscape. Citizens can share and provide feedback about 
their mobility experience, which is then factored into the 
decision-making process. 
This feedback includes qualitative (social media) as well 
as quantitative data that will be integrated with the urban 
sensory data streams to provide a holistic and accurate account 
of the transport situation to maximize co-benefits across the 
mobility value chain. Furthermore, AntifragiCity’s resilience 
approach is nature-inspired, with a focus on homeostasis 
(“Subjective Wellbeing (SWB) Homeostasis theory asserts 
that each individual has a set-point for their SWB, which is a 
genetically determined individual difference” [6]), but also 
incorporates antifragile and allostatic attributes for a more 
dynamic response to change. Lessons learnt during the period 
of imposition and lifting of Covid related restrictions, as well 
as other stressors and disruptions experienced by participating 
cities, will be analyzed and key lessons shared and factored 
into the decision support tool approach.  
Figure 2. AntifragiCity Conceptual Framework 
III. 
CONCEPT AND METHODOLOGY 
AntifragiCity's vision recognizes that urban environments 
consist of multiple layers of complex and dynamic data from 
various systems and user groups. When captured, analyzed, 
and interpreted correctly in a timely manner, this data can 
significantly enhance the city's monitoring system, enabling 
real-time responses that present various opportunities. This 
approach allows for optimal management of city pressures, 
leading to improved immediate outcomes for citizens and 
helping update long-term sustainable development and 
resilience management plans. 
A. Six-stage nature-inspired approach 
The methodology approach to Antifragility resilience will 
involve a six-stage nature-inspired approach exploiting the 
concept of homeostasis, augmented with antifragile and 
allostatic attributes. Antifragility describes a system, which 
under stress or deviation from the normal, improves its 
overall state. Allostasis extends the antifragility of our urban 
systems when the city is under continuous stressors. 
The first stage involves citizen engagement with a view of 
preparing the local population to the step changes that will be 
brought to the city via the planned demonstration project. 
Through the process itself, citizen participation can be used 
instrumentally to identify critical risk issues on developing 
and 
integrating 
infrastructural 
developments. 
The 
AntifragiCity Framework proposes participatory methods to 
be applied to explore public understanding, expertise, values, 
and preferences in respect of city systems integration and the 
underpinning governance models. 
The second stage concentrates on developing an urban 
systems integration approach, which involves semantic 
conceptualization of urban systems. An integrated semantic 
representation of built, infrastructure, and mobility facilities 
across the 10+1 selected urban areas (including energy, 
transport, water, land use, IT, and health) is proposed to be 
developed, which will enable holistic system reasoning and 
analytics in a way that makes possible cross-sectoral 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

evaluation of changes / perturbations to city networks 
(including design, configuration, pricing, management, and 
governance). The resulting urban ontological referential can 
be used as a basis for reasoning on a city network 
interdependencies between infrastructure variables ranging 
from traffic flow intensity to public health indicators. 
The third Stage involves the understanding and mapping 
of Technical, Commercial, Geospatial and Regulatory 
Interdependencies within each participating city. The decision 
support tool proposes to identify existing urban system 
analytical models unravelling governing variables and 
parameters where the analysis of system-specific flow 
network data models, can be done by using existing GIS 
techniques to determine each of the main ‘flow’ sectors: 
transport, and water. A conceptual framework for identifying 
governing risks of city system interdependencies will be 
developed with a view of promoting system adaptability and 
resilience. 
The fourth stage will involve building a holistic and 
dynamic urban analytical modelling environment that 
incorporates the above understanding of inter-systems 
variable interdependencies and uses indicators to: (a) organize 
technical, socioeconomic, and environmental data to 
understand real-time urban system dynamics and interrelated 
impacts, and (b), aid in risk and impact assessment and city 
holistic informed decision making. The predictive models will 
be developed with a high degree of plasticity, allowing 
exploration of the influence of a broad range of socio-
technical variables on system performance – e.g., the impact 
of different governance styles (markets, hierarchies, and 
networks) norms, and regulations. 
The fifth stage will involve exploiting the semantic, 
dependency, and predictive models developed in the previous 
stages to deliver managed city systems with a decision-
making capability that factors in decision criticality, 
implications, stakeholder, and citizen views, as well as 
security, confidentiality, and data sensitivity issues. A multi-
layered architecture is proposed that delivers integrated city 
systems with a view of achieving adaptability and resilience. 
One of the innovative aspects of the framework is the reliance 
on the concept of agency (cognitive and collaborative agents) 
to provide an abstraction capability and interface to hardware 
and software components. The semantic layers ‘machinery’: 
City Ontology, dependency modelling and sensitivity analysis 
play a central role in interpreting actively requested low level 
data about the city integrated systems environment. Machine 
Learning (ML) approach and related functionality/service will 
be implemented whenever it is needed to handle the problem 
of missing data and produce predictive model control 
algorithms. The upper layer (SUMA PaaS) represents the user 
front-end that exploits all the above modules using adapted 
visualization metaphors to enable decision makers monitor 
and manage the performance of their city systems. 
The sixth stage will be to explore the potential of different 
business models to promote efficient integrated UM and wider 
infrastructure systems, and develop tools for monitoring and 
evaluation by understanding the mechanisms, which enable 
mobile, domestic and community capital to be allocated to 
integrated infrastructure projects in an economically and 
environmentally efficient manner, and to consider effects of 
scale economies in gaining finance packages; developing a 
taxonomy of potential project ownership and control models 
for integrated infrastructure and outline their strengths and 
weaknesses in terms of impact on social, economic and 
environmental variables; understanding how transitions might 
occur from existing forms of project ownership and control to 
those, which permit greater levels of local resilience and local 
determinism in the process; and to develop understanding on 
how city systems can be developed and how processes will be 
adopted, which will optimize understanding of the trade-offs 
between economies of scale, financial cost, social equity and 
environmental impact. 
B. The AntifragiCity Urban demonstration activities 
The AntifragiCity demonstrations should aim to support 
cities in achieving the goals of the Climate Neutral and Smart 
Cities Mission [7] through the development of an innovative 
working environment in which mobility solutions are 
developed based on a user-designed approach and are 
monitored and improved by the input of a sensor-supported 
monitoring system and citizen participation scheme. The 
methodology of the demonstrations follows the approach 
below: 
• User-centered design plan: includes the user research 
and analysis of each demonstration, and the development 
of a detail plan to ensure greater value of the 
demonstration for its end-users, the citizens. 
• Living lab design: This task contemplates 3 steps. First, 
the co-creation of the living lab design together with the 
end-users, second, the testing prototypes in SUMA and 
the users-testing, and third, the detailed design of the 
living labs, including the technical, legal, operational, 
and communication requirements of each living lab, 
together with the city specific KPIs to monitor the 
performance of the demonstration. 
• Preparation for the demonstration and monitoring 
system: This task includes the implementation of the 
operational, legal, commercial/communication and 
citizen engagement activities identified by the cities' 
Living Labs design and user-centered design plan. In 
addition, it will include the setting up of the monitoring 
system, based on Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, 
for each Living Lab, to ensure baseline measurement and 
a Smart project monitoring. 
• Demonstrations: 
User-centric 
innovations 
are 
implemented, and demonstrations will be conducted in 
each lead city. Physical and digital campaigns will be 
conducted to raise awareness of the innovations among 
citizens. Co-creation activities shall be conducted to 
receive feedback from citizens and stakeholders. 
Quantitative and qualitative data from citizens/users, 
stakeholders, network, and operations are collected 
through surveys and sensor devices as part of the 
monitoring process. 
• Assessment of the demonstrations: The data collected 
in the monitoring system along with other data collected 
in the previous steps are used to assess the 
multidimensional impact of the implemented concepts. 
Comparisons can be made between the baseline and the 
implementation phase to assess changes in travel 
behavior, user satisfaction, modal shares, risk factors 
mitigation, emissions, noise, resilience, etc. Based on the 
lessons learned in the evaluation phase, a decision shall 
be made regarding the continuation of the living lab as is 
or the initiation of a new experimental cycle of co-
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

creation (agile approach to innovation) to explore new 
ideas. Additionally, the evaluation will include a cross-
cities impact evaluation and a transferability assessment. 
C. Potential barriers and obstacles 
Table 2 presents identified barriers and mitigation 
measures to secure AntifragiCity’s impacts. 
TABLE II.  
POTENTIAL BARRIERS & OBSTACLES 
Barriers / 
Obstacles 
Proposed mitigation measures 
Dispersed 
regulatory 
framework and 
the need for cross-
modal and cross-
sectoral 
interoperability 
and commonly  
accepted 
standards 
It is widely acceptable that there are important 
discrepancies in the regulatory framework 
governing, either at Member State, regional or 
even local level coupled with the need for cross-
modal and cross-sectoral interoperability and the 
use of commonly accepted regulations and 
standards. They comprise of an innovation 
challenge that may affect the adoption of 
AntifragiCity’s models at European-wide up-take 
framework. The requirement is to analyze these 
implications to adopt an approach that utilizes 
collective methods and tools that ensures the 
participation of all related stakeholders from an 
early stage to highlight and adequately discuss the 
respective implications from the design phase. 
Implementation 
dependent  
of political 
decisions 
AntifragiCity's proposed approach will involve 
stakeholders from different disciplines, from the 
design stage to the implementation stage. In 
particular, the participation of city authorities in 
the consortium, which have the political mindset 
to implement the proposed actions, that will 
ensure the successful implementation of the  
Decision support tool actions at pilot level. 
Conservative 
mindset and  
lack of confidence 
in innovative 
solutions from the 
demand / 
consumer side 
The decision support tool user-centric approach is 
designed to gather and analyze user intelligence, 
together with its co-creation approach that directly 
involves users as key stakeholders, ensures high 
user acceptance rates and is expected to confront 
any symptom of conservative mindset and lack of 
confidence in the proposed innovative solutions 
and services. 
Capital 
intensiveness of 
innovation, 
reinforced by  
problems of 
financing 
The innovative business models and services that 
will be co-created and proposed by the decision 
support tool will take into account capital 
investment needs vs. potential funding sources. 
Those will be further accompanied by a 
preliminary estimation of service implementation 
costs vs. potential inflows for the value chain as a 
whole. The approach aims to ensure that the 
suggested innovative business models and 
services will constitute a financially viable and 
sustainable option for the targeted stakeholders, 
pre-describing and assessing potential financing 
sources at either public or private sector. 
D. Assessing existing software to be incorporated into 
SUMA 
The current technique aims to exploit existing technology 
and software developed in previous European research 
projects to structure the multimodal functionality of the 
Simulator for UM Antifragility (SUMA), in line with the 
proposed architecture. The combination of existing software 
will result in saving valuable resources from redeveloping 
already existing technology. The outcome of this assessment 
will be a cohesive analysis of the different available software 
that will be incorporated into the SUMA. 
IV. BEYOND STATE-OF-THE-ART 
The AntifragiCity Framework will progress current state-
of-the-art in the following areas:  
a) resilient urban areas,  
b) land use and urban planning,  
c) urban semantic models for mobility management,  
d) reference architectures for mobility management, and  
e) smart city platforms for UM. 
A. Resilient urban areas 
Resilient Urban Areas: Resilience is generally defined as 
the capacity of a system to withstand an external disturbance 
and proactively recover towards a new stable state [8] 
AntifragiCity decision support tool will progress state-of-the-
art in the field of urban resilience by exploiting the nature-
inspired concept of biomimicry, as exemplified by the natural 
phenomenon of homeostasis, representing the natural 
tendency towards maintaining a relatively stable equilibrium 
between the constituents of a complex system, as maintained 
by physiological processes, while acquiring an increased 
resilience. Such a concept will implement homeostatic 
interventions to bring deviation back to the setpoints and if 
such events create permanent issues in the city, an allostatic 
state will then be initiated. 
B. Land use & urban morphology 
Research shows that efficient planning of land use 
contributes significantly to resilience when dealing with 
urban development [9]. AntifragiCity will develop holistic 
approach to model the urban dynamics from a social (human-
driven) perspective factoring in a wide range of variables. 
This model will assist local authorities in their planning 
process as well as their quest to transition towards inclusive, 
sustainable, and resilient (including from a gentrification 
perspective) urban areas. AntifragiCity will also provide 
services that incorporate the vulnerable road users dimension 
into infrastructure planning, including aspects of safety and 
security, accessibility, digital and smart tools for enforcing 
speed limits and vehicle access, design and operation or 
services and public spaces, including mobility hubs, public 
transport, and shared mobility. 
C. Urban semantic models for mobility management 
Semantic web technologies such as OWL ontologies 
introduce a common taxonomy to a specific domain and 
explicit real world concepts’ interrelationships, which can 
ultimately help tackle data heterogeneity and facilitate 
information discovery [10].  Several ontologies in connection 
with urban sustainability assessment will be analyzed from 
literature (i.e., building structure, water quality or personal 
health information) [11]. For example, the Transport 
Disruption ontology that describes travel and transport 
related events, assessing their disruptive impact on mobility 
at the urban level [12]. These ontologies are examples of the 
efforts 
made 
in 
semantic 
development 
for 
urban 
sustainability or sustainability subdomain representation. 
However, none of these ontologies abstract the high-level 
concepts required by AntifragiCity, as the existing models 
provide a fragmented view of the whole domain. 
AntifragiCity will progress current state-of-the-art in UM 
modelling by developing an UM Ontology that factors in all 
aspects that underpin the Urban metabolism, thus providing a 
holistic approach for managing mobility. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

D. Reference architectures for UM management 
 
AntifragiCity will focus on aligning the existing 
discipline-oriented 
models 
to 
form 
a 
reliable 
and 
comprehensive multi-disciplinary reference model that will be 
used and progressed / enriched on a continuous basis. The 
decision support tool will extend the IoT stack architecture to 
include a semantic referential, in the form of an UM reference 
model, that extends City information models, such as City 
Geography Markup Language (CityGML), while factoring in 
security (including data governance) considerations. The 
decision support tool reference architecture will factor in 
social constructs to promote a participative approach 
considering the complete value chain, with a focus on UM. It 
will include an inference layer that is grounded in the semantic 
description of UM. This form of intelligence will be 
distributed, i.e., available on the cloud as well as on the edge, 
to address network latency and security issues. 
E. Smart City Platforms for UM 
The decision support tool will comply with OASC (Open 
& Agile Smart Cities), and promote interoperability between 
various urban artefacts, including mobility, through dedicated 
APIs to access data, and context information. It will also 
provide the capability to develop a semantic contextualization 
of data feeds originating from connected objects found in 
cities, in the form of model constructs aligned with the 
proposed UM semantic reference model. These extensions 
will be reusable across platforms. Furthermore, the decision 
support tool will integrate the principles of agency to deliver 
an agent-based platform, with an application for mobility and 
related areas. Finally, it will also develop security approaches 
that adopt the principle of least privilege while factoring in 
existing standards, such as ISO 19650-5 as well as a model-
based governance approach taking into account the 
complexity of the urban metabolism. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper focused on a framework orientated on 
designing inclusive, safe, affordable, and sustainable UM. 
The proposed conceptual framework ‘AntifragiCity’ is based 
on the theory of antifragile whereby the city will resist short-
term effects of mobility disruption, maintain safety, 
innovation and optimize improvements. Four specific 
objectives (SUMP, Ontology, Real-time Senses, and Models) 
have been identified with recommended techniques and 
measurements. The framework’s adaptive process of 
maintaining resilience relating to Homeostasis theory 
through subjective well-being has been integrated into the 
methodology. The methodology has been presented in 6 
phases that will support positive outcomes for citizens such 
as better use of urban spaces and increase quality of life, 
while updating the city’s long term sustainable development 
and resilience management plans. A methodology for urban 
demonstrations was highlighted featuring recommended 
goals from the Climate Neutral and Smart Cities Mission. In 
acknowledgement to novel framework the paper addresses 
five beyond state-of-the-art requirements; a) Resilient urban 
areas – implementation of homeostatic interventions; b) Land 
use & urban morphology - develop holistic approach to 
model the urban dynamics; c) Urban semantic models for 
mobility management - progress current state-of-the-art in 
UM modelling by developing an UM Ontology; d) Reference 
architectures for UM management - a reference architecture 
that will factor in the complete value chain, with a focus on 
UM; e) Smart City Platforms for UM – it will comply OASC, 
and promote interoperability between various urban artefacts. 
In the opinion of the authors the development framework for 
‘Antifragile Cities - Decision Support Tools’ is an essential 
tool to Support the Implementation of the Climate-neutral and 
Smart Cities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge the contribution of Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki and Cardiff University. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] OECD, “Fostering Economic Resilience in a World of Open and 
Integrated Markets, Risks, Vulnerabilities and Areas for Policy 
Action,” Report Prepared for the 2021 UK Presidency of the G7, pp. 9, 
2021.  
[2] R. Gallotti , P. Sacco , and M. De Domenico, “Complex Urban 
Systems: Challenges and Integrated Solutions for the Sustainability 
and Resilience of Cities,” Hindawi Complexity, Volume 2021, Article 
ID 1782354, 15 pages https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/1782354 
[3] N.N. Taleb, “The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improable, 
2nd Edition, Published by Random House Trade Paperbacks, ISBN 
9780812973815, May 11, 2010 
[4] N.N. Taleb. "Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder," Published 
by Random House Trade Paperbacks, ISBN 97808129796882012, pp 
3. Jan 28, 2014 | 
[5] G. Roedler, and C. Jones. 2005, “Technical Measurement Guide, 
version 1.0.” San Diego, CA: International Council on Systems 
Engineering (INCOSE), INCOSE-TP-2003-020-01 
[6] R. A. Cummis, and M. Wooden, “Personal Resilience in Times of 
Crisis: The Implications of SWB Homeostasis and Set-Points”, J 
Happiness 
Stud 
DOI 
10.1007/s10902-013-9481-4, 
Springer 
Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013 
[7] Proposed mission: “100 climate-neutral cities by 2030 – by and for the 
citizens,” Report of the Mission Board for climate-neutral and smart 
cities, ISBN 978-92-76-21541-7 doi: 10.2777/347806 
[8] G. Cere, Y. Rezgui, and W. Zhao, “Critical review of existing built 
environment resilience frameworks: directions for future research,” 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 25, pp. 173-189. 
(10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.018) 
[9] M. del Mar Martínez-Bravo, J. Martínez-del-Río, and R. Antolín-
López, “Trade-offs among urban sustainability, pollution and livability 
in European cities,”. J. Clean. Prod. 224, 651–660. doi: 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.03.110, 2019 
[10] M. Dibley, H. Li, Y. Rezgui, and J. Miles, “An ontology framework for 
intelligent sensorbased building monitoring,” Autom Constr Dec. 28, 
pp.1–14, 2012 
[11] C. Kuster, J. Hippolyte, and Y. Rezgui, “The UDSA ontology: An 
ontology to support real time urban sustainability assessment,” 
Advances in Engineering Software, pp. 140, article number: 102731. 
(10.1016/j.advengsoft.2019.102731), 2020. 
[12] D. Corsar, M. Markovic, P. Edwards, and JD. Nelson, “The Transport 
Disruption Ontology,” In: Arenas M, Corcho O, Simperl E, Strohmaier 
M, D'Aquin M, Srinivas K, editors. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing; editors, pp. 329–36, 2015 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

