Achieving City Intelligence - A Systems Engineering Approach 
 
 
 
Yaw Adom-Mensah 
School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute 
of Technology 
e-mail: yawadom@gmail.com 
Mo Mansouri 
School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute 
of Technology 
e-mail: mo.mansouri@stevens.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Intelligent systems sense and react to their 
environment. They are amenable to change, heterogeneous, 
sustainable and secure. By their nature, cities develop due to 
various preconditions affirmative to local sustenance of their 
inhabitants. They are complex systems that encounter 
ranging 
pressures 
stemming 
from 
urbanization 
to 
uncontrolled socio-technical effects. To control and manage 
these pressures, various suggestions, frameworks and 
concepts have been proposed including but not limited to 
transitioning into Smart Cities. It is relatively accurate that 
most cities will aspire to be Smart merely for the perceived 
benefits of such a state. Nonetheless, the research on 
attainability and progress measurement is varied and 
deferring in this regard. In this paper, cities are presented as 
complex sociotechnical systems such that their optimization is 
a function of people, social systems and network-
technological systems. Five incremental levels of the city’s 
intelligence journey are proposed: Insulation, Micro-
Functional, Macro-Functional, Spatial Dominance, Self-
Orchestration and Astute. 
Keywords-intelligent cities; systems thinking; smat cities. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cities happen to be problems in organized complexity, 
like the life sciences. They present "situations in which a 
half-dozen or even several dozen quantities are all varying 
simultaneously and in subtly interconnected ways.'' Like 
the life sciences, cities do not exhibit one problem in 
organized complexity, which, if understood explains all. 
They can be analyzed into many such problems or 
segments which, as in the case of the life sciences, are also 
related with one another. The variables are many, but they 
are not helter-skelter; they are "interrelated into an organic 
whole" [1]. 
The city is manifestly a complicated system and only 
partial control can be exercised over its growth and form. 
It is a product of growth rather than of instantaneous 
creation. [2] compared the city to a biological entity. That 
is, a single organism covering the entire landscape surface 
and showing signs of a vast intelligence [3]. Cities typically 
evolve spontaneously and subsequently governed into 
desired states. Thus, more often cities are self-organizing 
and evolve from local-actions. This spontaneity contains 
elements of spatial consciousness and random unique 
forms commonly called fractals. Understanding these 
interacting elements have taken precedence on research on 
city systems since the nascent stages of the 20th Century.  
As systems, cities have existed no less than over 5000 
years ago and changes in their form follows a randomized 
process that manifest simultaneously at different spatial 
levels. The need for a formal control mechanism to close 
the gap between fur-flung anarchy and sporadic orderliness 
inspired the development of disciplines such as City 
Planning, Urban Studies et al. These specialized disciplines 
engaged in atomistic and mechanistic approaches to plan 
communities. Urban studies and related, have exerted a 
great deal of effort in theoretical and practical techniques 
following this pursuit.  
Cities generally are taken as a composition of discrete 
spatial nodes that perform separate functions at different 
points in time. This view has been prominent and promotes 
a vertical hierarchical-node structure where everything is 
controlled from a [city’s] central core. A theoretical idea 
extended from 19th century German economist, von 
Thünen whose 1826 iconoclastic treatise, The Isolated 
State, a century later led to – the mono-centric city models 
– one of the fundamental insights in Urban Planning. The 
idea of location theory, as Thünen’s views are known, has 
since the mid-19th century inspired a revolution of 
economists’ and geographers who have extended location 
theory into mainstream economic models. The latter 
mainly were interested in economic consideration and 
physical analogies as a means to explain emerging city 
patterns. 
The vertical elaboration of the city system has been 
dominant therein with notable applications in research on 
scaling patterns and in land use planning. However, this 
structure is changing into a horizontal one and spatial 
processes are no longer mainly controlled from a central 
core. Thus, relational linkages tend to be horizontal rather 
than hierarchical/vertical. At the same time, there is the shift 
from competitive cities to cooperative cities. The rest of this 
paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates more on 
the traditional view. Section III describes the core problem. 
Section IV discusses what an intelligent city is and Section 
V introduces and proposes the five stages. Section VI 
connects the dots. 
II. 
THE TRADITIONAL VIEW 
In Figure 1, foundational view about the city is 
dominated by well-defined familiar structures, a central 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

market place or core, distinct route structures that enable 
people to travel rapidly to the center from outlying places, 
suburban locations or neighborhoods or district centers that 
exist within a clearly structured hierarchy of places and 
segregated areas where industrial activities take place [4]. 
This view implicitly assumes that everything in space is 
homogenous and works as expected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     On the contrary, cities are open complex systems and 
exchange both mass and energy with their surroundings, 
and is a product many builders: Planners, Technologists, 
Architects, Scientists, Engineers and Policy Makers. They, 
[the] builders, constantly modify the structures of cities for 
reasons of their own. Regardless of the city exhibiting 
fundamental characteristics of open systems including the 
property 
of 
multiple 
builders, 
many 
theoretical 
propositions developed to explain and predict urban spatial 
structures typically describe the city as closed static 
system.  That is, a system permitting the export of mass but 
not energy. Forrester [5] attempted to introduce the concept 
of the closed dynamic system in his well-received but 
controversial book: Urban Dynamics. By a closed dynamic 
system, Forrester, does not outright describe the city as a 
conventional open system. Instead, as a system that 
generates its own problems and should be capable of 
reinventing itself to meet internal demands given 
institutional, economic, governance and infrastructural 
structures – a common property of all-natural systems. And 
as an emergent property, the boundaries do not exist in 
isolation - in order words, cities only have imaginary 
boundaries. Forrester strengthened his supposition and 
stated that: “it does mean cause and effect loops do not 
reach outside the boundary and return. For example, 
migration to the area [cities] has its effect by filling and 
thereby altering the area not by emptying the outside 
world”. 
      This position was fundamental in pioneering a 
complementing focus on the dynamics of urban systems as 
against only analyzing the current state and function of 
such cities.  In Figure 2, we demonstrate the representation 
of the city as a mesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
THE CORE PROBLEM  
The governance of urban systems poses an enormous 
challenge to stakeholders and their community of decision 
makers; a challenge heighted by the increasing need for 
resilience, sophistication, durability and intelligence in 
urban instrumentation defined, embedded and utilized in 
cities. The city problem is getting more profound and 
complex. Since 2008 and for the first time in human 
history, the world became more urbanized than rural, with 
more than 50% of the human population residing in cities. 
Estimations predict this percentage to surpass 70% by 
2050. 
Attainment of this milestone ushered in a new era for 
which cities were opened to mega challenges and mega 
opportunities encapsulated in the complexities of 
sociotechnical systems – the fundamental goal for cities 
shifted. Cities seek to minimize problems and to maximize 
opportunities across systems and processes. Some cities by 
virtue of structures, processes and available infrastructure 
are better positioned to explore these opportunities, 
however, none is immune and many especially, most in the 
developing world are highly susceptible to the negative 
repercussions of urbanization. As cities continue to search 
for solutions in what is theoretically an infinite solution 
space, it is indispensable to implement and monitor 
systems, programs and policies that inform and enforce a 
set of key performance parameters. Making-A-City-Think; 
in order words, architecting an intelligent urban space has 
emerged as the indispensable strategy to cope with the 
problems generated by the changing dynamics – and there 
are many of such challenges. However, the success of such 
transformation depends on how it is done [6] 
     Smart or intelligent cities by definition and application 
imply an extended integration of new technologies, 
solutions, policies and decision making in the ontology of 
city existence comprising of mobility, living, governance, 
Figure. 1. Traditional view of Cities and spatial processes; 
akin to star networks exhibiting a one-to-one relationship 
Figure. 2 The city as a mesh with many-to-many relationships 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

economy, environment, civic/people support [7]. It is 
primarily enabled by new computational power, open data 
availability and advanced problem synthesis and analysis.  
     The city system has become an experimental plot to test 
propositions and suppositions emanating from different 
academic disciplines. A new generation of city scientists 
and researchers employing multidisciplinary approaches to 
address many challenging city problems is relatively new 
[although actually old] and has doubled over the last 
decade due to rapid urbanization. Unlike any period in 
history, we observe an active desire of more and more 
people wanting to the move towards the cityscape in search 
of city resurgence – and not necessarily wanting to vacant 
the bucolic peripheries of the country side. We make this 
distinction, and to borrow from Forrester, such a movement 
is not intended to empty the country side [which will never 
happen] but rather to fill the cities.   
     It is intuitive and conceptually appropriate to describe 
the shift to cities – migration on bases of ‘interpreted’ 
transaction cost theory. That is, we relate how people move 
as a set of transactions with the cost of the transaction split 
between: perceived individual benefit(s) and perceived 
collective benefit(s) of migrants [as agents]. That is, the 
decision maker(s) probabilistic outcomes of ‘success’ at 
their [intended] destination is/are larger than their origin. 
Assuming Occam Razor all individuals and groups – all 
things being equal –are greedy and rational and that 
tentatively, gain a cognitive [learning] ability to infer, 
approximate, distribute and map as a function of time their 
egoistic and collective goals relative to their current state. 
Where perceived state is greater than generated state, they 
seek a movement towards nearest (Basic mobility ability, 
that is: distance travelled depends on distance to be 
travelled to reach the destination of choice) destination for 
improvement, that is: (Ps > Pg).  For instance, in developing 
countries, the decline of subsistence farming [favoring the 
masses] – the rise of mechanized large scale [favoring the 
few] coupled with the growing knowledge-based 
information centric technological age has generated a shift 
of form and a change in occupational dependents. When 
speaking with a ‘Lagotian’ (Somebody that has lived or 
preferably lives in Lagos, Nigeria – Africa’s biggest 
megacity) recently, he remarked: “In Lagos, you can sell 
anything and make money out of anything”. In order words, 
whereas their economic choices in the bucolic regions are 
limited; opportunities are assumed to be abundant in cities 
– literally. Glaeser [8] sums this up: in reality, there is no 
such thing as a poor urbanized city or a rich rural region. 
     Succinctly, cities generate more interactions with more 
people than rural areas because they are central places of 
trade that benefit those who live there and so people moved 
to cities because they intuitively perceived the advantages 
of urban life [3]. While technically possible, the 
assumptions above are not intended for quantitative 
translations. In making the above logical constructs, we are 
only re-emphasizing a trait of Homo sapiens such that are 
learning creatures - we learn both voluntarily and 
involuntarily. And that in fact, our most valuable 
knowledge may be one acquired involuntarily – just like 
the seasoned power plant engineer who through acquired 
intelligent cognition can think-ahead of machine warnings 
and shut down generators before an inevitable power surge. 
As a pioneer, Skinner [9] was the first persuader in this 
direction when through a counter theory to [10] he stressed 
on the need to focus more on the productive behavior [of a 
system] itself rather than using it to make hypotheses about 
mental states. In Figure 3, we provide an implicit example 
of a pseudocode of a human agent program that may be 
used to explain the growth of the core problem.  
     The choices of many especially in the developing 
countries to move to urban areas underscore the high-level 
of attraction the city offers. In essence, people have 
elevated their expected value of city returns – partly 
economic, others technological and some cultural, others 
security, etc. Stereotypically, intelligence permeates our 
cities because we now live in a world where objects are 
capable of gathering, processing, displaying, transmitting 
or taking physical action on information all at the same 
time. The roles of cities are being gradually transformed 
into managers of these containers of intelligence - 
egocentric centers of innovation and cognition embedded 
in socio-technical complexities. 
IV. 
WHAT IS AN INTELLIGENT CITY? 
     The city’s problems are relatively similar everywhere, 
they just vary by the degree of sophistication, intensity and 
impact. Climate change affects all cities and megacities are 
not necessarily generating new kinds of problems but 
rather intensifying and exposing the inability of existing 
structures to cope with and or minimize negativities. 
     Due   to   its   definitional   impreciseness, numerous   
unspoken assumptions and a rather self-congratulatory 
tendency [11], a smart city can mean different things to 
different entities – there exist an inherent stakeholder bias 
that practitioners, civic leaders, technocrats and related 
must strive to. In most cases, where cities are using 
networked infrastructure. [sometimes mainly, ‘plug and 
play’] solutions to gain a centralized view of information 
across certain city departments and agencies, they are 
sometimes referred as smart cities.  
    To the citizen, a smart city can mean automatically 
finding the fastest way to get to work; where smart meters 
control power usage and even to some [especially in 
developing countries], where drinking water that can be 
counted on, or perhaps, where they are safer streets due to 
increased closed circuit monitoring.  To the city 
administrator, a smart city can mean optimization of 
process through the installation of city management 
systems, etc. To the environmentalist on the other hand, a 
smart city may mean a city that produces few carbon 
emissions or one whose citizens have a smaller ecological 
footprint. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

     Figure 4 is a Systemigram. Systemigrams are used to 
bring context to the meaning of togetherness that is, to 
unravel ambiguity in methodical system descriptions, parts 
and relationships. Through this approach Systemigrams are 
able to gather and clearly present the structure and behavior 
of systems diagrammatically as an emergent whole. 
     The mainstay [the diagonal, from left to right] is the 
principal stakeholder bias; this can also be termed as the 
dependent variable given that it acts as a centralized 
governance structure that depends on the perspectives of 
other interests/ agents in the urban system. Such a governed 
interplay is for purposes of good service delivery in urban 
systems. For instance, in the smart growth node, consider 
“walkable neighborhood” a citizen may not necessarily 
consider himself safe [his community walkable] on the 
street because business and convenient-shops are within 
his reach of < 10 minutes of walking but because the city 
has installed real-time communications technologies to 
monitor streets. 
      From above and by extension, an intelligent city is 
therefore a smart connected community capable of 
reinventing itself through appropriate and optimal 
communications between local nodes enabled by the 
network and in addition, it engages in interconnectedness 
with foreign entities relevant to local sustenance and/or 
evolution. Getting to this point is not guaranteed by the 
upgrade of a sub-system – it helps- but to achieve or work 
towards achieving intelligence, a city must navigate a 
systematic and holistic course comprising of Insulation, 
Micro-Functional, Macro-Functional, Spatial Dominance, 
Self-Orchestration 
and 
Astute. 
Therefore, 
where 
intelligence shall be a function of: 
C (intelligence) = f (Cw1, Aw2, Aw3, Sw4…) 
Function parameters: weighted rate of the 5 stages 
V. 
THE STAGES 
Below are the proposed incremental stages considering a 
city’s intelligence journey.  
A. Insulation 
The main purpose of insulation is to limit the transfer 
of energy between the inside and outside of a system [12]. 
Cities [as we know] have been complex open systems since 
the evolution of the first of its kind. They have acted as 
centers of knowledge incubation, dissemination and 
transfer. They are the drivers of political, structural and 
economic growth of the national dynamic boundaries 
within which they are situated. 
Cities need to articulate a complex insulation 
mechanism in the form of predictive models on people 
movement in and out of cities and to control the attraction 
and retention of talent, local education institutions and 
related. The above does not call for restrictive policies to 
constrain the mobility of people 
seeking 
social 
opportunities, as misguided interventions often divert 
resources to locations that are not profitable for local level 
growth [13].  One cannot design a system without 
understanding the boundaries of such a system. 
B. Micro-Functional 
Effective approximation of the simple functions of a 
city measured against a verification and validation 
mechanism contributed by the actors of each individual 
sub-system. This approach is intended to assess the optimal 
operation or lack there-off of the assets in a neighborhood. 
This approach is akin to a focus group intended to collect 
perceptions of a product performance, and/or to improve 
features. In theory, it is possible to account for all 
properties of any particular urban system; for instance, the 
Health care delivery system or the Energy system and so 
on if available data allowed for a comprehensive 
knowledge of all the characteristics of such and the 
relationships existing between them. Practically however, 
this is infeasible because, we will never be able to know or 
even approximate all the properties of these systems. Few 
reasons are because urban systems defer from city to city 
with multiple socio-technical interacting relationships that 
are varying, unpredictable and subject to multiple 
subjective interpretations. 
C. Macro-Functional 
This is the extrapolation and extension of a holistic 
representation of the state of a city. It is the assessment how 
micro-functional agents are working collectively and 
optimally. Given the whole is greater than the sum of the 
parts, Macro-functional states are distinct and poses a 
different set of challenges in complexity. From a far, there 
may not be direct link between mobility and education but 
the nuances in-between are the containers to the solution. 
As a satisficing [14] solution to this complexity, the 
properties of the complex wholes – independent systems 
embedded in the city’s system of system ecology – remain 
irreducible to the characteristics of their parts. Hence, they 
are grouped as like terms and each group of like terms is 
assigned a different singular or multi-objective function 
identified with that particular group. Any of these groups 
will possess a spatial view of the urban form which stems 
to be a representation of an urban system from their 
common concerns.  
D. Spatial Dominance 
There is almost never the best system, but there is an 
optimal system at any given point in space. While in many 
real-world situations, optimal strategies are unknown or 
unknowable [15], the city is not one of those. Enabling 
urban 
intelligence 
fueled 
by 
urban 
technological 
innovations begins as a pragmatic, engineering-based 
attempt to improve the operation of individual urban 
infrastructure and services; it can also be seen as 
perturbing unconsciously the interactions of the many 
systems within a city. Urban networks consist of 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

infrastructure systems, interconnected service delivery 
mechanisms and social networks. 
In the context of the city, spatial dominance represents 
the estimation of interconnectedness of cities. Regardless 
of how minuscule it might be, it is important for a city to 
achieve a preferred status, in-other-words, be known as the 
go-to in an area relative to another city with which is shares 
relation. It’s possible for multiple cities to be equally 
preferred in enumerated areas or metrics. 
E. Self-Orchestration 
While making a city think may be a new research 
domain, the study of cities as systems dates back to at least 
the mid-1950s. Cities were first treated formally as systems 
when General System Theory and Cybernetics came to be 
applied to the softer social sciences in the 1950s.  It is worth 
mentioning that the structure of a digital urban space is not 
static, that is, with the continuous improvement of theory 
and practice related to urban management and operations, 
urban components and their systems can be dynamically 
optimized and adjusted so that they can better cover all 
areas of the city [16]. 
With self-orchestration, there is an end-to-end function 
of cities as systems within systems of cities, such that 
multiple areas of the city function autonomously and at the 
same time controlled. Example, the automatic detection of 
a pothole and the prevention of a pothole. It is a trusted, 
integrated state. 
F. Astute 
This is the final stage and a culmination of insulation, 
micro-functional, macro-functional, spatial dominance and 
self-orchestration. Thinking in systems or systems thinking 
can be said to hold the city in its dichotomy: it helps to 
show how local processes and interactions give rise to 
global structures considering a plethora of local views and 
constraints and how these global structures feedback into 
local interactions. 
VI. 
CONNECTING THE DOTS 
Studies on cities as socio-technical systems are recent 
and not well developed. Either there have been undue 
emphases on creating diminutive artificial societies – a 
technology lead approach or a 180 degree turn to 
emphasize the value of social welfare. The study of cities 
as socio-technical systems recognizes an eminent social 
part and an important technological dependency. The 
COVID-19 crisis made it clear that cities suffer if their 
citizens do, and that without the well-being of the latter, 
they are merely empty structures [17]. This approach 
reduces the evidence of social and technical polarization 
cited in earlier works such as [18], [19]. 
The ability to deal with commonsense knowledge about 
the world is fundamental for any intelligent system that 
acts in the real world and it has been early recognized as 
one of the central topics of Artificial Intelligence to 
represent and reason about commonsense knowledge.  
Space has always been considered to be an important part 
of commonsense reasoning given the physical world has a 
spatial dimension and all objects which are dealt with are 
located in space relative to other objects. Early approaches 
involving commonsense knowledge about the physical 
world were trying to solve text book physics and math 
problems, e.g., [19, 17]. but it soon turned out that 
mathematical equations were not sufficient for solving 
most problems.   
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Strong linkage between the state of cities and 
information technology is a function of time and obligate 
symbiosis. In order words, technological innovation, 
regardless of the geography within which it occurs: be it in 
a basement in India, Bangladesh, Nairobi, or in well-
organized centers in Silicon Valley, mostly occur in cities. 
Technology evolves when actors nurture and develop ideas 
directly impacting existing spatial dynamics of their living 
squatters’. Because money begets money, actors are 
attracted to disproportionally work towards where such 
technology will be needed. The law of disproportionality 
does not deny but delay diffusion into other areas.   
By 
employing 
systems 
thinking 
and 
systems 
engineering, we think about how a set of “city events” are 
governed and function as a function of nested complexities. 
We acknowledge learning in city spaces require abilities to 
decrypt, analyze, synthesize, apply, predict [actions] and 
re-configure an integral knowledge base.  Such 
information, where gathered can be molded into patterns of 
behavior, develop predictive models of likely outcomes 
allowing better decisions and informed actions [20]., 
learning in space require Networked Infrastructure, 
Information Systems and City Citizens as principal agents.  
Cities are complex spatial systems with social and 
technical rules, structures and networks. In the most 
general terms, there is a network of cities or a network in 
cities. Of more interest is network in cities where the city 
becomes less obtrusive and reinforce a network 
dependency of a system among systems, rightly called a 
system of systems.  By extension, it is important to realize 
these relationships because they serve a building blocks to 
understand how logical and physical networks work in 
cities. When we say a city is connected, more ‘smartly’ 
connected we mean it is capable of reinventing itself 
through appropriate and optimal communications between 
local nodes enabled by the network and in addition, it 
engages in interconnectedness with foreign entities 
relevant to local sustenance and/or evolution. 
In this paper, we have presented the background of the 
problem and introduced five stages of assessment and 
measurement. Further research will expand on guidance 
and evaluation of the proposed stages. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

REFERENCES 
[1]  J. Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities 
Part, New York: Random House, 1961.  
[2]  J. G. Miller, Living Systems, The Basic Concepts, 1978.  
[3]  D. V. Philippe Blanchard, Mathematical Analysis of Urban 
Spatial Networks, Springer, 2007.  
[4]  M. Batty, Cities as Complex Systems: Scaling, 
Interactions, 
Networks, 
Dynamics 
and 
Urban 
Morphologies, UCL Working Paper Series: London, 2008. 
[5]  J. Forrester, Urban Dynamics, MIT Press, 1969.  
[6]  J. Muvuna, T. Boutaleb, S. Mickovski, and K. J. Baker, 
"Systems engineering approach to design and modelling of 
smart cities," International Conference for Students on 
Applied Engineering (ICSAE), pp. 437-440, 2016.  
[7]  R. Giffinger, and H. Gudrun, "Smart cities ranking: An 
effective instrument for the positioning of the cities," 
Journal of the Center of Land Policy and Valuations, vol. 
4, no. 12, pp 13-18 2010.  
[8]  E. Glaeser, Triumph of the City, How our Greatest 
Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier 
and Happier, New York: Penguin press, 2011.  
[9]  B. F. Skinner, "Are theories of Learning Necessary?," The 
Psychological Review, Volume , vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 193-216, 
1950.  
[10] E. Tolman, "Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men," The 
Psychological Review, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 189-208, 1948.  
[11] R. Hollands, "Will the real smart city please stand up?," 
Analysis of Urban Change, Theory, Action, vol. 12, no. 3, 
pp. 303-320, 2008.  
[12] A. Bahadori, "Design and Application of Thermal 
Insulation," Thermal Insulation Handbook for the Oil, Gas, 
and Petrochemical Industries, 2014.  
[13] The Wor;d Bank Group, 2010. 
[14] H. Simon, "Rational Choice and the Structure of the 
environment," 1956. [Online].  
[15] H. Simon, "Rational decision making in business 
organizations," Advances in behavioral economics, vol. 1, 
pp. 18-47, 1987.  
[16] L. S. Souza, S. Misra and M. S. Soares, "SmartCitySysML: 
A SysML Profile for Smart Cities Applications," 
Computational Science and Its Applications , 2020.  
[17] IESE, "IESE Cities in Motion Index," IESE, Pamplona, 
2020. 
[18] A. Smith, A. Stirling, and F. Berkhout, "The governance of 
sustainable socio-technical transitions," Research Policy, 
pp. 1491-1510, 2005.  
[19] J. Peck, "Struggling with the Creative Class," International 
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 
740-770, 2005.  
[20] IBM Institute for Business Value, "A vision of smarter 
cities, How cities can lead the way into a prosperous and 
sustainable future," IBM Global Business Services, 2011. 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
 
           function   IMPROVE_QUALITY_OF_ LIFE(target)  
 returns   an action   
   
cognition:  localPercept,  access local conditions, initially set to null [0, 1]   
                                     
 foreignPercept 
, excepted opportunities for goal attainment [0, 1]  
                                    
Goal , access short term and long term  
                 DEFINE:   
localState  [‘current local State’ based on performance measure]   
                                           futureState 
 [‘perceived future State’ based on performance measure]  
       if {  
           localPercept  
approaches  1   &&  foreignPercept  
approaches  0 , then  
           Goal  ←  foreignPercept  
           VERIFY  
           Problem ((futureState – currentState) < (currentState – futureState))   
             execute  
← MIGRATIONDIRECTION  
( foreignPercept)  
                  ELSE if  
                 localPercept  approaches  0 then  
                break thought;  
           return action  
                    if   
                          
SOLUTION  is null [0]  after ‘x  LOOPS ’  
                          
AGENT   is  content  ←   SET  localPercept ( 
 approaches    0 )   
            }  
     END IF  
          return state 
  
  
Figure. 3 The core problem fueled by migration 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

             
    Figure. 4. The Systemigram of a Smart City 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

