 
An Application of Systems Thinking – Food Systems 
 
Edward Tettamanti 
School of Systems Engineering 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
1 Castle Point on Hudson 
 Hoboken, NJ. 07030 USA 
email: etettama@stevens.edu 
 
Mo Mansouri 
School of Systems Engineering 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
1 Castle Point on Hudson 
 Hoboken, NJ. 07030 USA 
email: mmansour@stevens.edu
Abstract – Most of us make our weekly trip to the grocery store, 
purchase, and consume our favorite foods without giving much 
thought into where it came from, the resources used to get it 
from farm-to-plate, laws and regulations dictating food safety 
and sustainment, factors influencing price, political pressures, 
etc. Our modern day food system is one of the most complex 
systems in society and is facing many challenges that includes 
feeding 
a 
growing 
population, 
distribution, 
managing 
ecosystems, nutritional value, and water shortages to name a 
few. To get to the root of these issues, they need to be viewed 
from a system’s point of view, tackled as systemic issues of the 
food system as a whole, instead of trying to solve these 
individually. This paper will apply the Systems Thinking 
framework to create an abstract model of the modern day food 
system that goes beyond food production, cultivation, 
distribution, processing, consumption, etc., but also dives into 
the socioeconomic factors, laws and regulations, environmental 
impacts, ethics, as well as external systemic impacts. Ultimately, 
the analysis done here will be used to lead the way into future 
research and system analysis that will lead to innovative ways to 
optimize the current food system and further build upon 
existing models and framework that may be used to help 
mitigate some of the major known impacts on the food supply. 
Keywords–Systemigram; Interest Map; Context Diagram; 
Drivers. 
I INTRODUCTION 
There are many challenges with our current food system, 
at varying degrees of severity and scale. Some of the major 
challenges with the food system include sustainment and the 
ability to feed a growing population with ever increasing 
strains on water supply, increase in poverty, a changing global 
environment, wars, political unrest, satisfying laws and 
regulations, reducing impacts on local ecosystems, and 
understanding the nutritional needs of the human population. 
An example of geopolitical pressures straining the food 
supply is the Russian-Ukraine war currently taking place, 
which is directly affecting the global supply of grain. Prior to 
the war, around 90% of Ukraine’s agriculture exports were 
seaborne, but blockades due to the Russian conflict has 
brought these exports to a virtual standstill, leaving a 
devastating impact on Ukraine’s economy and a significant 
spike to food prices worldwide [3]. Figure 1 below shows the 
worldwide impacts (food price index) due to geopolitical 
instability on the food supply relating to the Russian-Ukraine 
war. This increase in food price index further stresses an 
already recessed global economy. This forces nations to find 
other sources, which may have complications due to a variety 
of other factors. 
 
Figure 1. Food Price Index Impacts on Russian-Ukrainian War [3] 
Another example is climate change, which is turning what 
were once fertile lands into dry basins creating the 
engineering challenge of finding other water sources or 
conserving existing supplies for crops (as shown in [9] and 
[10]). In order to dive deep into these issues, one needs to 
understand the complex relationships and shaping forces that 
make up the food system with its stakeholders. What 
interactions and interrelationships impact the food supply 
chain. How can we improve existing processes, and eliminate 
non-value added ones? To answer these, first we must answer 
the question “what is a Food System”? 
The first step in understanding the problem that is our 
“Food System”, a formal definition needs to be developed 
and agreed upon. According to Oxford University, The Food 
System is a “complex web of activities involving the 
production, processing, transport, and consumption. Issues 
concerning the food system include the governance and 
economics of food production, its sustainability, the degree to 
which we waste food, how food production affects the natural 
environment and the impact of food on individual and 
population health” [1]. By this definition, our food system is 
not only the processes and technology involved with 
cultivating, distributing, processing, and consuming food, but 
also the governance of food, the economics of food, 
sustainment of the food supply and the environment. All of 
these aspects are key drivers of the food system. As shown in 
Figure 2, there is a feedback loop, where the drivers impact 
the food system (i.e., environmental, and socioeconomic 
drivers directly impact food system stability and supply) and 
vice versa (producing more food means more people can be 
fed, decrease in available water supply to population, and 
more greenhouse gas emissions). 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

 
 
Figure 2. Food System Drivers [1] 
As we begin our systems thinking approach to developing 
a holistic view of the food system as defined prior, this paper 
will dig deeper into each of these drivers, how they relate to 
our stakeholders, how they shape our system, what processes 
work, which ones have areas of improvement, and how we 
can use these drivers to sustain the food supply. This paper 
will not solve world hunger, but it will help establish the 
framework to better understand the knobs and levers that 
control some of the drivers responsible for world hunger 
along with other downstream effects to mitigate disturbances 
to the food supply.  
In Section 2, a stakeholder perspective analysis will be 
performed to identify stakeholders, understand their 
interactions with the system and their values. In Section 3, 
value-added (and non-value-added) processing will be 
identified, as well as the shaping forces that dictate these 
factors. In Section 4, an analysis of shaping forces will be 
performed to better understand how external (and in some 
cases internal) drivers that impact or dictate the system’s 
behavior and limitations. In Section 5, critical properties of 
the system will be analyzed and interpreted through the use 
of systemigrams. These types of diagrams help to build a 
framework of system interdependencies, tying in all 
stakeholder perspectives to tell a story.  
II. STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVE ANALYSIS 
Earlier, we defined what a food system was and talked 
briefly about the “drivers” of this system. From here, one can 
develop a list of considerations for this system of interest. 
Table 1 is a list of (key) considerations for the food system 
per our definition. Some considerations worth noting include 
Environmental considerations, which not only has to do with 
the land’s ability to yield large amounts of crops, but also the 
impacts that crops, livestock, factories, etc., have on the local 
ecosystem. Sustainability which ties into future generations. 
It is important to have a sustainable food supply for the 
foreseeable future. Socioeconomic factors like demographics 
and economy drive the types of food, the quality and 
scalability of the food sources. Technology allows for larger 
crop yields but may also have an environmental footprint. 
Finally, the stakeholders who have a direct stake in food 
systems, though technically the entire human population can 
be viewed as stakeholders of such a system, we can still 
divide this up into discernable categories as shown in the 
context diagram below in Figure 3. 
 
TABLE I. SYSTEM CONSIDERATIONS 
 
 
In the context diagram, the Food System boundary is 
established by the larger lighter shaded yellow circle. The 
darker yellow circles inside make up some of the key 
subsystems of the overall food system. The blue squares are 
the stakeholders where their relationship or connection to the 
subsystem is established by the arrows pointing to the food 
system. The green boxes show some of the external systems 
that directly/indirectly interact with the food system. Though 
technically the entire human population would be considered 
a stakeholder, the ones shown here in blue represent a layer 
of abstraction down from that. These stakeholders can be 
further 
extracted, 
for 
example 
“Food 
Related 
Appliance/Product Manufacturers” can be broken down into 
farm equipment, trucks for distribution, and even ovens, air 
fryers, toasters, etc., for the consumer markets. 
 
Figure 3. Food System Context Diagram 
An interest map (as was done in [7]) can be seen below in 
Figure 4 that gives a more dynamic depiction between the 
food system and its stakeholders. 
 
Considerations
Description
Environmental
Includes anything from fertility and climate to availability of water 
supply, environmental welfare, and impacts on local ecosystems
Sustainability
Long term sustainment of resources, land, food supply, trade routes, 
etc.
Supply and Demand
Ensure a steady supply to meet demand
Costs
Costs due to production, distribution, governing, etc.
Mass Production
Mass production system that is sensitive to demand, ethical, minimal 
downtime and disturbances, etc.
Distribution
Distribution from trade amongst countries to grocery store deliveries 
down to the customer
Efficiency
Producing and distributing food costs resources, making efficient use of 
these resources vital to keep costs reasonable, remain sustainable, keep 
a steady supply, etc.
Stakeholders
See Figure 3 Context Diagram
Safety and Governance
FDA, world trade laws, etc.
Future Generations
Availability of food supplies in the future
Economy
State of economy impacts food availability
Demographics
Cater food supply to regional demographics
Technology
Technology available in support of food production and distribution
Food System Considerations
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

 
 
Figure 4. Interest Map Food System 
From the interest map shown above, one can get an idea 
of how the various stakeholders (blue boxes) take part in the 
food system. We see some stakeholders taking in external 
objects shown in orange (i.e., producers taking in water, 
energy, and nutrients). Interactions between such objects and 
a stakeholder are represented by a dashed arrow. Actions are 
shown by the white boxes (i.e., legislators define laws, retail 
markets sell food, etc.), and the straight arrows show the 
connections between stakeholders and their subsequent 
actions. Some relationships are two-way (indicated by a two-
way arrow) such is the case between legislators and the 
regulatory systems. This relationship, though abstract, is 
important because we get a bird’s eye view of how a change 
in one aspect of the system (i.e., regulatory system) can 
impact various other aspects of the system (i.e., producers, 
distributors, retail markets, etc.). 
III. VALUE-ADDING PROCESSES ANALYSIS 
Now that we have established the key stakeholders, 
defined the system context and dynamic interactions among 
stakeholders and the system, next we can answer questions 
like “What is the system trying to achieve?” or “What is it’s 
true value?”. How can this system’s value be defined in its 
own terms and connection with other systems it interacts 
with? 
What 
processes 
are 
enabling 
the 
system’s 
achievement? 
In order to answer these questions, it is crucial to start 
looking at things from the stakeholder’s point of view. From 
the point of view of our producers, the goal is to provide food 
and generate revenue. It is important for both the producers 
and governing bodies that food is produced in a manner than 
meets regulations. It is important for environmental 
advocates to produce food in an environmentally conscious 
way. Financers want returns on investments, and distributors 
want a means of distributing goods and generate revenue. All 
of these get into the topic of “What do our stakeholders find 
valuable about food systems”? Table 2 below is a list of 
stakeholders and their corresponding values or expectations 
for a food system (as was done in [8]). Note a consistent 
theme among all the stakeholders (Have Food to Consume), 
which is necessary for survival. 
 
TABLE II. STAKEHOLDER FOOD SYSTEM VALUES 
 
With an understanding of system values, value-added 
processes can be established. A value-added process, in the 
context of this paper, is defined as a process of the food 
system that a particular stakeholder finds valuable. Below is 
a list of value-adding processes in relation to stakeholder 
values (The value of this system in its own terms). This list is 
not all inclusive provided the scale and scope of this system.  
1. Growing/Harvesting Crops and Livestock (Farming 
Process) 
2. Trading Crops and Livestock with Other Parties of 
Interest (Global and Local Trading) 
3. Distributing Food to Retail Markets for Consumers 
4. Retail Markets selling food and food related products 
(i.e., Ovens, Toaster, Mixer, etc.) 
5. Regulators routinely inspecting food at various 
points along the supply chain 
6. Food Preparation and Processing 
7. Rotating Crops (sustainment) 
8. Abiding by food related handling Laws 
9. Water Irrigation Systems 
Stakeholders
Food System Values
Environmental Advocacy 
Groups
Highly Sustainable System
Minimal Disturbance to Local Environment
Abides by all environmental protection laws and regulatory guidance
Ability to adapt to future energy trends
Have Food to Consume
Producers
Provide Food
Maximize Profits
Meet Demands/Needs
Feed population
Have Food to Consume
Financers
Low Risk
Food System Related Projects Completed Within Cost and Schedule
Returns plus interest
Have Food to Consume
Distributers
Resources Necessary to distribute goods
Follow laws and regulations
Provides goods in a timely manner
Maximize Revenue
Have Food to Consume
Retail Markets
Provide Food to Local Customers
Maximize Profits
Maintain customer satisfaction
Accessibility to Food
Have Food to Consume
Legislators
All Food Subsystems Satisfy Regulatory requirements and laws (global, 
national, and local)
Have Food to Consume
Maintainers
Ease of Maintenance of Food Systems
Maximize Profits
Availability of Maintenance equipment, tools, and materials
Have Food to Consume
Consumers
Easy Access to Food
Low Cost
Nutritional Value
Variety
Freshness
Maintainibility and Supportability of Food Related Appliances and 
Equipment
Safe
Sustainable Source of Food for Future Generations
Have Food to Consume
Regulatory Systems
Food System satisfies all regulatory requirements
Have Food to Consume
Food Related 
Appliance/Product 
Manufacturers
Customers/market for food producers and consumers
Maximize Profits
Sustainable
Have Food to Consume
Stakeholder Food System Values
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

 
10. Food Production Equipment Maintenance and 
Customer Support 
Next, we can define the value of this system in terms of 
the external systems it interacts with. From our Concept 
Diagram, some of the external systems of interest include: 
1. Energy System 
a. 
Energy is needed to support the food system in 
terms of producing, distributing, regulating, 
selling, and consuming it 
b. Maximizes profits for energy producers 
c. 
Using energy efficiently and minimizing carbon 
footprints satisfies stakeholders like regulators, 
environment advocacy groups, etc. 
d. Provides jobs for those working in the energy 
system 
2. Water System 
a. 
Crops, livestock, etc., require water 
b. Maximize Profits 
c. 
Using water efficiently and minimizing waste 
satisfies 
stakeholders 
like 
regulators, 
environment advocacy groups, etc. 
d. Provides jobs for those working in the water 
system. 
3. Transportation System/Sector 
a. 
Transportation 
is 
vital 
to 
trading 
and 
distributing food and food related products 
b. Maximizes profits for trucking, shipping, and 
rail industries 
c. 
Provides jobs to those working in the 
Transportation System 
4. Global Economy 
a. 
Maintaining low food prices reduces food price 
index, which has a positive effect on global 
economy. 
b. Lower food prices allow for better quality food 
to get to impoverished nations. 
5. Global Affairs 
a. 
Trade is what binds nations together 
b. Food variety across nations 
Now that the value of food systems has been discussed, it 
is time to begin thinking about some of the missing value-
adding processes from the existing food system. This will 
also be an opportunity to dive deeper into some of the driver, 
or “Shaping Forces” of the food system in order to better 
understand food system influences. 
IV. ANALYSIS OF SHAPING FORCES 
In this section, an analysis of the shaping forces will be 
done to get a better understanding of the drivers that impact 
the system that both shape and dictate some of the system’s 
general behavior and limitations (as was done in [6]). With 
this understanding, we can begin to understand how outside 
(or even internal) influences cause the system to behave the 
way it does. 
In [2], the authors introduce the food system and sector 
frameworks and then consolidate this into an integrated 
framework that allows for rapid assessments of impacts on 
the food system. In this sense, the food system framework is 
“an application of systems thinking that links the production, 
processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption of 
food, with elements of the environment, people, inputs, 
infrastructure, and institutions. It describes the connections 
and feedback loops between those elements and processes..” 
[2]. The sector framework, in the context of the agriculture 
sectors, defines a set of activities (8 total) and attributes 
within the agricultural sector that are influenced by socio-
economic and environmental drivers [2]. Activities as they 
relate to the agricultural sector include Production, Value 
Chain Development, Service Provision, Consumption, 
Stakeholder Organization, Regulation, Coordination, and 
Investment [2]. This integrated framework can be 
conceptualized in Figure 5 . 
 
 
Figure 5. Integrated Food System Framework [2] 
Through this integrated framework, there is a feedback 
loop between the drivers and the food system. The drivers 
drive the kind of food, the quality of food, the availability of 
food, and the price of food, food security, etc. The food 
system itself impacts these drivers by contributing to 
greenhouse gas emissions, dictating what needs the market 
has in terms of technology and food quality. Leveraging this 
integrated framework, we can defined the Shaping Forces of 
the Food System as: 
1. State of Global Economy 
2. State of Global Climate 
3. Human Population 
4. Latest Nutritional Guidelines 
5. Food Market 
6. Geopolitical Environment (wars, unrest, etc.) 
7. Cultures 
8. Technology 
(farming 
technology, 
appliance 
technology, distribution technology, etc.) 
9. Availability of Resources 
10. Water Source 
11. Energy Sources 
12. Local Environments 
We can also determine some of the missing value-adding 
processes by analyzing this framework: 
1. Integrate agricultural efforts with the existing 
landscape, as opposed to reshaping the landscape. [4] 
2. Implement cultivation techniques that minimally 
disturb or impacts fertile soil 
3. Raising livestock in a more ethical manner (grass fed, 
free roam, etc.) 
4. Utilize green energy where applicable 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

 
5. Purchase and consume from local food markets, 
which cuts costs and energy use due to distribution, 
removing the “middleman” 
6. Re-establish nutritional guidelines more frequently 
so that they are up to date with latest research 
7. Incentivize locally produced food via tax incentive 
programs 
8. Create programs that allow for selling/giving away 
unused food (reduce food waste) 
V. SYSTEMIGRAM ANALYSIS 
Finally, in order to present a proper definition and holistic 
view of the food system that can be agreed upon by all 
stakeholders, a Systemigram Analysis was performed (as 
described in [5]). Systemigrams are a system thinking tool 
used to provide an “inertial frame of reference” of sorts from 
the perspective of all stakeholders for the system of interest. 
It can be used to describe the interconnections in a 
“storyboard” like context. The systemigram for the food 
system is shown in Figure 6. The system of interest is shown 
at the top left (Food System) with the end node (bottom right) 
representing what the food system needs to accomplish in a 
way that satisfies all stakeholders.  
The overarching mainstay of the food system is to 
produce, distribute, and provide food to meet food demands. 
The food system contains a consumer market that purchases 
goods through retail markets to provide products (food and 
food products) in order to meet demand. The food system also 
consists of a transportation and distribution system that 
distributes food for retail markets and consumers. The food 
production system provides food for distribution. Both food 
production and distribution systems are regulated by all 
levels of regulators, which themselves are funded by 
financers (private, public, and individual). You can also see 
that food demand has impacts on the environment, 
availability for future generations, and supply in the market, 
which dictates prices. The systemigram tells a story about not 
only the hard systems, but their interactions with the soft 
systems which is often overlooked. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The modern day food system is one of the most complex 
systems in human society. Because of its complexity and 
delicate balance, the food system is at constant risk of 
disruption, which can have devastating impacts worldwide. A 
conflict on one side of the world can impact food prices on 
the other side. A changing climate could strain the supply of 
a particular food product, forcing the human population to 
adapt to an alternative food product. Growing populations 
stress the food system, requires more water and energy, thus 
impacting an already stressed water supply and contributing 
to greenhouse gas emissions. A system so vital to human 
survival requires care, and understanding of all of the forces 
that shape it.  
In this paper, we applied a systems thinking approach to 
the food system. We defined the system not only in terms of 
its hard/physical systemic properties, but it’s “soft” properties 
(social, economic, political, etc.). We established a system 
context, and stakeholder value list that allows us to better 
understand the true value of the food system from all 
perspectives. Understanding the value of this system allows 
us to eliminate processes we find do not add value, while also 
allowing us to come up with ways to improve existing 
processes further. This requires understanding all of the key 
drivers that shape the system into what it is. We tied all of 
these together into a storyboard like structure known as a 
systemigram, which provides us with an agreed upon, inertial 
frame of reference for the system of interest. 
Some of the challenges involved with characterizing such 
a system had to do primarily with the high complexity and 
large scope of the Food System. Though the Systems 
Thinking framework is designed to work with such 
complexity, understanding the interactions and defining the 
context  such that the system was not boundless due to the 
scope was a challenge. Further analysis will need to be 
performed to clear some of the lines of the system boundary. 
The systemigram also required several iterations before an 
agreed upon definition of high level system interactions can 
be established. Future work will involve many more 
Figure 6. Systemigram of Food System 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

 
iterations of the systemigram, and even a breakdown of lower 
level systemigrams to define some of the lower level 
interactions of the food system from the perspective of 
specific stakeholders. From there, we can begin to tackle 
some of the major issues mentioned earlier in this paper such 
as sustainment of the food supply for future generations, 
reducing the environmental impacts of food production, and 
continue to feed an ever growing population even in the face 
of major global conflict. 
Food is not only critical to survival, but also a business, a 
hobby, and people’s livelihood. Food brings together 
cultures, binds nations while also causing conflict for others. 
Our food system is a delicate balance that has both 
strengthened and threatened our existence since the 
beginning of time. Understanding such a complex system can 
only be achieved through the use of systems thinking. 
REFERENCES 
[1] University of Oxford, “What is the Food System?,” Future of 
Food, 
https://www.futureoffood.ox.ac.uk/what-food-system 
[retrieved: October, 2023].  
[2] G. D. Borman, et al., "Putting food systems thinking into 
practice: Integrating agriculturual sectors into a multi-level 
analytical 
framework," 
17 
November 
2021. 
[Online].Available: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221191242
1000997.  [retrieved: October, 2023]. 
[3]  European Council, “How the Russian invasion of Ukraine has 
further 
aggravated 
the 
global 
food 
crisis,” www.consilium.europa.eu. 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/how-the-
russian-invasion-of-ukraine-has-further-aggravated-the-
global-food-crisis/ [retrieved: August, 2023]. 
[4] B. Sonja, et al., “Sustainable Agriculture | Learn Science at 
Scitable,” Nature.com, 
2011. 
https://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/sustainabl
e-agriculture-23562787/. [retrieved: October, 2023]. 
[5]  Ali, H. B., Mansouri, M., Muller, G., & Salim, F. A. Supporting 
Systems Thinking Application by Data Analysis. [retrieved: 
October, 2023]. 
[6] N. Carter and M. Mansouri, "Safety Management Complexity: 
A Systems Thinking Approach," 2022 IEEE International 
Symposium on Systems Engineering (ISSE), Vienna, Austria, 
2022, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ISSE54508.2022.10005353. 
[retrieved: October, 2023]. 
[7]     Engen, Siv & Mansouri, Mo & Muller, G.. (2019). Application 
of system thinking to frame the problem in a subsea 
development projects with high-level business requirements. 
10.1109/SYSOSE.2019.8753859. [retrieved: October, 2023]. 
[8]     M. Kjørstad, M. Mansouri, G. Muller and S. Kjenner, "Systems 
Thinking for Early Validation of User Needs in the Front End 
of Innovation; a Case Study in an Offshore SoS," 2019 14th 
Annual Conference System of Systems Engineering (SoSE), 
Anchorage, 
AK, 
USA, 
2019, 
pp. 
382-387, 
doi: 
10.1109/SYSOSE.2019.8753865. [retrieved: October, 2023]. 
[9]  Sabbaghi, M. A., Nazari, M., Araghinejad, S., & Soufizadeh, S. 
(2020). “Economic impacts of climate change on water 
resources and agriculture in Zayandehroud river basin in Iran”. 
Agriculture 
Water 
Management, 
241. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037837741
930842X?casa_token=A8X0P6y48i4AAAAA:9H_5ZGlnzAu
FzP6EKFSpjF_hQ3Sr7fU2ooS8TfQGv2N9VB8LTG2t_T-
zjFb3SxBFYQSF-SbSLIg [retrieved: October 2023] 
[10]  Prosser, I. P., Chiew, F. H., & Stafford Smith, M. (2021). 
Adapting Water Management to climate change in the murray–
darling 
basin, 
Australia. 
Water, 
13(18), 
2504. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/w13182504[retrieved: October 2023] 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-088-9
MODERN SYSTEMS 2023 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions - 2023

