State of Affair in Terms of Big Data Utilization in
Complex System Engineering Organizations
Fahim A. Salim
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: fahim.a.salim@usn.no
Haytham B. Ali
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: haytham.ali@usn.no
Tommy Langen
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: tommy.langen@usn.no
Andreas Wettre
Centre for Design Research
Oslo School of Architecture and Design
email: andreas.wettre@aho.no
Gerrit Muller
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: gerrit.muller@gmail.com
Kristin Falk
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: kristin.falk@usn.no
Abstract—The primary goal of this ongoing questionnaire
is understanding the state of affairs in terms of big data
utilization in Norwegian high-tech enterprises. Employees at
partner organizations were asked 24 questions. The questions
comprised of categories such as Data Availability, Usability,
Integrity, Competency and Organizational behavior. The survey
attempted to get a nuanced understanding of the current pro-
cesses at partner organizations of the H-SEIF2 [1] consortium,
or lack thereof to systematically utilize big data in their projects
from the perspective of employee’s perception. For example, the
survey found that the Project Managers have a more optimistic
perception of their usage of big data while upper management
has a more modest opinion of their current state. In addition to
providing insights, the results will act as a baseline for making
recommendations and propose adaptive digitalization solutions
for each partner organization.
Index Terms—Questionnaire; Big data; Early Phase Decisions;
I. INTRODUCTION
The benefits of using big data in enhancing operations
in general and in project life cycle management are well
understood by organizations of all types and sizes [2]–[5].
However, how to do so effectively is still an open questions for
most organizations [3] [6] [7]. For example, a study conducted
by Qlik and Accenture states that over 74% of employees
feel anxiety with working with data [8], while a recent
study by Rackspace Technology [2] reported that organizations
perceived a rise in difficulty in terms of utilizing Big Data
Analytics (BDA) and specifically Artificial Intelligence (AI)
and Machine Learning (ML).
Researchers have identified multiple challenges which lim-
its organizations ability for enhance utilization of big data.
This includes, a lack of common language among engineers,
ineffective knowledge sharing and difficulty in finding system
information to name of few [9]–[12]. The presented paper will
focus on the users of big data, specifically the internal users
such as employees working on projects.
The primary goal of the ongoing survey is to understand
the current state of affairs in terms of big data utilization
at the partner organizations in the H-SEIF2 [1] project. The
H-SEIF 2 project aims to harvest the value of big-data to
enhance the experience of stakeholders during complex system
engineering project by collaborating with industry partners to
improve their digitalization efforts. The goal is to design data
driven frameworks and methodologies to allow the industry
partners in data supported early phase decisions.
Employees at partner organizations were asked 24 ques-
tions. The questions were comprised of categories such as
Data Availability, Usability, Integrity, Competency and Orga-
nizational behavior. In doing so, the survey attempted to get
a nuanced understanding of the current processes at partner
organizations or lack thereof, to systematically utilize big data
in their projects from the perspective of employee’s perception.
It aims to provide deeper insights at gaps and differences
at different organizations or at different department within
a large organization. This will act as a baseline for making
recommendations and propose adaptive digitalization solutions
for each partner organization.
There are few other surveys which analyse the state of
affairs at organizations [2] [6] [8]. They have only focused
on Chief Information Officers (CIOs) or high level decision
makers. The presented paper takes a deeper dive and took the
perspective of a cross section of employees to get a better
understanding of the current state at each company.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section II de-
scribes the related work. Details about the questionnaire are
described in Section III. Which is followed by a discussion
in Section IV and finally Section V contains the concluding
remarks and some plans for the future.
II. RELATED WORK
Questionnaires and surveys are widely used for different
purposes e.g., comparing two products and/or services [7] [13].
They are often used to understand the needs of perspective
users of future products and services or as part of user-centric
design [14] [15], or to collect data on customer, employee
and/or student satisfaction, [16]–[18].
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure. 1: Respondents Profile: information about respondents
Regarding the utilization of big data in operations of or-
ganizations, Qlik and Accenture [8] conducted a survey to
have an understanding of big data utilization in enterprises .
They found that 60 to 70% of the collected data in enterprise
is never used and a vast majority of about 74% of employees
feel overwhelmed or simply unhappy working with data. They
also found that only 37% of employees trust their decisions
more when they are based on data while 48% preferred gut
feeling over data driven decision making [8].
Focusing on high level decision makers, a survey by
Rackspace Technology [2] found that employees perceived
difficulty with ML and big data has actually been increasing.
The survey [2] also found that employees considered data
dispersed across many different systems to be one of the
biggest barrier in drawing insights from it. Lack of skillset
and talented employees is perceived as a great concern and
limitation in fully utilizing big data in enterprise decision
making [2] [8] [19].
Raguseo [6] focused on the CIOs of French medium and
large enterprises to understand differences if any, across indus-
try and the size of organizations. Analysis of the questionnaire
found that investments in technologies like machine learning
software tools are influenced by the size of the organization
and the author did not find any statistical differences across
different industries.
While employees appear often in the discourse and con-
sidered a crucial element in utilizing big data systems, they
are often the ones most neglected [20]. Moreover, majority of
the above mentioned research focused on high level decision
makers and not a cross-section of employees, departments and
job roles.
The presented survey is part of the H-SEIF2 [1] research
project that aims to develop human centered framework for
the utilization of big data during early phase decision making.
The presented work, by focusing on Norwegian industry
partners extends the related work by focusing on a cross-
section of employees to get a more nuance understanding
of any differences among different departments, employee
profiles and across different industries.
III. SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE
The survey questionnaire consists of 24 questions in 5
categories. The categories were selected by a combination of
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

TABLE I: THE QUESTIONNAIRE.
Information About You
Organization / Company
Job title
Department
Job Description
Educational Background
Gender
Age group
In what Life-cycle phase(s) is your current work activities?
Idea Generation and Analysis, Concept Development, Detailed Engineering,
Fabrication Testing and Integration, Operations, Maintenance and Modification
Data Availability
1. In my current project, team spent a significant effort to gather relevant data for decision making.
2. In my current project we gather data of high relevance to end-user values.
3. When I do my work, I have easy access to all relevant data that I need to do my work.
4. I am familiar with tools and methods that can help me to better explore and analyze data that include AI and ML?
5. In my work, I have easy access to useful data-analysis tools and methodologies that help to better understand the task at hand.
6. I have available all the data-analysis tools and methods that I need to do my work effectively.
7. Pertinent data and information that is being held back from me in due to confidentiality.
Data Usability
8. Getting access to and analyzing big amount of data is an important part of the early-phase development-process in my company.
9. In my organization, we have a history of bashing out new ideas and products on data and information rather than on “gut-feeling”.
10. In My company, we make disruptive innovations rather than incremental product improvements.
11. In my company we use data from previous systems/projects to improve the performance of the current system/project.
12. In my company we have a consistent and effective procedure for storing/sharing data.
13. The procedure for storing/sharing data in my company is sufficient for our purposes?
14. I always use the existing stored data from old projects as “lessons learned” in new projects.
Data Integrity
15. In my work, I fully trust the data presented and developed by others.
Competency
16. I am fully confident about how to best use data to improve products, services and/or systems.
17. In early-phases of product-development, I am fully confident that my team has sufficient knowledge to effectively use all available data.
18. My managers always understand the data and simulations I present to him/her.
19. I always have enough context when I use data in my work.
20. My company encourage competency-development digital skills such as big data and digitalization.
Organizational Behavior
21. My company fully take advantage of operational data as feedback in the early development.
22. We spend sufficient time to collect and analyze all available data in the early phase.
23. My company has a process that helps us make use of big-data for early validation of system solutions.
24. Decisions in my company are made based on reliable data rather than gut feeling
literature review [2] [3] [6] [8] [20] and our initial co-creation
sessions with industry partners, in order to understand the
issues faced by the H-SEIF2 [1] industry partners in fully
utilizing big data in early phase decision making in their
projects.
Table I lists the questions asked in the questionnaire. The
participants were asked to rate the extent to which they agree
or disagree with the statements on a 7-point Likert scale. In the
initial phase, we have collected 40 responses from employees
at partner organizations. Figure 1 shows the basic information
about the survey respondents. Most respondents are from
the Tech and Engineering Consultancy firm that works on a
diverse range of innovative projects for their clients, followed
by an industrial conglomerate with division in shipping and
digital technology and startup incubation. More than half of
the respondents are engineers i.e., 23, while 7 are project
managers and 6 belong to top management positions.
In terms of educational background, 22 of the respondents
reported having a Masters degree. Engineering was the most
common reported educational background, while Finance and
Management the other. The age distribution of the respondents
is quite balanced as well (see Figure 1(f)), however our current
data have a gender imbalance, as 34 out of the 40 respondents
are male. We will make efforts to address that in future
versions.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The questionnaire results (see Figure 2) show that internal
stakeholders (employees) feel dissatisfied by the utilization of
big data in their projects, especially in early phase decision
making as the Net Promoter Score (NPS) is negative across
the board. It is not surprising, as it is not only the finding
of our initial conversations with industry partners but other
surveys reached the same conclusion [2] [8].
One notable surprise however is question# 7 which asks
the respondents if data is being held back from them for
confidentiality reasons; to which the respondents disagreed.
In this case it is a positive outcome and runs counter to our
earlier assumptions [21]. However, it may change when in
the next phase we collect data from additional respondents
belonging to industry partners involved with defense and
aerospace industries.
Another interesting outcome is that engineers and personnel
involved with technical aspect of projects gave lower scores
than project managers and upper management. Project man-
agers seem to have a rosier perception compared to others
(see Figure 3). There is a need for greater communication
among project managers and other non-technical stakeholder,
engineers and technical personnel. While the more positive
responses are somewhat in line with [8], there are notable
differences compared to [8]. For example, in our survey the
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure. 2: Overall responses
Figure. 3: Average responses per job roles.
upper management seems less optimistic compared to the
project managers.
Another notable exception is the “Competency” section
of the questionnaire. For example, the report [8] stated that
business leaders overestimate the capabilities of their work-
force, while our survey showed that both engineers and
project managers gave higher responses compared to the upper
management (see Figure 3).
In terms of age groups, employees in younger and older age
Figure. 4: Average responses per age group.
groups overall gave higher scores compared to middle (35-
44) age group, while the middle age group reported the most
confidence in their competency compared to the others (see
Figure 4). Also, in terms of the organization behavior category,
younger and senior employees express greater optimism com-
pared to the 35-44 age group. Question# 21 was an exception,
which asks about taking full advantage of operational data in
early phase decision making, to which the 35-44 age group
gave higher score compared to the others.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

V. CONCLUSION
The current version of the survey gave us a deeper under-
standing of the state of affairs as perceived by the internal
stakeholder at some of the industry partners. It provided a
glimpse at the disparity of different stakeholders in terms
of their perception of their utilization of big data in their
operations and decision-making process. Overall, the survey
concluded that employees at the H-SEIF2 industry partners
understand the need of using big data in their project to
enhance their operations as the NPS is negative across the
board. Another conclusion that can be drawn is that the project
managers need more communication with engineers and other
technical personnel to get a better calibration of their big data
needs.
In the future, we plan to extend the survey by gathering
responses from all the industry partners in the H-SEIF 2
consortium to allow us an even deeper understanding of the
perception of employees and the state of affairs. For future
versions, we will target different departments within larger
organizations to get a more balanced dataset for our analysis
and we also plan to conduct semi-structure interviews with
some employees to get further insights.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is part of the H-SEIF 2 project and is funded
by the Research Council of Norway through the innovation
project (IPN project no.: 317862).
REFERENCES
[1] U.
NISE,
“H-SEIF
2
Project.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.usn.no/hseif last accessed on 20-06-2022
[2] R. Technology, “AI / ML Annual Research Report 2022,” 2022.
[3] K. Falk, A. K. Kamara, E. P. Brathen, K. Helle, P. T. Moe, and
S. Kokkula, “Digitizing the Maintenance Documentation; A System of
Systems in Oil and Gas Industry,” SOSE 2020 - IEEE 15th International
Conference of System of Systems Engineering, Proceedings, pp. 493–
499, 2020.
[4] H. B. Ali and F. A. Salim, “Transferring Tacit Knowledge into Explicit:
A Case Study in a Fully (Semi) Automated Parking Garage,” in
PROCEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, 2021.
[5] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, and K. Falk, “Towards a Data Processing
Framework for Enhanced User Centric System Engineering,” in PRO-
CEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, Workshop
on Smart Pervasive Computing, 2021.
[6] E. Raguseo, “Big data technologies: An empirical investigation on their
adoption, benefits and risks for companies,” International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 187–195, 2018.
[7] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, S. Luz, and O. Conlan, “Automatic transformation
of a video using multimodal information for an engaging exploration
experience,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.
[8] Qlik
and
Accenture,
“The
Human
Impact
of
Data
Literacy,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact
last
accessed
on
20-
06-2022
[9] B. A. Delicado, A. Salado, and R. Momp´o, “Conceptualization of a T-
Shaped engineering competency model in collaborative organizational
settings: Problem and status in the Spanish aircraft industry,” Systems
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 534–554, 2018.
[10] S. Engen, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “The need for systems awareness
to support early-phase decision-making—a study from the norwegian
energy industry,” Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, 2021.
[11] Juzgado P.D. Borches, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for effective
communication in product evolution,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, 2010.
[12] T. Tomiyama, V. D’Amelio, J. Urbanic, and W. Eimaraghy, “Complexity
of multi-disciplinary design,” CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology,
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 185–188, 2007.
[13] B. Laugwitz, T. Held, and M. Schrepp, “Construction and Evaluation
of a User Experience Questionnaire,” HCI and Usability for Education
and Work, pp. 63–76, 2008.
[14] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, O. Conlan, and S. Luz, “An approach for ex-
ploring a video via multimodal feature extraction and user interactions,”
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, no. October 2017, 2018.
[15] G. Gravier, M. Ragot, A. Laurent, R. Bois, G. Jadi, E. Jamet, and
L. Monceaux, “Shaping-Up Multimedia Analytics: Needs and Expec-
tations of Media Professionals,” in The 22nd International Conference
on Multimedia Modelling, vol. 9516, Miami, 2016, pp. 303–314.
[16] G. Nicolini and L. D. Valle, “Errors in Customer Satisfaction Surveys
and Methods to Correct Self-Selection Bias,” Quality Technology Quan-
titative Management, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 167–181, 2011.
[17] B. Popovic, R. Maletic, and T. Paunovic, “Employee Satisfaction Survey
in Function of Business Improvement,” Management - Journal for theory
and practice of management, vol. 20, no. 76, pp. 31–40, 2015.
[18] L. She, L. Ma, A. Jan, H. Sharif Nia, and P. Rahmatpour, “Online
Learning Satisfaction During COVID-19 Pandemic Among Chinese Uni-
versity Students: The Serial Mediation Model,” Frontiers in Psychology,
vol. 12, no. October, 2021.
[19] B. Dudley, “Digital Transformation Initiative: Oil and Gas Industry In
collaboration with Accenture,” World Economic Forum, no. January,
p. 32, 2017. [Online]. Available: www.weforum.org last accessed on
20-06-2022
[20] D. H. Shin, “Demystifying big data: Anatomy of big data developmental
process,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 837–854, 2016.
[21] N. M. Sjøkvist and M. Kjørstad, “Eliciting Human Values by Applying
Design Thinking Techniques in Systems Engineering,” INCOSE Inter-
national Symposium, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 478–499, 2019.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

