Investigating the Conditions of Emerging Requirements of Advanced Technologies 
for BIM-SPEED Platform 
Alan Martin Redmond
Information Technologies Directorate (DTI),  
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment  
Sophia Antipolis, France 
email: alan.redmond@cstb.fr 
Sonia Álvarez-Díaz
Energy Division,  
CARTIF Technology Centre  
Boecillo, Valladolid, Spain 
email: sonalv@cartif.es 
Nicolas Pastorelly
Information Technologies Directorate (DTI),  
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment  
Sophia Antipolis, France 
email: nicolas.pastorelly@cstb.fr 
Abstract—As society is becoming more and more aware of the 
negative environmental impact of our living environments 
there is a need for interoperability of a full range of Building 
Information Modelling (BIM) tools for renovation that will be 
accommodated on an innovative BIM cloud platform. The use 
of BIM will be the catalyst for a more intelligent and efficient 
method of deep renovation for the residential building sector. 
This paper is based on the deliverable report ‘Strategies for 
user acceptance, collaboration support, and BIM data 
maintenance’ of the BIM-SPEED project, an H2020 research 
project. This report aimed to investigate and define the 
conditions for improving the use of the BIM-SPEED platform 
and fostering its adoption by the largest community of 
stakeholders. The methodology is based on two complementary 
aspects: i) feedback provided by the first end-users of the 
BIM-SPEED cloud platform, the necessary functionalities 
required to be implemented in the future versions of the 
platform to support renovation projects that have been 
collected and synthesized; and ii) by using end-user 
expectations regarding BIM content and update during 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of buildings. The result of 
this paper provides general recommendations for improving 
such an Integrated BIM Platform to guarantee its usability 
over time by advancing future versions, such as the services 
offered, user needs (user friendliness, user interface and ease of 
use), performances, flexibility, and availability. 
Keywords-BIM; 
Renovation; 
Agile 
Development; 
Collaboration; Platforms; Usability Testing, O&M. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
The current trend in the use of digitalization of built 
assets to support in the deep renovation of buildings has led 
to the development of many tools based on Building 
Information 
Modelling 
(BIM), 
both 
desktop 
and 
cloud-based. This paper aims to investigate and define the 
conditions for improving the use of the BIM-SPEED 
platform and fostering its adoption by the largest community 
of stakeholders. This platform is part of the Horizon 2020 
project BIM-SPEED (harmonized Building Information 
Speedway for Energy-Efficient Renovation) [1], which aims 
to improve the performance of building stock by developing 
a combination of techniques and tools with one central 
information source at its core: the use of BIM.  
The BIM-SPEED platform is part of an ambitious work 
package ‘Implementing BIM cloud platform and data 
management’ whose objective is to develop and deploy an 
operational cloud platform for collaboration and exchange of 
BIM data and other project documentation between all 
stakeholders in the whole cycle of European Environmental 
Bureau renovation projects [2]. For this purpose, there are 
several points that were analyzed: 

The functionalities or services offered by the 
platform and how they meet the needs of different 
end-users’ profiles to support renovation projects. 

The user-friendliness of the platform, in particular 
the user interface and ease of use. 

The robustness, reliability, performance (e.g., 
response time for certain actions), security of data 
(e.g., in case of system failure). 

The flexibility and evolution of the platform (its 
capacity to adapt to the real needs of the end-users). 

The availability of a user support service. 

And finally, the data maintenance and update in the 
long term during the building operation. 
In order to investigate the conditions of emerging 
requirements of advanced technologies needed to improve 
the BIM-SPEED platform, a study was conducted to select 
the most viable components and what and how to update in 
practice, explained in Section II of this paper. In Section III 
is explained the first part of the methodology followed, and 
the second part focused on the development of an agile 
platform is explained in Section IV. Some BIM 
recommendations are included in Section V, and the 
conclusions and future exploitation of the BIM-SPEED 
platform are explained in Section VI. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

II.
EASE OF USE
The following section addresses the selecting of the 
components for advancement and the use of a desktop 
study. 
A.
Selecting the Components for Advancement 
The first aspect was developed through an online survey 
by the end-users of the 13 demonstration sites of the 
BIM-SPEED project, complemented with some face-to-face 
interviews. The main result of the survey was that the BIM-
SPEED platform, in its current version (i.e., the launch 
version with mainly collaborative features had a limited set 
of BIM-based renovation-oriented services) was mainly used 
as a file repository and document sharing service. In this 
initial version in which it was at the time of the first survey, 
the platform did not show significant innovative features 
compared to many other products available on the market, 
according to user’s answers. However, very valuable 
information on the expected developments had been 
collected during the survey, amongst which the most 
demanded ones were predefined folder structure specific to 
renovation projects, workflow management, online Industry 
Foundation Classes (IFC) viewer, and integration of BIM 
services for renovation (scan to BIM, energy simulation, 
checklist of BIM object properties at different stages of the 
renovation process, connection with BIM objects libraries, 
etc.). Specific feedback was provided on the level of 
information needed for some BIM objects (e.g., Heating, 
Ventilation, 
and 
Air 
Conditioning 
(HVAC) 
system 
components) during the building operation phase, which 
allowed to make the link with the second part of this study. 
B.
The Integrity of the Desk Review 
This second part of the study was about the update of 
BIM during building operation and maintenance, and the 
central role that BIM is called upon to play during the 
operation of a building, in relation to traditional O&M tools 
and emerging initiatives like Digital Building Logbooks or 
BIM Passports. The study was informed by a desk review 
combined with the contributors' own experience. It resulted 
in a set of recommendations for updating BIM during 
renovation operations, even for smaller changes. 
III.
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH (PHASE I) 
The methodology followed relied on a two-step approach 
(Figure 1”). In a first step (1), conduct a survey among the 
users of the platform to better know how they use the 
platform in practice, and what are their expectations in terms 
of 
data 
organization, 
work 
progress 
monitoring, 
functionalities, and required BIM content for renovation 
projects. The results of this survey were used, on the one 
hand, to inform future developments of the platform, and on 
the other hand, as input to the second step.  
The 
second 
step 
(2) 
consists 
in 
setting 
up 
recommendations for the BIM update and maintenance. This 
work relied on a desk review of relevant techniques, 
standards, and initiatives such as the building Logbook, the 
BIM 
Passport, 
IFC 
annotation 
mechanisms, 
on-site 
information acquisition, etc. 
Figure 1. Methodology followed
A.
User Survey 
An online questionnaire was set up in April 2020 (as the 
project originally started in November of 2018 with a 
duration of 48 months). The questionnaire was re-launched 
in March 2021 for additional answers. The objectives were: 

To collect data on how end-users practically use the 
BIM-SPEED cloud platform. 

To get some qualitative information on their level of 
satisfaction. 

To identify current strengths and weaknesses. 

And to collect their expectations for future versions 
of the platform. 
Two main target groups were identified for the survey: 
a) the BIM-SPEED partners who are the contacts for the 13 
demo projects and b) the registered users of the platform 
outside the BIM-SPEED consortium. In all, this represented 
a sample of 41 people. This online questionnaire consisted 
of some 30 questions organized in several sections such as: 
identity (Table I), background in BIM, and expectations 
(Table II). 
B.
Results 
Only a small part of the 41 identified end-users (between 
7 and 12, pending the question) of the project had provided 
fully exploitable answers to the online survey. This is 
mainly because at the time of the survey, some of the pilots 
had only just started, so end-users did not have enough 
insight into the use of the platform to provide informed 
responses. 
C.
Main characteristics of the BIM-SPEED pilot project 
and background in BIM 
Including the 2021 re-launch, the respondents represent 
12 (9 from the first questionnaire, 3 from the second) from 
the 13 BIM-SPEED pilot projects in Italy, Romania (x2), 
Poland (x2), The Netherlands, Bulgaria, Spain, Germany 
(x2) and France (x2). All these projects included a 
residential part (sometimes beside other activities like hotel 
or commerce). These are mostly private projects, of very 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

different sizes (from less than 1,000 m2 up to 20,000 m2). 
Half of them have a renovation budget lower than 100,000 € 
but one project has a budget higher than 10,000,000 €. 
Three-quarters of respondents had already good experience 
with BIM (through several projects), the others having 
participated once to a BIM project. Except in one case, all 
respondents’ organizations have plans to develop the use of 
BIM internally.  
TABLE I. 
YOUR IDENTITY
Structure 
Profile 
Type 
 Company: 66,7% 
 Research and Technology Organization: 25% 
 Public Community: 8,3% 
Size of 
Organization 
 <10 (VSE): 8,3% 
 11<250 (SME): 41,7% 
 250><5,000: 25% 
 >5,000: 25% 
Business Area 
 Promoter: 8,3% 
 Building owner: 16,7% 
 Project manager: 33,3% 
 Architect: 25% 
 Engineering Office: 33,3% 
 Main contractor (builder): 8,3% 
 Subcontractor (crafts): 8,3% 
 Consultant (crafts): 8,3% 
 Surveyor: 0% 
 Real estate information manager: 8,3% 
Using another 
platform 
 Yes: 66;7% (Dalux Box, BauApp, C&C, Bim 
Server Center, BIM 360) 
 No: 33,3% 
TABLE II. 
BACKGROUND IN BIM 
Structure 
Results 
Participation in projects 
using BIM 
 Never: 16;7% 
 Only once: 25% 
 Several times: 58,3% 
Organization BIM 
expertise/experience 
 No experience: 8,3% 
 <1 year: 0% 
 1<2 years: 33,3% 
 2<5 yeas: 25% 
 >5 years: 33,3% 
Training sessions to BIM 
tools 
 No yet: 25% 
 Yes, on need base: 41,7% 
 Yes periodically: 25%% 
 Yes, and every post has a BIM 
training roadmap: 8,3% 
Have you used the BIM-
SPEED platform yet? 
 Yes: 75% 
 No: 25% 
D.
Appreciation of the BIM-SPEED Platform 
The BIM-SPEED platform questionnaire implemented 
in this Phase I, used multiple methods or data sources to 
develop a comprehensive understanding of the stakeholders 
needs. The questionnaire, interviews and observation of the 
usability testing sites provided the inductive reasoning 
results, shown in TABLE III. Whereas Phase II outlined the 
deductive reasoning ‘the act of backing up the BIM-SPEED 
platform applications with specific scenarios – observations 
learnt from existing case studies and analysis from inductive 
reasoning, leading the product progression to BETA stage.’ 
The BIM-SPEED platform server was in an ALPHA 
development stage, and in this phase no functionalities of 
the software are tested, it is a previous stage of a BETA 
version, something of which respondents were unaware. For 
that reason, the stakeholder’s requirements were still 
unclear. The survey and interviews were apart incremental 
and iterative methods to represent a practical and useful 
approach to promote initial capabilities that will be followed 
by successive deliveries to reach the product development 
phase.  
TABLE III. 
BIM APPRECIATION
Structure 
Results 
BIM-SPEED 
Satisfaction 
 Satisfied: 11,1% 
 Partially satisfied: 55,6% 
 Not satisfied: 11,1% 
BIM-SPEED Platform 
meet your expectations? 
 Yes: 22,2% 
 No: 77,8% 
Main teamwork features 
used 
 Document sharing: 100% 
 Task scheduling: 33,3% 
 Calendar: 33,3% 
 Meeting scheduling: 33,3% 
 Chat: 11,1% 
 Videoconferencing: 0% 
Use the invitation 
function to invite a 
partner 
 Yes: 55,6% 
 No: 44,4% 
Using of Basic Services 
 File naming convention: 80% 
 Model checking: 60% 
Using EveBim Viewer 
 Yes: 22,2% 
 No: 7,8% 
Time using the BIM-
SPEED Platform 
 Every day: 0% 
 1 to times a week: 22,2% 
 3 to 5 times a week: 0% 
 Once a month: 66,7% 
 Once a certain period: 0% 
BIM-SPEED Platform 
Advice 
 It speeds up the renovation process: 60% 
 It reduces the renovation costs: 20% 
 It improves the quality of the renovation: 
80% 
In summary, the following results provided in TABLE 
IV. represent comments that contributed constructively to 
identifying future requirements and deductive comments 
that enabled the desired features and capabilities to be the 
target focus of future development 
TABLE IV. 
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
Summary of future requirements 
Summary of key deductive 
comments 
No predefined folder structure 
specific to renovations projects. 
In response to what features 
does the platform lack the 
most: “energy calculations, 
management of the document, 
checklist, issue tracking, cost 
analysis, time analysis, in fact 
soon every employer’s 
information requirement 
specification will demand 
Common Data Environment 
platform”. 
No tool to manage the BIM 
workflow. 
Limited size of files that can be 
uploaded (e.g., large cloud points). 
Lack of business functions and 
support tools integrated into the 
platform (the platform is mainly 
used as a file repository). 
No online BIM viewer – eveBIM 
is integrated into the platform but 
it is a desktop application. 
In response to what are the 
main types of tool/services to 
be integrated into the BIM-
SPEED platform: BIM 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Summary of future requirements 
Summary of key deductive 
comments 
passport, model checker, 
energy analysis/ simulation/ 
calculation was all mentioned 
extensively in the survey. 
And “file naming, scan to BIM 
tools – that creates LOD 100-
200 model (also referred to as 
a schematic design stage), and 
renovation scenarios results.” 
The overall endgame (‘the final stage’) is to present a 
platform that provides a streamlined process that overrides 
existing challenges, faster exchanges, easier sharing of files 
and managing of data. However, in order to reach this stage, 
the summary of the results shown in TABLE IV. must be 
taken into consideration to identify current obstacles. 
IV.
AGILE PLATFORM DEVELOPMENT (PHASE II) 
The generalized comparison of commercial versus 
contract/task development domain is that the former requires 
the anticipation, innovation, developing and applying new or 
emerging technologies to create new products in a fast-paced 
time to market environment before the competition seizes on 
the opportunity spaces [3]. Whereas European H2020 
projects recognize the importance of the commercial market 
while heavily leaning towards contract/task development 
domain (‘the latter’) which focuses on the dependency of the 
customer (project officer) satisfaction concerning results of 
performance-based outcomes (Key Performance Indicators - 
KPIs, 
Measurement 
of 
Effectiveness 
(MOE), 
and 
Measurement of Suitability (MOS)). 
The Agile Platform Development Method had been 
adapted from the traditional contract/task schedule that is 
illustrated in a step sequence of events in Figure 2”. During 
this stage of the development, the BIM-SPEED project had 
been involved in the ALPHA design stage of the platform 
which had partially incorporated the end-user anticipated 
needs. However, to further evolve the platform step 2 User 
defined needs required step 3 User Cases, to achieve step 4, 
identify features & capabilities. In reference to this paper, 
these stages are acknowledged by the questionnaire, and 
face-to-face meetings that were organized with professionals 
involved in some real-time usability testing (on specific user 
sites). These meetings were conducted by the BIM-SPEED 
partners defined as contact points for the user sites in 
Germany, Italy, and Spain. 
In  Figure 2”, the importance of step 3 User Cases has 
been defined by a two-way directional arrow. This indicates 
that BIM-SPEED development process incorporated an 
agile platform development method at this stage (shown by 
the number 3 User tested sites on the right-hand side of the 
diagram). The reason for implementing this technique was 
to allow the platform developers to perform two incremental 
tests. The first evaluation at step 3 and the second evaluation 
at step 6. The results of the first evaluation helped to 
advance the development of the architecture (requirements
& functional) referring to step 5 as outlined in Section IV. 
Step 6 Rapid prototyping will be conducted after the project 
partners accumulate the results provided from each of the 
site tests and incorporates them into an updated version of 
the BIM-SPEED Platform.
Figure 2. Agile Platform Development Method 
The identified incomplete requirements and constructive 
comments will be revisited and tested on the existing sites 
via performing rapid prototyping & Demos. The outcome of 
these incremental (step by step process that loops back to 
refine the platform - iteration) and incursion (where the 
outputs at one level become the inputs for the next 
successive level), will lead to step 7 ‘decision gate’. At this 
stage the consortium will decide whether the platform has 
advanced to BETA testing. The agile technique enables 
short testing cycles rather than trying to implement one final 
test. It allows the platform to grow/evolve in a heuristic 
manner after two cycles. The process also assists in 
achieving the technical measures; MOE – the acquirer’s key 
indicators and the process of MOS – the most suitable 
applications to be provided for the BIM-SPEED platform 
A.
Real-Time Usability Testing 
In most cases usability testing requires four key areas to 
be examined: i) what features need to be improved; ii) what 
are the biggest obstacles to using the prototype; iii) what 
goals do you require when you come to the platform; iv) 
what did you learn from the usability test. However, as 
previously identified, the platform was a part of an agile 
development process, meaning that at this stage of the first 
incremental test, learning material was created to 
demonstrate the features available at that time, such as 
naming conventions. The survey results had highlighted this 
feature as necessary component of the platform and CSTB 
had responded (Figure 2”). According to [4], specifying the 
electronic data file format for information deliverables is 
critical.  
If the data models of the export/import applications 
don’t match, some modification of exported BIM data may 
be needed before it can be imported into the Computerized 
Maintenance Management System (CMMS)/ Integrated 
Workplace 
Management 
System 
(IWMS) 
software. 
Analyzing and addressing these data format compatibility 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

issues before creating any data in the BIM model can 
greatly minimize these issues. If both applications support 
Construction Operations Building Information Exchange 
(COBie) format, as a non-proprietary data format, you can 
specify that data from the BIM can be delivered in a COBie-
compliant format.”  
B.
Summary of Sprint Iteration 
A compilation of the three individual sprints (usability 
testing) are listed below. These results are based on the 
analysis of the problems and opportunities arising from the 
usability test. The following step 5 of Figure 2, Develop 
Architecture,” incorporates the patterns (systems thinking) 
identified to advance the architecture of the BIM-SPEED 
platform. The three user sites results are composed into two 
sections: usability study experience summary and summary 
of views on future changes/improvements. The results are 
displayed in a manner to find the patterns and traceability 
between the different tests user requirements and future 
design requirements.  Usability Study Experience Summary: 
a)  
Germany: the layout of the platform offers useful 
extensions through the versioning and chat 
function; very beneficial to publish data (models, 
reports, versions) which therefore can represent 
official, trustworthy documents; and the platform is 
only effectively usable for data storage so far. 
b) 
Italy: the platform was mainly used as a platform 
for file sharing; tools used and from different data 
formats were also placed on the platform: 
AutoCAD (Autodesk), Revit (Autodesk), Thermus 
(ACCA Software), Primus (ACCA Software). 
c) 
Spain: the main use of the platform has mostly 
been like a repository to exchange information; 
 BIM model viewer has been implemented which 
turned out to be helpful. 
Evidently the user experience in all three sites 
recognized at this stage the platform is an efficient 
repository for exchanging files. The use of additional 
extensions such as versioning and chat function for 
communication is beneficial. The BIM model viewer option 
and the semantic checker for elements etc., were also 
recognized as positive applications. Integrating different 
tools with different data formats streamlined the usability 
experience. Again, the naming convention was highly 
recommended. 
C.
Summary of Views on Future Changes/Improvements 
The process of validating files, changing names, and 
modifying several files simultaneously, structuring files into 
folders and file checking for clearer workflows was 
highlighted in both Germany and Italy usability tests as 
areas for improvement. The SemChecker had been 
previously acknowledged as a positive contribution, 
however for future changes it was suggested that more 
information be provided. Likewise, the model viewers were 
viewed as positive contributor, however in the future an 
online viewer is deemed essential. The site usability test in 
Spain produced some constructive comments such as: 
missing a functionality to follow the site, like a logbook 
which allows to register all the issues during the site through 
the 3D model; linked annotations inside the model to 
different parts of it; and missing the possibility to link 
different documents like pdf or jpeg with different elements 
of the model. Both Spain and Italy recommended higher 
level of detail for objects. Next Steps: The information 
obtained from the survey and usability testing formed the 
basis of the key focus areas to advance the BIM-SPEED 
platform. The following suggestions address the main future 
services. 
V.
BIM RECOMMENDATIONS
The Level of Development (LOD) had been defined as a 
crucial process to initialize and update all information 
during renovation operations. Indeed, a process that would 
be too complicated can make this data structure unusable. 
On another hand, when smaller changes have been made to 
the building, they are often not integrated into the model. 
This issue can be linked to the development and 
management of the building Logbook which must list all 
operations made on the building. In this context, the use of 
BIM is often seen as a data sink for initializing CMMS 
software. However, one also must think of the opposite way, 
it means, how to update BIM following operations directly 
managed in the CMMS software. Indeed, if we can use BIM 
as an operational support of the Digital Building Logbook 
(DBL) (two ways communication between BIM and 
dedicated tools for maintenance), this will ensure the 
transmission of information about building operation 
including when the operator changes (using possibly 
different asset management tools). 
Alternatively, we also looked at how BIM can be used to 
provide information to DBL or maintenance management 
systems, or conversely, how BIM can be updated from 
them. The challenges are to keep the BIM up to date during 
maintenance/renovation operations, even for small changes, 
and to ensure the transmission of information on building 
operations, even when the building operator changes and 
uses a different asset management tool. 
A.
Digital Building Logbook 
The ‘Digital Building Logbook’ is defined as a digital 
traceable container for all the data of a building, including 
all the documents and information regarding design, 
structure calculation, system implementation, materiality, 
costs, maintenance, energy efficiency (including possible 
certifications), Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), urban 
conditions, property, etc. The DBL belongs to the building 
owner and can be shared with public entities (e.g., 
municipalities), AECOM professionals, energy certifiers, 
etc., to facilitate processes of review and management of the 
building, as well as to carry out future renovations on it.  In 
more advanced scenarios it is also possible to use the DBL 
as a container for energy measurement data from the 
building, so that results that differ from the numbers in the 
digital twin's energy analysis can be a symptom of a 
breakdown in the air conditioning systems or a problem in 
the thermal envelope. Due to the relevance of this topic, 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

some European initiatives related with the Building 
Logbook are already being developed in Germany 
(Gëbaudepass), 
Portugal 
(CASA+), 
France 
(Carnet 
numérique du logement) or Belgium (Woningpas), with the 
aim of bringing building owners and stakeholders together. 
The DBL is already starting to be implemented in countries 
such as France, Germany, or Belgium, as detailed in the 
European study BUILDING RENOVATION: Customized 
roadmaps toward deep renovation and better homes [5]. 
B.
BIM Passport 
The automated evaluation of information contained in 
the DBL holds great potential in supporting (future) 
building owners and operators to assess the quality and 
completeness of the given information to implement certain 
use cases related to deep building renovation. There are 
several (research) projects developing BIM-based Material 
Passports (MP) to increase the efficiency and sustainability 
in the construction sector, promoting circular solutions for 
building design and operation, as proposed by the 
HOUSEFUL project [6], which is supported by the 
MADASTER platform, a cloud platform that allows the 
generation of Material Passports for buildings [7]. 
The concept of the BIM Passport would be applicable to 
any type of construction project, however, in BIM-SPEED 
the focus lies on enabling (future) building owners and 
service providers to make informed decisions based on the 
information 
contained 
in 
the 
DBL 
regarding 
the 
implementation of certain use cases presented (Baseline and 
Use Cases for BIM-Based renovation projects and KPIs for 
EEB renovation) [8].  
C.
BIM Collaboration Format (BCF – IFC Annotations) 
BIM Collaboration Format (BCF) is a buildingSMART 
International openBIM standard to communicate about the 
‘issues’ of a BIM model during its live cycle. The 
development of BCF started in 2009 and was originally 
conceived by two members of the buildingSMART 
International Implementation Support Group (ISG), Solibri 
and Tekla, along with the Institute for Applied Building 
Informatics at the Munich (Germany) University of Applied 
Sciences. Their desire to leverage open communication 
technology for IFC-based workflows led to prototyping and 
eventually fully developing BCF with other ISG members 
[9].  
BCF 
allows 
software 
to 
activate 
interoperable 
information workflows. The exchange of information in 
construction projects already benefits from the ISO 29481 
IDM (Information Delivery Manual) standard. BCF's 
assessment of compliance with this ISO standard will help 
to further expand its use when quality management involves 
full adoption of ISO standards. Discussions within the 
buildingSMART association are underway to define BCF as 
a standard compliant with ISO 29481. 
BCF 
was 
introduced 
to 
allow 
an 
intelligent 
communication workflow between BIM tools and a 
workflow communication capability connected to IFC 
formats, where the purpose was to separate the virtual 
communication from the model into a BCF format based on 
XML schemas. BCF process focuses on the support to 
comments and status of issues across platforms instead of 
focusing on a single discipline and its own product. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
The survey conducted as part of the BIM-SPEED project, 
whose methodology has been explained in this paper, 
showed that construction stakeholders have a strong 
expectation for user-friendly BIM platforms, where project 
information can be collected and structured in a logical way 
that corresponds to professional practices and project 
progress. In these platforms, the ability to trace the history 
of different changes with their various contributors can be 
included. In addition, a set of basic services (e.g., to track 
and control workflow, or check the completeness of the 
BIM model at each stage of the process) can also be offered, 
as well as business services dedicated to renovation projects. 
At the time this survey was conducted, within the 
BIM-SPEED project, the BIM platform made available to 
the pilot sites was the launch version, mainly offering a 
generic Common Data Environment (CDE) with still few 
renovation-oriented BIM services (except for a model 
checker). It is therefore not surprising that the survey 
showed that early users of the platform used it mainly as a 
file repository and document sharing tool. However, the 
expectations gathered through this survey had been very 
useful and helped guide future developments such as a 
weather data service, a service to link IoT data with BIM, a 
GIS data collector, a ‘Material’ service (to enrich IFC4 files 
with material properties), and a LoDlifter service (to enrich 
IFC files with object properties and values).  
As a final recommendation, the integration into the BIM 
of all the necessary information to be able to undertake a 
renovation operation in a well-informed way (the so-called 
BIM PASSPORT, which differs depending on the intended 
use, for example an energy or structural renovation 
operation), is essential. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work has been funded under the research 
project BIM-SPEED. This project has received funding from 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme under grant agreement No. 820553. This 
research work reflects only the author’s view, and the 
Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made 
of the information it contains. 
The authors would like to say thank you to the 
BIM-SPEED Project Partners (CSTB, TUB, CARTIF, 
CYPE, PB40, STRESS, VISESA) involve in deliverable 6.3: 
Strategies for user acceptance, collaboration support, and 
BIM data maintenance [10]. 
REFERENCES
[1]
BIM-SPEED 
Project 
Partners, 
“Harmonised 
Building 
Information Speedway for Energy-Efficient Renovation 
(BIM-SPEED 
Project),” 
2018. 
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/820553 (accessed June. 20, 
2022). 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

[2]
European Environmental Bureau, “EEB website”, 2022, 
https://eeb.org/ (accessed June. 20, 2022). 
[3]
C. S. Wasson, ‘System Engineering; Analysis, Design, and 
Development, 2nd, Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2016. 
[4]
M. Tardif, “Establish Uniform Naming Conventions to Best 
Use BIM for FM” Second part of a three-part Green Building 
Report., 
2021. 
https://www.facilitiesnet.com/facilitiesmanagement/article/Est
ablish-Uniform-Naming-Conventions-to-Best-Use-BIM-for-
FM--17072 (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[5]
M. Fabbri, M. De Groote, and O. Rapf, “Building Renovation 
Passports”, Customised Roadmaps Towards Deep Renovation 
and Better Homes, Published in October 2016 by the 
Buildings Performance Institute Europe (BPIE), Second 
Edition (November 2016), ISBN: 9789491143175, pp. 10-20 
[6]
HOUSEFUL project, “Material Passports based on advanced 
3D Model”, https://houseful.eu/solutions/material-passports-
based-on-advanced-3d-model/ (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[7]
Madaster Training, “Material Passports Training the Arc”, 
Published 
by 
Sander 
Beeks, 
11/12/2020 
https://madaster.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Material-
Passport-The-Arc-EN.pdf (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[8]
BIM-SPEED Project Partners, “BIMSPEED results, D4.1: 
Baseline and Use Cases for BIM-based renovation projects 
and KPIs for EEB renovation”, 2019, https://www.bim-
speed.eu/en/Project%20Results%20%20Documents/Delivera
bles/D4.1.pdf  (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[9]
buildingSMART International, “BIM Collaboration Format 
(BCF) 
- 
An 
Introduction”, 
https://technical.buildingsmart.org/standards/bcf 
(accessed 
June. 20, 2022) 
[10] BIM-SPEED Project Partners, “BIM-SPEED results: D6.3: 
Strategies for user acceptance, collaboration support, and 
BIM 
data 
maintenance,” 
2022. 
https://www.bim-
speed.eu/en/Project%20Results%20%20Documents/Delivera
bles/D6.3.pdf (accessed June. 20, 2022). 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

