Developing European Defense Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience 
Infrastructure Network  
Alan Martin Redmond,  
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment, Sophia Antipolis, France 
email: alan.redmond@cstb.fr
Alexandru Georgescu,  
The National Institute for Research and Development in Informatics ICI Bucharest, Romania 
email: alexandru.georgescu@ici.ro
Abstract—As part of the Design Process Model that 
includes systematic 
methods for the 'Developing 
European 
Defence 
Strategy 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience Infrastructure Network' this paper focuses on 
the analytical phase. In essence, the paper presents 
inductive reasoning (develop a theory), while also 
examining deductive reasoning (proposed solution) to 
promote the need and resources of the creative phase 
(development of such a strategy). The paper focuses on 
Spectrum capabilities in defense and acknowledges that 
the development of European Defense strategy for 
Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure is necessary. 
Issues such as interoperability, and ability to keep pace 
with technological advances by potential adversaries will 
require Europe to emulate recent developments by DoD 
to advance the USA superiority in EM warfare. The 
result of this paper will identify opportunities, risk and 
challenges within the scope of the European Defence 
Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure 
Network. 
Keywords—Electromagnetic Spectrum; Resilience; Strategy; 
Infrastructure; Networks; Energy; Standards. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
In physics,  Electromagnetic Radiation (EM radiation or 
EMR) refers to the waves (or their quanta, photons) of the 
electromagnetic field, propagating (radiating) through space, 
carrying electromagnetic radiant energy. It includes radio 
waves, microwaves, infrared, (visible) light, ultraviolet, X-
rays, and gamma rays. In applications across civil, 
commercial, and government sectors, the characteristics of 
the waves used often drive the use [1] . Table 1 is an 
extraction from [2] and cross-referenced by the author to 
identify the specific use of the spectrum in Space and 
Defence. It highlights the theme of the paper’s magnitude for 
reflection on Spectrum capabilities in defence.  
In February 2021, the Congressional Research Service 
Report outlined DoD use of the EMS (Electromagnetic 
Spectrum) based on: (i) Interoperability, (ii) Ability to keep 
pace with technological advances by potential adversaries, 
(iii) The private sector’s increasing interest in using 
frequencies traditionally reserved for the military (for 
example the 5G spectrum), (iv) Spectrum Sharing, (v) The 
interagency process for spectrum allocation – such as the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) authorisation 
of the Ligado 5G network, which could affect the global 
positioning system’s radio signals, and (vi) Anticipating 
future spectrum needs for both commercial and military 
users. These principles have called the DoD to action and 
develop a strategy to control and enable these 6 principles in 
order to advance the USA superiority in EM warfare.  
TABLE I. 
ELECTROMAGNETIC USES AND APPLICATIONS (EXTRACTED 
FROM [2]) 
The paper comprises of 7 main sections: i) introduction - 
observation and addressing the problem; ii) scope & 
objectives - what is required and measured; iii) project 
analysis - evaluation 'why it is needed'; iv) methodology - 
development of EMC standards and specification; v) 
proposed solution - how it will be achieved; vi) impact, 
opportunities & risks - the added value gained from such a 
strategy and risks associated with trying to achieve it; and 
vii) way ahead - funding. Overall results of the paper present 
a summary, synthesize, critique, and use of information as 
"background" for a research proposal. 
II.
SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES
This section will address the overall scope of the 
projects contribution and outline the objectives. 
A.
Scope 
This project is a contribution to the development of the 
European Defence Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience 
Infrastructure and raises the profile of its activities in 
particular by working on the following: i) support the 
operation of the European Defence Agency (EDA) 
Directed-Energy 
(DE) Weapons 
Concentrated EM energy rather than kinetic 
energy to incapacitate, damage, disable, or 
destroy enemy equipment, facilities, and/or 
personnel examples include ground forces in 
Counter Rocket, Artillery, and Mortar (C-RAM), 
Counter-Unmanned Aircraft (C-UAS), or Short-
Range Air Defense (SHORAD) missions. 
Radio frequency 
waves 
Can be used to transmit messages between 
electronic devices. Low frequency radio waves 
can travel long distances, and can penetrate 
seawater, but cannot support high data rates. 
These waves are useful for communications with 
submarines. long distance waves can pass 
through solid objects, like buildings and trees, 
making them useful for mobile communications.  
Microwaves 
Microwaves are used in radars—systems that 
send out pulses of high frequency waves that 
reflect off an object and back to the source. 
Microwaves 
are 
also 
used 
in 
satellite 
communications, which experience few obstacles 
in their transmission path. 
Infrared 
radiation (IR) 
Receives and converts light signals to electrical 
signals that instruct microprocessors to carry out 
commands, similarly infrared lasers can be used 
for point-to-point communications over short 
distances 
to 
provide 
high-speed, 
reliable 
connections.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

governance structure; ii) conduct national and regional based 
process for preparing a Research and Innovation investment 
Roadmap and priorities by involving research and industry 
stakeholders, and engaging in wide dissemination of the 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience 
Infrastructure 
results; 
iii) 
organise outreach events and engage in structured 
discussions with the general public, including on the social 
implications and ethics of Electromagnetic technology 
development and innovation, particularly with regard to 
privacy and security, public trust and acceptance; iv) provide 
research dissemination services to projects; v) identify 
relevant training, education and infrastructure needs. The 
results should be compared with best practices of 
international cooperation partners of similar governance 
(e.g., USA and Canada), and shared based on mutual 
exchange.  
B.
Objectives 
1.
Investigate and map best practice activities in 
European and international spheres - where 
Electromagnetic technologies will play a major role 
in the near future and where resilience in such 
fields can enhance existing capabilities, protection 
and offer a competitive advantage to Europe. 
2.
Increase the adoption of standards and regulations 
in Electromagnetic Warfare - either in existing 
standardisation activities and bodies and where 
relevant, by contributing to creating and testing 
new standardisation activities in existing groups 
and/or creation of new groups. 
3.
Open Innovation Days – mobilise the whole value 
chain (research, standardisation and the industry 
sectors, and defence sectors) at innovation days and 
advance the discussions at European level to 
achieve impactful results promoting the European 
interests in Electromagnetic standardisation. 
4.
Perform an extensive mapping of current and 
future resilient requirements for Electronic Warfare 
education and training; define standards for 
implementing appropriate educational strategies; 
host existing and newly developed teaching 
materials and resources within a European Defence 
repository. 
5.
Develop 
strategies 
for 
scaling 
up 
training 
programmes across Europe in the use cases of 
advanced Electromagnetic Spectrum Management; 
and establish a network between science, civil 
society, and industry to exchange ideas, needs, and 
human resources. 
6.
Develop the European Defence Strategy for 
Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network 
- involve and be driven by representatives of the 
relevant actors of the field (e.g., academia, RTOs, 
and industry, including SMEs, and intermediaries). 
III.
PROJECT ANALYSIS
The 
project 
focuses 
on 
the 
capabilities 
of 
electromagnetic waves and how the infrastructure for 
supporting such emissions is protected such as Data 
Centers and 5G Networks. EM waves in basic principle 
carry energy, momentum, and angular momentum away 
from the source particle and radiates without the need for 
continuing charges. EMR is sometimes referred to as far 
field because it achieves sufficient distance from such 
charges whereas near field are close to charges and the 
current that produces them. In reference to the incredible 
evolution of communicating systems; “the deployment of 
Internet and mobile networks, connected objects and 
sensors, has brought about the emergence of silicon 
photonics to meet these new major challenges” [3].  
In 
essence, 
fiber 
optical 
communications 
have 
revolutionized the telecommunications industry as well as 
the data networking community. Fiber optic cables have 
enabled telecommunications links to be made over greater 
distances, with lower levels of transmission losses and 
enabled higher data rates. “As a result, fiber optic 
communication 
systems 
are 
widely 
employed 
for 
applications ranging from major telecommunications 
backbone infrastructure to Ethernet systems, broadband 
distribution, and general data networking [4].   
Why is this important? The need for high speed, more 
capacity and longer distances has made Dense Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (DWDM - is an optical multiplexing 
technology used to increase bandwidth over existing fiber 
networks) the technology of choice for greenfield 
installations, for upgrading existing networks, and is 
compulsory for transmission of 100G and above. In fact, the 
DWDM C-band 1525nm – 1610nm spectrum supports up to 
96 wavelengths spaced at the standard ITU grid of 50GHz 
[5].  At higher data rates, including 400G and 1T, the signals 
will be transmitted over multiple subcarrier channels [6]. 
From a 5G commercial aspect, Intel acknowledged the 
benefits of their 100G silicon photonics transceivers that are 
optimised to meet the bandwidth requirements of next-
generation 
communications 
infrastructure 
while 
withstanding harsh environmental conditions. Furthermore, 
their market opportunity projection for its connectivity 
business, which includes silicon photonics, is to grow from 
$4 billion today to an estimated $11 billion total addressable 
market by 2022 [7]. 
However, Spectrum Sharing is an issue with emerging 
technologies and policies are demonstrating commercial 
systems can use the same frequencies without degrading 
defense capabilities. Such policies, best practices, standards, 
and regulations must be referenced within the European 
Defence Agency context. Integrated quantum, Photonic 
Devices, 5G security Networks (such as QKD and system 
lockout chip) are not only a part of defence resilience 
strategies, but also of the cities of the future. Data centers 
bandwidth for communication and the use of silicon such as 
Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT) and Metal–
Oxide–Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET) 
by STMicroelectronics to discharge batteries in electric and 
hybrid vehicles indicate 
the 
dependency 
on 
the 
Electromagnetic spectrum and thus the need for 
protection from advanced Electronic Warfare Systems
and Electromagnetic Interference in urban areas such 
as: 

Electronic Support, Networking & Cyber Enabling 
– i) networks with Tactical Radios, ii) electronic 
support (detect, direction finding and geo-location, 
iii) cyber-enabling platform. 

Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems (CUAS) – i) 
integrates with radars, sensors, and fire control 
solutions, ii) stationary and on-the-move capable, 
iii) configurable for dismounted, mounted, fixed 
site and airborne platforms. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

IV.
METHODOLOGY
In practice Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) is the 
engineering discipline concerned with the behavior of a 
system 
in 
an 
Electromagnetic 
Environment 
(EM). 
According to INCOSE [8]: “A system is considered to be 
electromagnetically compatible when it can operate without 
malfunction in an EM environment together with other 
systems or system elements and when it does not add to that 
environment as to cause malfunction to other systems.” The 
term electromagnetic interference (EMI) is recognised when 
a system causes interference, and in EMC the EM 
environment includes all effects classically attributed to 
electromagnetics (such as radiation) and electrical effects 
(conduction).
Fig 1. Process for achieving EMC (Arnold de Beer, cited by [8]:   INCOSE 
page 219)
Arnold de Beer developed the Business Process Map 
(BPM) in Fig 2 which outlines how EMC will be 
successfully achieved during system development. It has 5 
main areas: i) electrical and electromagnetic environmental 
effects (E4) - this analysis describes all the threats (natural 
and man-made) that a system may encounter during its life 
cycle, furthermore MIL-STD-46C [9] is still been used to 
determine requirements of a system such as installation; ii) 
EMC requirements (Standards and Specifications) – are 
used to regulate the EM environment in which a  system is 
operating, however the process acknowledges that existing 
standards and specifications (whether commercial, military, 
avionic, automotive, or medical) can be used as EMC 
requirement based on its class or category according to the 
outcome of the E4 analysis; iii) EMC Design and 
Implementation – overall EMC requirements are inputs for 
the concept and development stages of design that includes 
both 
mechanical 
and 
electrical/electronic 
hardware 
implementations, the use of zoning for system elements with 
similar emissions or sensitive circuits require a control of 
interface and the EMI control plan includes EMC 
requirements, zoning strategy, filtering and shielding, 
mechanical and electrical design to EMC; iv) EMC 
Engineering Test – prequalification testing is done on a 
system element level and even as low as the single circuit 
board assembly level during the development stage; v) EMC 
qualification – EMC qualification tests verify the EMC 
design of a system against its requirements, the first part of 
such tests is to compile an EMC test plan and map each 
requirement to a test and a test set up.  
Given the severity of EMI and the urban dependency on 
the Electromagnetic spectrum, the overall methodology is 
based on re-engineering the process for achieving EMC for 
urban interoperable design. For instance, challenges exist 
when testing for EMC qualification as the process must be 
in operational mode during emission testing to predict 
malfunctions during susceptibility. Just like EMC standards 
and specifications when it is impractical to test a large 
system such as ship, aircraft, or complete industrial plant, 
the qualification tests are based on the systems elements. In 
the opinion of this author, there needs to be an updated 
review EMS based on a similar international structured 
principle; (i) Interoperability, (ii) Ability to keep pace with 
technological advances, (iii) The private sector’s increasing 
interest in using frequencies, (iv) Spectrum Sharing, (v) The 
Interagency process for spectrum allocation and (vi) 
Anticipating future spectrum needs for both commercial and 
military users.
V.
PROPOSE SOLUTION
As part of a trains protection system, Delft University 
have been testing ERTMS/ETCS Hybrid Level 3 and ATO: 
A simulation-based capacity impact study for the Dutch 
railway network [10].  A EEIG ERTMS Users Group has 
been focusing on the implementation of ERTMS/ETCS 
Level 3, the Hybrid Level 3 concept. “The main 
characteristic of the concept is that it uses fixed virtual 
blocks for the separation of trains which are fitted with a 
Train Integrity Monitoring System (TIMS), while a limited 
installation of trackside train detection is used for the 
separation of trains without TIMS, as well as for the 
handling of degraded situations” [11] (EEIG ERTMS Users 
Group, page 5).
The common theme here for testing EM designs in 
reference to requirements is the creation of user’s groups, 
the analysis of best practices (case studies) and the use of 
personas. In order to ‘Develop European Defense Strategy 
for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network’, the 
project must build upon existing networks and create similar 
Special Interest Groups (SIGs). 
Fig 2. IEEE Standard Association ICAP (Adaption of this Authors, 
Interpretation)  
Figure 2 is a graphical mind map representation of IEEE 
Conformity Assessment Programs based on the following 
10 main points of their ICAP working group Extensive 
Program Support [12]: 

ICAP is a facilitator and administrator of 
certification programs.

Full oversight 
for testing and certification 
activities. 

Certificate issuance. 

Development and management of test plans, test 
suites and certification schemes. 

Maintenance of certified products registry. 

Test laboratory assessment and authorisation. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions


Technical and logistical support services to 
industry 
groups 
executing 
interoperability 
demonstrations of specific technologies related to 
IEEE standards. 

Educating IEEE Working Groups on conformity 
assessment to ensure conformity assessment is 
injected early in the standards development 
process. 

The development of customised conformity 
assessment programs that meet industry needs. 

Defining and designing conformity assessment best 
practices. 
The concept for the Developing European Defence 
Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure 
Network is to build similar SIG groups to the IEEE 
Standard Association ICAP (IEEE Conformity Assessment 
Programs) but concentrate on attributes of the DoD 6 pillars. 
VI.
IMPACT, OPPORTUNITIES & RISKS
The following section will outline the impact of 
advancements associated to the Electromagnetic Spectrum, 
the opportunities relating to technologies and infrastructure, 
and the current known risks and challenges. 
A.
Impact 
Advancements in Electromagnetic Spectrum have 
revolutionised how we manage, control, use and distribute 
data that affects our digitally operated devices in order to 
advance our health and well-being on a daily basis. 
Optronics (the combination of optical and electronics) such 
as fiber optic communication and in particular fiber optical 
receivers have presented opportunities through wide band 
width devices. With the inclusion of WDM multiplexing 
technology 
the 
capacity 
to 
enable 
bidirectional 
communication over one strand fiber exists. This is just one 
example; other added advantages include: 

Security – quantum communications such as 
WDM have been operating through the protection 
of Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) can offer 
communication with unconditional security).

Speed – multiplexing enables high speed capacity 
and high-speed telecommunications. 

Energy – i) charge pumps circuits are capable of 
high efficiencies, sometimes as high as 90–95%, 
while being electrically simple circuits; ii) 
MOSFETs and IGBTs are powered by Charge 
pumps in H bridges in high-side drivers for gate-
driving high-side n-channel power [13] ; The 
Silicon Micro-Ring Resonator (MRR) has gained 
significant attention for use in an energy-efficient 
and high-bandwidth photonic system and is ideally 
suited for both inter- and intra- data center 
communication [14]. 

Cost – the use of DWDM (referring to optical 
signals multiplexed within 1550Nm) leverages cost 
and capabilities of Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifiers 
(EDFAs) for wavelengths between C-Band and L-
Band, 1525nm – 1565nm and 1570nm – 1610nm. 
B.
Opportunities 
According to RADIO WAVES [15], “Massive Multi-
Input Multi-Output (MIMO) antennas provide access to wide 
frequency bands for very high-speed connections. Their 
‘agile’ technology gives them the ability to direct their beams 
to countless moving devices thanks to their multifocal 
technology. As a result, they enhance a better direct signal to 
the user, by following them as they move. Furthermore, they 
provide: 

reduced energy consumption. 

the handling of a larger number of users, and 
increased speeds. 

a significant improvement in signal quality to the 
user while also reducing superfluous surrounding 
emissions. 
There have been many studies on the role that photonics, 
particularly microwave photonics, can have in implementing 
5G networks. Currently, there are several general disruptive 
technologies needed for 5G cellular networks, such as 
small-cell architectures, the utilisation of the millimeter-
wave (mmWave) spectrum, and the implementation of 
MIMO systems at mobile base stations [16]. Other benefits 
of fiber include the fact that “the mmWave frequency band 
is a “sweet spot” for Radio Frequency over fiber and 
mmWave signal with broadband data can be easily 
transported over large distances with minimal loss [17]. 
However, interoperability will always be the main issue 
when exchanging information and standards are the key 
mechanism to achieving interoperable solutions when 
developing systems and providing ICD (Interface Control 
Document). The U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA) has been working on “developing 100 
Gb/s RF Backbone (100G) program whose goal is to design, 
build, and test an airborne Millimeter based RF 
communications link with fiber-optic equivalent capacity 
and long reach capable of propagating through clouds and 
providing high availability.” DARPA’s focus is to provide a 
system comprising 100 Gb/s capacity at ranges of 200 km 
for air-to-air links and 100 km for air-to-ground links when 
installed in a high-altitude (e.g., 60,000 ft) aerial platform 
[18]. And these types of systems will adhere to DoD 
military specifications, therefore if commercial interests are 
also using frequencies traditionally reserved for the military 
there needs to be the inducement of technologies such as AI-
enabled dynamic spectrum sharing. Such technologies will 
require best practices regulation and standards to achieve the 
end game. 
C.
Risks & Challenges 

The main risks are related to not being able to build 
upon existing networks and create similar Special 
Interest Groups (SIGs). 

Another risk is the fact that typical military 
specifications and commercial specifications would 
need to be reviewed in order to proceed with a joint 
strategy for developing European Defense Strategy 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience 
Infrastructure 
Network. 

This ambitious project will require collaboration 
between the Energy Consultation Forum’s Working 
Groups (CF SEDSS), the largest defence energy 
community in Europe, and support from Institutes 
such as the European Telecommunication Standard 
Institute 
(ETSI) 
and 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU). While the CF 
SEDSS working groups do not implement projects, 
they can address conceptual design and, through 
the Forum, EU and Member States funding could 
be mobilized to produce tangible results.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions


Many of the disruptive technologies already exist 
for implementing the key systems but there is a 
significant lack of training and open collaboration 
that can involve all major players that will utilise 
the EMS with particular reference to resilience 
system engineering. For instance, the defence and 
private sectors may not wish to share information. 

To appreciate the challenges, all of the supply 
chain actors (Large enterprises, Mid-Caps, SMEs) 
must be included in the discussions at the 
innovation days. 

There will be challenges and risks associated with 
tests, particularly the new development of 
European Defense Electromagnetic Compatibility 
documents. 
VII.
WAY AHEAD
This section will focus on the core theme ‘a possible 
project’, case study, and funding mechanisms. 
A.
Theme 
A possible project would be to develop a framework for 
assessing EMS resilience in power plants in the context of 
hybrid threats that can be offered to Member States, along 
with a toolkit of best practices, guidelines and technical 
solutions to ameliorate the risks. The project could have a 
practical implementation at the level of 1 or 2 power plants 
volunteered by one of the participating Member States. It 
can also propose to deliver a network of stakeholders, 
including developers, beneficiaries, expert groups and 
research labs, to serve as a resource for supporting future 
efforts.  
Fig 3. Resilience System Developmental Configuration Architecture, 
Legend: Common Data Exchange (CDE); Extract, Transform, Load (ETL); 
Machine Learning (ML); Application Performance Interface (APIs); 
Industry 
Foundation 
Classes 
(IFC); 
Intentional 
ElectroMagnetic 
Interference (IEMI); Nuclear ElectroMagentic Pluse (NEMP); High 
Altitude Electromagnetic Pluse (HEMP); High Power ElectroMagnetic 
Pulse (HPEM) 
B.
Case Study 
According to [19] a case study is a strategy used to 
research an experimental theory or topic using set 
procedures. The authors are of the opinion that testing a case 
study starting at TRL2 (technology concept formulated) and 
finishing at TRL 4 (technology validated in lab) will add 
significant value to any potential funding key performance. 
Figure 3 below shows how pre-existing components 
(databases, platforms) and concepts of EMC for BIM model 
structure topology can be configured to developed 
‘Resilience 
System 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience 
Infrastructure’.  
The following points identify the requirements: 
 According to [20] the starting point is to identify what we 
are looking for! Example: unauthorised, unlicensed 
wireless devices, new wireless services turning on in an 
area of interest, keeping up with changes in the spectral 
landscapes. 
Furthermore, 
a 
signal 
development 
environment is required to; a) enable rapid development, 
test, and optimisation of signal (or device) detection and 
isolation capabilities; b) utilise commercial tools and 
software; c) can be setup in a secure or open environment; 
d) can be configured as portable, rugged, or transportable 
system. In essence for EMC the basic question to answer 
is there a frequency plan and should frequency plan be 
statutory for cities with buildings of interest (civilian 
infrastructures etc.). 
 [21] Created a European project based on two phases: 
phase 1 consisted of assessment scenarios concerning 
IEMI - intentional malicious generation of electromagnetic 
energy introducing noise or signal into electric and 
electronic systems, NEMP – an electronic pulse produced 
mainly from gamma rays from a nuclear explosion, HEMP 
– a series of electromagnetic waveforms generated from a 
nuclear detonation at altitudes above 30km and the 
propagate to the earth surface, and HPEM which 
produces intense electromagnetic radiated fields or 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

conducted voltages and currents with the capabilities 
to damage or upset a city infrastructures. Phase 2 
investigated IEMI risks and introduced protection 
strategies based on sensor design, characteristics of 
susceptible devices and simulation tests. 
 Figure 3 illustrates such requirements under the EMC 
column. Investigating such requirements can be enacted 
and enhanced via Digital twins, while interoperability as 
previous identified will be provided through Common 
Data Exchange (CDE) using IFC (BIM open data 
exchange files), under point 2 Autodesk in the diagram it 
shows how collaborative workstations are implemented in 
modeling design and this type of collaboration allows 
various actors/stakeholders to review the model sections 
referring to their needs and any changes can be 
synchronised to a central sever, or unsynchronised and 
shared as an independent file. 
 The French National Database (BDNB) is a database built 
by joining multiple building-stock databases, including 
energy 
performances 
diagnostics, 
and 
energy 
consumption. BDNB concentrates on the Extraction, 
Transformation, and Loading (ETL) that refers to 
collecting raw data from disparate sources, transmitting it 
to a staging database for conversion, and loading prepared 
data into a unified destination system. This allows all the 
previous disjointed databases to be consolidated into a 
centralised system where analytics and calculations can be 
performed [22]. 
 The concept is to build upon [21] and create at national 
(French) and European level a centralised database that 
monitors HEPMs for civilian infrastructures. 
C.
Funding 
To take the project forward will require a partnership 
built on trust and mutual respect. Securing funding for such 
research will be an onerous task. However, there are 
existing funding mechanisms such as HORIZON EUROPE 
– Work Programme 2021-2022 Digital, Industry and Space. 
Other funding mechanisms include the European Defence 
Fund – EDF (information superiority and disruptive 
technologies) 
and 
the 
European 
Defence 
Industrial 
Development 
Programme 
(EDIDP) 
which 
has 
five 
priorities: 

Facilitating operations, protection, and mobility of 
military forces. 

Information, 
secure 
communications, 
and 
cyberspace. 

Ability to conduct peak operations. 

Innovative defence technologies and SMEs. 

Innovation in defence research in materials 
Actions of finance: 

Development of CBRN threat detection capabilities 
or anti-drone systems. 

Development of the next generation of precision 
ground 
strike 
capabilities, 
ground 
combat 
capabilities, aerial warfare capabilities and future 
naval systems. 

Solutions in the field of artificial intelligence, 
virtual reality and cybertechnologies. 
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The papers’ main objective was to illustrate a process 
model based on Developing European Defense Strategy for 
Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network. The 
paper highlighted the need/background for such a strategy 
by examining existing international strategies of reasoning 
such as the DoD Congressional Research Service Report 
that outlined the use of EMS. The capabilities of 
electromagnetic waves and how the infrastructure for 
supporting such emissions is protected such as Data 
Centres and 5G Networks is the background of the paper. 
The paper has also addressed KETs such as photonics in 
particular reference to Si photonics with CMOS electronics 
and bandwidth challenges. However, advancements in how 
we use standards to design a process that will achieve EMC 
taking into consideration EMI, needs to be addressed and 
function as part of an overall EMS strategy. The paper has 
outlined potential solutions such as the project must build 
upon existing networks and create similar Special Interest 
Groups (SIGs). The paper identified opportunities, risk and 
challenges and presented opportunities and the added value 
associated with utilising EMS, security, speed, energy and 
cost. In essence, the paper is a medium for identifying 
research opportunities within the scope European Defense 
Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure 
Network.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The ideas of this article originated in the works of the 
Consultation Forum for Sustainable Energy in Security and 
Defence Sector (CF SEDSS) of the European Defence 
Agency (EDA), in its Working Group 3 on the Protection of 
Critical Energy Infrastructures (PCEI). The authors would 
like to address special thanks to Dr. Constantinos 
Hadjisavvas, Project Officer Energy at EDA and CF SEDSS 
Project Manager, Ioannis Chatzialexandris, CF SEDSS 
PCEI WG3Team Leader, and Dr. Nicolas Mazzucchi, CF 
SEDSS PCEI WG3 moderator. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Purcell and Morin, Harvard University. (2013). Electricity and 
Magnetism, 820p (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press, New 
York. ISBN 978-1-107-01402-2. p 430:
[2]
J.R. Hoehn, J.C. Gallagher, and K. M. Sayler, “Overview of 
Department of Defense Use of the Electromagnetic Specturm,” 
Congresssional Research Service CRS Report; Prepared for Members 
and Committees of Congress, http://crsreport.congress.gov R46564 
[3]
L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini, E. Cassan, C. Alonso-Ramos, C. 
Baudot, F. Bœuf, and B. Szelay, “Circuits Intégrés Photoniques 
Silicium, 
Photoniques, 
EDP 
Sciences, 
2018. 
Pp. 
18-22. 
10.1051/photon/201893/18. Hal-02413568 
[4]
Electronicnotes, “Optical Fibre Cable – an overview or tutoroial 
covering fibre optic cabling, the construction of the fibre optic cables, 
how they work, their applications and specifications, electronics-
notes.com/articles/connectivity/fibre-optics/optical-fibre-cable.php 
(access 13/04/2021) 
[5]
F. Maze, M. Traetta, M. Bentivegna, F. Kaiser, D. Aktas, W. Zhang, 
C. Alonso-Ramos, L. Bin-Ngah, T. Lunghi, E. Pichelle, N. Belabas- 
Plougonven, X. Le Roux, E. Cassan, D. Marris-Morini, L. Vivien, G. 
Sauder, L. Labonté, and S.Tanzilli, “High-quality photonic 
entanglement for wavelength-multiplexe of quantum communication 
based on a silicon chip,” Opt. Express 5128731 (2016) DOI: 
10.1364/OE.24.028731, arXiv:1609.00521 [quant-ph]. 
[6]
LIGHTWAVE, “Evolution to flexible grid WDM, WDM networks 
operate by transmitting multiple wavelengths, or channels, over a 
fiber simultaneously, Each channel is assigned a slightly different 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

wavelength, 
Nov 
26th, 
2013, 
 
(access 
14/04/2021) 
https://www.lightwaveonline.com/network-design/dwdm-
roadm/article/16649471/evolution-to-flexible-grid-wdm 
[7]
M. Alleven, “Intel takes aim at 5G infrastructure with latest silicon 
photonics 
technology”, 
FIERCE 
Wireless, 
Sep 
24, 
2018, 
https://www.fiercewireless.com/wireless/intel-takes-aim-at-5g-
infrastructure-latest-silicon-photonics-technology (access 14/04/2021) 
[8]
INCOSE 2015, Systems Engineering Handbook, A Guide for 
Systems Life Cycle Processes and Activities, 4th Edition  
[9]
DoD 
Military 
Standard, 
MIL-STD-46C 
(4 
August 
186), 
Electromagnetic Emission and Susceptibility Requirements for the 
Control of Electromagnetic Interference. M. Young, The Technical 
Writer’s Handbook. Mill Valley, CA: University Science, 1989. 
[10] R. Vergroesen, “ERTMS/ETCS Hybrid Level 3 and ATO A 
simulation based capacity impact study for the Dutch railway 
network”, Master Thesis: TU Delft Civil Engineering and 
Geosciences; TU Delft Transport and Planning, 2020-06-10, 
http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:971cdcde-1a9a-490a-b72c-
8490f2f668ed
[11] EEIG ERTMS Users Group, “Hybrid ERTMS/ETCS Level 3”, Ref: 
16E042, Version: 1A, Date: 14/07/2017, 123-133 Rue Froissart, 1040 
Brussels, 
Belgium, 
http://www.ertms.be/sites/default/files/2018-
03/16E0421A_HL3.pdf 
[12] IEEE Standards Association, “ The ICAP Advantage”, IEEE 
Conformity 
Assessment 
Program 
(ICAP), 
https://standards.ieee.org/products-services/icap/index.html, 
(access 
14/04/2021) 
[13] Toshiba, “MOSFET Gate Drive Circuit, Application Note”, Toshiba 
Electronic Devices & Storage Corporation, 2018-07-26 
[14] Z. Wang, D. Paez, A. I. Abd El-Rahman, P. Wang, L. Dow, J. C. 
Cartledge, and A. P. Knights, "Resonance control of a silicon micro-
ring resonator modulator under high-speed operation using the 
intrinsic defect-mediated photocurrent," Opt. Express 25, 24827-
24836 (2017)
[15] Radio Waves, “The Key role of antennas”, Orange, https://radio-
waves.orange.com/en/the-key-role-of-antennas/ (access 14/04/2021) 
[16] R. Waterhouse and D. Novack, "Realizing 5G: Microwave Photonics 
for 5G Mobile Wireless Systems," in IEEE Microwave Magazine, 
vol. 
16, 
no. 
8, 
pp. 
84-92, 
Sept. 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1109/MMM.2015.2441593. 
[17] A. L. Swidlehurst, E. Ayanogolu, P. Heydari, and F. Capolino, 
“Millimeter-wave massive MIMO: The next wireless revolution?” 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, pp. 56–62, Sept. 2014.  
[18] R. Uppal, “DARPA Developing Millimmter Wave Wireless 
Communications to Connect Dismounted War fighters using UAVs 
and Provide 100 GB/S RF Backbone (100G) using high-altitude, 
Long-endurance 
Platforms”, 
Oct 
13, 
2018, 
https://idstch.com/technology/communications/darpa-developing-
milimmter-wave-wireless-communications-connect-dismounted-
warfighters-using-uavs-provide-100-gbs-rf-backbone-100gusing-
high-altitude-long-endurance-platforms/, (access 14/04/2021) 
[19] R. Fellows and A. Liu, Research Methods for Construction (2nd
edition), Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, 2003. 
[20] I.C. Tillman, “Accelerating  Signals  Development  for the  Modern 
Specturm Warrior “ BDM, RF/uW Senors, Geo Keysight 
Technologies, September 2019 
[21] S. van de Beek et al., "Overview of the European project 
STRUCTURES," in IEEE Electromagnetic Compatibility Magazine, 
vol. 
3, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
70-79, 
4th 
Quarter 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1109/MEMC.2014.7023202. 
[22] M. Thorel and P. Schetelat, Construction de la base de Données 
Nationale 
des 
Bâtiments, 
June, 
2021, 
https://datafoncier.cerema.fr/sites/datafoncier/files/inline-
files/03_base_donnees_nationale_batimentaire_0.pdf 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

