A Systematic Mapping of Natural Gas
Transportation Systems’ Reliability and Risks
Analysis
Yefeng Liang
School of Systems and Enterprises
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, USA
yliang32@stevens.edu
Mo Mansouri
School of Systems and Enterprises
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, USA
mmansour@stevens.edu
Abstract—This paper will analyze the challenges, profits,
and risks that the gas transportation systems could face. As
valuable economic and industrial systems, gas transportation
systems are complicated, comprehensive, and elastic. However,
gas transportation systems connect different levels of customers,
and gas transportation systems rely heavily on the relationship
loop between gas customers and gas producers, these factors
make the gas transportation systems have to face comprehensive
engineering and human-related challenges. In this paper, we will
analyze the natural gas transportation system together with four
parts of its interaction systems. First, we will list general gas
transportation challenges. Second, we will analyze the risks and
interactions between each part of the system. Finally, we will
bring our conclusions about the system’s construction risks.
Index Terms—system engineering; natural gas transportation
systems; system risks analysis; decision making; stakeholders.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Gas Transportation Systems can transport gas and
energy across the border, support thousands of residents,
families, commercial agents, product institutes, as well as
different industries. A natural gas transportation system is
made up of compressor stations, pipelines, city gate stations,
and storage facilities [9]. However, since this system has so
many stakeholders and bring benefits to so many people, it
is inevitable that the systems could face many transportation
risks. How to target those risks and avoid these effects could
be a important part to expand and maintain the system.
Current research put the concentrations on economic anal-
ysis for the transnational natural gas transportation system
[12][13][15], technology assessment [2][3], and policy analy-
sis of managing transnational natural gas transportation system
[6][8][17]. One of the basic consideration is the risks and
reliance of this high-level systems.
In this paper, we will list challenges and risks of transna-
tional natural gas transportation systems’ construction in sec-
tion 2, 3, 4, 5, analyze the reasons that cause these challenges
and potential consequences in section 6, 7, and bring the sug-
gestions about how to maintain target sub-systems 8. Finally,
in section 9, we explain our conclusions from the research. The
research of this paper is expected to bring more risk analysis
options, ideas, and methods on building transnational natural
gas transportation systems.
II. NATURAL GAS PRODUCTION AND TRANSPORTATION
OVERVIEW
First, we need to take an example to explain how normal
gas transportation systems work as a whole part.
The figure below shows the example of Malaysia Peninsula
Gas production and transportation systems.
Fig. 1. Malaysia Peninsula Gas Utilisation Natural Gas Natural-gas Process-
ing Pipeline Transportation [16]
As the figure shows here, there exits different commercial
gas using, thus, there are many forms of the gas generated
energy, this could cause the transportation systems to become
complicated. The production, processing, transportation and
selling processes make the whole systems full of uncertainty.
Those uncertainty things in each step leading significant
construction risks. In order to make the whole system works
normally and resiliently, we have to be aware of the factors
that cause those risks, how these factors work in the whole
system and what decisions need to be made at the same time.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Since the whole systems is complicated and technique
comprehensive, at the beginning, we should put the list of
factors in the natural gas transportation system, in this project,
we focus on these main factors: Pipelines constructions, gas
distribution limitations, gas distribution system’s stakeholders,
and the system shaping forces.
Besides those key factors, there are other defining charac-
teristics in constructing the system:
Local environment and residents’ energy-using safety and
health. Commercial monopoly. The system maintains’ prob-
lems. Realigned infrastructures Challenges of constructions
Local benefits of the gas supplement.
III. NATURAL GAS TRANSPORTATION AND PIPELINES
CONSTRUCTION
The natural gas transportation is a crucial activity performed
by the gas industry in which the gas and other energy has
to be moved from one location to another. Several types
of transportation means might be applied to transport the
gas, yet it is well known that pipelines represent the most
economical means to transport large quantities of natural gas.
In addition, the advent of metallurgical improvements and
welding techniques, coupled with the exponential increase
of pipeline networks during the last decades all over the
world, have made the gas transportation via pipelines more
economically attractive.
Currently, pipelines are used in constructions on both
offshore and onshore energy transportation systems, with a
remarkable difference in terms of security and construction
prices. Building pipeline systems under the sea is highly
costly and technically demanding, a lot more than onshore.
For example, the Nord Stream2 pipeline project is expected to
as long as 1,222km corresponds to the 965.7 km long onshore
pipeline system on Russian and German territories, whereas
the remaining is destined to the 259.4 km long offshore section
of the project. However, as the consequence of Russia’s recog-
nition of the Donetsk and Luhansk republics, Nord Stream 2
AG, a consortium for construction and operation of the Nord
Stream, filed for bankruptcy on 1 March 2022 and laid off all
106 employees from its headquarters in Zug, Switzerland [8].
Hence, when financial, political or environmental issues arise,
gas transportation operators need to look for different alter-
natives to perform this task inevitably. Especially for onshore
gas transportation, from which natural gas can be transported
as liquefied natural gas (LNG), medium conditioned liquefied
gas(MLG), or compressed natural gas(CNG), by using the tank
of specially constructed seagoing vessels.
The scale of a gas network system be greatly different from
one country to another. In the US, for example, a large gas
network system may encompass several hundreds of pipelines
(adding up to several hundreds of thousands of miles) and
tens of compressors stations strategically distributed along the
transmission lines. The US natural gas pipeline network has
about three million miles of mainline and other pipelines that
link natural gas production areas and storage facilities with
consumers. This natural gas transportation network delivered
more than 25 trillion cubic feet of natural gas in 2016 to about
74 million customers” (Natural Gas Pipelines, 2017). On the
contrary, the natural gas transmission network in Belgium is
composed of a relatively smaller number of pipelines (20–40)
and compressor stations (4–8) when compared to those found
in the US and Russia [10].
While the size of a gas pipeline system definitely plays
an important role when solving natural gas network flow
problems, it is the network topology that really defines the
complexity of the model, e.g., cyclic networks are extremely
more difficult to solve than its (gun-barrel and tree-shaped)
network counterparts [2]. The current state of the art on
natural gas transmission network problems in steady-state
can efficiently handle large gas systems by applying network
reduction and decomposition techniques, or hybrid-heuristic
algorithms, most of them, however, with no guarantee of
optimality, which enforces the scientific community to enhance
the existing methods [2].
IV. STAKEHOLDERS
We list the main stakeholders that rely on the natural gas
transportation systems.
1. Technical engineering institutes 2. Local residents 3.
Natural gas customers’ communities 4. Natural gas company
and government
• 1. Technical engineering institutes
1.1 Pipeline constructions 1.2 Pipeline operations
• 2. Safety and environment impact for residents
2.1 Health
2.2 Living environment
• 3. Impact on the natural gas customers’ community 3.1
Stability 3.2 reliability
• 4. Economic benefits for natural gas company and gov-
ernment 4.1 Revenues to the government 4.2 Employment
4.3 Flexibility of transport increases industry profit mar-
gins; minimizes price instability
After listing the main stakeholders, We draw a relationship
impact map and a interest map of stakeholders to discuss those
stakeholders.
Fig. 2. Stakeholder Relationship
According to Figures 2 and 3, each of those stakeholders
rely on the benefit of natural gas transportation systems. At the
same time, they have interactions with each other. The negative
impact between different stakeholders hurt the resilience of the
whole natural gas transportation system.
2
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Fig. 3. Interest Map of Stakeholders
One of the general and significant case is the natural
environment. The impact between natural gas providers and
natural environment, as well as the impact different levels
of natural gas customers and natural environment, both of
those two groups have to face environment challenges and
the value transformations brought by gas supply constitution.
The government, as the potential stakeholder controller, have
to consider some trade-off solutions and implement them as
policy. This case of natural environment decides the reliability
of the whole system. On the other hand, system’s controllers
have to face several specific and inevitable risks when they
make construction decisions on different parts of gas providing
facilities and gas consuming facilities.
Fig. 4. Value adding process
After those construction decision settle down, as different
parts of the natural gas transportation systems, those stake-
holders wish to keep the values that brought by the system
to be consistent, and expect to expand these values based on
their needs.
V. RISKS ANALYSIS
The specific attributes of transportation and the complexity
of gas pipeline networks both bring operation challenges.
Natural gas producers and different levels of consumers are
dominant stakeholders of the whole gas transportation system.
Those parts could be the sub systems that rely on the gas
transportation systems, even have inner reliance across sub
systems. We have to be aware of the risks during these sys-
tems’ interactions with gas transportation system, and strength
the reliance in building gas transportation system.
We would first try to analyze and summarize short and long
term risks exit on the natural transportation systems.
A. Short-term risks
The construction of gas transportation system require large
investment. Investment costs in the natural gas transportation
system would be higher due to the frequent need to invest
not only in the pipelines itself, but also in the insulation of
houses and additional supplementary infrastructure. Therefore,
a change would often have negative financial consequences
and hence potentially negative social consequences as well
[5].
Natural gas transportation brings health risks aligned with
natural gas producing system. Producing natural gas can
contaminate air and drinking water, creating negative health
impacts for citizens close to production sites. The gas-related
accidents and the threat of earthquakes also named as ad-
ditional threats. Studies also identified an increased human
mortality rate due to shale gas (compared to conventional gas,
nuclear, or renewables) [5].
B. Long-term risks
Long term risks of gas transportation systems always bring
concerns about energy security. For the example from Rus-
sia, concerns from two main aspects: -The need for long-
term shortage-free supply of consumers with the required
energy resources, provided the energy sector operates under
nominal conditions. -The creation of conditions for providing
consumers with energy resources under emergency conditions
[3]. For the example from Germany, the country is widely
recognised as a climate leader with impressive progress in its
energy transition and ambitious plans while at the same time
offering strong state support to three new LNG terminals.
Consideration of the energy security calls for identification
of critical facilities, i.e. energy transportation systems which,
in case of partial or complete failure to operate, can cause
severe damage to the country through the energy sector [3].
Some health risks, especially invisible ones (such as risks
that occur underground such as the contamination of aquifers
or seismic activity), are beyond the direct perception of lay
people. Moreover, those risks are spatially diffuse, uncertainty
exists about which region will be affected to what extent, and
the effects are often temporally delayed [6].
VI. SHAPING FORCES
Compared with other systems that high related with natural
transportation systems. Gas export system could be sensitive
and sometimes vulnerable when facing shaping forces. In this
project, it is the diplomatic situation.
In most cases, gas, oil, electricity, and other energy systems
have huge transportation costs. The values that exist in these
3
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

huge transportation systems could be a vital remedy and,
probably benefits for these transportation systems.
But in general, those transportation systems cover huge
areas, even across countries. When gas transportation work
across the border, the export system could be the sub-
component of this system. The export system of gas transporta-
tion systems could bring interests from political, commercial,
and economic values to gas transportation systems. Some-
times, those benefits could be affected and even dominated
by political forces.
In EU, many countries are small and failed to accomplish
energy producing-consuming balance. They rely heavily on
energy import from Russia. As the chart shows, some countries
rely on almost totally energy import from Russia. Actually,
until 2022, Russia supplies about 40% of the natural gas
European Union overall [18].
Fig. 5.
Europe gas import percentage chart (Sources: Bruegel/European
Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas/Eurostat/UK Govern-
ment/Government of Ukraine)
The diplomatic relationship between many countries could
shape and determine the export systems, transnational system
constructions, international energy transportation, and different
levels of stakeholders, as Figure 8 shows, all of these essential
components can’t work and add other values without stable
diplomatic agreement. Considering current Ukraine War, the
shaping force are definitely reshaping the energy map of the
EU.
Besides, the diplomatic activities could force the gas pro-
viding and transportation in a economic way, the price fluctu-
ations of energy market. This cause the stakeholders, such as
energy company and the government may face deficits. This
Fig. 6. Shaping Forces
deficits consequence, again, decrease the fund that used for
transportation facilities and security remediations.
VII. RELIANCE ANALYSIS
Many energy consumers rely on gas transportation systems.
Figure 9 shows the reliance among gas transportation systems
and other 4 main gas-using systems.
Fig. 7. Reliability between systems
Figure 10 shows the whole map of risks, reliance from
stakeholders, related gas using subsystems to the gas trans-
portation system, in most of cases, those different circle
parts in this graph shows bi-direction relationship. Those
relationship put risks, and the reliability of gas transportation
could decrease and avoid these risks.
4
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Fig. 8. Risk and reliance relationship graph of gas transportation system
Those reliance above need a operational gas transportation
system. They revealed how a stable gas transportation can link
those consuming systems together tightly.
Consider the complex of gas transportation, such as Nord
Stream1 and Nord Stream2 built though comprehensive ge-
ographic situations, offshore gas transportation and onshore
gas transportation bring more options for gas transportation.
For example, the onshore transportation can finish by using
either vessel with tanks or undersea pipelines. The latter
always face huge costs and uncertain risks, financial crisis,
diplomatic shaping forces, geographic limitations and benefits
for stakeholders could could the decision to be complicated.
In order to minimize the technical uncertainty and stabilize
the benefits, the gas transportation systems should be built to
be reliable at the early time.
Transporting energy by pipeline is safe and environmen-
tally friendly. Furthermore, pipeline transportation is safer
than transportation by road, rail, or vessel, as measured by
incidents, injuries, and fatalities even though more road and
rail incidents go unreported [17]. This means the pipelines
based gas transportation are more reliable compared to other
transportation methods.
A. Cost saving and safety improvement for energy providers
In Figure 11, the causal loop of the natural gas providers
shows the factors’ relationship with reinforcement (R in Figure
11) and balance forces’ explanations (B in Figure 11), positive
(+) and negative consequent effects (-) among these factors. In
this graph, one factor is among the causes of another factor.
According to this graph, the reliable gas provider could
inform a positive feedback loop, the factors in this loop
all receive potential benefits: The reliable gas transportation
system decrease the perceived need to adding new investment.
The gas company could use saved money to invest in the
improvement of natural gas pipelines’ modernization tech-
nology, this motivate would accelerate the new technology’s
innovation. All of these could reinhence the gas transportation
reliability, strengthen the positive loop and keep benefits, and
save cost for gas providers.
Fig. 9. Casual Loop analysis for gas providers
B. Price fluctuation and Monopoly
Figure 12 shows the natural gas price’ fluctuation in these
years. To avoid huge fluctuations, the whole gas transportation
system have to be built in a control organization, this organi-
zation generally consists of several gas producers, they aim to
stabilize the gas supply, to avoid the gas supply shortage when
one of the gas producers halt its gas providing, and protect the
reliable gas supply system.
Fig. 10. Gas price fluctuation chart in U.S
After the year of 2021, in 2022, with the influence of
Russia-Ukraine War, the U.S banned Russia energy, cause the
significant price increase over past 25 years.
If one country’s gas transportation systems not working for
providing gas, especially for the main gas export country like
Russia, this could cause chaois for the whole gas transportation
network, even cause the transportation halting. To avoid this
situation, the related stakeholders need a third party organiza-
tion to guarantee the price of the gas. The organization, such as
OPEC, could aim to stabilize the international energy supply
and price could make decisions to avoid energy price’s huge
fluctuations. During Iraq War time, this measure could even
flat the price fluctuations [5].
5
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
The transnational natural gas transportation systems brings
benefits for thousands of consumers. Stakeholders of natural
gas transportation systems rely heavily not on each other, but
also the natural gas transportation systems.
At same time, the complicated benefits groups may face
more specific risks from engineering challenges, making the
trade-off between system construction and environment, cus-
tomers living experience and gas benefits. Those consid-
erations bring more implementation uncertainty and risks.
Concerns from those challenges and issues need the natural
gas transportation system to be built reliability and durable.
In the end, try to identify risks and avoid related severe
consequences in early system-building stage, these measures
would lead the whole system become more stable and robust,
and the system could benefit more stakeholders in a very long
term. The controllers and decision makers of the system could
make the improvement of current system to be reality and with
low economic and environment cost.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to my research teammates, Meng Jiao and Shiyu
Yuan, they help draw those analysis graphs and contribute their
ideas about how to list and plot analysis steps for each research
section.
REFERENCES
[1] Joaqu´ın
Navarro-Esbr´ı,
Adri´an
Fern´andez-Moreno,
Adri´an
Mota-
Babiloni, “Modelling and evaluation of a high-temperature heat pump
two-stage cascade with refrigerant mixtures as a fossil fuel boiler
alternative for industry decarbonization,” Energy, Volume 254, Part B,
2022.
[2] Roger Z. R´ıos-Mercado and Conrado Borraz-S´anchez, “Optimization
problems in natural gas transportation systems: A state-of-the-art re-
view,” Applied Energy,Volume 147,2015, pp.536-555.
[3] S.M. Senderov and A.V. Edelev, “Formation of a list of critical facilities
in the gas transportation system of Russia in terms of energy security,”
Energy, Volume 184,2019, pp.105-112.
[4] Alvaro Silva-Calder´on, “Short and long-term energy security in the
UNECE region: trends and prospects Speech by Dr Alvaro Silva-
Calder´on, OPEC Secretary General to the Energy Security Forum, UN
Economic Commission for Europe Committee on Sustainable Energy”.
Geneva, Switzerland, 20 November 2003.
[5] G.P. Hammond and ´A. O’Grady, “Indicative energy technology assess-
ment of UK shale gas extraction Application,” Energy, 185 (2017), pp.
1907-1918.
[6] M. Cotton, I. Rattle, and J. Van Alstine, “Shale gas policy in the
United Kingdom: an argumentative discourse analysis,” Energy Policy,
73 (2014), pp. 427-438.
[7] Hanna Brauers, Isabell Braunger, and Jessica Jewell, “Liquefied natural
gas expansion plans in Germany: The risk of gas lock-in under energy
transitions,” Energy Research Social Science, Volume 76, 2021.
[8] Valentin Jeutner, “Amendments, annexations, alternatives: Nord Stream
2’s contemporary status under EU and international law,” The Journal
of World Energy Law Business, Volume 12, Issue 6, December 2019,
pp. 502–512.
[9] Anna Mikulska, “Gazprom and Russian Natural Gas Policy in the First
Two Decades of the 21st Century,” Orbis, Volume 64, Issue 3, 2020, pp.
403-420.
[10] Rios-Mercado and Roger. Z. Borraz Sanchez, Conrado, “Optimiza-
tion problems in natural gas transportation systems: A state-of-the-
art review,” Provided by the author(s) and the Los Alamos National
Laboratory (2016-01-08). Applied Energy, Volume 147, 1 June 2015,
pp.536-555.
[11] John A.P. Chandler, “Developing offshore petroleum to meet socio-
economic objectives: Lessons from Australia, Norway and the United
Kingdom,” Energy Policy, Volume 144, 2020.
[12] Justyna Wo´zniak, Zbigniew Krysa, and Michał Dudek, “Concept of
government-subsidized energy prices for a group of individual con-
sumers in Poland as a means to reduce smog,” Energy Policy, Volume
144, 2020.
[13] Bal´azs R.Sziklaiac, L´aszl´o ´A.K´oczyab, and D´avid Csercsikd, “The
impact of Nord Stream 2 on the European gas market bargaining
positions,” Energy Policy Volume 144, September 2020.
[14] Paulina Landry, “The EU strategy for gas security: Threats, vulnerabil-
ities and processes,” Energy Policy, Volume 144, 2020.
[15] James Conca, “Pick Your Poison For Crude – Pipeline, Rail, Truck Or
Boat,” Forbes, April 26 2014.
[16] V. Zapukhlyak, Yu. Melnychenko, . kipnyi, L. Poberezhny, Ya. Grudz,
N. Drin, and M. Chernetskyy, “Reliability assurance of gas-hydrogen
mixture transportation by gas pipeline system,” Procedia Structural
Integrity, Volume 36, 2022, pp. 378-385.
[17] Diana Furchtgott-Roth and Kenneth P. Green, “Intermodal safety in the
transport of oil,” Studies in ENERGY TRANSPORTATION. October,
2013.
[18] Jeff Tollefson, “What the war in Ukraine means for energy, climate and
food Russia’s invasion has caused a short-term spike in prices, but could
prompt a long-term shift towards sustainability,” NEWS FEATURE,
Nature, April 05, 2022.
6
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

