Applying Systems Thinking for Early Validation of a Case Study Definition: An 
Automated Parking System  
Haytham B. Ali 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
haytham.ali@usn.no  
Mo Mansouri 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
Hoboken, USA 
mo.mansouri@stevens.edu  
Gerrit Muller 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
gerrit.muller@usn.no  
Abstract—Case study research and industry-as-laboratory 
research are well-known research methods in industry–
academia collaboration research projects. Defining a case study 
well in the early phase of an industry–academia complex 
sociotechnical and data-oriented research project is crucial for 
success. This success can be measured by the Company’s active 
participation and sharing of all data needed for the research 
project. In this paper, we apply systems thinking and its tools to 
validate the Company’s need in an early phase to define the case 
study in the research project. We use systemigrams for early 
validation. The foundation for the systemigram is system 
thinking tools. These tools include stakeholder analysis, context 
diagram, and Customers, Actors, Transformation, Worldview, 
Owner, and Environment (CATWOE) analysis. Systems 
thinking and its tools aid in communicating and sharing a 
common understanding of the Company’s case study and 
support further exploration of the value proposition for the 
Company’s actual needs.  
Keywords—early validation; systems thinking; CATWOE 
analysis; systemigram; company’s need; visualization. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
 A lack of available land and a need for more parking 
places, especially in urban cities, triggers the need for an 
Automated Parking System (APS) [1]. However, the APS fails 
mostly for two main reasons: when the system is used at a high 
rate and when the end-user is unfamiliar with it. In addition, 
the APS fails due to some mechanical failures[2][3]. The 
failure rate of an APS is higher than that of the traditional 
system. Thus, there is a need to increase the reliability of APSs 
[4]. 
In this paper, we investigate the application of systems 
thinking to validate the Company’s need in an early phase as 
part of defining the case study within the harvesting value 
from big data and digitalization through the Human Systems-
Engineering Innovation Framework (H-SEIF 2) research 
project. Defining a case study well during the early phase of a 
complex sociotechnical research project is crucial for the 
success of a research project. This success can be measured by 
the Company’s participation and data sharing. Data sharing is 
an essential factor in this research project. We systematically 
analyze the needs and investigate how external forces affect 
the project’s development [5]. 
1) The case. The H-SEIF 2 project is a research project
aiming to enable data-supported early decisions in the early 
design phase of the New Product Development (NPD) 
process. Today, an enormous amount of data is available. 
With the right approach, suitable algorithms, and structure, 
Norwegian companies can use big data to provide a decisive 
competitive advantage in the international market. This 
research project is an ongoing project that investigates how 
companies that deliver complex systems can streamline their 
innovation and NPD processes by using big data and 
digitalization more effectively [5]. 
2) The Company. The Company is small and medium-
sized enterprise that delivers APSs, including maintenance, 
primarily for land developers and building owners. The APSs 
include fully and semi-automated car parking systems. The 
Company is transitioning from selling to developing, 
producing, and marketing. Their systems are not designed 
with enough sensors to achieve proper condition monitoring, 
and they require proper data management. Company 
management believes that other parking systems are far 
behind this solution. 
The Company has stored data, also called big data. Big 
data refer to datasets whose size or complexity exceeds the 
capability of current or conventional methods within the 
Company. However, the challenge for companies is to explore 
value from their stored big data [6]. The application of big data 
will increase the reliability of APSs by making more data-
driven decisions for the early design phase within the NPD 
and maintenance processes [7]. The paper reminder is as 
follows: Section II illustrate the study’s research method. 
Section III shows systems thinking application in a case study. 
Section IV provides a thorough discussion, and ultimately 
Section V wraps up the study with a conclusion. 
II.
RESEARCH METHOD
A. Case Study Research
We use case study research, as we use industry-as-
laboratory research during the research project [8][9]. Case 
study research includes the following three steps: defining the 
case study well, selecting the design, and using theory in 
design work [9]. In this paper, we focus on the first step 
through applying systems thinking. A case study usually 
includes multiple units of analysis. We collected mainly 
qualitative data. The qualitative data include direct 
observations, 
participant 
observations, 
open-ended 
(nonstructured) interviews, and physical artifacts.  
The direct and participant observations resulted from the 
authors as researchers involved in a real-life context by 
participating in events and meetings within the Company-of-
Interest. We also conducted open-ended interviews as part of 
the observation and part of the workshops we performed with 
the Company. Moreover, we identified and collected stored 
data within the Company as physical artifacts. These data 
were downloaded by the Company’s employees and provided 
to the main author of this paper. 
Having different sources of evidence permits us, as 
researchers, to investigate and reinvestigate the consistency of 
the findings from various sources of evidence. Furthermore, 
we can converge these pieces of evidence, also called data 
triangulation, to increase the robustness of the results [10]. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

B. Checkland’s Soft Systems Methodology 
Applying systems thinking in a case study within the 
industry-as-laboratory enables soft systems methodology 
(SSM) and supports systems engineering. Boardman et al. 
(2009) [11] argue that systems thinking is the foundation of 
systems engineering, SSM, and applied complexity science.  
Figure 1 depicts Checkland’s SSM. We modified the 
methodology to be iterative, excluding the phases between the 
steps and emphasizing that there was no one right path. 
Further, we use the systemigram as a conceptual model, 
structured text as the root definition of relevant systems, and 
dramatization and dialogue as a comparison of steps 2 and 4. 
This modification was inspired by Sauser et al. (2011) [12], 
who called the SSM that includes those modifications 
Boardman’s SSM (BSSM).  
SSM allows for individuals’ different perspectives and 
different desirable outcomes of the case study. In addition, 
SSM bridges the real world and systems thinking [12]–[14]. 
The SSM consists of the seven steps visualized in Figure 1. 
Steps 1 to 7 are repeated until consensus is reached among the 
individuals involved in the in the case study. In other words, 
the process including the steps is repeated until the Company’s 
need as part of the case study definition is verified and 
validated.  
III. 
APPLYING SYSTEMS THINKING METHODOLOGY  
IN A CASE STUDY 
There are several definitions of systems thinking. 
However, Barry Richmond, one of the leaders of systems 
thinking, emphasizes that systems thinkers look at the tree and 
the forest simultaneously [15]. In this context, the tree is the 
Company, and the forest is the H-SEIF2 research project as 
the project includes other companies. We investigate the 
similarities and synergies between those companies further 
during a co-creation process. In this paper, we adopt Arnold 
and Wade’s definition of systems thinking: “Systems thinking 
is a set of synergistic analytic skills used to improve the 
capability of identifying and understanding systems, 
predicting their behaviors, and devising modifications to them 
in order to produce desired effects. These skills work together 
as a system” [16].  
To get a better understanding of the context, we describe 
the system. Furthermore, we define system boundaries with a 
context diagram. We then identify the stakeholders and their 
interests in a stakeholder interests map. We use systems 
thinking tools: CATWOE analysis and systemigram. 
A. Description of the APS 
The APS is a complex system due to its multiplex 
hardware and people’s interactions with the system [4]. 
Problems that occur include not retrieving the right car or no 
a car at all. Figure 2 shows the System-of-Interest (SOI): a 
semi-automated car parking system (garage). Figure 2 also 
depicts a drive-in indication. The car entrance can be a 
straightforward or inclined plane. The SOI has different 
configurations. These configurations include different 
heights, breadths, and depths. The car entrance and the SOI’s 
configurations depend on the building and its architecture. In 
addition, the SOI includes many parts, such as the gate, control 
unit, platform, wedges, and so forth.  
B. System Boundaries 
We can understand systems in the context within their 
environment [17]. The system context helps us to understand 
the openness of the system. Figure 3 depicts a context diagram 
for the SOI. 
The context diagram illustrates three variables: 
1) Controllable variables are variables in which we 
identified the SOI. Having the SOI within the 
innermost circle means that it is necessary to act 
sufficiently to achieve the needed outcome. 
2) Influencing variables are uncontrollable variables 
that we can influence. We identified the critical 
stakeholders within the influencing variables. The 
critical stakeholders are Company management, land 
developers, building owners, suppliers, local 
authorities (communes), maintenance personnel, 
development team, and car owners. We discuss the 
stakeholders more in the following subsection. 
Figure 1. Checkland’s soft systems methodology (SSM) based on [12]–
[14]. 
Figure 3. Context diagram of the SOI. 
Figure 2. The SOI: the semi-automated parking 
system. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

3) 
Appreciating variables are uncontrollable variables 
that we cannot influence; thus, we need to appreciate them. 
The appreciating variables include the following: 
a) Existing competitors. To date, there has been 
only one competitor in the Norwegian market. 
b) New competitors. Any new competitor can 
emerge and enter the market. We included new 
competitors, although the barrier to entry makes 
that problematic.  
c) Norwegian urban cities plan. Norwegian cities 
have their own development plans, including 
construction of new buildings 
and 
the 
architecture of old and new buildings [18]. 
d) Market situation. The market situation is 
crucial, as many Norwegian cities (including 
Oslo) aim to have car-free downtowns [19]. In 
addition, the Norwegian market is part of the 
global market and is highly affected by it. 
e) Norwegian 
government. 
The 
Norwegian 
government is responsible for existing and 
future 
regulations 
and 
standards. 
The 
regulations include which level of authorities 
have 
the 
local 
authorities, 
also 
called 
communes.  
f) 
Social skepticism toward automated systems. 
These automated systems include fully and 
semi-automated 
parking 
systems. 
Social 
skepticism is one of the challenges facing the 
SOI. Car owners may get the wrong car or no 
vehicle. Thus, increasing the system’s reliability 
is necessary to improve social acceptance. Using 
big data analytics, including two different data 
sources to monitor and maintain the SOI, is 
crucial. 
C. Stakeholders and Their Interests 
Figure 4 shows the critical stakeholders for the SOI. The 
SOI in the middle of the figure. Furthermore, we connected 
the essential stakeholders with the SOI with two types of 
arrows.  
The first type is a solid line and arrow, indicating an 
intense connection and a strong influence or interest in the 
SOI. The dashed arrows and lines indicate a weak association 
between the SOI and the stakeholders(s) and a weak influence 
on or interest in the SOI. For instance, we identified a weak 
connection between the government and the SOI, which has 
regulations, safety, and rules as their interest in the SOI. The 
government makes the regulations and standards for the 
systems, including the SOI. However, the government is not 
involved and does not strongly influence the development 
process. Thus, we chose to identify this relationship as a weak 
connection. Furthermore, we identified an intense relationship 
between the SOI and the following stakeholders: Company 
management, the development team, maintenance personnel, 
land developers, building owners, and car owners. This strong 
connection results from high involvement or influence in the 
SOI and its development process. 
We also identified relationships or connections among the 
stakeholders. For instance, there is a strong connection 
between car owners and Company management, as car owners 
are the end-users of the SOI. We present an intense 
relationship with a solid line between building owners, land 
developers, and Company management. The Company sells 
its SOI primarily to land developers. However, the Company 
also sells its SOI directly to building owners or land 
developers. Table I lists the stakeholders and their interests.  
TABLE I.  
STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR INTERESTS  
 
D. CATWOE Analysis 
Customers, Actors, Transformation, Worldview, Owner, 
and Environment are called CATWOE. CATWOE analysis is 
an essential tool for understanding the different stakeholder 
perspectives. This understanding is the foundation of the 
systemigram that we present in the following section.  
The CATWEO analysis tool aids in constructing the root 
definition of the proposed system [20]. This tool also provides 
an understanding of what the Company wants to achieve with 
the stored data, alongside their need as a case study. In 
addition, the CATWEO analysis identifies the problem areas 
and suggests how the proposed solution could impact the 
Company and its critical stakeholders. 
We apply CATWEO analysis to the two main critical 
stakeholders in the case study: Company management and 
maintenance personnel. The results are shown in Table II and 
Stakeholder 
Interests (why) 
Government 
Urban city development, including building new 
buildings and car-free downtowns. The government 
has the authority for regulation and standards for the 
SOI and includes the Norwegian Competition 
Authority 
Company 
management 
A reliable SOI as the traditional parking system, 
customer satisfaction, profit maximation 
Land 
developers 
Operating Expense (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure 
(CAPEX) 
Building 
owners 
Operating Expense (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure 
(CAPEX) 
Car owners 
Availability of parking spots and reliability of the SOI 
(getting the right car without any damage at the right 
time) 
Suppliers 
Maximize profit by winning contracts and satisfying 
the Company, which is the supplier’s customer 
Maintenance 
personnel 
Accessibility and usability of the SOI to conduct 
maintenance 
Development 
team 
Accessibility and usability of the SOI for car owners 
and maintenance personnel or anyone who uses the 
SOI 
Figure 4. Stakeholder interests map. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Table III, respectively. The CATWOE illustrates the different 
aspects of the two main critical stakeholders. These different 
aspects show the different abstraction levels of the Company’s 
need as part of the case study in the H-SEIF2 research project. 
Thus, we use the CATWOE analysis as a foundation of the 
following systems thinking tool: a systemigram. 
TABLE II.  
CATWOE: COMPANY MANAGEMENT   
Aspect 
Description 
Customers 
Company management 
Actors 
Partners, suppliers, maintenance personnel 
Transformation 
Increase the reliability of the SOI 
Worldview 
H-SEIF2 research project: value from big data 
(provide data to the project) 
Maximize profit 
Owner 
Company management 
Environment 
Urban cities 
TABLE III.  
CATWOE: MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 
Aspect 
Description 
Customers 
Maintenance personnel 
Actors 
Suppliers, Company management, car owners 
Transformation 
Maintenance process and method 
Worldview 
Increase reliability and availability of the SOI 
Owner 
Department heads of service and maintenance 
Environment 
The Automated Parking System (APS), building, 
cars, traffic density, weather, city infrastructure 
E. Systemigram 
A systemigram, also called a systemic diagram, is a graphical 
visualization of the Company’s need in terms of storytelling 
[13]. Using a systemigram aids in communicating 
understanding of the Company’s need. The Company’s need 
represents the surface of the problem definition, as well as the 
Company’s case study in the H-SEIF2 research project. We 
developed a systemigram based on the analysis and discussion 
in the previous subsections. The systemigram represents the 
Company management’s and maintenance personnel’s 
perspectives, focusing on the SOI and Condition-Based 
Maintenance (CBM) system, CBM also seen as the System-
Of-System (SOS).  
The systemigram, showing the case study based on the 
Company’s need, is visualized in Figure 5. The flow for the 
systemigram is from the top left to the bottom right. In the 
upper left is the Company management who presents the SOI 
for the systemigram, where the primary goal is at the bottom 
right, which is to maximize business viability. The 
systemigram is sorted into two main categories with two 
colors. The first category is the mainstay in dark gray blue. 
The other main category is big data, in light blue. We aim to 
have an overview of available stored data and possible needed 
data for the Company’s proposed system (request) within the 
Company’s case study: the CBM system (SOS).   
The mainstay is diagonal and presents the central message 
of the systemigram. The mainstay can be read as follows: 
“Company management owns the SOI that comprises the 
NPD process that constitute sensor(s) that allow CBM system 
implementation, which permits observation of anomalies that 
aids mechanical failure detection and prediction in real-time 
which allows continuous monitoring of the SOI through a 
dashboard that maximizes business viability.” Business 
viability includes many other nodes: increase in the reliability 
of the SOI, increase in availability in the SOI, and increase in 
customer satisfaction.  
The SOI consists of parts and data. Data include service-
log data (maintenance records data) that constitute internal 
data, which are part of big data that can be provided to data 
analysts. Service-log data can be analyzed to identify 
measurable critical parameters and the most critical parts that 
can be used to decide which sensors to install. Data analysts 
include mainly researchers, in addition to the Company and 
partners.  Sensor(s) (already installed sensors and planned to 
install) generate sensor data that constitute internal data. 
Maintenance personnel who maintain the SOI have tacit 
knowledge, and researchers can transform part of it into 
explicit knowledge in terms of visualization (information) and 
data that also constitute internal data.  
Researchers conduct data analysis. Researchers including 
the main author are in process of the data analysis as part of 
the Company’s case study. Data analysis enhances decision-
making regarding the maintenance process of the SOI. Data 
analysis includes the following steps (nodes): data storage and 
retrieval, data pre-processing, data analysis, and data 
visualization. Decision-making regarding the maintenance 
process includes implementing the CBM system for the SOI 
(Company’s request as part of the case study).  
CBM implementation permits observation of anomalies 
that aids in detecting mechanical failure events. However, 
CBM passes over electronic failure events. Failure event 
detection and prediction allow continuous monitoring of the 
SOI through a dashboard using a traffic light color code. 
Researchers also identify the external data needed to verify the 
analysis results from internal data. External data is a third part 
data that the Company is not storing internally at their 
databases. Internal data is the data that the Company owns and 
is available to be downloaded. Implementing the CBM system 
requires external data. CBM generates sensor and stream data.   
External data and internal data constitute big data. Big data 
can be provided, as mentioned, to data analysts who conduct 
data analysis. Data analysis investigates patterns and trends. It 
also supports the decision-making of the SOI maintenance 
process, including CBM implementation.  
A CBM system can have system failures. These failures 
include data anomalies and downtime (CBM downtime). 
CBM can also give a false positive and a false negative. 
System failures and false alarms decrease business viability.  
F. Possible Leverage Points 
Applying systems thinking and its analysis tools aids in 
communicating and sharing understanding of the case study 
definition. This communication occurs through visualization 
of the systemigram. We developed the systemigram through 
several iterations after applying other systems thinking tools. 
These tools are the foundation of the systemigram 
development and include stakeholder analysis, a context 
diagram, and CATWEO analysis. 
The systemigram visualizes the case study, including its 
multiple-unit analysis. This visualization aids in defining the 
case study well and sharing mutual understanding of the 
Company’s need as part of the case study definition. The 
systemigram also helps communicate the case study definition 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

to the Company, scholars, and other partners in the complex 
sociotechnical research project. The Company and the 
researchers used the systemigram to prioritize the most 
significant unit analysis in the case study. For instance, we 
agreed that CBM system is a long-term vision to increase the 
SOI’s reliability. The second short-term vision is data analysis 
to investigate the use case for developing the CBM system. 
This communication aided in early validation of the 
Company’s need as part of the case study during the early 
phase of the research project. 
Early validation contributed to the project’s success. This 
observation results from the Company’s active participation 
in the research project. In addition, the Company shared all the 
stored and needed data with the main author of this paper. 
Moreover, the systemigram helped explore the problem 
domain that define the case study and not only touching the 
surface of the problem. In other words, systemigram helped at 
dig deeper into Company’s actual (real) needs, which 
continues this an ongoing case study. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We developed the systemigram through several iterations. 
These iterations resulted in several versions of the 
systemigram. Some of the iterations were conducted with 
other researchers in the H-SEIF2 research project. The 
researchers were also involved in some of the workshops and 
interviews conducted with the Company. However, we 
struggled to visualize the systemigram so that is readable, as 
it included many nodes and explanatory links. We had to 
perform several iterations and use various tools. The iterations 
include feedback as part of the validation process with the 
Company. This visualization represents how researchers’ 
knowledge is chaotic and disordered, while the systemigram 
aims to visualize this knowledge in a nice storytelling way. 
Moreover, the systemigram aids in explaining all the aspects 
and key stakeholders’ perspectives and communicating and 
sharing understanding of the case study definition, including 
its multiple-unit analysis.  
One of the essential perspectives to evaluate is the 
profitability aspect of the Company’s request (the proposed 
system): the CBM system from an economic perspective. This 
profitability includes a business plan, including the capital 
expenditure (CAPEX), operating expense (OPEX), and return 
on investment (ROI) of the proposed system. However, we 
made a quick iteration to develop a rough business plan. This 
plan is not included in this paper, as we focus on using 
conceptual modeling, mainly systems thinking and its tools, to 
validate the Company’s need in an early phase as part of the 
case study definition. We could also evaluate it by using other 
conceptual models and could include the economic 
perspective, such as cost optimization and performance in the 
systemigram(s). However, including this perspective could 
make the systemigram unreadable. 
The Company’s key personnel, including Company 
management and department heads of service and 
maintenance, validated the systemigrams. The Company’s 
feedback 
indicated 
that 
the 
systemigram 
aids 
in 
communicating a common understanding and includes all the 
aspects and perspectives of the Company’s case study.  
Figure 5. The systemigram visualizes the value proposition of the Company’s need. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

The main author tested the systemigram as a 
communication tool for the Company’s case study with other 
companies in the H-SEIF2 research project. Company 
management also tested systemigrams as a communication 
tool for external stakeholders. The feedback indicated that the 
systemigram works as a communication tool. However, we 
may need to investigate further the need of other conceptual 
models that can be used as a supportive tool for 
systemigram(s). This support can be towards more concrete 
and specific solutions and technologies. 
We could also apply other systems thinking tools to 
explore and increase understanding of the problem and 
solution domains from all perspectives and at different 
abstraction levels. These tools could include casual loop 
diagrams and conceptagon(s). We could use these tools to 
increase understanding of system behavior and dynamics and 
to organize system information and definitions. However, we 
believe that the systems thinking methodology and tools we 
applied in this paper achieved the goal of its application: early 
validation of the Company’s case study definition.  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
We aim to develop a financial model for the SOI. The 
model will investigate the profitability of implementing CBM 
in the short and long term. This model also aims to include the 
cost of the optimization and performance of adapting the 
Company’s proposed system or request (the CBM system) as 
an option to increase the SOI’s reliability. 
Another option we plan to investigate is data analysis. We 
aim to analyze service-log data (maintenance record data) to 
increase the SOI’s reliability. We believe that these data can 
support reliability engineering activities during the early 
design phase of the NPD process. In addition, we believe in 
using data analysis aids as input to discover the Company’s 
actual needs. In other words, exploring the problem definition 
for the case study and not only touching the problem 
definition’s surface by going forward for the Company’s 
actual needs.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Defining a case study well within the early phase of a 
complex sociotechnical research project is crucial for its 
success. This success can be measured by the Company’s 
active participation and trust by sharing all needed data. We 
applied systems thinking and its tools to a real-industry case 
study. The tools include stakeholders’ analysis, context 
diagram, CATWEO analysis, and systemigram. This 
application aims to validate the Company’s need early as part 
of defining the case study well, including its several unit 
analyses. Feedback on the application of systems thinking 
methodology and its tools indicates that systems thinking aids 
in communicating and sharing understanding of all aspects 
and critical stakeholders’ perspectives within the case study. 
This early validation helps researchers (academia) and 
Company (industry) investigate the Company’s need and what 
triggers such a need to further explore the actual needs of the 
Company’s case study.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This research is part of a larger research project, the second 
iteration of the Human Systems Engineering Innovation 
Framework (HSEIF-2), funded by The Research Council of 
Norway (Project number 317862).  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Nourinejad, S. Bahrami, and M. J. Roorda, “Designing 
parking facilities for autonomous vehicles,” Trans. Research 
Part B: Methodological, vol. 109, pp. 110–127, 2018. 
[2] G. Cudney, “Parking Today | Articles - Automated Parking: Is 
It 
Right 
for 
You?” 
Available: 
https://www.parkingtoday.com/articledetails.php?id=181&t=a
utomated-parking-is-it-right-for-you 
(accessed 
June. 
17, 
2022). 
[3] F. Robles, “Road to Robotic Parking Is Littered With Faulty 
Projects,” The New York Times, Nov. 28, 2015. Accessed: 
Junev 
17, 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/28/us/road-to-robotic-
parking-islittered-with-faulty-projects.html 
[4] A. Mathijssen and A. J. Pretorius, “Verified design of an 
automated parking garage,” in International Workshop on 
Parallel and Distributed Methods in Verification, 2006, pp. 
165–180. 
[5] “H-SEIF 2,” Universitetet i Sørøst-Norge, Nov. 25, 2020. 
https://www.usn.no/english/research/our-
research/technology/norwegian-industrial-systems-
engineering-research-group/h-seif-2/ 
(accessed 
June. 
17, 
2022). 
[6] H. B. Ali, “Unlocking the power of big data within the early 
design phase of the new product development process: A case 
study 
in 
a 
Company,” 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gaudisite.nl/INCOSE2021_AliEtAL.pdf 
[7] “Defining 
and 
Clarifying 
Reliability.” 
https://www.reliableplant.com/Read/98/defining-reliability 
(accessed Aug. 15, 2021). 
[8] C. Potts, “Software-engineering research revisited,” IEEE 
software, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 19–28, 1993. 
[9] R. K. Yin, Applications of case study research. sage, 2011. 
[10] M. Duneier and O. Carter, Sidewalk. Macmillan, 1999. 
[11] J. Boardman, B. Sauser, L. John, and R. Edson, “The 
conceptagon: A framework for systems thinking and systems 
practice,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on Systems, 
Man and Cybernetics, 2009, pp. 3299–3304. 
[12] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri, and M. Omer, “Using systemigrams 
in problem definition: A case study in maritime resilience for 
homeland security,” J. Homeland Security & Emergency 
Mang.,  
[13] J. Boardman and B. Sauser, Systems Thinking: Coping with 
21st Century Problems. CRC Press, 2008. 
[14] P. Checkland, “Systems thinking,” Rethinking management 
information systems, pp. 45–56, 1999. 
[15] B. Richmond, “System dynamics/systems thinking: Let’s just 
get on with it,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 10, no. 2–3, pp. 
135–157, 1994. 
[16] R. D. Arnold and J. P. Wade, “A definition of systems thinking: 
A systems approach,” Procedia computer science, vol. 44, pp. 
669–678, 2015. 
[17] J. Gharajedaghi, Systems thinking: Managing chaos and 
complexity: A platform for designing business architecture. 
Elsevier, 2011. 
[18] J. F. Nystad, C. B. Eckmann, and Gibbs, Walter, Building and 
urban development in Norway: a selection of current issues. 
2004. 
[19] Fast Company, “What happened when Oslo decided to make 
its 
downtown 
basically 
car-free?,” 
Jan. 
24, 
2019. 
https://www.fastcompany.com/90294948/what-happened-
when-oslo-decided-to-make-its-downtown-basically-car-free 
(accessed Sep. 28, 2021). 
[20] A. Basden and A. T. Wood-Harper, “A philosophical 
discussion of the root definition in soft systems thinking: an 
enrichment of CATWOE,” Systems Research and Behavioral 
Science, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 61–87, 2006, doi: 10.1002/sres.689. 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

