Cloud Computing Ontologies: A Systematic Review 
Darko Androcec, Neven Vrcek, Jurica Seva 
Faculty of Organization and Informatics 
Varazdin, Croatia 
e-mail: darko.androcec@foi.hr, neven.vrcek@foi.hr, jurica.seva@foi.hr 
 
 
Abstract—The main objective of this study is to obtain a 
holistic view of Cloud Computing ontologies, their applications 
and focuses. The identification of primary studies in this 
systematic review is based on a pre-defined research protocol 
with a research question, inclusion and exclusion criteria and a 
search strategy. We summarize the selected studies into four 
main categories: Cloud resources and services description, 
Cloud security, Cloud interoperability and Cloud services 
discovery and selection. The analysis of the included studies 
indicates a number of challenges and topics for future 
research, including those specifically related to using ontologies 
to improve security and interoperability of Cloud Computing 
offerings. 
Keywords—Cloud Computing; ontology; systematic review; 
Cloud service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud Computing has become a new paradigm for the 
provision of computing infrastructure, platform or software 
as a service. Its main benefits are flexibility, pay-per-use 
model and significant cost reduction. Linthicum [1] 
concludes that the most comprehensive definition of the 
aforementioned paradigm is that provided by NIST. 
According to this definition, ―Cloud computing is a pay-per-
use model for enabling available, convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g. networks, servers, storage, applications, 
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service provider interaction‖ 
[1]. The minimum definition of Cloud Computing must 
contain 
scalability, 
pay-per-use 
utility 
model 
and 
virtualization [2]. Cloud Computing is primarily a new 
business paradigm [3] that enables on-demand access, 
elasticity, pay-per-use, connectivity, resource pooling and 
abstracted infrastructure [4]. 
There are a lot of Cloud Computing review papers in the 
current literature but to date no systematic review of Cloud 
Computing ontologies has been published. Therefore the 
primary aim of our research is to systematically select and 
review published work and provide an overview of Cloud 
Computing ontologies, their types, applications and focuses. 
The following research questions are stated: What are the 
main focus and application contexts of Cloud Computing 
ontologies covered in the scientific literature? What is the 
impact of the studies to scientific and professional 
community? 
This paper proceeds as follows. Firstly, in Section 2, we 
describe the research method used in this review. Section 3 
contains the overview data concerning the included studies. 
In the Section 4 we provide a detailed description of relevant 
reviewed papers and classify them into appropriate 
categories according to topics. Then, Section 5 presents a 
synthesis of this systematic review. Our conclusions are 
presented in the last section. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
Our research uses a systematic review method [5], which 
is a formalized process to assess and interpret all available 
research related to a specific research question. Guidelines 
that address specific problems of software engineering 
research are introduced in [5]. A systematic review has three 
main phases: planning the review, conducting the review and 
reporting the review.  
We developed a review protocol in the planning phase. 
The background and the research question are specified in 
the introduction of our paper. Only full papers in English 
from peer-reviewed journals and conferences published from 
2008 to 2011 were considered. Studies that are not related to 
the usage of ontology in Cloud Computing were excluded. In 
cases where several duplicated studies were found that 
existed in different versions, only the most complete version 
of the study was included. We focused on searching Google 
Scholar and the following electronic scientific databases: 
ScienceDirect, Current Contents, IEEE Xplore, SpringerLink 
and ISI Web of Science. These databases had been chosen 
since they provide the most important journals and 
conference proceedings covering Cloud Computing and 
ontology engineering.   The following search term was used 
to find relevant studies: Cloud Computing AND ontology. 
Irrelevant studies were excluded based on the analysis of 
their titles, abstracts and keywords, whereas primary studies 
were obtained based on full text read. The search process 
was performed in November 2011, during which a total of 
463 publications were identified. After filtering the 
publications list by reading titles, abstracts and keywords, 
full text reading of the articles that had not been excluded 
was performed to ensure that the content is related to our 
research question. Finally, 24 studies were identified as 
primary studies. Data extraction and synthesis were done by 
reading the full text of these 24 studies and extracting 
relevant data to Excel spreadsheets.  
 
III. 
OVERVIEW DATA CONCERNING SELECTED STUDIES 
In this section we describe the sources of publication and 
the citation status of the selected studies. Most of these 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-196-0
MOPAS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

studies were published in conference proceedings, book 
chapters and journals. Table I. provides an overview of the 
distribution of the studies and the number of studies from a 
particular source type.   
TABLE I.  
DISTRIBUTION PER PUBLICATION SOURCE TYPES 
Source 
Count 
Conference proceedings 
13 
Book chapters 
5 
Journals 
5 
Workshops 
1 
Total 
24 
 
Figure 1. Number of studies by year of publication. 
TABLE II.  
ACTIVE RESEARCH COMMUNITIES 
Institution 
Number of studies 
Gwangju Institute of Science and 
Technology, South Korea 
3 
Wuhan Univ. of Technol., China 
2 
Victoria Univ. of Wellington, New 
Zealand 
2 
 
The obtained distribution is in line with expectations 
since Cloud Computing is a relatively new paradigm. The 
citation rates for the included studies were obtained from 
Google Scholar. The citation rates of the studies are quite 
low (most studies <10 citations). This result is in line with 
expectations since all the initially selected studies were 
published from 2008 to 2011, and 75% of those that were 
eventually included were published in last two years. 
According to Google Scholar data, the most cited 
publications from our selected set of studies are [6] with 191 
citations and [7] with 38 citations. When the year of 
publication of the papers is concerned (Figure 1), we noticed 
an upward trend in the number of relevant publications about 
Cloud Computing ontology. In the selected set of studies we 
also looked for the authors’ affiliation details in order to 
identify active research communities involved in work 
related to Cloud Computing ontologies (Table II.).  
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Our examination of the selected studies was based on 
their similarities in terms of the main focus and application 
of Cloud Computing ontologies. We identified four main 
categories: Cloud resources and services description, Cloud 
security, Cloud interoperability and Cloud 
services 
discovery and selection. 
 
Figure 2. Classification of included studies. 
 
Figure 2 illustrates these categories while also specifying 
their distribution across studies. The identified categories 
will be elaborated in the following subsections. 
 
A. Cloud Resources and Services Description 
The studies in this category use the Cloud ontologies to 
describe Cloud resources and services, classify the current 
services and pricing models or define new types of Cloud 
services.  
One of the first attempts to establish a detailed Cloud 
ontology was presented in [6]. In that paper the authors 
proposed an ontology which demonstrates a dissection of the 
Cloud into five main layers: applications, software 
environments, software infrastructure, software kernel and 
hardware. Each layer encompasses one or more Cloud 
services which belong to the same layer if they have 
equivalent levels of abstraction. The authors of the ontology 
in [6] also discussed each layer’s strengths, limitations and 
their dependency on preceding computing concepts. 
Weinhardt et al. [7] proposed a Cloud business ontology 
model to classify current Cloud services and pricing models. 
Their ontology consists of three layers: infrastructure, 
platform and application as a service. Cloud users and 
providers can use it to map the existing Cloud services and 
set pricing schemes. 
Bohm et al. [8] suggested various definitions of Cloud 
Computing, its billing models and a systematic description of 
its major actors and value network. They also reviewed the 
definitions, models and ontologies from the existing 
literature. 
The concept of ontology as a service was proposed in [9]. 
Ontology as a service (OaaS) is a service where Cloud 
vendors provide the application and infrastructure to tailor 
the source ontology to the users’ requirements. The authors 
of the study reported in [9] elaborated ontology extraction 
and sub-ontology merging process.   
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-196-0
MOPAS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

Sheng-Yuan et al. [10] proposed an ontology-supported 
ubiquitous interface agent and described the interaction with 
the backend information agent system in Cloud Computing. 
A formal catalog representation of Cloud services was 
proposed in [11]. In this paper, Deng et al. introduced a 
range of Cloud services and their processes modeled by 
means of ontological representation. 
B. Cloud Security 
The studies in this category use ontologies to describe 
and improve Cloud security. 
Takahashi, Kadobayashi and Fujiwara [12] built the 
ontology for cyber security operational information and 
applied it to Cloud Computing. Since the essential changes 
of cyber security information in Cloud Computing are data-
asset decoupling, composition of multiple resources and 
external resource usage, they included data provenance and 
resource dependency information into their ontology. 
The architecture of a deployed service in the Cloud 
Computing environment used for malware detection was 
presented in [13]. The authors used the ontology for malware 
and intrusion detection that represents the signatures for 
known and novel attacks as well as an ontological model for 
reaction rules creating the prevention system. 
C. Cloud Interoperability 
One of the biggest obstacles of Cloud Computing is 
provider lock-in that can be solved by means of interoperable 
Cloud services. The studies in this category show how to use 
ontologies to achieve interoperability among different Cloud 
providers and their services. 
The FP7 mOSAIC project is aimed at creating and 
exploiting an open-source Cloud application programming 
interface and a platform for developing multi-Cloud oriented 
applications. The mOSAIC Cloud Ontology is described in 
[14]. The concepts in this ontology were identified by 
analyzing standards and proposals from literature and will be 
used for semantic retrieval and composition of Cloud 
services.  
Bernstein and Vij [15] presented the InterCloud 
Directories and Exchanges mediator to enable connectivity 
and collaboration among Cloud vendors. Their ontology of 
Cloud Computing resources intended for facilitating work 
with heterogeneous providers of Cloud Computing services 
was defined using RDF.   
A method for semantic interoperability aggregation in 
requirements refinement and a metric framework for 
calculating semantic interoperability capability based on 
ontologies are proposed in [16]. This methodology can 
provide a semantic representation mechanism for refining 
users’ requirements in the Cloud Computing environment. 
D. Cloud Services Discovery and Selection 
This category consists of the studies that use ontologies 
to discover and select the best Cloud service alternative. 
Along with a lack of standard definitions of resource 
requirements, managing Cloud resources implies resource 
information management issues and resource allocation 
compatibility problems. As a solution to the aforementioned 
problems, Yoo et al. [17] proposed a resource virtualization 
method using ontology.  
Wang and Li [18] introduced the basic principles of the 
HCCloud (Heterogeneous Computing Cloud) design. The 
HCCloud is their architecture for the deployment and 
management of distributed applications in the Cloud where 
users can access services based on their requirements 
regardless of where the services are hosted. The resource 
selection mechanism starts with the user's requirements, 
calculates the similarity between resources and a particular 
candidate in the database of the Cloud resource ontology and 
ranks candidate resources accordingly.  
Han and Sim [19] presented a Cloud service discovery 
system that uses Cloud ontology to determine the similarities 
between and among services. It is an agent-based discovery 
system that enables reasoning about the relations of Cloud 
services using three types of similarity reasoning to assist 
users in searching available Cloud services more efficiently. 
Their Cloud ontology consists of concepts of different Cloud 
services for IaaS (infrastructure as a service), PaaS (platform 
as a service) and SaaS (software as a service). 
Zhou, Yang and Hugill [20] introduced a novel approach 
to reengineering enterprise software for Cloud Computing. 
They proposed the ontology for enterprise software and then 
partitioned it to decompose enterprise software from legacy 
system into potential service candidates during migration to 
the Cloud Computing environment. 
In their study, Kang and Sim [21] proposed a Cloud 
ontology to semantically define the relationship among 
different Cloud services. The similarity among Cloud 
services is determined using concept similarity reasoning, 
object property similarity reasoning and data type property 
similarity reasoning. They also presented their own Cloud 
service search engine that uses the defined ontology. Users 
can specify functional, technical and cost requirements, and 
the search engine returns the list of relevant Cloud services. 
Sim [22] proposed the development of software agents for 
Cloud service discovery, service negotiation and service 
composition. An agent-based search engine for Cloud 
service discovery consists of a service discovery agent that 
uses the defined Cloud ontology and multiple Cloud 
crawlers. In the aforementioned study, Sim [22] also devised 
a complex Cloud negotiation mechanism and adopted a 
focus selection contract net protocol and service capability 
tables to automate Cloud service composition. 
In [23] Dastjerdi, Tabatabaei and Buyya presented an 
architecture using ontology-based discovery to provide QoS 
aware deployment of virtual appliances on Cloud IaaS 
services. Virtual appliances are sets of virtual machines 
including operating systems, pre-configured and ready-to-
run applications and embedded needed components. The 
proposed architecture can help users to deploy their virtual 
appliances on the most appropriate IaaS providers based on 
their definition of QoS requirements.  
Yun et al. [24] introduced a tele-management system 
using a Cloud Computing platform for ubiquitous city. 
Ontology was used for context aware intelligence 
processing. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-196-0
MOPAS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

Semantic services discovery from the available Cloud 
providers is described in [25]. In this study, Wang et al. 
extended the Support Vector Machine (SVM)-based text 
clustering technique and proposed an iterative process to 
incrementally enrich domain ontology. 
Ma, Schewe and Wang [26] extended their ASM-based 
model of Abstract State Services (ASSs) to a Cloud 
Computing model. They proposed a formalism of Clouds by 
federations of services and a description of Cloud services in 
form of ontology. These descriptions contain a technical 
description of services (types, pre- and post-conditions) and 
keywords which describe the application area and 
functionality of the annotated service. 
The architecture to provide a semantic service for 
document management in Cloud Computing implemented by 
using techniques of web service and ontology was proposed 
in a book chapter by Wei and Junpeng [27]. 
In their paper, Ma, Jang, and Lee [28] proposed an 
ontology-based job allocation algorithm for a resource 
management system in Cloud Computing. They considered 
virtual machines as Cloud resources and built a Cloud 
ontology based on Cloud resource information and agreed 
SLAs (Service Level Agreements). The aforementioned 
ontology can be used to process complicated queries for 
searching Cloud resources. Its experimental results have 
verified that the ontology-based resource management 
system improves the efficiency of resource management for 
Cloud Computing when compared to the existing resource 
management algorithms.   
The approach to developing semantic Cloud services 
which are annotated based on shared ontology was proposed 
in a book chapter by Chen, Bai, and Liu [29], along with a 
description of the usage of these annotations for semantics-
based discovery of relevant Cloud services. 
V. 
DISCUSSIONS 
Research papers regarding Cloud Computing ontologies 
vary in terminology, descriptions and involved activities, but 
they also share a lot in common (focus, goal, application 
etc.). Our examination of the selected studies was based on 
their similarities in terms of the main focus and application 
of Cloud Computing ontologies. We divided them in the four 
categories: Cloud resources and services description, Cloud 
security, Cloud interoperability and Cloud services discovery 
and selection.  
Since the bias in our selection of the studies to be 
included presented the main threat to validity of our 
research, we used a research protocol to define the research 
question, inclusion and exclusion criteria and our search 
strategy. The review protocol was prepared by the first 
author and reviewed by the other two authors. 
Our review reveals that Cloud Computing ontologies are 
predominantly applied in the discovery and selection of the 
best service alternative in accordance with users’ needs and 
the description of Cloud resources and services (80% of the 
relevant identified studies deal with these issues). The 
identified categories of themes provide an overview of 
Cloud Computing ontologies research as well as a basis for 
discovering possibilities for improvement in research and 
practice. Table III specifies the main achievements, 
limitations and challenges of these categories in the existing 
literature.  
TABLE III.  
CURRENT STATE OF THE CLOUD COMPUTING ONTOLOGIES  
Category 
Achievements 
Limitations and 
challenges 
Cloud 
resources and 
services 
description 
- general Cloud business 
ontology 
- dissection of the Cloud 
into layers 
- classification of the 
current Cloud services 
- Cloud market is very 
dynamic, new Cloud 
services often emerge 
- detailed ontology of the 
Cloud resources and 
services is missing 
Cloud security 
- the ontology for 
cyber security 
operational information 
in Cloud Computing 
- the ontology for 
malware and intrusion 
detection deployed in the 
Cloud 
- data and assets can be 
decoupled and 
manipulated 
independently in the 
Cloud Computing 
- external resources usage 
and composition of 
multiple resources 
- privacy and data security 
risks 
 
Cloud interoperability 
- the mOSAIC Cloud 
ontology that uses 
concepts from standards 
and proposals from 
literature to improve 
interoperability 
- ontology based Cloud 
Computing resources 
catalog to federate or 
interoperate resources 
- lack of interoperability 
among Cloud Computing 
services 
- common Cloud API or 
an orchestration platform 
is currently not available 
(some on-going FP7 
research projects such as 
mOSAIC plan to develop 
Cloud interoperability 
platforms) 
- detailed ontology 
focused on Cloud API 
resources and operations 
does not exists 
Cloud 
services 
discovery and 
selection 
- multiple Cloud services 
discovery and selection 
approaches were 
proposed 
 
- user-friendly application 
for Cloud services 
discovery and selection is 
still missing 
 
The analysis of the selected studies indicates a number of 
challenges and topics for future research based on identified 
limitations and challenges in the existing literature. The most 
promising area of future research is the use of ontologies to 
improve security and interoperability of Cloud Computing 
offerings, because the main obstacles of the Cloud 
Computing 
paradigm 
are 
provider 
lock-in 
and 
security/privacy issues. For example, interesting research 
challenge is using an ontology-based approach as a basis for 
creation of the mechanism to automatically determine and 
solve interoperability problems among two or more Cloud 
Computing 
services 
provided 
by 
different 
vendors. 
Ontologies can also be useful tool to annotate sensitivity of 
data and portions of data stored in Cloud services. Existing 
Cloud Computing ontologies are mostly general and detailed 
ontologies of each Cloud Computing layer (software as a 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-196-0
MOPAS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

service, platform as a service, infrastructure as a service) are 
still missing. 
Besides for researchers, this systematic review might have 
implications for practitioners. They can use this review as a 
source in searching for relevant approaches for Cloud 
services discovery and selection. The identified limitations of 
the current literature can inspire programmers and Cloud 
users (e.g., development of user-friendly application for 
Cloud services discovery and selection). 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
Cloud Computing is a new paradigm for the provision of 
computing infrastructure, platform or software as a service. 
The main objective of the systematic review presented in 
our paper is to obtain a holistic perspective of Cloud 
Computing ontologies, their applications and focuses. We 
identified 24 primary studies using the systematic review 
methodology described in [5].  
 The main focus and application contexts of Cloud 
Computing ontologies covered in the scientific literature 
are: Cloud resources and services description, Cloud 
security, Cloud interoperability and Cloud services 
discovery and selection. The studies in the first category use 
the Cloud ontologies to describe Cloud resources and 
services, classify the current services and pricing models or 
define new types of Cloud services. The Cloud security 
category shows how to use ontologies to describe and 
improve Cloud security. Cloud interoperability consists of 
the studies that use ontologies to achieve interoperability 
among different Cloud providers and their services. Finally, 
the fourth category comprises the studies that focus on 
discovery and selection of the best Cloud service alternative 
using the previously defined ontology.  
The analysis of the selected studies indicates a number of 
challenges and topics for future research, including those 
specifically related to using ontologies to improve security 
and interoperability of Cloud Computing offerings. The 
main obstacles of the Cloud Computing paradigm are 
provider lock-in and security/privacy issues, which 
researchers can overcome by using an ontology-based 
approach. Practitioners can use our work to find existing 
approaches or develop new applications inspired by 
identified limitations of the currently available solutions. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. S. Linthicum, Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in 
Your Enterprise: a step-by-step guide, 1st ed., Addison-
Wesley, 2009. 
[2] L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. 
Lindner, ―A Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud 
Definition‖, ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review, vol. 39, pp. 50-55, January 2009. 
[3] A. Rosenthal, P. Mork, M. H. Li, J. Stanford, D. Koester, and 
P. Reynolds, ―Cloud computing: A new business paradigm for 
biomedical information sharing‖, Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, vol. 43, pp. 342-353, April 2010. 
[4] D. Durkee, ―Why Cloud Computing Will Never Be Free‖, 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 8, pp. 62-69, April 2010. 
[5] B. Kitchenham, ―Procedures for Performing Systematic 
Reviews‖,  Technical Report 0400011T, Keele University, 
July 2004. 
[6] L. Youseff, M. Butrico, and D. Da Silva, ―Toward a Unified 
Ontology of Cloud Computing‖, GCE '08 Grid Computing 
Environments Workshop, pp. 1-10, November 2008. 
[7] C. Weinhardt, A. Anandasivam, B. Blau, and J. Stosser, 
―Business Models in the Service World‖, IT Professional, vol. 
11, pp. 28-33, March-April 2009. 
[8] M. Bohm, S. Leimeister, C. Riedl, and H. Krcmar, ―Cloud 
Computing – Outsourcing 2.0 or a new Business Model for IT 
Provisioning?‖ in Application Management,  F. Keuper, C. 
Oecking, and A. Degenhardt, Eds. Gabler, 2011, pp. 31-56. 
[9] A. Flahive, D. Taniar, and W. Rahayu, ―Ontology as a Service 
(OaaS): a case for sub-ontology merging on the cloud‖, The 
Journal of Supercomputing, pp. 1-32, October 2011. 
[10] Y. Sheng-Yuan, H. Chun-Liang, and L. Dong-Liang, ―An 
ontology-supported ubiquitous interface agent for cloud 
computing — Example on Bluetooth wireless technique with 
Java programming‖, Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, pp. 2971-
2978, July 2010. 
[11] Y. Deng, M. R. Head, A. Kochut, J. Munson, A. Sailer, and 
H. Shaikh, ―Introducing Semantics to Cloud Services 
Catalogs‖, 2011 IEEE International Conference on Services 
Computing, pp. 24-31, July 2011. 
[12] T. Takahashi, Y. Kadobayashi, and H. Fujiwara, ―Ontological 
approach toward cybersecurity in cloud computing‖, 
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Security of 
information and networks, pp. 100-109, September, 2010. 
[13] C. A. Martinez, G. I. Echeverri, and A. G. C. Sanz, ―Malware 
detection based on Cloud Computing integrating Intrusion 
Ontology 
representation‖, 
2010 
IEEE 
Latin-American 
Conference on Communications (LATINCOM), pp. 1-6, 
September, 2010. 
[14] F. Moscato, R. Aversa, B. Di Martino, T.-F. Fortis, and V. 
Munteanu, ―An Analysis of mOSAIC ontology for Cloud 
Resources annotation‖, Proceedings of the Federated 
Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems, 
pp. 983-990, 2011. 
[15] D. Bernstein, and D. Vij, ―Intercloud Directory and Exchange 
Protocol Detail Using XMPP and RDF‖, 2010 6th World 
Congress on Services (SERVICES-1), pp. 431-438, July, 
2010. 
[16] K.-Q. He, J. Wang, and P. Liang, ―Semantic Interoperability 
Aggregation in Service Requirements Refinement‖, Journal of 
Computer Science and Technology, vol. 25, pp. 1103-1117, 
November 2010. 
[17] H. Yoo, C. Hur, S. Kim, and Y. Kim, ―An Ontology-Based 
Resource Selection Service on Science Cloud‖ in Grid and 
Distributed Computing,  D. Slezak, T. Kim, S. S. Yau, O. 
Gervasi, and B. Kang, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 
221-228. 
[18] B. X. N. Wang and C. Li, ―A Cloud Computing Infrastructure 
on Heterogeneous Computing Resources‖, Journal of 
Computers, vol. 6, pp. 1789-1796, 2011. 
[19] T. Han, K. M. Sim, ―An Ontology-enhanced Cloud Service 
Discovery System‖, Proceedings of the International 
MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists 2010 
Vol I, March 2010. 
[20] H. Zhou, H. Yang, and A. Hugill, ―An Ontology-Based 
Approach to Reengineering Enterprise Software for Cloud 
Computing‖, 2010 IEEE 34th Annual Computer Software and 
Applications Conference (COMPSAC), pp. 383-388, July 
2010.  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-196-0
MOPAS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

[21] J. Kang and K. M. Sim, ―Ontology and search engine for 
cloud computing system‖, 2011 International Conference on 
System Science and Engineering (ICSSE), pp. 276-281, June 
2011. 
[22] K. M. Sim, ―Agent-based Cloud Computing‖, IEEE 
Transactions on Services Computing, vol. PP, pp. 1-13, 
October 2011. 
[23] A. V. Dastjerdi, S. G. H. Tabatabaei, and R. Buyya, ―An 
Effective Architecture for Automated Appliance Management 
System Applying Ontology-Based Cloud Discovery‖, 2010 
10th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Cluster, Cloud 
and Grid Computing, pp. 104-112, May 2010. 
[24] C. H. Yun, H. Han, H. S. Jung, H. Y. Yeom, and Y. W. Lee, 
―Intelligent Management of Remote Facilities through a 
Ubiquitous Cloud Middleware‖, 2009 IEEE International 
Conference on Cloud Computing, pp. 65-71, September 2009. 
[25] J. Wang, J. Zhang, P. C. K. Hung, Z. Li, J. Liu, K. He, 
―Leveraging Fragmental Semantic Data to Enhance Services 
Discovery‖, 2011 IEEE International Conference on High 
Performance Computing and Communications, pp. 687-694, 
September 2011. 
[26] H. Ma, K.-D. Schewe, and Q. Wang, ―An Abstract Model for 
Service Provision, Search and Composition‖, APSCC 2009. 
Services Computing Conference, pp. 95-102, December 2009. 
[27] Y. Wei and C. Junpeng, ―Semantic Service in Cloud 
Computing‖ in Advances in Information Technology and 
Education,  T. Honghua and Z. Mark, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 156-160. 
[28] Y. B. Ma, S. H. Jang, and J. S. Lee, ―Ontology-Based 
Resource Management for Cloud Computing‖ in Intelligent 
Information and Database Systems,  N. Nguyen, C.-G. Kim, 
and A. Janiak, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 343-352. 
[29] F. Chen, X. Bai, and B. Liu, ―Efficient Service Discovery for 
Cloud Computing Environments‖ in Advanced Research on 
Computer Science and Information Engineering,  G. Shen and 
X. Huang, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 443-448. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-196-0
MOPAS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

