Ontology for Quality Specification in Requirements Engineering 
 
Farideh Heidari, Frances Brazier 
System Engineering Section, TBM faculty  
Delft University of Technology 
Delft, The Netherlands 
{f.heidari, f.m.brazier}@tudelft.nl 
Pericles Loucopoulos  
Department of Informatics and Telematics 
Harokopio University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
p.loucopoulos@hua.gr
 
 
Abstract—The field of Requirements Engineering (RE) is 
arguably one of the most crucial areas in the development of 
systems in support of organisational structures and processes. 
Eliciting, negotiating, analysing and validating are RE 
processes that rely on appropriate abstraction mechanisms. 
This paper focuses on a specific modelling approach, that of 
Business Process Modelling (BPM), and the use of a specific 
ontology for modelling and evaluating quality aspects of 
business processes. This business process ontology provides an 
explicit specification of the shared conceptualization and 
understanding of enterprises between IT and none-IT experts. 
Specification and measurement of requirements based on an 
ontology fosters communication between experts. This paper 
proposes 
an 
approach 
that 
drives 
specification 
and 
measurement of quality requirements. Application of the 
proposed approach is illustrated for a simplified version of a 
business process. 
Keywords- 
Ontology; 
Quality 
requirements; 
Quality 
sepcification; Quality measurement; Business process; Business 
process modelling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Arguably the most significant issue in systems 
development is getting requirements right and transforming 
them without information loss into a semantically rich 
specification, from which various types of software artefacts 
can be derived [1]. An important challenge for requirements 
engineering (RE) is to facilitate communication between 
non-IT and IT specialists [2]. An ontology designed for this 
purpose with well-defined semantics at the appropriate level 
of abstraction is the challenge this paper addresses. 
Currently, enterprises are described in terms of business 
processes 
models. 
Linking 
business 
process 
quality 
requirements with business process concepts enables IT and 
business experts to define their requirements collaboratively 
at a common abstract level during the earliest stage of design 
and development of information systems.  
The motivation for the work this paper presents is to use 
ontological constructs to facilitate specification of quality 
requirements based on business process concepts; in other 
words, ontology driven quality requirement specification. In 
addition to quality requirements, annotation of business 
process models with related information artefacts using 
domains’ vocabulary leverages different concepts (goals, 
rules, patterns, motivation, etc.)  into the scope of business 
process ontology [3, 4]. Each business process modelling 
(BPM) language provides an ontology consisting of a set of 
concepts. A systematic realization and representation of 
concepts and relationships between the concepts of different 
BPM languages in a business process ontology [5], is 
essential. The formalism of a generic purpose modelling 
language (GPML) e.g. UML class diagram provides the 
ontology description. The approach is exemplified using an 
example from a real-life business process in an industrial 
case.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a 
brief summary of related works. Section 3 elaborates on 
ontologies, in particular business process ontologies and their 
application and introduces an ontology driven approach to 
specification and evaluation of quality of business processes. 
Section 4 illustrates the proposed approach for a business 
process. The paper concludes in Section 5 with a number of 
observations, reflections and suggestions for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Quality has been the topic of research in several closely 
related disciplines as requirement engineering, software 
engineering, workflow analysis, industrial engineering, 
system dynamics and discrete event simulation. Different 
levels of granularity can be considered for realizing and 
measuring quality in an enterprise involving many 
organizational layers from the very general i.e. organization-
wide quality to concepts of business processes. Synoptically, 
investigation of the most relevant approaches in following 
aspects will be considered in this section: (A) the way they 
are being practiced (methodology e.g. systematic or ad hoc), 
(B) representation of business process and quality 
requirement (modelling and language dependency), and (C) 
generalizability of the approach (application) is conducted in 
this section. 
A. Methodlogy  
While “focus of work”, “required inputs”, “expected 
outputs” and a “set of phases” are prescribed with details in 
an approach, the approach is considered to be systematic in 
terms of methodology (e.g. [14], [6], [7], [8], [9]);  otherwise 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-266-0
MOPAS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

the approach is considered to be ad-hoc in terms of 
methodology (e.g.  [10], [7], [11]) 
 Wolter et al. [12] deploy a method to assign elements of 
their security model to a process model. Capturing quality 
dimensions of a business process in form of a framework are 
considered by Heravizadeh et al. [13]. A framework for 
evaluation of business process quality is introduced by 
Kedad et al. [14]. A requirements engineering framework 
with the aim of allowing active stakeholder participation is 
introduced by Donzelli et al. [8]. Pourshahid et al. [15] 
introduce a framework to measure and align processes and 
goals subjectively. In their work, key performance indicators 
(KPI) are added to user requirement notation (URN) together 
with explicit goals for each business process. A scenario-
based methodology and a toolset for BPM and analysis is 
introduced by Glykas[9]. The approach defines and measures 
KPIs in qualitative as well as quantitative manner.  
The approach by Firesmith [7] proposes a checklist of 
questions over which defects in software-intensive system 
architectures would be realized. Measurement is included in 
the structure although the process toward the measurement is 
not discussed.  Lohrmann et al[11] provide a definition for 
business process quality and introduce business process 
quality model.  There are no details provided on how 
measurement should be conducted  
B. Modelling and language dependency   
Modelling is concerned with the way an approach 
represents a business process. The consideration here is the 
use of formal or semi formal languages in the representation 
(e.g. [8],[13],[14], [6],[16].) Language dependency examines 
this fact if an approach’s focus is on a specific language. 
Works by Kedad et al [14] and Said-Cherfi et al. [17] are not 
tied to a specific modelling language.  
Heinrich et al [18] use the quality characteristics and 
attributes of processes. They distinguish on the basis of the 
ISO/IEC standard for software quality [10] to enhance 
BPMN. Saeedi et al [14] propose a set of quality requirement 
factors for BPMN concepts. Role Activity Diagram notation 
is considered for representation of business processes by 
Aburub et al. [16]. The strategic rationale for the choice of 
business processes to be specified in BPMN models and 
described in terminology familiar to business people are 
considered by Decreus et al. [6].  
C. Application  
The application aspect is concerned with the target of the 
approach. Generic approaches can be applied to all or most 
situations (e.g. [19], [14]). Specific approaches (e.g. [12], 
[16]) are dedicated to a particular class or application or 
business sector.  
Wolter et al. [12] focused on security requirements. 
Aburub et al. [16]  introduced an approach in remodelling 
business processes for identification and inclusion of Non-
Functional Requirements (NFRs) for a specific case. With 
the focus on quality of business process model the approach 
by Said-Cherfi et al. [17]considers ontologies in a number of 
specific domains.  
There are variations in methodology, in the specification 
approaches used and the target application of these quality 
approaches. The desire is to provide an approach, which is 
systematic and well-structured, generic enough and not tied 
to a specific domain or situation, and while considering 
formal expression of business processes is not tied to a 
particular BPM language. The majority of approaches 
discussed above are based on the assumption that a formal 
language (e.g. BPMN) is used to describe business 
processes, the majority of which use one representation 
scheme. A few are language independent. Some provide 
systematic way of working and some are generic enough to 
be applied in generic situations. The approach introduced in 
this paper in some ways complements and in others extends 
existing approaches by emphasizing a well-structured way 
for specification and objectively measurement of business 
processes, which is generic in application and language 
independent. 
III. 
THE ONTOLOGY DRIVEN  APPROACH 
During requirement analysis, an important consideration 
is to understand current business processes. In this effort, 
business process modelling plays a key role. Therefore, 
Fig 1. 
Conceptual Framework for Business Process Concept Quality 
Specification and Measurement (in ORM) 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-266-0
MOPAS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

having an ontology for quality aspects of any business 
processes, using a corresponding model, would go a long 
way to unifying the field and to facilitating a more 
systematic way of treating quality.  
Synchronization between requirements and business 
process models requires a common basis. This common basis 
can be presented in an ontology confined to requirement 
aspects. The ontology construction is to provide an explicit 
representation of knowledge, that can be understood by both 
computers and people [20].  
A business process ontology represents an abstraction of 
business process concepts, that is universal and not dedicated 
to one single BPM language. The business process ontology 
can be designed for business analysts to describe functional 
as well as non-functional requirements in a single place [21].  
Another applications of a business process ontology 
confined to quality aspects is that stakeholders to define their 
desired requirements in a higher level (meta-model) rather 
than in specific business process specifications. A business 
process ontology, enriched with the desired requirements, 
can act as a reference model for future enriched business 
processes generations. 
This ontology can also act as a repository. This 
repository can have several applications: (a) to represent 
models created via deploying any of the constructing 
modelling languages as its instantiations, (b) to be a 
reference between multiple business process modelling 
approaches of the same project, (c) to provide the basis for a 
repository of emerging business process models irrespective 
of the language used, (d) to be extended to a knowledge 
base, (e) to facilitate direct implementation, and (f) to be a 
reference model fostering incorporation  of  stakeholders’ 
requirements.  
This paper proposes an ontological approach to 
specification and measurement of quality requirement for 
business 
process 
concepts. 
This 
approach 
includes 
quantitative 
metrics 
for 
business 
processes 
in 
its 
specifications. The conceptual framework of the approach is 
shown in Fig. 1. The framework is presented in Object Role 
Modelling (ORM) notation [22].  
The “conceptual framework” encompasses a set of 
concepts that link requirements to specific business process 
concepts, their factors and corresponding metrics. Fig.1 
depicts that “Requirements”, are associated with “Business 
Processes Concept”. A “Requirement” is expressed by a 
“Stakeholder” and is operationally queried by a set of 
“Questions”. Operationally querying “Requirements” are 
linked to components that participate in measuring 
achievement of the “Requirement”. “Question” essentially is 
a query on the 3-nary relationship of “Business Process 
Concept”,   “Factor” and “Metric" as depicted in the 
objectified relationship “Result” related to “Question”. 
A “Business Process” consists of a set of “Business 
Process Concepts”. A business process “Factor” is an 
inherent property of a “Business Process” or a “Business 
Process Concept” that can be measured quantitatively by 
“Metrics”.  
The gap between “Objective” and the observed current 
performance through “Question” is shown in the relationship 
of “Target” and “Result”. Several “Metrics” can be 
associated to a single “Factor” as there might be several 
ways for evaluating it. Different stakeholders can indicate 
different metrics based on their needs [14]. 
The 
contribution 
of 
this 
framework 
is 
in 
the 
establishment of a set of conceptual structures that are 
independent of descriptive languages, or applications. 
Applicability of the framework is illustrated for an example 
of business process in the next section.  
In addition to specification and measurement of quality 
requirements for individual business process concepts, there 
is a need for measuring requirement fulfilment by a business 
process as a whole or a part of business process. A business 
process ontology can foster objective evaluation of the 
degree to which a quality requirement for a business process 
is achieved based on achievements of its individual concepts.  
To evaluate business processes on the basis of the result 
of its individual constructs, analysts need to break down 
process models into more manageable and easily measurable 
parts. Realization of reusable patterns makes this task more 
straightforward [23]. A business process ontology defines 
business process concepts and the relationships among them. 
In this paper, the five generic patterns of “ sequential”, “ 
exclusive”, 
“parallel”, 
“loop” 
and 
“inclusive” 
are 
implemented [5]. Higher degree business process are 
described as a combination of these patterns [23]. Semantics 
of individual patterns determine the computation rules and 
formulas for evaluation of the pattern based on its 
constructing concepts.  
Due to space limitation, discussion on the method, rules 
and mathematical formulas for measurement (computation) 
and estimation (prediction) of quality of business processes 
based on its constructing concepts are not included in this 
paper. This application of the ontology driven approach is 
illustrated via an example in the next section. 
IV. 
DEMONSTRATION OF APPLICABABILITY 
The applicability of the approach this paper proposes is 
demonstrated for a simplified version of business process, 
namely “Accepting clients” from an anonymous enterprise. 
The business process is known to this enterprise.  
A. Evaluation of quality of individual concepts  
First, in a more visual way, the instantiation of the 
framework is provided (Fig. 2). Fig. 2 illustrates not only the 
business process in terms of a model but also provides 
examples of the related elements for quality specification and 
measurement considering the business process concepts. 
Later, the conceptual framework is instantiated (Fig. 3) to 
demonstrate its application relates to the example in form of 
an ORM model. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-266-0
MOPAS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

 As can be observed from Fig. 2, there are different 
departments/roles involved in the process. The process 
trigger is arrival of a request to accept a client. To accept the 
client, a set of activities is performed in a predefined order. 
Some related quality factors are shown in Fig. 2 namely, 
time to recover, time to failure, maturity, authority, 
timeliness, cycle time, and through put. Quality factors are 
assigned to the business process concepts via dashed lines as 
shown. For the mater of distinction, quality factors are 
shown in a separate box below the example. The “business 
process” is presented via applying BPMN as a “Business 
process modelling language” supported by a business 
process ontology e.g. [5].  
Fig. 2 shows that the quality requirement of “Capturing 
client data should be executed more than 95% of the time 
without failure”, is associated with the business processes 
concept of “Capturing client data”; this concept belongs to 
business process of “Accepting client”. The Requirement is 
expressed by a the “Company manager” as the stakeholder 
and is operationally queried by questions of “What is the 
percentage of the time that execution is without failure out of 
the whole time of execution?” The quality factor “maturity” 
can be measured by a quality metric expressed as following:  
M(a)=[TF(a)/TF(a)+TR(a)]*100                   (1) 
Where “a” demotes the “Activity”, TF(a) is the “Time to 
Failure” and TR(a) is the “Time to Recover”.  
Applicability of the proposed approach is also 
demonstrated via instantiation of the conceptual framework 
(Fig. 3) with regards to the example. The instantiation is 
focused on quality requirement of “ capturing client data 
should be executed more than 95% of the time without 
failure”.  Instances are introduced as “roles” in “fact tables”. 
Information in the fact tables is inline with the example 
described earlier and provided in Fig 2. 
B. Evaluation of quality of a part of busienss process  
Formula (1) is for calculation of the maturity of a single 
activity as an individual concept of a business process. 
Besides single concepts, there is a need for computational 
formulas enabling one to evaluate quality of a business  
Measurement of maturity of a part of business process (Fig. 
          Fig 2.          Accepting Client Business Process and Examples of Quality Factor, Requirement, Question and Metric 
Fig 3.    Conceputal Framework Instantiation  for Accepting Client 
Process (Capturing Client Data Should Be Executed More than 95% of 
the Time Without Failure 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-266-0
MOPAS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

2) executed by “executing team” is considered in this 
example.  The lane under investigation encompasses a flow 
of activities linked together either with sequential or 
exclusive relationship; in sequential and exclusive patterns 
composed of smaller parts.  
Inspired by an algorithm offered for workflow reduction 
in [24], as can be observed in Table 1, the recognized 
patterns can be reduced to more manageable and easily 
measurable concepts. Different formulae are introduced for 
the different patterns. Reduction is performed in different 
stages. The end result is one single activity (Fig.4). Either 
estimation or measurement of the activity flow is possible. 
Based on the reduction patterns and the formulae introduced 
in Table 1, four steps toward complete reduction are 
involved in the calculation of maturity of the flow of activity 
(Fig. 4). For the ease of communication, the name of each 
activity is replaced simply with just a capital letter. Each 
phase involves one reduction. The result of reduction of each 
set of two activities is presented as another activity. The 
resulted activity name is indicated as the combination of the 
labels of the constructing activities; for example in stage 1, 
reduction of sequential patter of “AàB” is a single activity 
namely “AB” and so on.  
For the purpose of simplification, the same value is 
specified for the maturity measurement and estimation of the 
value of an activity before reduction. In the examples 
provided, measurements, assume the client is to be accepted. 
Probability of activity “C” is 75% and consequently 
probability of activity “D” is 25%.  
Table 2 provides the formulae for calculation of the 
activities resulting from each of the stages of reduction for 
two cases of measurement and estimation. The calculation is 
based on the formula introduced in Table 1.  
As demonstrated, calculation of requirement fulfilment of 
a business process can be based on results of constructing 
concepts. This provides an objective and valid result for the 
business process. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper assumes that the quality of a business process 
can be defined by the degree to which pre-defined properties 
of pre-defined concepts identified within a business process 
are linked to stakeholder requirements. The methodological 
stance of the approach proposed in this paper is systematic. 
Stakeholder goals are transformed to objectified components, 
a quality objective and a quality question, that are directly 
linked to quality factors for a pre-defined business process 
concept. The approach relies on formal expressions of 
business processes in business process models. At the same 
time, it is independent of any language. The utility of 
approach is generic, i.e. applicable to any application and 
within any domain.  
The outcomes of this research are beneficial to the areas 
of business and management, requirement engineering, 
software engineering, business process modelling and 
service-oriented architectures. In the areas of requirement 
engineering and software engineering, these results make it 
possible for practitioners to consider quality requirements at 
the earliest stage.  
This paper establishes a strong framework upon which 
different methodological and technological developments 
may emerge such as an enhancement of existing business 
process modelling tools with a simulation component, the 
development of a workbench for analysing measured 
qualities and the development of further cases on an 
industrial basis [25]. Future research will focus on  
extensions and developments both in theoretical and 
practical perspectives. Exploring possibilities to enhance 
TABLE I. 
REDUCTION FORMULAE 
TABLE II. 
CALCULATION REULSTS 
Fig 4.      Business Process Reduction Stage 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-266-0
MOPAS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

existing industrial business process-modelling tools with 
quality evaluation extensions is currently subject of research. 
Also, strategic modelling approaches such as system 
dynamics are to be coupled to business process modelling 
using parametric definitions according to quality criteria and 
experimenting 
with 
‘what-if 
scenarios’ 
thus 
giving 
stakeholders an early view of the impact of their choices, on 
the behaviour of a business process [26]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Loucopoulos and V. Karakostas, System Requirements 
Engineering, 1st ed. London: McGraw Hill, 1995. 
[2] 
P. Loucopoulos, "The F3 (From Fuzzy to Formal) View 
on Requirements Engineering," Ingénierie des Systèmes 
d'Information, vol. 2, pp. 639-655, 1995. 
[3] 
P. Loucopoulos and E. Katsouli, "Modelling Business 
Rules in an Office Environment," SIGOIS Bulletin, vol. 
13, pp. 28-37, 1992. 
[4] 
E. Kavakli and P. Loucopoulos, "Experiences with Goal-
Oriented Modelling of Organisational Change," IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics - Part C, 
vol. 36, pp. 221-235, 2006. 
[5] 
F. Heidari, P. Loucopoulos, and Z. Kedad, "A quality-
oriented business process meta-model," in International 
Workshop on Enterprise & Organizational Modelling 
and Simulation,CAiSE/EOMAS 2011, Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, 2011, pp. 85-99. 
[6] 
K. 
Decreus 
and 
G. 
Poels, 
"A 
Goal-Oriented 
Requirements 
Engineering 
Method 
for 
Business 
Processes," in CAiSE Forum, Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, 
pp. 29-43. 
[7] 
D. Firesmith, "Quality Requirements Checklist," Journal 
of Object Technology vol. 4, pp. 1-8, 2005. 
[8] 
P. Donzelli and P. Bresciani, "Improving Requirements 
Engineering by Quality Modelling – A Quality-Based 
Requirements Engineering Framework," Journal of 
Research and Practice in Information Technology, vol. 
36, pp. 277-294, 2004. 
[9] 
M. M. Glykas, "Effort Based Performance Measurement 
in Business Process Management," Knowledge and 
Process Management, vol. 18, pp. 10-33, 2011. 
[10] 
ISO/IEC, "Software engineering - Product quality - Part 
4: Quality in use metrics," ISO, Switzerland2004. 
[11] 
M. Lohrmann and M. Reichert, " Understanding 
Business 
Process 
Quality," 
in 
Business Process 
Management ,Theory and Applications. Studies in 
Computational Intelligence (444), 41-73, ed Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer 2013, pp. 41-73. 
[12] 
C. Wolter, M. Menzel, A. Schaad, P. Miseldine, and C. 
Meinel, 
"Model-driven 
business 
process 
security 
requirement 
specification," 
Journal 
of 
Systems 
Architecture, vol. 55, pp. 211-223, 2009. 
[13] 
M. Heravizadeh, J. Mendling, and M. Rosemann, 
"Dimensions of Business Processes Quality (QoBP)," in 
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Business 
Process 
Management 
Workshops 
(BPM 
Workshops), Milan, 2008, pp. 80-91. 
[14] 
Z. Kedad and P. Loucopoulos, "Considering quality 
factors for business processes during requirement 
engineering," in Fifth International Conference on 
Research Challenges in Information Science (RCIS), 
2011, pp. 1-9. 
[15] 
A. Pourshahid, D. Amyot, L. Peyton, S. Ghanavati, P. 
Chen, M. Weiss, et al., "Towared an integrated user 
requirement notation framework and tool for business 
process management," in 3rd Int. MCeTech Conf. on 
eTechnologies, Montréal, Canada, 2008, pp. 3-15. 
[16] 
F. Aburub, M. Odeh, and I. Beeson, "Modelling non-
functional 
requirements 
of 
business 
processes," 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 49, pp. 1162-
1171, 2007. 
[17] 
S. Said-Cherfi, S. Ayad, and I. Comyn-Wattiau, 
"Aligning Business Process Models and Domain 
Knowledge: A Meta-modeling Approach " in Advances 
in Databases and Information Systems, AISC 186, T. 
Morzy, T. Härder, and R. Wrembel, Eds., ed Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2013, pp. 45-56. 
[18] 
R. Heinrich, A. Kappe, and B. Paech, "Modeling Quality 
Information 
within 
Business 
Process 
Models," 
Proceedings of the SQMB'11 Workshop, TUM-I1104, pp. 
4-13, Karlsruhe (Germany), February, pp.4-13, 2011. 
[19] 
P. Loucopoulos and F. Heidari, "Evaluating Quality of 
Business Processes," in Modelling and Quality in 
Requirements Engineering, Essays Dedicated to Martin 
Glinz on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday, N. Seyff and 
A. Koziolek, Eds., ed Munster: MV-Wissenschaft, 2012, 
pp. 61-73. 
[20] 
S. Z. Fan, L. ; Sun, Z. , "An ontology based method for 
business 
process 
integration 
" 
in 
International 
Conference on Interoperability for Enterprise Software 
and Applications, China, 2009, pp. 135-139. 
[21] 
D. E. Jenz, "Business processs ontologies: speeding up 
business process implementation," Jenz & Partner 
GmbH2003. 
[22] 
T. A. Halpin, "Object-Role Modeling: an overview. 
Online at http://www.orm.net," 1997. 
[23] 
T. Gschwind, J. Koehler, and J. Wong, "Applying 
Patterns during Business Process Modeling," in BPM 
2008. LNCS. vol. 5240, M. Dumas, M. Reichert, and M. 
C. Shan, Eds., ed Heidelberg: Springer,, 2008, pp. 4–19. 
[24] 
J. Cardoso, J. Miller, and J. Arnold, "Modeling quality of 
service for workflows and web service processes,"  vol. 
#02-200, ed: LSDIS Lab, Computer Science, University 
of Georgia, 2002. 
[25] 
D. Karagiannis, "A Business process Based Modelling 
Extension for Regulatory Compliance," presented at the 
Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik 2008, 2008. 
[26] 
P. Loucopoulos, K. Zografos , and N. Prekas, 
"Requirements Elicitation for the Design of Venue 
Operations for the Athens2004 Olympic Games," in 
Proceedings of 11th IEEE International Requirements 
Engineering Conference, Monterey Bay, California, 
U.S.A, 2003, pp. 223-232. 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-266-0
MOPAS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Models and Ontology-based Design of Protocols, Architectures and Services

