106
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
User Preferences and Segments in App Store Marketing: 
A Conjoint-based Approach 
 Stephan Böhm, Stefan Schreiber, and Wendy Colleen Farrell 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Media Management, 
Center of Advanced E-Business Studies (CAEBUS), 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
e-mail: {stephan.boehm, wendycolleen.farrell}@hs-rm.de, stefan.schreiber87@web.de 
 
 
Abstract—Today, little is known about how the various elements 
involved in the presentation of mobile applications (apps) in app 
stores influence the download or purchase decision of potential 
users. Current publications primarily focus on the possibilities 
and technical tools of app store marketing based on best prac-
tices or experience. However, research on customer preferences 
with regards to the presentation of apps in app stores as well as 
the impact of single app store elements on purchase or usage 
decisions has yet to be addressed. In this context, the key re-
search objectives of this paper are to not only analyze the impact 
of individual app store elements on customer choice but also see 
if the customers can be segmented into homogenous groups ac-
cording to their preferences. Accordingly, this study will iden-
tify the relative importance of individual app store elements, 
from both a general or mass market perspective as well as a user 
segmentation perspective, and derive recommendations on how 
to successfully present mobile applications in app stores. With 
this objective in mind, a conjoint analysis of a fictitious mobile 
messaging app in the Apple App Store was carried out for the 
purpose of identifying the relative importance of app store ele-
ments in the mass market. It was followed by a Latent Class 
Analysis, which looked at how those preferences differed among 
different market segments. 
Keywords-Mobile App Marketing; App Store Elements; App 
Marketing; Consumer Preference; Conjoint Analysis; Market 
Segmentation; Latent Class Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As discussed in [1], the number of mobile applications is 
steadily growing. More than a million applications are now 
available for Android and iOS in the respective app stores 
(i.e., GooglePlay and Apple App Store). Accordingly, the 
competition among individual app providers is constantly ris-
ing [2]. It has long since ceased to be enough to simply turn a 
good idea into an app. More and more, the question has be-
come, which factors trigger the user’s purchase decision. Nu-
merous managers in the mobile phone business are now forced 
to deal with this situation and to define mobile app marketing 
strategies on how to achieve and defend a competitive position 
for their apps in the market. 
Marketing plans and strategies are usually created accord-
ing to the concept of the marketing mix, which also plays a 
key role in mobile app marketing [3]. The marketing mix 
should be an optimal combination of marketing tools from the 
areas of Product (product policy), Price (pricing policy), Pro-
motion (communication policy) and Place (distribution pol-
icy) [4]. These “4Ps” are also the components of the app store 
marketing toolkit. Product policy starts at a very early stage 
and deals with the app idea and with the subsequent design of 
the application [3]. 
With regards to pricing policy both before and after the 
launch of the mobile app, a wide range of decisions have to be 
made. These decisions range from adequate price level to dy-
namic pricing strategies designed to systematically alter prices 
over time in order to react to changes in actual demand and 
current market conditions. However, pricing policy is limited 
by the possibilities and restrictions of the app stores. For ex-
ample, the app stores may specify certain price points to be 
selected or not permit providers to offer trial versions for a 
limited period of time [5]. 
Distribution policy generally deals with all the marketing 
decisions and activities concerned with the delivery channel 
from the producer to the customer and therefore from produc-
tion to consumption [4]. As early on as the development stage 
of an app, the distribution channel is determined, or at least 
influenced, by the technical implementation. So-called web 
applications, for example, can simply be made available for 
download per link or published via any webserver. The distri-
bution channel for so-called hybrid und native applications, 
on the other hand, is the app store. Before use, they must be 
completely downloaded and installed on the mobile device. 
While native applications are created using the platform-spe-
cific development environment and programming language, 
web technology is usually used with hybrid applications. Ad-
ditional development frameworks and tools, however, allow 
for further processing and compilation of this source code in 
a way that enables its distribution via an app store in a similar 
way to a native application. 
Within the communication policy, we have to differentiate 
between activities inside and outside the app store. This in-
cludes advertising and other activities, which provide and dis-
seminate information aimed at familiarizing the potential cus-
tomer with the app and its features. App stores are usually the 
only official channel for users to buy and install new apps on 
their mobile devices. Thus, the communication policy within 
the app stores and the corresponding design of the various app 
store elements are of particular importance [6]. Here, it must 
be noted that each store has its own specific regulations and 
guidelines on how to publish an app for distribution as well as 
which elements can be used to present the app in the store. 

107
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, although the regulations vary in detail, the core con-
cepts and the core elements for the app presentation are quite 
similar. 
All the aforementioned app marketing activities need to be 
aligned with the intended target group of the app. Hamka et 
al. argue that the mobile market is evolving at an ever increas-
ing rate as is the behavior of mobile users. Accordingly, they 
suggest that it is an imperative to segment the market “i.e. di-
vide the addressable market into segments that have a con-
sistent demographic, psychographic or usage pattern” [7]. 
However, the options for segment specific app marketing are 
limited. Currently, when a mobile app is launched the app el-
ements can be adapted to local markets by selecting national 
stores and providing market specific app elements (e.g., app 
descriptions in different languages). In addition, the app can 
be placed in categories that represent the general usage con-
cept of the app. These categories range from educational to 
games to tools. That being said, while these groupings help 
the potential user search of a specific type of application, they 
do little to actively market to specific groups of potential us-
ers. This might be sufficient for standard applications target-
ing relatively homogenous user preferences found in mass 
markets. In contrast, user groups with a differing preference 
structure looking for non-standard apps would argue for a 
more segment specific approach in app store marketing. 
In this context, the objective of this study is to first develop 
appropriate recommendations for the setup and design of im-
portant app store elements, to empirically validate common 
app store marketing best practices and to determine potential 
user groupings based upon preferences. For this reason, a con-
joint approach was chosen to analyze user preferences and 
characterize the relative importance of different app store ele-
ments. Then, using the data collected as part of the choice 
based conjoint analysis, a latent class analysis was conducted. 
This analysis was used to discover user groups with similar 
preference structures according to the presentation of app 
store elements. 
With this in mind, Section II presents a short discussion on 
related work and current best practices in app store marketing. 
Section III describes important elements of the presentation 
for mobile applications in app stores. The explanations refer 
to the example of the Apple App Store; can, however, to a 
great extent be generalized to include other app stores. In Sec-
tion IV, the methodological approach of this study is then de-
scribed. Significant results of the conjoint analysis and the 
subsequent latent class analysis are presented in Section V, 
before we finally discuss the central findings and recommen-
dations for practical implementation in the concluding sec-
tion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Mobile app marketing is still a relatively new marketing 
topic. It was not until the first app stores emerged that the ne-
cessity for a market-oriented way of thinking when develop-
ing and marketing mobile apps started to become apparent [5]. 
In principle, we can say that many well established concepts 
from general marketing practices are transferable to mobile 
app marketing. Consequently mobile app store marketing 
adopts standard marketing principles and tools and adapts 
them to the needs of the app specific market. 
Current literature on mobile app marketing predominantly 
focuses on guidelines and recommendations for the successful 
monetization of app concepts. For example, the topic of app 
marketing can be found as part of the technical literature on 
app development in which the monetization of the app in the 
app store is seen as being the final step in the app development 
process [5][8][9]. Additionally, more specialized publications 
focusing on mobile app marketing are available as well 
[2][6][10][11]. However, most of these publications comprise 
structured guidelines and extended checklists on how to suc-
cessfully monetize mobile applications based on the authors’ 
experience or the discussion of successful case studies. In con-
trast, scientific research on app stores and app (store) market-
ing is rather rare today. Only few publications have so far dealt 
with individual aspects of app stores, mainly focusing on app 
ranking mechanisms and fraud [12][13][14], pricing strategies 
[15] or recommendations and user reviews [16][17]. 
Against this background, a significant research gap can be 
observed with regard to the availability of empirically based 
recommendations on the market-oriented configuration of app 
store elements. The suggested research approach, a study 
measuring customer preferences and segments based on a 
conjoint analysis, has been applied to software selection pro-
cesses and even to mobile application development [18][19], 
but is rather new to the specific area of app store marketing. 
Accordingly, this study will attempt to answer the following 
two research questions: 
 What are the most important app store elements from a 
user perspective and how should those elements be pre-
sented (based on the example of a messenger app)? 
 Do users of mobile messenger apps (in Germany) fall 
into specific segments based on their preference struc-
tures for the presentation of app store elements?  
Understanding the answer to these questions can help devel-
opers and marketers to more effectively reach the intended 
end user and communicate the product benefits.  
III. 
APP STORE ELEMENTS 
As stated above, the design of the various app store ele-
ments is one of the key instruments of mobile app marketing. 
Potential users search for suitable mobile applications in the 
app store and obtain information about their features and prop-
erties [3]. In order to acquire a common frame of reference for 
this study, we focused solely on the Apple App Store. There 
are various app stores for different mobile operating systems, 
which are characterized by different appearances, but which 
are fundamentally similar in terms of the possibilities to pre-
sent mobile applications. 
A fictitious messenger app was chosen to concentrate on 
the importance of the app store elements and prevent partici-
pants from being biased by earlier purchase decisions, 
knowledge of real-world app presentations or brand prefer-
ences. The Apple App Store can be accessed via several mo-
bile devices. It is possible, for example, to open the app store 

108
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
via smartphones (iPhone) and tablets (iPad) to download ap-
plications. However, the number of elements is the same for 
all devices and always identical in each case.  
In total, based on an analysis of the Apple App Store and 
best practices derived from the mobile app marketing litera-
ture in Section II, eight key app store elements were examined 
for this study, which will be described in more detail below. 
Moreover, the study also deals with variations of each of the 
attributes, which were compared and examined with regard to 
their influence on customer preference in terms of a purchase 
or usage decision. The fictitious messenger app was presented 
to the participants of the study based on the attributes and its 
selected attribute levels only. There was no prototype or trial-
version in an app store available in this study. 
A. App Icon 
The app icon is seen as being one of the most crucial ele-
ments, as it is generally the first visual element that a potential 
user sees. The purely aesthetic design of the app icon can al-
ready have an effect on the development of user preference, 
for example in the way that the icon makes an impression and 
is taken as an indication of the quality of the app. The app icon 
and the app name are central design elements in many app 
stores, not least because they would be the first items that ap-
pear on the search results page [5][20]. In Figure 1, three icon 
versions are shown that were developed for a fictitious mes-
senger app in the study.  
 
 
 
 
(1) Modern/Specific 
„High quality“ 
version  
(2) Balanced 
„Medium quality“ 
version 
(3) Abstract 
„Low quality“ 
version 
 
Figure 1.  App Icons Variations 
In the form of these icons, the intention is to refer to a par-
ticular messaging app, which is characterized by an especially 
high level of security. Best practice guidelines have been used 
to develop the design variations [21]. For example, the color-
ing and the legibility were varied in order to portray the spec-
trum from a representative “high” to a “low” quality design. 
The same is also true for the clarity of the graphic elements to 
visualize the messaging and security features of the app. 
While icon (1) has easy to understand graphical representa-
tions of messaging, icon (3) uses a vague illustration and faint 
writing. The consideration of the icon design as an attribute 
will allow an empirical verification of the aforementioned ex-
isting best practices in the study. 
B. App Name 
As mentioned above, the name of the app is also a central 
element with respect to the presentation of mobile applications 
in app stores, as it is shown in the app store’s search and rank-
ing lists and may therefore influence the user’s purchase deci-
sion [5]. The app name should fulfil certain criteria in order to 
be easy to remember on the one hand, and easy to find via the 
app store’s search algorithms on the other. Ideally, solutions 
to internationalize the name should also be available [3]. For 
the test app in the conjoint analysis, the same name was used 
for all three, but a claim was added for extra clarification. The 
claim varied from a simple allusion to security to a technical 
description, which is difficult for the average user to under-
stand (high to low comprehensibility): 
 
„high“: SafeTalk – Your Safe Messenger 
 
„medium“: SafeTalk Secure Messenger 
 
„low“: Safetalk with AES-256 Encryption 
C. Reviews („stars“) and the number of reviews 
The reviews in the app store are assigned according to the 
star principle (1–5 stars) and are – together with the number 
of total reviews – an initial indicator for the user of how satis-
fied other users were with the app after downloading. A high 
number of stars is perceived as being a positive purchase rec-
ommendation [6]. App providers should note that star reviews 
are not immediately displayed for new apps but are only pub-
lished once a meaningful average value can be calculated. In 
the Apple App Store, this means a minimum of 5 reviews. Ap-
ple also differentiates according to countries. At present, it is 
not possible for the user who is giving the review to interact 
directly with the app provider [3]. The following analysis in-
cludes the review alternatives none, three and five stars.  
D. Price 
Pricing is another element that is immediately displayed 
on the search result page and in all the app store’s lists (for 
example in the „top charts“) and can therefore influence the 
user’s purchase decision during the app selection process. For 
the analysis in this study, a cost-free version and three price 
points were chosen, which represented a low, a medium and a 
high price segment, respectively, in comparison to actual mo-
bile messaging applications (0.89 EUR, 1.79 EUR, 2.69 
EUR).  
E. Screenshots 
Screenshots are usually only visible in the detail view of 
an app, with the exception of the result page of the search fea-
ture. Here, the first of a total of five possible screenshots is 
already shown in the preview. Screenshots have several tasks: 
On the one hand, they should display the features of the mo-
bile application and, on the other, communicate the app’s de-
sign [3]. Screenshots offer crucial support to the descriptive 
text as many users do not read this or only read it in part and 
therefore rely heavily on the screenshots for their purchase de-
cision [20]. App store users draw conclusions from the screen-
shots as to the aesthetics and user friendliness of the mobile 
application as a whole [6]. In this study, three different quali-
ties of screenshots were created (high, medium, low), which 
vary with regard to recognisability and clarity of the func-
tional elements of the mobile messaging app. The functional 
“low quality” screenshot, for example, displays purely func-

109
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tional content, whereas the notated “high quality” one high-
lights important core functions with accompanying explana-
tions. 
F. App Description 
The descriptive text is the only element presented here, 
which appears solely in the detail view of an app once it is 
opened. The Apple App Store allows a descriptive text with a 
maximal number of 4000 characters [6]. The descriptive text 
is important for two reasons: Firstly, potential customers are 
presented with a list of sales arguments and secondly, the 
search algorithms of most app stores use the text to carry out 
corresponding search requests. As the optimization for search 
purposes was not the main focus here, the quality of the de-
scriptive text was varied mostly in terms of comprehensibility. 
Here again, three levels of quality were created (high, me-
dium, low). Whereas the user oriented “high quality” descrip-
tion used simple language and comprehensible wording, the 
complex “low quality” descriptive text was characterized by 
technical terms, which the average user would find difficult to 
understand. In addition, the text was automatically translated 
as is often the case in app stores, which reduced the compre-
hensibility yet further.  
G. Server Location (as an additional attribute) 
As a messenger with special focus on secure communica-
tion had been chosen as a fictional product for analysis, an 
additional attribute entitled “server location” was included in 
the study for evaluation. This is not an element of an app store 
in a narrow sense, but an important company related attribute 
of the app provider that can be emphasized within the app de-
scription. While the aforementioned attribute is used to meas-
ure how the quality of language influences user preferences, 
the server location is an example of how various app charac-
teristics, even if just mentioned in the description, could have 
an impact on customer choice. Due to current discussions 
about data security in Germany [22], heightened customer 
awareness was assumed to be a significant influencer on cus-
tomer preference. The goal of including this attribute was to 
test whether and to what extent such attributes contribute to 
the user’s purchase decision in comparison to the other mar-
keting-related app store elements. Server locations in the US, 
in Germany and an unknown server location were included in 
the study.  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
In identifying the most appropriate methodology to ana-
lyze the app store elements and provide potential user segmen-
tation, multiple methods were considered. Conjoint analysis 
was identified as the most appropriate method to analyze the 
user preferences for the various app store elements. Based 
upon that decision, Latent Class analysis was selected to ana-
lyze the potential segmentation of users based on their prefer-
ence structures. In the following, these methods and the rea-
soning for applying them in this study are discussed in detail.  
A. Conjoint Analysis 
The conjoint analysis is considered to be the standard 
method when investigating customer preferences and buying 
decisions. Traditional Conjoint Analysis (TCA) goes back to 
the year 1964 and was developed by the psychologist Luce 
and the statistician Tukey [23]. TCA, as well as all the subse-
quent versions of conjoint analysis, basically deals with the 
measurement of preferences for product attributes. Instead of 
asking the participants directly about the importance of attrib-
utes, conjoint analysis is based on the evaluation of product 
profiles. Each product profile consists of several attributes de-
scribing the product characteristics (e.g., brand, price, design, 
etc.). Different product profiles are derived by variation of at-
tribute levels (e.g., high, medium, and low price). An analysis 
is always carried out in such a way that each product profile 
or “stimulus” has to be examined and assessed from a holistic 
perspective or considered jointly) [24][25]. Instead of asking 
directly about the importance of a product attribute, conjoint 
analysis considers products as bundles of attributes, on which 
the customer decides and makes trade-off decisions. The ap-
proach is better aligned to real-world purchasing decisions and 
the part-worth utilities of the attributes can be decomposed by 
using statistical methods like regression analysis. 
For this reason, the conjoint method is well suited to ana-
lyze the impact of different app store elements on the customer 
choice decision. As a result, the relevance of the key app store 
elements, derived from the practical literature, can be empiri-
cally validated based on the example of fictitious messenger 
app. The analysis also provides the relative importance of the 
different app store elements for market success. From a more 
practical perspective the results could be used by an app pro-
vider to determine the optimal app store configuration for the 
analyzed secure messenger app or to conduct market simula-
tions based on different configurations. However, the study at 
hand focusses on the relative importance of the app store ele-
ments. The reference to a fictitious messenger app was re-
quired only because the conjoint analysis cannot be conducted 
based on a non-specific and generic “mobile app”. 
Since the mid-sixties, conjoint analysis research has 
evolved and produced several variants that can be divided into 
traditional and more recent approaches. Traditional Conjoint 
Analysis (TCA) can be applied by using trade-off or full-pro-
file approaches but its significance in research has been de-
clining since its first appearance due to limitations on the num-
ber of attributes as well as other methodological and statistical 
problems [26]. Of the more recent approaches, Choice Based 
Conjoint Analysis (CBC) and its variant, the computer-aided 
Adaptive Choice-Based Conjoint Analysis (ACBC) are taken 
into consideration for this study. 
CBC is the most popular conjoint analysis today. In CBC, 
unlike TCA, discrete selection decisions are analyzed instead 
of preference decisions [27]. During CBC, the subject is there-
fore not asked to make an order of precedence of all the prod-
uct profiles, but must select the preferred product profile 
within a set of alternatives or, if such an option is included, 
reject the choice by deciding on a “none option” [24][25] as 
shown in Figure 2. The ACBC is a computer-aided enhance-
ment of classic CBC and includes an adaptive approach. This 
means that every piece of information supplied by the test sub-
ject during the course of the interview gradually reveals the 
formation of his/her preference structure so that the questions 
posed to him/her can be successively adapted to the answers 

110
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[28]. In this context, the first consideration for the study was 
to determine, which kind of conjoint analysis should be ap-
plied. For best results, CBC is recommended if the product 
bundle in question has around six attributes or less, however, 
the method can be carried out with up to ten attributes. ACBC 
has proved to be especially suitable if 5 to 15 attributes are to 
be examined. However, it is characterized by a more complex 
and time-consuming questioning process [29]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a Choice Set in the Study 
The number of attributes in this study was eight. There-
fore, we had to determine the feasibility of using a CBC de-
spite the large number of attributes, or if the larger effort of 
drawing up an ACBC would be needed. The form of the at-
tributes provided an important aspect in making this decision. 
The amount of information that a test subject has to absorb 
and process in connection with every single attribute is espe-
cially important when calculating the reasonable maximum 
number of attributes. If the attributes being examined are 
graphic elements (e.g., app icon) or information, which can be 
quickly understood (e.g., price), then CBC could be a feasible 
option to carry out this type of analysis with more than six 
attributes [29].  
Due to these criteria and considering the impact of an 
ACBC on the interview duration, CBC appeared to be the 
more suitable choice for the planned empirical survey. As far 
as survey design was concerned, it was important to define the 
form of the stimuli, specifically the question of which combi-
nation of attribute variations would constitute the stimuli and 
how the stimuli should be presented to each test subject. Here, 
the Full Profile Method was used, in which each product pro-
file consists of all the attributes. As the number of attributes 
was already very high, we decided to present only two stimuli 
at a time so as not to overstrain the test subjects with regard to 
the information they had to evaluate. In order to create a se-
lection situation as close as possible to a real-life purchase sit-
uation, a “none option” was also included.  
Figure 2 shows a complete selection situation as an exam-
ple of how it also appeared in the final survey. In addition to 
the (randomly) created selection sets, so-called hold-out sets 
were integrated into the survey. These special selection sets 
serve to analyze the validity of the prognosis. They are not 
integrated into the benefit evaluation and are used to evaluate 
the quality of the prognosis of the preference rating. Two of 
these sets were defined and included. 
The conjoint analysis was carried out using the Sawtooth 
SSI Web 7 software package [30]. The main objective of the 
study was to measure the importance of the presented app 
store elements for mobile application purchase decisions. The 
study was conducted as an online survey. The website for the 
online survey was generated by the SSI Web 7 software, based 
on the aforementioned study design. The configuration of the 
CBC analysis and selected configuration parameters are sum-
marized in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
CONFIGURATION OF THE CBC ANALYSIS 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of Random Choice Tasks 
12 
Number of Fixed Choice Tasks 
2 
Number of Concepts per Choice 
Task 
2 (and an additional 
“none option”) 
Response Type 
Discrete Choice (single 
select radio button) 
Advanced Design Module Settings 
Traditional Full-Profile 
CBC Design 
Randomize Attribute Position 
within Concepts 
No Randomize of At-
tribute Order 
 
B. Latent Class Analysis 
The idea behind consumer market segmentation is to di-
vide the market into smaller homogenous groups for the pur-
pose of product placement and targeted marketing [31]. By 
doing so, it becomes possible to better adjust the product and 
marketing efforts to consumer preferences or user require-
ments. According to [32], two approaches to market segmen-
tation are a priori, aka common sense, or post hoc (i.e., data 
driven). A priori segmentation would define segments based 
on obvious group characteristics such as age, gender, geo-
graphical region and other general demographic information 
(e.g., men over 50 years living in a specific area). As a priori 
segmentation needs no analysis, it is much easier to select ho-
mogenous groups. While this approach might already be more 
effective than mass marketing, it relies on the discriminating 
power of directly observable group characteristics and ignores 
underlying variations of product needs and preferences of the 

111
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
individual user or consumer. Accordingly, post hoc segmen-
tation tries to look at the results of studies specifically de-
signed to understand the potential user’s needs and prefer-
ences. 
Conjoint based preference data can be used for segmenta-
tion based on latent class analysis (LCA) [33][34]. Having 
gained popularity in the 1990’s, the model “detects segments 
of respondents having similar preferences based on their 
choices in CBC questionnaires” [35]. Latent class analysis 
takes CBC one step further in that it identifies groups of re-
spondents that share specific preferences and estimates the av-
erage part-worth utility for each of the groups of respondents. 
In other words, the approach can be used to “discover seg-
ments of respondents who tend to have similar preferences 
manifest within the CBC (choice-based conjoint) data” [36]. 
In an LCA, the segmentation process is initiated by ran-
domly selecting estimates of each group’s part-worth utility 
values and then estimating the probability that a given re-
spondent belongs to a specific group. Summing the logs of 
those probabilities, for all respondents across all questions re-
sults in the log-likelihood. In an iterative approach those prob-
abilities are used to recalculate the logit weights until a “con-
vergence limit” is reached [37]. Solutions can be calculated 
for a different numbers of groups. To determine the best num-
ber of groups, the log-likelihood cannot be used as it typically 
moves closer to zero as the number of segments increases. 
Thus, goodness-of-fit or Information Criterions (ICs) are used 
to determine the number of segments. 
Two of the most common ICs are Akaike's Information 
Criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) 
[38]. Often these ICs are automatically calculated by statisti-
cal packages, e.g., the Sawtooth software used in this study, 
with the expectation that they will provide some guidance 
with regards to selecting the appropriate number of segments. 
That being said, from a managerial perspective “the most im-
portant aspects to consider when choosing a solution for seg-
mentation purposes are its interpretability and stability (repro-
ducibility)” [36]. Once the group size has been determined, 
the data can be interpreted using the segment specific attribute 
importance as well as part-worth utilities rescaled for compa-
rability. 
V. 
STUDY FINDINGS 
Based on our methodical considerations an empirical 
study was conducted. The study was based on the presentation 
of the app store elements as discussed in the previous section 
in an online questionnaire. The survey was online between 
December 19, 2013 and January 10, 2014. Participants were 
acquired by using social media and various other online and 
offline channels of the RheinMain University of Applied Sci-
ence in Wiesbaden, Germany. A total of 221 people partici-
pated in the conjoint analysis interview. Of these, 163 com-
pleted the interview in its entirety and are, therefore, included 
in the subsequent evaluation. Selected demographic charac-
teristics of the study participants are shown in Table II below. 
The demographics show that the study might be biased by the 
participating media and design students and due to the result-
ing high proportion of iOS users compared to the lower usage 
rate in the total population in Germany of around 32 percent 
at the end of 2013 [39] and the underrepresentation of older 
user segments. 
TABLE II.  
DEMOGRAPHICS OF THE STUDY PARTICIPANTS 
Characteristics 
Absolute 
Number 
Percentage 
Mobile OS 
 
 
Apple iOS 
78 
47.9% 
Android 
78 
47.9% 
Blackberry OS 
1 
0.6% 
Windows Phone/Mobile 
5 
3.1% 
Symbian 
1 
0.6% 
Purchased Apps 
 
 
None 
32 
19.6% 
1–5 
40 
24.5% 
6–10 
20 
12.3% 
11–20 
19 
11.7% 
21+ 
52 
31.9% 
Gender 
 
 
Female 
70 
42.9% 
Male 
93 
57.1% 
Ages 
 
 
18–24 
66 
40.5% 
25–34 
70 
42.9% 
35–44 
21 
12.9% 
45–54 
5 
3.1% 
55+ 
1 
0.6% 
 
The evaluation of the collected data took place in two 
steps: In the first phase, a counting analysis was conducted. 
This analysis can be used to calculate an outline of so called 
main effects. A main effect of an attribute level is calculated 
here as a proportion and reveals how many times a specific 
attribute level was chosen, divided by the number of times this 
attribute level was available for choice in the testing. Counting 
analysis is a simple way to get a first indication of the rele-
vance of the attribute levels. As a second step, the part-worth 
utilities of the attribute levels were estimated based on a logit 
analysis to find the maximum likelihood solution for the data. 
Based on the results of the part-worth utility estimation, the 
relative importance of the individual app store elements were 
finally determined. 
A. Counting Analysis 
A counting analysis and the proportions that are calculated 
at this stage can be used to identify the “winner” of the differ-
ent attribute levels. Table III shows the results of the counting 
analysis for all attributes and attribute levels considered in this 
study. The higher the proportion of an attribute level is, the 
stronger this attribute level may have influenced the choice of 
participants. For the app store element “Reviews (stars)” a 
five-star rating was the “winner” – which is not surprising. 
However, in comparison, choices with this attribute level were 
selected more than twice as often (0.421/0.158) as choices 
with no stars in the reviews. 
 

112
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III.  
SUMMARY OF STUDY RESULTS 
Attributes and  
Attribute Levels 
Counts 
(Proportions 
of “Wins”) 
Part-
Worth 
Utilities 
App Icon 
High quality 
0.312 
0.22215 
Medium quality 
0.262 
-0.01639 
Low quality 
0.234 
-0.20575 
App Name 
SafeTalk – Your safe messenger 
0.277 
0.02744 
SafeTalk Secure Messenger 
0.247 
-0.10392 
Safetalk with AES-256 Encryption 
0.283 
0.07648 
Reviews (stars) 
5 stars 
0.421 
0.73209 
3 stars 
0.229 
-0.13465 
No stars 
0.158 
-0.59744 
Number of Reviews 
7.240 reviews 
0.329 
0.31666 
310 reviews 
0.320 
0.26487 
5 reviews 
0.229 
-0.19484 
No reviews yet 
0.198 
-0.38669 
Price 
Free of charge 
0.385 
0.60605 
0.89 EUR 
0.274 
0.02966 
1.79 EUR 
0.238 
-0.14028 
2.69 EUR 
0.180 
-0.49543 
Screenshots 
High quality 
0.262 
-0.02198 
Medium quality 
0.274 
0.01437 
Low quality 
0.271 
0.00760 
App Description 
High quality 
0.283 
0.07434 
Medium quality 
0.269 
0.01472 
Low quality 
0.256 
-0.08906 
Server Location 
Germany 
0.373 
0.52316 
USA 
0.224 
-0.20529 
Unknown 
0.212 
-0.31788 
 
However, as mentioned before, this analysis can give a 
first indication of the relevance but does not provide measure-
ments for the part-worth utilities of attribute levels and rela-
tive importance of the different attributes, i.e., app store ele-
ments. 
B. Estimation of Part-worth Utilities 
Part-worth utilities were calculated by using the multino-
mial logit estimation provided by the Sawtooth software for 
the CBC analysis. For the model estimation, a Chi Square of 
473.7 was reported. Considering 18 degrees of freedom (26 
attribute levels and 8 attributes) the Chi Square is much larger 
than the required 34.8 for a 0.01 level, which would mean that 
the choices of the respondents are significantly affected by the 
attribute composition [27]. The estimated part-worth utilities 
represent the relative desirability of an attribute level. The 
higher the value of a part-worth, the greater the impact of the 
corresponding attribute level on the buying decision. Part-val-
ues are automatically standardized, so that the result per at-
tribute amounts to „0“. Reciprocally, this means that negative 
values can also arise. Table III shows the estimated values for 
all attribute levels. These should be interpreted to mean that a 
higher number corresponds to a higher part-worth utility and 
that this attribute variation therefore had a higher preference 
among the test subjects. If we look again at the attribute “Re-
views (stars)“, it becomes evident that the attribute level „5 
stars“ has a very high part-worth value with a positive value 
of 0.73209. The other two variations „3 stars“(-0.13465) and 
„no stars“(-0.59744) were less important for the purchase de-
cision of the test subjects due to smaller values of the corre-
sponding part-worth utilities. 
C. Calculation of the Attribute Importance 
The defined objective of the empirical study was not only 
to find out the utilities of the attribute variations but also to 
analyze each individual app store element in terms of its rela-
tive importance for an app purchase decision. Therefore, we 
must find a unit of measurement to express the relative im-
portance of each attribute. The calculation is carried out by 
dividing the range of the part-worth of each attribute by the 
sum of the part-worth ranges of all the attributes. Hereby, the 
range is defined as the difference between the highest and the 
lowest part-value within the levels of an attribute [40]. The 
results can be seen in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF ATTRIBUTES 
Attribute 
Attribute Importance 
Reviews (Stars) 
27.8% 
Price 
23.2% 
Server Location 
17.6% 
Number of Reviews 
14.9% 
App Icon 
9.0% 
App Name 
3.6% 
App Description 
3.3% 
Screenshots 
0.6% 
Total 
100.0% 
 
The values reveal that the reviews according to the star 
principle have the largest influence on the purchase decision. 
Almost 28% of the decisions are based on this criterion. The 
highest part-worth utility and/or the most positive influence 
was of course an app review with 5 stars. The distance to the 
other attribute variations (3 stars, no stars) was the highest 
with this app store element compared to the other elements. 
This highlights the extremely high relevance of good reviews 
and the importance of this attribute for the perceived total util-
ity of the corresponding app presented in the app store. As was 
to be expected, pricing has a high level of importance for the 
purchase decision, too. The test subjects reacted in a very 
price-sensitive way. It should also be noted that many apps are 
now offered at the Apple App Store for free or at a greatly 
reduced price at the beginning or at some stage of their life 

113
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
cycle for a certain period of time. A certain „freebie“ mental-
ity is also reflected in the order of precedence in this study and 
shows that price is one of the most important criteria for an 
app. The app provider’s server location differs from the other 
elements in as far as it is not a standardized app store element 
but the app developer‘s company-related element. Therefore, 
we can conclude that users not only include the app store’s 
design elements into their purchase decisions, but also con-
sider and evaluate outstanding and specific properties of the 
app. In this case, there was a particularly positive effect on the 
purchase decision if the messenger provider was located in 
Germany. The number of reviews relates to the reviews ac-
cording to the star principle. Here, we see the tendency that 
the part-worth utility is perceived as higher, the more reviews 
an app has. An interesting aspect here is that the part-worth of 
the extreme scenario considered in the survey with 7,240 re-
views did not substantially differ from the next level with 310 
reviews. The distance to the next two steps (5 reviews, no re-
views) is considerably larger, however. This means that an op-
timal number of reviews – which can be attained with a rea-
sonable amount of effort on the part of the app provider – can 
be assumed to be more than 5, but not significantly higher than 
310 reviews. The app icon is considerably less important than 
expected. Besides the screenshots and the star reviews, it is 
the third graphic element and easy for the potential buyer to 
understand. Nevertheless, the test subjects apparently did not 
assess the quality of the app on the basis of the icon but stuck 
to the very much more rational criterion of the reviews when 
making their purchase decision. The app name is of very low 
significance. Many users see it as a “frill” within the overall 
impression of the app store and it is therefore of little interest. 
The study results even show that the name “Safetalk with 
AES-256 Encryption,” which was previously defined as the 
worst variation, actually had the highest partial benefit value. 
However, this could be a result of the specific setup and the 
sensitivity of the app users towards data security in Germany. 
The complicated name – even if not understood by the cus-
tomers – may be associated with a highly sophisticated tech-
nological solution to protect the user from the danger of inter-
ception. The app’s descriptive text is also of little importance 
in terms of decision making. This suggests that potential buy-
ers do not take the time to read it or may be very familiar with 
the type of apps that have been tested here. It should be noted 
at this point that the descriptive texts used in the survey were 
relatively short. In real life, an app is mostly described in much 
more detail and using many more characters – the attention 
span could, therefore, be even shorter than for the texts used 
in the survey.  
With a relative importance of 0.6 percent, the screenshots 
had the lowest influence on the purchase decision. Here, too, 
it was striking that the part-worth of the medium quality 
screenshots was the highest, followed by those of the worst 
quality. The highest quality level had the lowest part-worth 
value for the test subjects. Here we should note, however, that 
the differences recorded were marginal and the general result, 
i.e., that screenshots hardly influence purchase decisions, is 
predominant. This may also be due to the fact that the subject 
of the study, messaging app functions, is relatively well-
known and simple and that therefore screenshots have only 
minor informational value as far as the app is concerned. 
D. Group Segmentation 
In order to better understand if these preferences are uni-
versal or if the user preferences fall into different groupings 
according to common preferences, a LCA was conducted as 
discussed in Section IV. Solutions were computed with the 
Sawtooth software package for a minimum of two and a max-
imum of seven groups considering typical ranges used in LCA 
studies [41][42]. As shown in Table V, the log-likelihood 
moves closer to zero as more segments are included in the so-
lution. To determine the number of groups, the ICs mentioned 
in the methodology needed to be analyzed. The most common 
used ICs in LCA studies are Akaike’s Information Criterion 
(AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) as mentioned 
before. Both criteria are based on the likelihood function but 
incorporate penalties to control for over fitting (to derive a 
parsimonious solution). The goal is to minimize the value of 
the IC where the lowest value indicates the best fitting model. 
TABLE V.  
INVORMATION CRITERIA OF THE LCA 
Group 
Log-likelihood 
AIC 
BIC 
2 
-1637 
3351 
3569 
3 
-1562 
3243 
3572 
4 
-1497 
3152 
3593 
5 
-1437 
3071 
3624 
6 
-1409 
3056 
3720 
7 
-1373 
3023 
3799 
 
However, as shown in the Table V, the two IC produce 
contrary results by supporting the two (BIC) or the seven 
(AIC) group solution. Such ambiguous results are not unusual 
in LCA and so [38] suggest that the choice of an IC has to 
consider the goal of the study. In this context, the BIC-
preferred size can be interpreted as the minimum size for a 
parsimonious model and the AIC-pref erred size as a maxi-
mum when the exploration of population heterogeneity is in 
focus. The choice then has to be made “based on other kinds 
of fit criteria, on theory, or on subjective inspection of results” 
[38]. As the aim of the study at hand was to explore the popu-
lation heterogeneity, a subjective inspection of the two-group 
solution offered only limited insights into potential market 
segments. On the other hand, the seven-group solution was 
selected for further interpretation and provided clear group-
ings with distinct preferences.  
As discussed before in the methodology section, the rela-
tive importance of the attributes and the preferred attribute 
levels can be used to interpret the preference structures of the 
computed user segments. In a first step, the group specific rel-
ative importance of the attributes was inspected. Considering 
an equal relative importance of each of the eight attributes for 
the group members, a relative importance of 12.5 percent 
could be expected. Accordingly, those attributes with a rela-
tive importance greater than 12.5 percent could be interpreted 
as truly impacting the purchase decision. In Tables VI through 
XII, those attributes with a relative importance greater than 

114
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
12.5 percent were highlighted in grey. Once the attributes of 
importance were identified, the preferred attribute level was 
determined based on the group specific estimation of the re-
scaled part-worth utilities. At the attribute level, the (rescaled) 
part-worth utilities for each of the three versions of the app 
element were compared. Accordingly, the version with the 
highest part-worth utility represented the preferred configura-
tion of that app store element. The information about the 
group specific importance of the attributes and the preferred 
group levels where then used to define an appropriate charac-
terization of preference structure for the presentation for app 
store elements. 
The first group shown in Table VI was focused on quality 
as indicated by the high preference for 5 stare ratings. They 
were also very interested in the server location being in Ger-
many. Price was not as important and the group members 
would prefer to pay a moderate price (1.79 EUR) for an app 
with the appropriate quality features. From this perspective 
the mindset of this group can be characterized as “Quality for 
Money”. More than 13 percent of the sample (N=23) have 
been assigned to this segment. 
TABLE VI.  
LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 1 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 1 (“Quality for Money”, N=23) 
Server Location 
44% 
Germany 
Reviews (stars) 
16% 
5 stars 
App Description 
12% 
High quality (User-oriented) 
App Icon 
11% 
Medium quality (Balanced) 
App Name 
6% 
Safetalk w. AES-256 Encryption 
Number of Reviews 
6% 
7.240 reviews 
Screenshots 
3% 
High quality (Notated) 
Price 
2% 
1.79 EUR 
 
Similar to the “Quality for Money” group, the preferences 
in the next group, presented in Table VII, were heavily influ-
enced by quality as indicated by the importance of 5 star rat-
ings, the server location in Germany, and the preferred high 
number of user reviews.  
TABLE VII.  
LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 2 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 2 (“Free Rider”, N=30) 
Reviews (stars) 
23% 
5 stars 
Server Location 
20% 
Germany 
Price 
19% 
Free of charge 
Number of Reviews 
18% 
7.240 reviews 
App Description 
7% 
Medium quality (Tech Savvy) 
App Name 
5% 
SafeTalk – Your safe messenger 
App Icon 
5% 
High quality (Modern/Specific) 
Screenshots 
5% 
Med. quality (Design-focused) 
The main differentiating factor being that they did not 
want to pay for it. Given that they expect high quality for free, 
this segment was characterized as the “Free Rider” segment. 
More than 18 percent (N=30) of the respondents are classified 
in this group. 
Just the opposite can be seen in group three. As seen in 
Table VIII, this group is actually willing to pay “top dollar” 
for high quality apps. Accordingly, this group has been de-
scribed as the “Premium” group. 
TABLE VIII.  LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 3 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 3 (“Premium”, N=14) 
Reviews (stars) 
22% 
5 stars 
Price 
20% 
2.69 EUR 
App Icon 
14% 
High quality (Modern/Specific) 
Server Location 
11% 
Germany 
App Name 
11% 
Safetalk w. AES-256 Encryption 
App Description 
10% 
Medium quality (Tech Savvy) 
Number of Reviews 
9% 
310 reviews 
Screenshots 
3% 
Med. quality (Design-focused) 
 
 
In this case, quality is seen as 5 star ratings and usage of 
the modern/specific design icon. This segment is on the 
smaller side, accounting for only 9 percent (N=15) of the re-
spondents, but their willingness to pay a high price for an ap-
plication make them a relevant segment. 
Similar in size is the “free at all costs” group seen in Table 
IX. This group has been deemed so as price is the only attrib-
ute that matters to them. 
TABLE IX.  
LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 4 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 4 (“Free at all Costs”, N=15) 
Price 
67% 
Free of charge 
Reviews (stars) 
8% 
5 stars 
Screenshots 
7% 
Low quality (Functional) 
App Name 
5% 
Safetalk w. AES-256 Encryption 
Number of Reviews 
4% 
310 reviews 
Server Location 
3% 
USA 
App Description 
3% 
Medium quality (Tech Savvy) 
App Icon 
3% 
Medium quality (Balanced) 
 
This group also accounts for about 9 percent (N=15) of the 
respondents but unlike the premium group, if the app is not 
free, this group will most likely not consider it. Similarly, the 
largest segment, accounting for 33 percent (N=54) of respond-
ents, also prefers apps that are free of charge, however, that is 
less important than high ratings and reviews. This group has 
been labeled the “Socially Motivated Majority” group.  
 
 

115
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE X.  
LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 5 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 5 (“Socially Motivated Majority”, N=54) 
Reviews (stars) 
30% 
5 stars 
Number of Reviews 
25% 
7.240 reviews 
Price 
20% 
Free of charge 
App Icon 
8% 
High quality (Modern/Specific) 
Server Location 
7% 
Germany 
App Description 
6% 
High quality (User-oriented) 
App Name 
4% 
SafeTalk – Your safe messenger 
Screenshots 
1% 
Low quality (Functional) 
 
As seen in Table X, the members of this group are heavily 
influenced by the experiences and ratings of other users and 
thus might be inclined to follow "word-of-mouth". Confirm-
ing what was assumed during the design of the app elements, 
group 6 is a perfect example of the German customer’s height-
ened awareness about data security, accounts for 13% of the 
respondents this group is very concerned with security and has 
thus received the title “privacy concerned” 
TABLE XI.  
LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 6 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 6 (“Privacy Concerned”, N=22) 
Server Location 
52% 
Germany 
App Icon 
12% 
High quality (Modern/Specific) 
Number of Reviews 
10% 
310 reviews 
Reviews (stars) 
9% 
5 stars 
App Description 
8% 
Low quality (Complex) 
Price 
6% 
Free of charge 
App Name 
2% 
SafeTalk Secure Messenger 
Screenshots 
2% 
Low quality (Functional) 
 
As seen in Table XI, server location is of utmost im-
portance, so much so that it is the only attribute influencing 
their purchase decision. Most likely due to the recent NSA 
disclosures [22], they have a strong preference for a server lo-
cation in Germany. However, their willingness to pay for this 
is questionable. Table XII shows the outlier group. Account-
ing for only 3% of the respondents, this group is not only 
small, their preferences did not conform to any expectations. 
TABLE XII.  
LCA MARKET SEGMENTATION: GROUP 7 
Groups and 
Attributes 
Relative 
Importance 
Preferred Attribute Level 
(Part-worth Utilities) 
Group 7 (Outliers/Not Considered, N=5) 
Price 
34% 
Free of charge 
Number of Reviews 
20% 
No reviews yet 
Reviews (stars) 
12% 
5 stars 
App Name 
8% 
SafeTalk – Your safe messenger 
Screenshots 
7% 
Low quality (Functional) 
App Description 
7% 
Low quality (Complex) 
App Icon 
6% 
Medium quality (Balanced) 
Server Location 
6% 
Unknown 
Accordingly, this group has not been analyzed to any further 
extent. However, the existence of such a group indicates that 
the decision to use a maximum of 7 groups the LCA was a 
good estimate.  
VI. 
IMPLICATIONS  
This study confirms the observation from best practices, 
that reviews have a major influence on the user’s purchase de-
cision. Not only from a mass market perspective, but also 
among the majority of the market segments. Average ratings 
according to the star principle as well as the number of re-
views given determine the buying decision of an app to a very 
large degree. These two criteria, however, cannot be directly 
influenced by the app provider – reviews are made by the app 
user and are published by the app store with no prior screen-
ing. Nevertheless, there are numerous possibilities for the pro-
vider to influence the reviews, at least to some extent. Active 
review management should therefore be conducted. Review 
reminders within the app can for example help to continuously 
increase the number of reviews. It is advisable to wait for a 
certain period of time before displaying review reminders as 
the probability of receiving a positive review is higher when 
the app has been used for a period of time. Reviews can also 
be stimulated by actively reacting to user feedback, i.e., by re-
sponding to reported software bugs or considering suggestions 
for improvements in upcoming updates. 
The possibilities for the provider to influence the price are 
often strongly determined by the costs. In addition, the price 
decision can depend on the app’s life cycle or even some im-
portant seasonal factors (special offers on public holidays for 
example). Thus, a low price level may not be an option and 
the findings of the conjoint analysis cannot be transferred to a 
general recommendation on an adequate pricing strategy. 
However, if it makes sense for the type of app in question, a 
free version can be offered, which can be supplemented by 
additional content per in-app-purchase. This “freemium 
model” takes the user’s initial price-sensitivity into account. 
Revenue generation is then postponed to a later phase of us-
age. Alternatively, the results of the Latent Class analysis sug-
gest that there are certain groups willing to pay a premium for 
quality applications. Accordingly, while mass marketing may 
be less effective for higher priced apps, effectively targeting 
the appropriate market segment can be another solution in 
such situations. 
Another important finding is that particular attention 
should be drawn to app-specific properties if these could pos-
itively influence sales. From a mass market perspective, this 
applied to the server location of the company providing the 
app and the corresponding messenger service. In this particu-
lar case, it appears to have addressed a basic need for security 
among the test subjects. This may not be directly transferable 
to other apps. However, such “unique selling prepositions” 
should be particularly highlighted and communicated via the 
other elements. This is especially important from a market 
segmentation perspective because for one of the groups, the 
location of the server was the main influencer in the ultimate 
purchase decision. 

116
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The elements not yet mentioned at this point (app icon, app 
name, descriptive text, screenshots) should by no means be 
neglected during the course of marketing activities. From a 
mass market perspective these have a smaller overall influ-
ence on the customer’s purchase decision and only have a lim-
ited ability to set the product apart from the competition. That 
being said, the segmented markets show that these elements 
have a greater influence over some of the groups. Accord-
ingly, such elements must indeed be well designed, in order to 
convince a customer to purchase or to use the app. This is es-
pecially true when marketing to desired market segments. The 
descriptive text and the app name, for example, are neverthe-
less crucial for the app store’s search algorithms to enable the 
mobile application to be found at all. Whether the app name 
is easy to remember is another factor that plays an important 
role in the selection process and in word-of-mouth propa-
ganda.  
Furthermore, it can be expected that in a perfect world, a 
killer app would be created and launched in the app store. As 
soon as it is launched, all potential users would be exposed to 
it and have the opportunity to download it and thus provide 
ratings which will promote further usage. However, generally 
speaking the app market is not a “field of dreams” and just 
because an app is built it does not mean “they” will come. As 
originally expected, there are different homogenous segments 
with very specific preferences with regards to the various app 
elements. Accordingly, effectively targeting the appropriate 
market segment can not only increase awareness and potential 
downloads, but also increase the chance that the app meets the 
user’s needs and interests, which will result in higher ratings. 
As discussed earlier, outside of placing an app in the appro-
priate category, app stores do not offer the ability, via their 
platform, actively market to specific market segments. Thus, 
this study shows the need for such a tool as developers and 
marketers looking to reach these segments are currently 
forced to use external channels. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
This study has revealed some empirically based recom-
mendations on how to align the elements of the app presenta-
tion in app stores to customer preferences. The results of the 
CBC analysis showed four main attributes of importance. 
While developers and marketers can influence two of the at-
tributes the other two are a result of feedback from other users. 
While these four elements had the greatest over all influence 
over a user’s ultimate purchase decision, the results of the LC 
analysis showed that different user segments have very differ-
ent preferences and needs. While one group was very heavily 
influenced by price another was influenced by server location. 
This indicates that while the overall trend is to offer applica-
tions that are free (not counting for in app purchase options) 
there are still those that are willing to pay a premium for qual-
ity. Accordingly, appropriate market segmentation can help 
developers better reach their intended market and stand out in 
the vast sea of applications. 
 The findings, however, refer to a rather small and not rep-
resentative sample. Moreover, the generalizability of the study 
is limited due to the fact that here just one single, specific ap-
plication was investigated, using the example of select design 
elements of the Apple App Store. More detailed studies in dif-
ferent application domains and with regard to different app 
stores will be necessary in order to verify the validity of the 
findings derived in this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Böhm and S. Schreiber, "Mobile App Marketing: A Con-
joint-based Analysis on the Importance of App Store Ele-
ments," CENTRIC 2014, The Seventh International Confer-
ence on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mech-
anisms, Technologies, and Services, 2014, pp. 7–14. 
[2] 
J. F. Hughes, iPhone and iPad apps marketing. Secrets to sell-
ing your iPhone and iPad apps. Que Pub., Indianapolis, 2012. 
[3] 
J. Mayerhofer, Apps erfolgreich verkaufen. Vermarktungsstra-
tegien für Apps auf iPhone, iPad, Android und Co. Hanser, 
München, 2012. 
[4] 
P. Kotler and G. Armstrong, Principles of marketing. Pearson, 
Upper Saddle River, N.J, 2014. 
[5] 
D. Wooldridge and M. Schneider, The business of iPhone and 
iPad App Development. Making and marketing Apps that suc-
ceed. Apress; Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, New 
York, 2011. 
[6] 
R. Mroz, App-Marketing für iPhone und Android. Planung, 
Konzeption, Vermarktung von Apps im Mobile Business. 
mitp, Heidelberg, 2013. 
[7] 
F. Hamka, H. Bouwman, M. de Reuver, and M. Kroesen, "Mo-
bile customer segmentation based on smartphone measure-
ment," Telematics and Informatics 31, 2, 2014, pp. 220–227. 
[8] 
N. Kuh, Ed., Foundation iPhone App Development. Apress, 
Berkeley, CA, 2012. 
[9] 
L. Jordan, Ed., Beginning iOS 5 Games Development. Apress, 
Berkeley, CA, 2011. 
[10] E. Kim, The best book on marketing your android app. Cre-
ateSpace Independent Publishing. 
[11] M. Amerson, The best book on IOS app marketing. Hyperlink 
Press, 2012. 
[12] S.-Y. Ihm, W.-K. Loh, and Y.-H. Park, "App Analytic: A 
Study on Correlation Analysis of App Ranking Data," 2013 
International Conference on Cloud and Green Computing 
(CGC), pp. 561–563. 
[13] H. Zhu, H. Xiong, Y. Ge, and E. Chen, "Ranking fraud detec-
tion for mobile apps," Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, 
pp. 619–628. 
[14] H. Zhu, H. Xiong, Y. Ge, and E. Chen, "Discovery of Ranking 
Fraud for Mobile Apps," IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 27, 1, 
2014, pp. 74–87. 
[15] B. Ifrach and R. Johari, "Pricing a bestseller," SIGMETRICS 
Perform. Eval. Rev. 41, 4, 2014, p. 51. 
[16] C. Iacob and R. Harrison, "Retrieving and analyzing mobile 
apps feature requests from online reviews," 2013 10th Work-
ing Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). Pro-
ceedings, May 18-19, 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 41–
44. 
[17] P. Yin, P. Luo, W.-C. Lee, and M. Wang, "App recommenda-
tion," Sixth ACM International Conference on Web Search 
and Data Mining, WSDM 2013, pp. 395–404. 
[18] J. Muller and M. Lillack, "Conjoint Analysis of Software Prod-
uct Lines: A Feature Based Approach," 2011 37th 
EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Ad-
vanced Applications (SEAA), pp. 374–377. 

117
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[19] D. Eckjans, J. Fahling, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "Mo-
bile Customer Integration: A Smartphone Application Proto-
type for Conducting Mobile Conjoint Studies," 2011 Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Mobile Business, ICMB, pp. 129–
135. 
[20] R. Sandberg and M. Rollins, The business of Android Apps 
development. Making and marketing Apps that succeed on 
Google Play, Amazon App Store and more. Apress, New 
York, 2013. 
[21] M. Flarup, iPhone App Icon Design: Best Practices. 
http://www.pixelresort.com/blog/iphone-app-icon-design-
best-practises/ 2014.08.01. 
[22] H. Schmundt and G. Traufetter, 2014, Digital Independence: 
NSA Scandal Boosts German Tech Industry. http://www.spie-
gel.de/international/business/german-it-industry-looks-for-
boom-from-snowden-revelations-a-950786.html 2014.08.12. 
[23] R. Luce and J. W. Tukey, "Simultaneous conjoint measure-
ment: A new type of fundamental measurement," Journal of 
Mathematical Psychology 1, 1, 1964, pp. 1–27. 
[24] C. Breidert, Estimation of Willingness-to-Pay. Theory, Meas-
urement, Application. DUV, Wiesbaden, 2006. 
[25] A. Gustafsson, A. Herrmann, and F. Huber, 2007, "Conjoint 
Analysis as an Instrument of Market Research Practice," Con-
joint measurement. Methods and applications, A. Gustafsson, 
A. Herrmann and F. Huber, Eds. Springer, Berlin, New York, 
pp. 3–30. 
[26] P. E. Green and V. Srinivasan, "Conjoint analysis in market-
ing: New developments with implications for research and 
practice," Journal of Marketing 54, 4, 1990, pp. 3–19. 
[27] Sawthooth Software, 2013, The CBC System for Choice-
Based Conjoint Analysis. Technical Paper Series. https://saw-
toothsoftware.com/download/techpap/cbctech.pdf 
2014.08.01. 
[28] P. E. Green, A. M. Krieger, and Y. Wind, "Thirty Years of 
Conjoint Analysis: Reflections and Prospects," Interfaces 31, 
3, 2001, pp. S56-S73. 
[29] Sawtooth Software, 2014, The Adaptive Choice-Based Con-
joint (ACBC) Technical Paper. http://www.sawtoothsoft-
ware.com/download/techpap/acbctech.pdf 2014.08.01. 
[30] Sawtooth Software, 2014, What is SSI Web? http://www.saw-
toothsoftware.com/support/downloads/download-ssi-
web/what-is-ssi-web 2014.09.19. 
[31] N. Djokic, S. Salai, R. Kovac-Znidersic', I. Djokic, and G. 
Tomic, "The Use of Conjoint and Cluster Analysis For Prefer-
ence-Based Market Segmentation," Inzinerine Ekonomika-
Engineering Economics 24, 4, 2013, pp. 343–355. 
[32] S. Dolnicar and F. Leisch, "Using graphical statistics to better 
understand market segmentation solutions," Int. J. Market Res. 
56, 2, 2014, pp. 207–230. 
[33] W. S. Desarbo, V. Ramaswamy, and S. H. Cohen, "Market 
Segmentation with Choice-Based Conjoint Analysis," Market-
ing Letters 6, 2, 1995, pp. 137–147. 
[34] W. S. Desarbo, M. Wedel, M. Vriens, and V. Ramaswamy, 
"Latent Class Metric Conjoint Analysis," Marketing Letters 3, 
3, 1992, pp. 273–288. 
[35] Sawtooth Software, Inc, Latent Class v4.5, 2012. 
[36] Sawtooth Software, 2004, The CBC Latent Class Technical 
Paper (Version 3). 
[37] Sawtooth Software, 2004, The CBC Latent Class Technical 
Paper (Version 3). 
[38] J. J. Dziak, D. L. Coffman, S. T. Lanza, and R. Li, Sensitivity 
and specificity of information criteria. Technical Report Series 
12-119. The Methodology Center, The Pennsylvania State 
University. 
[39] StatCounter, 2014, Top 8 Mobile Operating Systems in Ger-
many from July 2013 to July 2014. http://gs.statcounter.com 
/#mobile_os-DE-monthly-201307-201407 2014.08.01. 
[40] B. K. Orme, Getting started with conjoint analysis. Strategies 
for product design and pricing research. Research Publishers, 
LLC, Madison, WI, 2006. 
[41] C. Chan-Halbrendt, E. Zhllimab, G. Sisiorc, and D. Imamid, 
"Consumer Preferences for Olive Oil in Tirana, Albania," In-
ternational Food and Agribusiness Management Review 13, 3, 
2010, pp. 55–74. 
[42] E. Zhllima, C. Chan-Halbrendt, Q. Zhang, D. Imami, R. Long, 
L. Leonetti, and M. Canavari, "Latent Class Analysis of Con-
sumer Preferences for Wine in Tirana, Albania," Journal of In-
ternational Food & Agribusiness Marketing 24, 4, 2012, pp. 
321–338. 
 

