188
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Information Visibility in Public Transportation Smart Card Ticket Systems  
Maja van der Velden  
Department of Informatics  
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: majava@ifi.uio.no 
Alma Leora Culén  
Department of Informatics  
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway  
e-mail: almira@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—This paper discusses the role of information 
visibility in public transportation ticket systems. The case is 
the replacement of paper tickets with smart card tickets in the 
Oslo region in Norway. By contrasting the visibility of ticket 
information to users of paper tickets and smart card tickets, 
this paper describes the move from local information on paper 
tickets to distributed information on smart cards. We used a 
qualitative content analysis of reader comments to an online 
opinion article on the new smart card system to analyse the 
effect of the loss of ticket information. Using the concept of 
‘networked visibility’, this paper argues that the move from 
paper to smart card ticket resulted in less informed travelers 
and more informed providers. We discuss issues around the 
visibility of ticket information and present diverse design 
solutions, including an augmented reality application, which 
may address the ticket information needs of public 
transportation users. 
Keywords—Information 
Visibility; 
Smart 
Card; 
Ticket 
Information; Public Transportation; Mobile Apps 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
In 2009, Ruter, the public transportation company in the 
Oslo region in Norway, began to replace the paper tickets 
with a contactless smart card [1]. By February 2013, Ruter 
stopped the sale of the last of the paper tickets, the coupon 
card. This prompted a former user of the coupon card to send 
a letter to the editor to one of Norway’s national newspapers. 
In We don’t want this!, the user expresses her frustration 
with the new smart card system [2]. She argues that the new 
ticket system leaves her permanently insecure about the 
validity of her ticket. 
This user was not alone in her critique. Ruter has 
experienced a high level of user dissatisfaction with the new 
system, as well as critique for the way the company dealt 
with it.  We identify information visibility as an important 
factor contributing to the wide spread dissatisfaction. In 
design of information systems and usability studies, the 
visibility of information is related to the visibility of a 
system’s status. Being informed about a system’s status is 
one of the ways in which users receive feedback on a 
system’s use or performance. Studies of the visibility of 
information on smart cards have been implemented in 
several sectors, such as supply chain management, the 
automotive industry, and the healthcare sector [3]–[6]. In 
public transportation studies, information visibility is 
discussed as part of radio-frequency identification (RFID) 
applications for identifying and tracking vehicles, e.g., [7]. 
We are not aware of information visibility studies of 
ticketing systems in the public transportation sector, although 
some other interesting and related issues have been reported 
in [8]–[10]. 
Rust and Kannan [6] consider ubiquitous computation to 
offer a great opportunity towards enhancement of user 
experience.  How could a smart card enhance user 
experience? A smart card is a credit card size plastic card 
containing a microchip with antenna for contactless 
communication with a card reader; see Fig. 1 for the card 
and Fig. 2 for card readers. The embedded sensor 
technology provides an opportunity to use the card for 
several purposes, integrating diverse systems into one, e.g., 
transportation and event services, or the annual subscription 
to a museum. It also enables service providers to store 
information about user’s behavior on the card, in order to 
offer better one-to-one services.  
When moving from paper-based practices [11] to 
practices 
where 
computing 
and 
communications 
technologies are embedded into everyday objects,  there are 
many ways “to capitalize on our familiarity, skill and 
experience in dealing with the everyday world around us” 
writes Dourish [12]. New values, new possibilities, but also 
new concerns may emerge when interacting with these 
familiar objects with and without embedded technology.  In 
the case of the RFID-enhanced transportation ticket, we 
could not capitalize on familiarity, because, one major 
characteristic of the ticket was lost: the visibility of 
information. 
In this paper, we investigate the role of information 
visibility in the use of the smart card ticket. Our study was 
guided by two questions: 
 
1. What is the role of information visibility in a public 
transportation ticketing system? 
2. What design solutions are possible to increase 
information visibility in the smart card ticket? 
 
Our case is the ‘Reisekort’, the smart card ticket used in 
the public transportation system in the Oslo region. Our 
focus is on the basic information that is needed to use the 
smart card as a valid transportation ticket. We identified 
three basic ticket information needs of public transportation 
users: the type of the ticket, the value of the ticket, and the 
duration of the ticket (see Table I). There are other ticket 
information needs, such as the price of one trip, an overview 
or log of implemented trips, and an overview of past travel 
expenses, but they do not add significantly to our argument. 

189
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In We don’t want this!, the author proposes one solution 
to the lack of information visibility of the smart card: 
“receive a receipt every time you use the card”. The rational 
behind this solution is that one will always have a visual 
confirmation of basic ticket information: what type of card is 
used and how much money and time are left on the card. 
Many readers responded to We don’t want this!. In this 
paper, we analyze the reader comments and discuss new 
proposals for design. We start with a discussion of ticket 
information needs, comparing paper tickets and smart card 
tickets. In Section III, we discuss our method and present our 
analysis of reader comments. In Section IV, we discuss our 
findings and in Section V, we use the analysis to propose or 
discuss some design interventions.  
Although our case is a local phenomenon, our findings 
may contribute to the study of networked near field 
communication (NFC) services in general. Information 
visibility, we argue, is an important aspect in user 
satisfaction and for guiding the (re-) design of smart card 
tickets.   
II. 
FROM PAPER TICKET TO SMART CARD 
In We don’t want this!, the author compares the paper 
coupon card with the pay-as-you-go smart card. Since the 
author is a pensioner, she used to have a discount coupon 
card, recognizable by a different color than the regular 
coupon card. The card was unregistered and could be used 
by several people traveling together. The monetary value of 
the ticket was printed on the card and the empty spots on the 
card visualized how many trips could still be made with the 
card. Once the coupon card was stamped in a ticket machine 
on board the bus or tram, or on the platform of the train or 
metro, the validity of the ticket could be read on the 
timestamp.  
 
Figure 1.  A  smart card ticket used in public transportation in Norway. 
In terms of information visibility, the user had the 
following information available at all times and without the 
use of extra technology (see Table I): 
 
 
The type of ticket: shape, color, name of ticket 
 
The value of the ticket: printed on the ticket 
 
The duration of the ticket: date and timestamp on the 
ticket 
 
This information has become invisible in the smart card 
ticket. All smart cards, be it a pay-as-you-go card, a weekly, 
monthly or day-pass, a regular or discount card, have the 
same shape, color, and name (see Fig. 1). The type of ticket, 
value of the ticket, and duration of the ticket can only 
become visible when an external reader is used (see Fig. 2).  
TABLE I.  
BASIC TICKET INFORMATION NEEDS OF PUBLIC   
TRANSPORTATION USERS 
Type of ticket 
The type of the ticket refers to the different kinds of 
tickets available. We can differentiate between types of 
tickets based on the number of trips and types of tickets 
based on the particular period they cover independent of 
the number of trips (day, week, month, and year). Other 
types are registered or unregistered (anonymous) tickets, 
and regular and discount tickets (for children and people 
over 65 years old). 
 
A popular paper ticket in Oslo was the 
unregistered 8 trip-ticket, the so-called Flexicard, 
which was available as a regular ticket and a 
discount ticket. The Flexicard could be used by 
more than one traveler at the same time. There is 
no smart card variation of this ticket. 
 
A popular smart card ticket is the pay-as-you-go 
card, which can be topped up when needed. This 
ticket can only be used by one traveler at the 
time. There is no paper variation of this ticket. 
Value of ticket 
The type of ticket decides the monetary value of the 
ticket. In the case of the pay-as-you-go card, the value of 
the ticket depends on how much money the user has put 
on the card. The monetary value of all tickets diminishes 
with use. A ticket has zero value when the duration of the 
ticket has expired or when the monetary value is below 
the price of a ticket. In the case of pay-as-you-go cards, 
any amount less than the value of a single ticket may be 
left on the card. Paper tickets did not have this 
characteristic. 
Duration of ticket 
The duration of the ticket is decided by the date and time 
stamp of a ticket and varies for the different ticket types. 
Registered monthly paper tickets were sent automatically 
by mail to the user before the monthly ticket expired. 
Registered smart cards can be automatically topped up 
(in case of a pay-as-you-go card) or extended (in case of 
the 30 days card). 
 
  
Figure 2.  Smart card ticket readers at metro stations and on the bus. 

190
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
How does this affect the use of the smart ticket? In this 
section, we look at information visibility in three activities 
public transportation usually users engage in: purchasing a 
ticket, using a valid ticket and having an expired ticket. 
A. Purchasing a ticket 
When a ticket is purchased, the three pieces of basic 
information (type of the ticket, value of the ticket and 
duration of the ticket) are given by the user to a sales person 
or are selected by the user on a vending machine or on the 
public 
transportation 
website. 
In 
addition, 
public 
transportation users also have the choice between a 
registered and an unregistered ticket. ‘Registered’ means that 
the name and date of birth of the user is registered with the 
public transportation provider. ‘Unregistered’ means that the 
user is anonymous and that the age of the user is unknown. 
The  information provided when the ticket is purchased is 
at all times visible on the paper ticket in the form of printed 
text (type, value, duration), the size of the ticket (type), the 
color of the ticket (type), and the shape of the ticket (type).  
For example, the Flexicard, the 8-trip ticket (see Fig. 3), was 
the only folded paper ticket. It had a pre-printed text to 
indicate the value of the ticket (kr.180) and the word 
‘voksne’ (adults) to indicate that it was a regular ticket. Also 
the color of the ticket informed the traveler that it was a 
regular ticket. Discount tickets have a different color. The 
printed text on a strip is a timestamp, indicating the time 
when the one-hour validity of the ticket ends. This 
timestamp is added to the ticket when a traveler enters a 
metro platform or a bus or tram and inserts the card in a 
ticket stamp machine (see Fig. 3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  A paper ticket (left) and a ticket stamp machine (right). 
An important difference between the paper ticket and the 
smart card ticket is that ticket information is never visible on 
the smart card ticket itself; information becomes visible 
when the smart card ticket is networked with other devices. 
This can happen in four different ways: via stationary ticket 
readers positioned at the entrances of stations and platforms 
of the metro and train and inside buses and trams, scanners 
handheld by human ticket controllers, smart card terminals at 
the point of purchase, and the Internet (only for registered 
smart card holders, see Fig. 4). 
Travelers can always buy more than one ticket. For 
example, a user of the 30-day ticket may buy a new 30-day 
ticket before the old one has expired. The smart card ticket 
can also contain several tickets of the same type, e.g., two 
30-day tickets or several different types of tickets 
 
 
Figure 4.  Accessing on the internet the information from the smart card. 
B. Using a Ticket  
When one is traveling, the value and duration of the 
ticket change. On the paper ticket this information is at all 
times visible, while travelers with a smart card need to use 
ticket readers to access this information on their card. The 
smart card readers are also used to validate a ticket and give 
information about the type of card, expiration date or 
remaining value of the card, and expiration time. This 
information is visible for two seconds at the time of 
validation. This is often too short. If the user tries to scan the 
card again, an error message is displayed. The user has to 
wait 2 minutes after validation in order to display the 
information again. The fact that the type of ticket is not 
visible without scanning it, presents the risk of traveling with 
a wrong card, e.g., a parent can use a child ticket without 
knowing it. This becomes possible because travelers with a 
week, 30-days, or year smart card ticket are not obliged to 
validate their ticket every time they use the public 
transportation system. 
When a traveler validates a ticket, the ticket reader can 
provide the wrong information. For example, an 11-year-old 
girl, who travels alone on a tram to her dance school, uses 
her pay-as-you-go smart card twice a week. Incidentally, her 
mother accompanies her one-day and notices that the child 
pays the adult fee instead of the discounted fee for children. 
The child’s birthday was recorded at the time of the purchase 
of the smart card ticket and the card has been working well 
over a long period of time. The mother and the daughter 
walk into the public transportation service centre. The 
customer representative scans the card. All the trips, and the 
fees paid for them, appear on the screen. It becomes apparent 
that somehow the discount child’s smart card was read as a 
regular card. The customer representative counts the number 
of wrongly charged trips, fills a paper based refund form, and 
issues the overcharged amount in cash.  
Because a smart card user can have several tickets stored 
on the card, the ticket reader will also give information about 
the type of ticket being in use. However, there has been a lot 
of confusion over the validation of period tickets, such as the 
7 or 30-days ticket. No user would stamp such a paper ticket 

191
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
before the old ticket was expired, but many smart card ticket 
users assumed they had validated their new period smart card 
ticket before the old one was expired. They thus assumed 
that they were traveling with a valid ticket after their old 
ticket had expired. Many of these travelers were fined for 
traveling without a valid ticket. 
C. The Expired Ticket  
A paper ticket is expired when the timestamp on a ticket 
has expired. The user of a smart card will not be able to see 
if the ticket is still valid. The ticket has to be read (see 
above). If the ticket is a registered smart card (only 10% of 
all smart card tickets are registered [22]), the validity of the 
ticket can also be checked by logging onto the public 
transportation system’s website.  
At the moment, travelers have no way of checking the 
validity of their smart card ticket when they leave their home 
or office or when they are inside a metro train or regular 
train, unless they have a registered card and Internet access. 
Smart card users taking the bus or tram find out if their ticket 
has expired or not by using a card reading located inside the 
bus or tram. Our observations with smart card readers 
located with the bus driver (regional buses) made clear that 
many travelers are surprised to find out that they have not 
enough funds on their card and that they were attempting to 
travel with an expired card (see Fig. 5). In that case the user 
needs to buy an expensive one-time paper ticket from the bus 
driver or has to leave the bus. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Validating a smart card ticket on the bus. 
III. 
WHAT SMART CARD TICKET USERS SAY 
A. Methodology 
The Norwegian news media (newspapers and online 
editions) have covered the transition from paper tickets to 
smart card tickets extensively. From the introduction of the 
smart card ticket (Reisekort) in 2009 until September 2013, 
392 articles were published [13]. These articles usually 
triggered many comments from readers, e.g., [14], [15]. 
Studies in reader comments take largely place in journalism 
and media studies. Research has shown that news that 
covers public affairs, that have high social impact, and that 
is negative, receives the most reader comments [16]. 
Readers are more willing to comment when they are 
involved in the issue under discussion [17]. 
One of the news stories and commentaries we read, the 
We don’t want this! article, attracted our attention. It 
generated many reader comments in short period of time. 
Secondly, because the author proposed a solution for the 
lack of basic ticket information, some readers contributed 
with their own ideas for the design of information visibility 
in the public transportation ticket. The article plus reader 
comments provided us with a rich body of use experiences, 
plus design ideas based on these experiences. 
We used qualitative content analysis [18], [19] to study 
the content of We don’t want this! and its reader comments.  
Generally, it is not clear if reader opinions, such as this one, 
are presenting the general opinion. American research has 
shown that such opinions are often written by people who 
are older, better educated, and more conservative than the 
general public, but, on the other hand, such letters on 
controversial topics may reflect public opinion [20]. A 
second limitation to our approach is that is often difficult to 
generalize the findings of qualitative methods such as 
content analysis to the general public at large. Thirdly, we 
have no way of knowing if our online sample, the article 
author 
and 
the 
commentators 
on 
the 
article, 
is 
representational of the general public.  
We dealt with the limitations of the qualitative content 
analysis by using other methods to supplement our findings. 
We have used direct observations of people purchasing or 
validating their tickets and we conducted semi-structured 
interviews with 20 randomly chosen public transport users. 
Both observations and interviews, summarized in [1], lead 
to the same conclusion: the lack of ticket information 
visibility is problematic for travelers. 
The article was published on June 1, 2013 on the Opinion 
section of the newspaper’s website. The article received 232 
comments written by 105 unique registered commentators. 
One hundred and one of the comments contained a negative 
opinion about the new smart card ticket, 38 comments 
contained a positive opinion, while 90 comments discussed 
related aspects of the new ticket system or expressed 
opinions that did not fall under the category ‘positive’ or 
‘negative’ or they were deleted (3 comments). The entire 
discussion (now closed) was coded independently by two 
researchers and the results were discussed and synthesized. 
The analysis of the reader comments shows that many public 
transportation users experience the loss of ticket information 
as problematic.  
B. Analysis 
In this section, we present our analysis of the online 
material. We first describe and present the main themes in 
the reader comments that emerged in the content analysis 
related to the design of the system, the lack of user’s 
perspective, validation of the ticket, nostalgia over the paper 
based solution, cognitive complexity, comparison with other 
systems and solution proposals. A discussion of these 
findings in the context of information visibility and the 
implications for design will be presented in the next section. 
1) Design 
Several readers comment on the design of the new ticket 
systems, both the smart card tickets as well as the readers, 
the placement of the readers: 

192
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
“We also have small children who need a card. Which 
card shall we give them? Do we need to go down to one 
of the stations to find out which is a regular card, which 
one a children [discount] card, and how much money is 
left on the card? And sometimes we have guests and we 
experience the same problems.” (#14: 24 likes)  
“Several times a week the system [card readers] doesn’t 
work when you get on [the bus] and many of the buses 
have older equipment so you can’t read [the screen] if 
you don’t bend over to a 1.40 m. height for the one 
second that the reader gives you information.” (#56: 75 
likes/1 dislike) 
“What kind of problem is solved with the [smart card 
ticket]? I used to have a [paper] monthly pass and I 
could always see its stamp and I was sure that the same 
date would still be on the ticket when there was ticket 
control.”  (#83: 12 likes) 
“I struggle using these validation machines [card 
readers]. Only seldom I am able to read what is written 
on them before it disappears. I am often unsure if I have 
paid or not. Shameful.” (#207: 57 likes) 
2) Users’ perspective 
Several readers mention that the system is developed 
without having the interests of the users in mind: 
“Don’t understand why they who decide in our little Oslo 
can’t come down from their prestige horse and actually 
deliver a system that takes the users’ interests in 
consideration.” (#73: 71 likes) 
“[H]ave made thousands of trips with tram, metro, bus 
and train, also in other countries, but never experienced 
problems with paying that come close to being as foolish 
and user-unfriendly as in Oslo.” (#36: 67 likes) 
“The reason for making a new system must be to make it 
simpler, not for making it more difficult. Ruter [the 
public transportation company] has made it difficult for 
many customers. Tried to complain, but they don’t pay 
attention to the individual customer.”  (#15: 22 likes) 
3) Validation 
Many of the reader comments focused on validation of 
the ticket. Users experienced that card readers did not work 
so they couldn’t validate their card. The comments also show 
that there is confusion about the act of validating a ticket. 
Although validating a smart card ticket has the same function 
as stamping a ticket, many readers don’t seem to understand 
the concept of validating a smart card. Some equate paying 
for a ticket with validating a ticket, while this is only true for 
the pay-as-you-go card: 
“This is BTW called ‘buy ticket’ too; that’s what is 
written in the display when you validate a pay-as-you-go 
card.” (#61)  
“After a few days my mother was using the card [a 2-
zone card] from zone 2 to zone 1, but then it became 
clear that I had topped up the card in zone 1 […] the 
card couldn’t be validated in zone 2.” (#148: 48 likes)  
4) Paper is best 
Many readers argue that the paper ticket system was a 
better system: 
“Paper is king. Paper doesn’t need electricity and it is 
easier to fill the ink cartridge in empty stamp machines 
than to cruise around town trying to find out where the 
mistake is when all ticket machines stop working.”  (#80: 
76 likes/1 dislike) 
“I miss the 8-trip ticket. Always overview over remaining 
trips, the stamp machines at the stations worked. Simple 
and effective.”  (#109: 73 likes) 
Not everyone was satisfied with the paper ticket and its 
stamps: 
“And there where different kind of stamps and 
explanations of what was the line number, the date and 
time, and the number of zones etc. … And now we have 
tickets whose ‘content’ is invisible!:-).”  (#172: 4 likes) 
 
5) Cognitive challenges 
The new system of smart card, card readers, and buying 
tickets is perceived as too complex: 
“I don’t know how the Ruter system works (the same as 
for any tourist coming to Oslo), I have no idea where and 
how to buy a ticket.” (#5: 12 likes) 
“I have no idea what I have to do to buy a ticket for the 
bus/metro/tram. […] I miss the paper ticket.” (#34: 41 
likes) 
6) Other places – different smart card ticket systems 
Many of the readers mention smart card systems in other 
countries. They have experienced systems that are simpler 
because they have only one type of ticket or the traveler pays 
per distance and checks in and out each time the card is used:   
“Seoul, Bussan (both South-Korea), Hong Kong (+ 
many Chinese cities) Tokyo (+ many Japanese cities), 
Singapore, most of Europe (this are many cities), 
Bangkok, Moscow, St. Petersburg (Russia), Kiev 
(Ukraine), Medellin (Colombia), Rio de Janeiro, Sao 
Paulo (both Brazil), New York (USA), Sydney 
(Australia) have all brilliant metro systems, where it is 
easy to buy a ticket and understandable systems that 
always work. I have tried all of them and never had any 
problems. In contrast, I have lots of problems with the 
system in Oslo.”  (#221: 103 likes) 
7) Solutions 
Several readers propose solutions to deal with the 
problems they experience with the smart card ticket system. 
Several propose to stop investing money in an expensive 
smart card system and ongoing ticket control in order to 

193
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
provide free public transportation or at least free 
transportation for senior citizens: 
“Wouldn’t it be simpler and cheaper for all parties if 
public transportation was completely free??”  (#74: 24 
likes) 
Based on experiences in other countries, several readers 
propose a simpler system: 
“Let people pay for each time they travel, dependent on 
the distance. Gladly with plastic card or app. Thus we 
need only one option in the machines (Put money on).”  
(#102: 3 likes)  
Others have started to use the new mobile phone app, 
which allows one to order a ticket on the spot: 
“On my mobile I can see the whole time how much time I 
have left again [on my ticket].” (#57:  3 likes/1 dislike) 
On the other hand, people with older mobile phones, 
including older models of smart phones, are unable to use the 
app and with the app more responsibility is transferred to the 
user. The user now needs to make sure that the valid ticket 
can be shown on demand by a ticket controller: 
“I prefer the smart card. It is not as vulnerable for 
mistakes as the phone app, for example something as 
simple as an empty battery. I don’t say that the app is 
badly made, but it puts more responsibility and risk on 
the user”. (#178: 9 likes) 
Another commentator proposed a smart card with a small 
‘ink screen’ that could keep the ticket information visible: 
“So can one always see how much one has again …” 
(#170: 6 likes) 
8) Responsibility to learn a new system 
Many of the readers who are positive about the smart 
card system state that users who have problems with the new 
system are lazy or do not take responsibility for learning 
something new: 
“This is new, not complicated […]. It doesn’t take a long 
time to learn oneself the new system, not even the elderly. 
This is just laziness.”  (#9: 11 likes/3 dislikes) 
“Don’t people no longer have responsibility? This case 
and the other cases that were in the media lately show 
that people don’t want to familiarize themselves with the 
new system, they don’t want to learn and they don’t take 
responsibility.” (#18: 10 likes/8 dislikes)  
One reader describes explicitly what it means to take 
responsibility: 
“The only thing I need to remember is to bring my card, 
to scan it when I go on board, and to make a note when I 
buy the ticket (I put the alarm on in my mobile phone an 
hour ahead in case I am not able to go out and back 
again in one hour).”  (#87: 15 likes / 1 dislike) 
IV. 
DISCUSSION: THE VISIBILITY OF TICKET 
INFORMATION 
The majority of reader comments critical of the new 
smart card system address the issue of loss of basic ticket 
information. Not only the timestamp is now removed from 
the ticket, also other visual pointers, such as the shape and 
color that indicated the type of ticket, have disappeared. The 
answer to simple questions, such as “is this my child’s 
ticket” or “how many more trips can I make on this ticket” 
now involve a variety of devices and places. Ticket 
information, once located on a piece of paper in the hand of 
the user, is now distributed and networked. Stalder [21] calls 
this networked visibility, which is “created by the capacity 
to record, store, transmit, access communication, action, and 
states generated through digital networks”. Stalder presents 
two types of visibility: horizontal visibility, pertaining to 
information becoming visible to users; and vertical 
visibility, pertaining to what information the service 
providers can see. While users can often manage their 
horizontal 
visibility, 
e.g., 
what 
information 
about 
themselves becomes visible to others, they have no control 
over the vertical visibility of their information. Service 
providers have access to the information of all users, but this 
visibility is one way, it is invisible to the users. 
Based on Stalder, we can differentiate between the 
horizontal and vertical visibility of ticket information. We 
understand horizontal visibility as the visibility of ticket 
information to the user of the public transportation system. 
The paper ticket user has immediate horizontal visibility, at 
all times and places. The ticket information is directly 
visible on the paper ticket – when the ticket is in use, not in 
use, or expired. The smart card user’s horizontal visibility is 
limited to particular places: when the ticket is purchased, 
when it is read or scanned, or when it is checked on the web 
(only for registered cards). As we saw in the previous 
section, many travelers are insecure about the validity of 
their smart card. Travelers taking the bus or metro can only 
found out if their ticket is still valid after they have boarded, 
unless they have a registered ticket (only 10% of the smart 
card ticket holders) or are close to a ticket machine at metro 
stations and main bus stations. 
We understand vertical visibility as the visibility of the 
ticket 
information 
to 
the 
provider 
of 
the 
public 
transportation system. The provider has other ticket 
information needs than the user. The provider is interested 
in use information, such as the users’ frequency, time, and 
destination of travel, and what type of ticket they use. This 
information is the basis for organizing public transportation 
schedules, the frequency of departures, and the number of 
routes. The provider had only limited vertical visibility 
when the paper tickets were in use and therefore had to 
implement user surveys to get this information. With the 
introduction of the smart card, the provider has full access to 
ticket information. 
A. Networked Visibility 
In our case, the networked visibility created by 
embedding computing and networking capabilities in a 

194
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
public transportation ticket has decreased the horizontal 
visibility of the users and significantly increased the vertical 
visibility of the provider. The loss of horizontal visibility 
negatively affects a large number of travelers who are 
uncomfortable using their smart card. They cannot transfer 
their familiarity, skill, and experience in using the paper 
ticket to the smart card. This becomes especially clear in the 
reader comments on validation. Travelers do not see the 
similarity between stamping a paper ticket and validating a 
ticket via a card reader. They experience new problems, 
such as card readers that do not work or cannot validate a 
smart card ticket. If they do validate or read their card, the 
basic ticket information is only visible for 2 seconds. 
Therefore, many smart card users express their insecurity 
about the validity of their tickets when they travel and 
several relate stories of unpleasant experiences during ticket 
control. 
B. Mobile Phone App 
None of the travelers, who were positive regarding the 
new smart card system, addressed the issue of ticket 
information visibility of the smart card ticket. They had 
found ‘work arounds’ for the loss of basic ticket 
information, e.g., setting an alarm on the mobile phone or 
validating the ticket every time they used public 
transportation, even if their ticket type did not require this. 
Many of the positive travelers are now using Ruter’s mobile 
app, which was launched in December 2012. The app 
provides all basic ticket information, including a count 
down function for travelers who bought a single ticket with 
one-hour validity (see Fig. 6). 
 
 
Figure 6.  An adult single trip ticket: the green zone states: valid and the 
timer shows the exact amount of validity time left 
C. New Concerns 
The increase of the vertical visibility of the provider can 
create new concerns in terms of privacy as the whereabouts 
of smart card users can be recorded, stored, and transmitted. 
These data can be accessed or aggregated for uses not 
directly related to the public transportation system, such as 
marketing. This seems less of a concern in Norway. At the 
introduction of the smart ticket, Ruter wanted all cards to be 
registered (linked to a person) and required cards to be 
validated before each trip. These demands soon disappeared 
after intervention by the Norwegian Data Protection 
Authority in 2009. At the moment 90% of more than 
600.000 smart cards used in public transportation in the 
Oslo region are not registered and there are strict rules about 
storage and use of data produced by the 10% registered 
cards. 
V. 
DESIGN ALTERNATIVES 
The design of the smart card ticket builds forth on some 
of the characteristics of the paper ticket: tickets need to be 
validated before use and the points of validation can be 
found at the same locations as the paper tickets. The main 
difference is the visibility of ticket information. On paper 
tickets, information was visible at all times and places 
because it was a local information, it was locally stored on 
the paper ticket. As we have seen in the previous section, 
there are serious issues with visibility of information on 
smart card tickets. Can we make this characteristic of the 
paper ticket available on the smart card ticket and thus 
capitalize on the familiarity with the paper ticket? 
A. ARTick: Augmenting the Smart Ticket 
As described in [1], in order to improve the user experience 
with smart tickets and offer local visibility of the ticketing 
information, we made a simple prototype: ARTick 
(Augmented Reality Ticket) (Fig. 7). ARTick turns any 
smart phone into a mobile smart card reader using NFC 
standards, see also [10]. NFC is a short-range wireless 
technology, enabling one-way and two-way communication 
between smart phones or between smart phones and other 
wireless devices, in our case the contactless smart card [23]. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  A 3D rendering of smart card ticket information using a NFC-
enabled smart phone with ARTick [1]. 
On 
NFC-enabled 
mobile 
phones, 
the 
ARTick 
application uses NFC to read the information off the card. 
The application enables the user to check the type of ticket, 
the value and duration of the ticket, as well as the latest 
transactions. ARTick enables ticket information to be read 

195
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in 2D and 3D, augmented using the camera as shown in Fig. 
7, as well as audio for the visual impaired.  
Non-NFC-enabled smart phones use the camera to take 
an image of the card number on the back of the smart card 
ticket, see lower left corner on Fig. 1, and use Optical 
Character 
Recognition 
(OCR). 
This 
card 
number 
corresponds with ticket information stored on the website of 
the public transportation provider. Once the number is 
recognized, a user can access the same information as the 
provider.  
The addition of audio is particularly interesting for users 
who have issues with their vision, whether it is related to 
sight challenges or various forms of dyslexia. ARTick 
follows universal design principles [24]. ARTick thus 
enables all mobile phones with camera, smart or not, to 
check the validity of the smart card ticket. After the launch 
of the mobile app [25], this solution’s appeal diminished.  
The smart phone Ruter app solves the problem of visibility.  
ARTick may, however, still be of interest for groups with 
special needs or travelers without smart phones. 
B. Solution Suggestions by Online Commentators 
In the Introduction, we stated that the author of We don’t 
want this!, proposes one solution: “receive a receipt every 
time you use the card”. She writes: 
 
“The system is not based on legal principles. It does not 
take into account two important principles: 
1. You must have a receipt each time you pay a 
commodity. 
2. This should be so not only when you buy a ticket for 
some period, or even buy a single ticket or just put 
money on your card, but also whenever you use 
your card. I see from other posts that you are 
referring to the Canary Islands, where this is a 
practice on their buses. I have spent so much, I have 
so much left. This principle applies in most other 
cases in business. When I put my money on the card, 
I borrow this money to Router until I use it to 
travel.” 
 
As mentioned in Section IV, a smart phone based 
ticketing service is now available, see Fig. 10. The app won 
‘The Best App award’ at Mobile Trends conference [25]. 
However, not everyone owns a smart phone. In the analysis 
of the customers’ comments we found the following 
conversation, pointing to several issues regarding this 
solution, e.g., expense related to acquisition of a smart 
phone, usability issues regarding the purchase of the ticket: 
“Mobile app is definitely a future oriented and good 
solution. Ruter / NSB should enter into an agreement 
with 
Telenor 
[telecommunications 
provider] 
as 
affordable smart phone and subscription to those who 
lack this. Let those born before 1940 go free, and sell 
day passes to tourists. And by all means, the app must be 
working in the whole country as soon as possible.”  
(#54: 8 likes)  
“This phone, that the app is attached to, do they send it 
to you in mail, free of charge?” (#55: 40 likes/1 dislike) 
 “Of course, but first you must use an order app and an 
email app on your existing mobile phone, or use 
password app to receive a password to a website where 
you can obtain the user name to an app, which provides 
access to a password that you can use to log onto a 
website …” (#56) 
Among user commentaries, we find several that propose 
alternative solutions. Most notably, a solution based on 
SMS: 
“Why can not the ticket be paid through a regular SMS, 
for those who do not have smart phones? I'm not saying 
that mobile is the only way to pay, but since there is app-
ticket requiring smart phone, it should have been SMS-
ticket too! You send an SMS with the typical B [Barn - 
Norwegian for children] for children, H for seniors 
[Honor citizens] V for adult [Voksen - adult] and get a 
code (which ticket controllers can check) with an 
expiration time and ticket type specification. If you need 
to have multiple zones, simply send B2, V2 etc - very 
easy.” (#78: 21 likes) 
Another design suggestion among commentators is: 
“What if you have a small ink display cards that get 
power from the computer right after you check, just to 
refresh the ink on the screen and become passive again? 
So you can always see how much is left.” (#86: 6 likes) 
“Why not have a solution where I do not have to check 
or validate. E.g., what about selling 100 trips (more or 
less) and an optional notification about the number of 
remaining trips? The more trips you buy the higher 
discount 
and 
flexibility 
for 
those 
who 
travel 
infrequently.”  (#44: 11 likes). 
“Introduce the city tax, get all ticket controllers fired, as 
well as everyone who worked on this s… ticket system, 
and make the collective traffic free.”  (#58: 3 likes) 
All of the above suggestions, explicitly or implicitly, 
address the visibility of the information. On a mobile app 
solution, it is already there. The solution by the author of We 
don’t want this!, the SMS solution proposed by the 
commentator #78, as well as the ink display on the ticket 
suggestion by commentator #86, all have explicit visibility 
at all times, and build on a familiarity with the old system. 
In the old system, the stamp in itself was a receipt for 
transaction. The last two suggestions simply remove the 
validation, or tickets, and thus address the visibility 
indirectly.  
C. Wearables: an Emerging Trend in Smart Ticketing  
Massachusetts based Sesame Ring project, supported by 
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), 
started in 2013, see [26].  The designers involved in the 
project managed to reduce the size of the RFID tag and 

196
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
place it inside a ring, see Fig. 8. Rings are custom sized and 
users may create their own designs for the front of the ring.  
 
 
Figure 8.  Wearable technology seems to be the direction for 
transportation solutions. Photo: Kickstarter, [27]. 
A similar solution has been developed for London’s 
transit smartcard Oyster, see [28].  Fig. 9 shows the card 
worn as a wrist-band attachment.  
The MBTA and London transport services are possibly 
different than services offered in Oslo, but the wearable 
tickets offer one possibility to code type of the card: color. 
One could then instantly and easily identify those carrying 
monthly, weekly, daily or any other type of ticket offered by 
Ruter. However, the problems related to visibility of 
expiration time would still remain unsolved, assuming 
current rules and regulations around the use of the card.  
 
Figure 9.  A wearable solution replacing the plastic smart card is proposed 
for London transport. Photo: via Yanko Design 
Many large smart phone producers, e.g., Samsung, 
Apple and Sony, see [29], are in a race to push their smart 
watches on the market. The watches could easily provide 
visibility of both ticket type, and validity period. As with a 
smart phone, though, this solution will not fit all travelers. It 
would involve investment into the device and skills to 
operate it. For many travelers though, also in Oslo, this 
could provide a solution scoring high on user satisfaction. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The move from paper-based to smart card-based public 
transportation tickets did not result in enhanced user 
experience. Travelers could not use their familiarity with the 
paper ticket when the smart card ticket was introduced. Our 
study showed that the lack of information visibility, the 
immediate and continuous access to ticket information, is a 
prerequisite for users to capitalize on their familiarity with 
the paper ticket. 
The loss of this visibility resulted in negative user 
experiences in the three main ticketing activities: purchasing 
a ticket, using a ticket, and knowing when a ticket is 
expired. This became especially clear in the discussion of 
the notion of the validation of the ticket. The loss of 
information visibility of the smart card user led to a 
situation in which the familiarity with stamping a paper 
ticket could not be transferred to the notion of validating a 
smart card ticket.  
Also new concerns emerged after the move from paper 
tickets to smart card tickets. Initially, Ruter wanted every 
traveler to register (personalized) the smart card ticket and 
to validate the ticket every time the public transportation 
system was used. In this way, the provider would gain 
access to user and use information (vertical visibility), 
creating new concerns about privacy. Ruter could not 
maximize 
its 
vertical 
information 
visibility, 
after 
intervention by the Norwegian Data Protection Authority, 
but still has access to more use data than was available when 
the paper tickets were still in use. 
The concepts of networked visibility and horizontal and 
vertical visibility helped us to understand the emergence of 
new user experience issues and concerns when computing 
and networking technology is embedded in a transportation 
ticket. These concepts were also used to explore solutions, 
such as how to restore the horizontal visibility of ticket 
information, 
the 
immediate 
and 
continuous 
ticket 
information to the users. We discussed several solutions that 
increase the information visibility of the smart card ticket, 
such as ARTick, an app that turns a smart phone into a 
smart card reader, a smart card with display, and the 
addition of a paper receipt every time the smart card is 
validated. We also discussed wearable smart tickets, which 
we believe will enhance user experience but not necessarily 
information visibility. Ruterbillett, Ruter’s mobile phone 
app, fully restores information visibility to the user, but can 
only be used on latest models mobile phones.  
In further research, we will continue studying the role of 
information visibility in smart technologies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. van der Velden, A. L. Culén, J. Herstad, and A. Atif, 
“Networked visibility: The case of smart card ticket 
information,” Proc. Sixth International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 2013 (ACHI 
2013), March 2013, pp. 228–233. 
[2] “Ruter endrer smartbilletten - Osloby.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.osloby.no/nyheter/Ruter-endrer-smartbilletten-
6744324.html#.UjIGkD-568A. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[3] B. A. Aubert and G. Hamel, “Adoption of smart cards in the 
medical sector: the Canadian experience,” Social Science & 
Medicine, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 879–894, Oct. 2001. 
[4] C. R. Plouffe, J. S. Hulland, and M. Vandenbosch, “Research 
report: Richness versus parsimony in modeling technology 
adoption decisions--Understanding merchant adoption of a 

197
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
smart card-based payment system,” Information Systems 
Research, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 208–222, June 2001. 
[5] F. Resatsch, U. Sandner, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, 
“Do point of sale RFID-based information services make a 
difference? Analyzing consumer perceptions for designing 
smart product information services in retail business,” 
Electron. Market., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 216–231, August 2008. 
[6] R. T. Rust and P. K. Kannan, “E-service: a new paradigm for 
business in the electronic environment,” Commun. ACM, 
vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 36–42, June 2003. 
[7] S.-Y. Chou and Y. Ekawati, “Cost reduction of public 
transportation systems with information visibility enabled by 
RFID technology,” in Global Perspective for Competitive 
Enterprise, Economy and Ecology, S.-Y. Chou, A. Trappey, 
J. Pokojski, and S. Smith, Eds. London: Springer, 2009, pp. 
553–561. 
[8] H. Iseki, A. Demisch, B. D. Taylor, and A. C. Yoh, 
“Evaluating the costs and benefits of transit smart cards,” 
California PATH Research Report, Berkely: University of 
California, 2008. 
[9] N. Mallat, M. Rossi, V. K. Tuunainen, and A. Öörni, “An 
empirical investigation of mobile ticketing service adoption 
in public transportation,” Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 
12, no. 1, pp. 57–65, Jan. 2008. 
[10] F. Morgner, D. Oepen, W. Müller, and J.-P. Redlich, “Mobile 
smart card reader using NFC-enabled smartphones,” in 
Security 
and 
Privacy 
in 
Mobile 
Information 
and 
Communication Systems, A. U. Schmidt, G. Russello, I. 
Krontiris, and S. Lian, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, 
pp. 24–37. 
[11] A. J. Sellen and R. H. R. Harper, The Myth of the Paperless 
Office. The MIT Press, 2001. 
[12] P. Dourish, “What we talk about when we talk about 
context,” Personal Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 
19–30, 2004. 
[13] Retriever, “Retriever research: ruter AND reisekort”. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://web.retriever-info.com/ 
services/archive.html. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[14] “Du risikerer å måtte betale for gammelt Ruter-rot,” 
Dagbladet.no. [Online]. Available: http://www.dagbladet.no/ 
2011/10/26/nyheter/innenriks/kollektivtrafikk/18775825/. 
[Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[15] “Feil i Ruters systemer ga Marianne bot på t-banen,” 
Dagbladet.no. [Online]. Available: http://www.dagbladet.no/ 
2012/08/16/nyheter/kollektivtrafikk/ruter/bot/22983916/. 
 [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
 
[16] P. Weber, “Discussions in the comments section: Factors 
influencing 
participation 
and 
interactivity 
in 
online 
newspapers’ reader comments,” New Media Society, doi 
1461444813495165, Jul. 2013. 
[17] N. Diakopoulos and M. Naaman, “Towards quality discourse 
in online news comments,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work, New 
York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 133–142. 
[18] S. Elo and H. Kyngäs, “The qualitative content analysis 
process,” Journal of Advanced Nursing, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 
107–115, 2008. 
[19] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology,” Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 77–101, 2006. 
[20] M. McCluskey and J. Hmielowski, “Opinion expression 
during social conflict: Comparing online reader comments 
and letters to the editor,” Journalism, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 303–
319, April 2012. 
[21] F. Stalder, “Politics of networked visibility,” Acoustic Space, 
no. 10, pp. 13–19, 2011. 
[22] J. B. Bakken, “Aner ikke hvem 90 prosent av kundene er,” 
Dagens 
IT. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at 
http://www.dagensit.no/k/mappami/article2618470.ece. 
[Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[23] D. K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and 
Applications in Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency 
Identification and Near-Field Communication, Third Edition. 
John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[24] S. Goldsmith, Universal Design. Routledge, 2012. 
[25] “RuterBillett er kåret til årets app | Ruter.” [Online]. 
Available: https://ruter.no/verdt-avite/presse/pressemeldinger/ 
ruterbillett-er-arets-app/. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[26] “MIT students create MBTA Charlie Card ring,” Boston 
Magazine. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/blog/2013/08/22/mbta
-charlie-card-ring-kickstarter/. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[27] L. LaBianca, “Sesame ring - Where will it take you?,” 
Kickstarter. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1066401427/sesame-
ring-where-will-it-take-you. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[28] “Accessorize with London’s fashionable new Oyster Card,” 
TheCityFix. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://thecityfix.com/blog/accessorize-with-londons-
fashionable-new-oyster-card/. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
[29] “Samsung Galaxy Gear wrist watch | Technologist.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.technogist.com/2013/08/samsung-
galaxy-gear-wrist-watch.html. [Accessed: 05-Dec-2013]. 
 
 
Figure 10.  The new Ruter mobile app. One can clearly see the type of the ticket and the expiration date/time: 30-day ticket expires in 24 hours. Photo: Ruter.  

