AD4ON: An ITS-based Decision Making Architecture for Opportunistic Networking
Rodrigo Silva1,2, Jean-Marie Bonnin1,2
IRISA / IMT Atlantique / INRIA / CNRS / University of Rennes1
Rennes, France
Email: rodrigo.silva@imt-atlantique.fr, jean-marie.bonnin@irisa.fr
Thierry Ernst2
YoGoKo2
Paris, France
Email: thierry.ernst@yogoko.fr
Abstract—To participate in smarter transportation systems,
vehicles need to increase their environment awareness. This
could be achieved by enabling vehicles to communicate with
their environment. Once vehicles become connected, an ecosystem
of applications and services could be developed around them,
enabling the information exchange with other connected devices
and contributing to a Cooperative Intelligent Transportation
Systems (C-ITS). The environment of connected and cooper-
ative vehicles is characterized by its heterogeneity. Numerous
stakeholders are involved in providing various services, each
of them with speciﬁc requirements. Moreover, countries may
have speciﬁcs regulations. Therefore, a single access technology
to connect all these heterogeneity is impossible. For ubiquitous
connectivity it is necessary to use existing wireless communication
technologies such as vehicular WiFi (ITS-G5, DSRC), urban
WiFi, 802.15.4, and cellular. In such heterogeneous network
environment, applications and services cannot take into account
all technology particularities. A ITS communication architecture
should hide to the application the underlying differences of access
networks, providing seamless communication independently of
the access technology. Based on the ITS architecture designed
by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), we
proposed the AD4ON, a modular decision maker architecture
capable to choose the best available communication proﬁle and
path for each data ﬂow in an heterogeneous and dynamic network
environment. The proposed architecture manages requirements
and preferences from different actors (e.g., applications, users,
administrators and regulators). It considers the context informa-
tion (e.g., vehicle speed, battery level), and it takes into account
the route conditions between two communicating devices. It could
make proactive decision taking into account short-term previsions
about the network environment.
Keywords—ISO TC 204; ETSI TC ITS; ITS station communi-
cation architecture; C-ITS; decision making.
I. INTRODUCTION
The number of connected devices is growing fast around the
world. According to Cisco Visual Networking Index (VNI)
forecast, there will be more than 20 billions of connected
devices by 2020 [2], i.e., an average of 3.2 devices per capita.
These objects are components of a network known as the
Internet of Things (IoT), where each object has the possibility
to acquire and exchange data with others. This scenario
enables the development of smart cities, where vehicles are
supposed to be one of the communicating objects. According
to Gartner research company, connected cars would be a major
element of the IoT [3].
To participate in smarter transportation systems, vehicles
need to increase their environment awareness. This could
be achieved by enabling vehicles to communicate with their
environment. Such connection could be local between nearby
devices or global, i.e., connection over the Internet.
Once vehicles become connected, an ecosystem of applica-
tions and services can be developed around them. Nowadays,
we are connected to Internet through our computers and smart-
phones. In the future, the vehicles will be directly connected
too, supporting a variety of applications just like smartphones
do. For example, vehicles could connect to the Internet to
enhance driver and passenger experience, improving the nav-
igation services and offering on-board Internet connectivity.
Vehicles can exchange information with other devices in
a smart city environment in order to improve safety and
driver assistance, e.g., preventing car collisions and enabling
automatic emergency call services (eCall). In this context,
users, devices and vehicles need to be connected anywhere,
anytime with anything. Such connections will enable the
information exchange between vehicles and their environment
for a Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems (C-ITS).
However, a single access technology to connect all these
heterogeneity of services and devices is impractical or even
impossible. For ubiquitous connectivity it is necessary to use
existing wireless technologies, such as vehicular WiFi (ITS-
G5, and DSRC), urban WiFi (e.g., 802.11 ac, g, n), 802.15.4,
WiMAX, cellular (3G, 4G, and 5G under preparation) [4]–[6].
Each of these networks has speciﬁc characteristics in terms of
bandwidth, data rate, latency, security and others. Due to this
network heterogeneity and its complementary characteristics,
more connectivity opportunities are available. Mobile devices
equipped with multiple communication capabilities can use
multiple access technologies simultaneously in order to max-
imize ﬂows satisfaction (e.g., to maximize communication
bandwidth, to reduce latency, and others) and to satisfy com-
munication requirements (e.g., security, monetary cost, trafﬁc
load balancing among available networks, and others).
The environment of connected and cooperative vehicles is
characterized by its heterogeneity. There are a wide variety
of applications, each one with speciﬁc requirements, e.g.,
safety services usually need low amount of bandwidth but
are highly sensitive to delays, while entertainment services
like video streaming need more bandwidth, but they are delay
tolerant. There are a variety of users with different preferences.
11
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Countries could have speciﬁcs regulations. There are a variety
of access technologies, each one with speciﬁc characteristics in
terms of bandwidth, data rate, security and others. Moreover,
vehicles can move at high speed and frequently change its
network environment.
In such heterogeneous and dynamic network environment,
applications and services cannot take into account all tech-
nology particularities, unless they explicitly need it. The
communication architecture has to hide to the application the
underlying differences of access networks, providing seamless
communication independently of the access technology. It
should be capable to handle multiple access technologies
simultaneously selecting the most appropriate access network
for each ﬂow. Such an architecture should choose the path,
i.e., the route between two communicating nodes that best
meets the communication requirements (e.g., a local connec-
tion between nearby devices or a global connection over the
Internet). Moreover, in order to have seamless communication
in such dynamic environment it is desirable to anticipate
network changes, i.e., it is desirable that the communication
architecture performs proactive decisions taking into account
the short-term prevision about the network availability.
Based on our research, on the ITS architecture proposed
by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) and
a survey of the litterature, we identiﬁed the good properties
such a decision mechanism should have. We propose here
the Ant-based Decision Maker for Opportunistic Networking
(AD4ON), a new Decision Maker (DM) architecture that meet
such identiﬁed properties. Such DM architecture is capable
to manage requirements and preferences from different actors
(e.g., applications, users, administrators and regulators), it
takes into account the short-term prevision about the network
environment and it considers the context information (e.g.,
vehicle speed, battery level), in order to make proactive
decisions. The proposed DM architecture is developed in an
ISO/ETSI standard compliant way.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II overviews main trends in attempts to establish an
harmonized communication-centric architecture for Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS). Section III reviews some related
work. The proposed AD4ON architecture as well as its integra-
tion in the ITS-S communication architecture are described in
Section IV. Section V concludes the paper and proposes future
directions.
II. ITS STANDARDIZATION
In the absence of a standardized communication architec-
ture, services tend to be developed in silos, i.e., services are
developed in a self-contained system. Usually, these services
are developed for a speciﬁc problem and use a speciﬁc commu-
nication technology. Data is formatted according to previously
known constraints of such communication technology. It is the
case for example for current services of ﬂeet management,
emergency call (eCall), electric vehicle charging and data
collection. As a result of the silo approach, heterogeneous and
isolated solutions are deployed. It is therefore challenging and
expensive to leverage them to provide new services.
In order to enable interoperability between such differ-
ent existing technologies and cooperation between services,
standardization bodies and researchers have been working
toward a convergent architecture. The IEEE standardization
body deﬁned a family of standards for Wireless Access in the
Vehicular Environment (WAVE) [7]. The WAVE architecture
is shown in Figure 1. Such architecture is mainly devoted to
V2X communications, which are based on the IEEE 802.11
standard [8]. The WAVE architecture presents a management
plan and the capability to manage multiple channels. Despite
its capability to manage multiple channels, such set of stan-
dards is not able to exploit heterogeneous wireless access
technologies.
LLC
IPv6
WSMP
(WAVE Short Message 
Protocol)
WME (WAVE Management Entity)
             802.11p / WAVE MAC   
             802.11p / WAVE PHY
TCP/UDP
PLME
(Physical Layer ME)
MLME
(MAC Layer ME)
Multi-
channel
Operation
WAVE Applications
(IEEE 1609.1)
Security
Figure 1. WAVE architecture
In order to establish an harmonized communication-centric
architecture for ITS, ISO and ETSI have proposed a reference
ITS communication architecture supported by nodes called
ITS Stations (ITS-S), where each ITS-S (e.g., vehicles) can
handle its communication through different access technolo-
gies [9]. This architecture is shown on Figure 2. The proposed
AD4ON is based on such ITS architecture, and leverage
on its capability to manage heterogeneous wireless access
technologies.
The concept of the ITS-S communication architecture is to
abstract applications from both the access technologies and
the networks that transport the information between commu-
nicating nodes. Therefore, applications are not limited to a
single access technology, but they can take advantage from
all available technologies. While the lower layers can be
independently managed without impacting applications.
In such architecture, two cross layers entities, i.e., “ITS
Station Management” and “ITS Station Security” are respon-
sible to station management functionalities and to provide
security and privacy services, respectively. Since applications
are developed regardless to communication networks, “ITS
Station Management” entity is responsible, among others to
choose the best network interface for each application. In
12
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Security
Applications
Safety-
related 
Applications
Trafﬁc 
efﬁciency
Other 
applications
(Infotainment)
MA-SAP
SA-SAP
FA-SAP
Facilities
Application support
Information Support
MF-SAP
FA-SAP
Session Support
SF-SAP
NF-SAP
Networking & Transport
ITS dedicated transport
ITS 
dedicated
MN-SAP
TCP/UDP
Geo-
Routing
Other 
Protocols
IPv6 + 
Mobility
IN-SAP
SN-SAP
NF-SAP
Access
IN-SAP
Other 
Media
CALM
media2
Media GPRS
Media EDGE
CALM
media2
Media WiMAX
Media UMTS
CALM
media2
Media M5
Media WiFi
2G
3G
WLAN
MI-SAP
SI-SAP
MM-SAP
SM-SAP
Security Information Base
(Trust, Identity, Privacy, Key & Certiﬁcat Management)
Authentication, Authorization, 
Conﬁdentiality, Proﬁle Management
Firewall and Intrusion Management
Hardware 
Security Module 
(HSM)
Management
ITS Station
Management
Networking
Management
Cross Interface 
Management
Management Information Base
Cross Interface 
Management
Networking
Management
ITS Station
Management
Management Information Base
Figure 2. The reference ITS station communication architecture.
order to manage different process in the ITS-S, such cross
layers entities communicate with the horizontal layers: “ITS
Station Access Technologies” layer that is responsible for
media access control and provides data transmission through
different access technologies, such as vehicular WiFi (ITS-
G5, DSRC), urban WiFi, 802.15.4, WiMAX, and cellular (3G,
4G, and 5G under preparation); “ITS Station Networking &
Transport” layer, which is responsible to execute operations
like packet routing, path establishment, path monitoring and
Internet Protocol (IP) mobility; “ITS Station Facilities” layer
that provides applications, information and communication
supports (e.g., encode/decode message support, time-stamping
and geo-stamping) and “ITS Station Application” layer that
provides Human-Machine Interface (HMI).
Network Mobility Basic Support Protocol (NEMO) [10] has
been chosen by several standardization bodies for IP-based
mobility management, including ISO and ETSI. NEMO allows
a Mobile Router (MR) to manage the IP mobility for all mobile
network attached to it. The MR maintains a bi-directional
tunnel (protected by IPsec) to a server in the cloud referred
to as the Home Agent (HA), as shown on Figure 3. For the
mobile network, it is allocated an IPv6 preﬁx identifying the
mobile network in the IP addressing topology as permanently
attached to the HA. Based on this preﬁx, the MR assigns
unchangeable addresses to its attached nodes called Mobile
Network Nodes (MNN). When a new network is available, MR
generates a new auto conﬁgured IP address (Care-of-address
(CoA)) within the new visited network and notiﬁes them to
the HA. Only the MR and the HA are aware of the network
change, since MNNs remain connected to the MR through
their permanent IP address.
MRs can be equipped with multiple communication inter-
faces. Multiple Care of Addresses Registration (MCoA) [11]
is used to managed these communication interfaces simultane-
ously, as illustrated on Figure 3. MCoA enables the registration
BS
2G/3G
 
AR
Internet
 
AR
AP
802.11p
Mobility Manager
(HA)
 
AR
Routing table: 
Green on tunnel 1
Bleue on tunnel 2
Routing table:
Green on tunnel 1
Bleue on tunnel 2
Tunnel 1
Tunnel 2
Routing policies
MNN1
MNP::LFN1Id
MNN2
MNP::LFN2Id
Home Network
Binding Cache:
HoA - CoA1
HoA - CoA2
Preﬁx Table: 
MNP - HoA
Visited
Network
Bindings:
HoA - CoA1
HoA - CoA2
Mobile Router
(MR)
Correspondant Nodes
(CN2)
Correspondant Nodes
(CN1)
Figure 3. NEMO and MCoA.
of several CoAs for a single MR. In this case, the MR could
establish multiple tunnels through each of its communication
interfaces and the HA.
The possibility of having multiple applications in an ITS-S
simultaneously competing for communication resources leads
to the need for a controlled access to these resources. In
such a control, requirements and objectives presented by
application, user preferences, set of rules (e.g., regulations,
network operator policies, etc.) and communication protocols’
status are used by the ITS-S Management Entity (SME),
from “ITS-S Management” cross layer, to select the best
suited communication proﬁle and path per communication
source. The determination of the path implies the selection
of the communication interface, the logical node in the access
network to which the ITS station is locally attached (ingress
anchor node) and the intermediary nodes in the network used
to reach the destination node (egress anchor node). Aware
about paths characteristics, the SME can choose the path
that best meets the communication requirements (e.g., a local
connection between nearby devices or a global connection over
the Internet). The methods to determine the most appropriate
path and to perform ﬂow-interface mapping is implementation
speciﬁc as it could be a competitive factor between stakehold-
ers. It is thus not speciﬁed in the ISO standards.
III. RELATED WORK
Several researches have been worked on the development
of a DM architecture for network selection in heterogeneous
network environment. Authors of [12] proposed a modular
architecture for multi-homed mobile terminals. In such ar-
chitecture, a middleware interacts with “higher-layers” and
“lower-layers”. The “higher-layers” gather the user and the
administrator preferences, handle the applications’ require-
ments, and detect the current terminal capabilities. The “lower-
layers” detect available access networks and provide real-
time information about the interfaces and access network
capabilities, as well as it handles the selection execution
process, i.e., it maps the application’s ﬂows on the preferred
access network. It does not consider the path condition of a
13
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

given ﬂow between sender and destination nodes. It does not
consider the near future of the network environment, i.e., the
short-term prevision access network resources.
Paper [13] proposes a context-aware management solution
to maximize the satisfaction of the applications while respect-
ing the stakeholders policy rules. The proposed framework
collect and combining policies from stakeholders (e.g., user,
administrators and applications). Based on such policies and
context information, it evaluates the network that better match
the communication requirements. Once the best network is
chosen, the ﬂow routing is enforced on the device using
NEMO and MCoA. Such architecture does not consider the
path condition experienced by a ﬂow or the near future of the
network environment.
Paper [14] proposes a framework for supporting network
continuity in vehicular IPv6 communications. Such frame-
work follows the ISO/ETSI guidelines for the development
of cooperative ITS systems and it is based on standardized
technologies, such as NEMO protocol to provide an inte-
gral management of IPv6. However, it considers cooperation
between mobile devices and networks based on the IEEE
802.21 standard (Media Independent Handover (MIH)), i.e.,
it considers that all networks support speciﬁc functionalities
from IEEE 802.21 standard [15].
Authors of paper [16] propose a mobile IPv6-based mobility
management framework in a C-ITS standard compliant way.
This framework uses dynamic and static context information to
network discovery and selection for Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
(V2I) communication. The proposed system uses the Local
Dynamic Map (LDM), a conceptual data storage entity, to
store and manage context information [17]. It extends the
structure of Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM) messages
to acquire both network conditions and application context
information. Then, such acquired information are stored in
the LDM. Network information are acquired by cooperation
between vehicles and networks by using IEEE 802.21 MIH or
Access Network Discovery and Selection Function (ANDSF)
signalling schemes [15], [18]. Based on the current vehi-
cle speed and direction, the mobility manager calculates its
prediction window, i.e., the geographical positions for which
it wants to receive candidates access networks. The vehicle
sends this prediction window to the Roadside Unit (RSU),
which provides back the network context information. Based
on such information the mobility manager makes predictive
decision about wireless networks for the V2I communication.
The decision making algorithm is based on Analytic Hierarchy
Process (AHP) methodology. Like paper [14], this paper
assumes that access networks support speciﬁc functionalities
from IEEE 802.21 standard.
Based on the MIH abstraction layer, the author of paper [19]
designed a cross layer framework to manage the mobility
through heterogeneous networks. An entity called “Cross
Layer Management Entity (XLME)” is designed between the
application and transport layer. Such entity is responsible
to take into account the application requirements during the
decision process and to manage the interaction between lower
and upper layers. When a change is detected in the network
by the MIHF (e.g., new network detected), it veriﬁes the new
network efﬁciency based on the application requirements. If
the new network meets application requirements, the handover
is based on the RSSI, i.e., the handover is triggered only if
the detected network is more efﬁcient than the current one in
term of RSSI. Despite to consider application requirements to
list network alternatives for a given application, the decision
is based only in the network signal level.
Paper [20] proposes an mobility management architecture
in the case of network mobility handover, i.e., handover
performed by a MR on behalf of Mobile Node (MN) attached
to it. The proposed mechanism is based on the IEEE 802.21
standard to acquire context information about network envi-
ronment. The architecture proposes some functional entities in
the MR side. A handover manager module is responsible to
make network selection, while a context information module is
responsible to extracts context information from both attached
users and neighboring radio access networks. Such acquired
information are stored in a local MR database. It is supposed
that mobile users attached to the MR are able to acquire
context information. The handover manager module uses the
context information stored in the MR database, as well as,
context information from other networks and handover policies
received from the core network, in order to perform network
selection and start the handover process. Such paper considers
that all networks have the capability to cooperate with the
decision maker (e.g., using IEEE 802.21 standard).
According to paper [21], as MIH works on the link layer,
application and user context information are ignored. This
paper proposes a enhanced MIH framework by integrating
information from application, user and network in the process
of network selection. It designs some functional modules.
A context aware module is responsible to acquire informa-
tion from applications and user. Based on these acquired
information and in link layer information from well know
MIH entities, a handover control module is responsible to
rank the network candidates and to select the best one. The
enhanced MIH framework can trigger handover in both client
and network side. The proposed architecture does not consider
the path condition experienced by a ﬂow or the near future of
the network environment.
Paper [22] proposes the “Intentional Networking”, a mech-
anism that considers applications characteristics for better
network selection in heterogeneous network. This framework
does not consider user preferences or administrator poli-
cies. It uses a network monitoring module called “scout”,
which periodically attempts to establish network connections,
and measures the throughput and latency of the connection.
Besides the network conditions received from “scout”, the
decision maker module receives application information. Ap-
plications can express two kind of information to DM module:
information about the data size to be transmitted (small
or large) and information about latency dependence, i.e., if
application is delay sensitive or not. Based on such application
information the decision maker sort the applications data in
14
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a predeﬁned preference order, e.g., latency sensitive preferred
over non latency sensitive. Therefore, when the decision maker
is informed by “scout” module that a given network is able
to send data, it pulls data from the ﬁrst application in the
sorted list. When none of available networks matches with
applications requirements, applications’ ﬂow are delayed until
an appropriate network becomes available. In this design, the
decision maker does not handle input from multiple actors. It
considers only a limited number of application requirement.
Paper [23] proposes a framework to network selection based
on applications QoS and user preferences. First of all, a
preference speciﬁer module acquires application requirements
(e.g., bandwidth, delay, jitter) and user preference (e.g., how
much the user is willing to pay for a given communica-
tion). A score calculator module receives such application
requirements, user preference and networks conditions in order
to produce exploitable scores for each potential application-
network mapping. Finally, a load distribution module considers
all these inputs to choose the best network for each application,
while it performs load distribution among the interfaces. This
framework does not consider the near future of the network
environment.
Authors of paper [24] propose a shim layer between the
network layer and the MAC layer of the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) layered data model. This shim layer
adapts ﬂows to the available lower layers while make lower
layers (i.e., MAC and Physical layer) transparent for appli-
cations. The proposed shim layer consists of a classiﬁer, that
receives packets from network layer and classiﬁes it in ﬁve
queues, according to theirs trafﬁc types (i.e., video, voice, best-
effort, background and safety critical); and a “Multi Interface
Scheduling System (MISS)”. The MISS module is responsible
to distribute the queued packets across different Radio Access
Technology (RAT). The distribution process is divided in two
parts: called “scoring system” and “scheduler”. In the scoring
part, the MISS module considers application requirements,
network conditions and user preference in order to assign a
score for each application-network mapping possibility. The
scheduler uses the previous calculated scores to distribute the
packets among available RAT. The proposed architecture does
not consider the near future of the network environment.
According to the literature review, researches have worked
on the development of modular DM architecture. Most of
proposed architectures suppose cooperation with the network
side, for example by using speciﬁc functionalities from IEEE
802.21 standard. In this way, they consider that all networks
support such speciﬁc functionalities. Moreover, although some
solutions propose cross layer modules to hide applications
from the wireless access technologies, few researches have
been carried out in an ISO/ETSI standard compliant way.
IV. THE ITS-BASED AD4ON ARCHITECTURE
This section describes the modular AD4ON architecture
for opportunistic networking in heterogeneous access network
environment. The proposed architecture is based on the pre-
viously described ITS-S communication architecture and de-
signed to meet the main challenges for communication proﬁle
and path selection in C-ITS environment. This architecture was
ﬁrst stretched in our previous work [1] and it is more detailed
here.
A. Expected properties
As described in [25], the environment of connected and
cooperative vehicles is characterized by a large heterogeneity.
There are a wide variety of applications with different com-
munication requirements. There are different wireless access
technologies each one with speciﬁc characteristics in terms
of bandwidth, data rate, security and others. In such an envi-
ronment, the process to select the best suited communication
proﬁle and path for each data ﬂow presents some challenges.
Different actors are able to present their requirements,
preferences, constraints and policies in the decision making
process. For example, applications can request a speciﬁc
bandwidth, data rate or security level. Users can present
their preferences, e.g., deﬁning a priority or security level
for a given message. Industrial and mobility service providers
(i.e., operators) can present their policies, such as network
constraints and particular billing procedures. Moreover, these
wide variety of objectives could be contradictory. The DM
architecture should be capable of managing these multiple
objectives simultaneously.
Such an architecture should manage ﬂow per ﬂow, in order
to select the most appropriate communication proﬁle and path
for each ﬂow as well as to manage ﬂow priorities.
The DM architecture should be able to monitor a variety of
information in order to enable more accurate solutions in the
decision making process. One essential piece of information
to be monitored is the wireless networks availability as well
as the performance of the networks in use. Moreover, it is
necessary to monitor ﬂows and their characteristics (e.g., used
bandwidth, ﬂow status).
Besides network monitoring, other signiﬁcant parameters
could be monitored. Vehicles would be able to take infor-
mation from their environment, as vehicle’s battery level,
geographical position (e.g., GPS) or vehicle’s speed in order
to adjust the decision’s strategies. For example, a power con-
suming network interface could be deactivated if the vehicle’s
battery level is under a certain threshold. Or a WiFi network
could be privileged if the vehicle is stationary, while a cellular
network could be preferred if the vehicle is moving.
The DM architecture should be capable of handling com-
munication proﬁle and communication path for each ﬂow.
A data ﬂow is deﬁned by ISO as an identiﬁable sequence
of packets [26]. And packets are dependent upon applied
protocols, links and nodes characteristics. For example, pack-
ets sent over different communication paths (routes) to the
same destination node experience distinct network condi-
tions/performances. Such distinct experiences are consequence
of the applied protocol stacks (communication proﬁle) and
the speciﬁc characteristics of the traversed path (e.g., delay,
throughput, security level, etc.). Therefore, on the Flow-
Interface mapping process, it is not enough to indicate only
15
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

what access network a given ﬂow should use. In addition,
according to ﬂow requirements and paths characteristics it is
necessary to determine the communication proﬁle and path for
each ﬂow.
Moreover, due the vehicle’s high speed the networks avail-
ability could change rapidly. In such highly dynamic mobility
the decision making process should take into account the short-
term prevision about the network environment condition. If the
DM is aware about the near future of the network environment
it can perform proactive and ﬁne-grained decision. For exam-
ple, it can decide to increase the data buffer for a given video
streaming, if the vehicle is going to cross a wireless dead
zone. Or, an on-board application could decide to delay a data
transmission if it knows that a better network will soon be
available.
The short-term prevision can be obtained in different ways.
It can be obtained by cooperation with networks, e.g., using the
IEEE 802.21 standard if the network support such protocol.
The vehicle can store network information from a previous
traversed route, e.g., for an user who uses the same route
every day, the database could stores information about network
conditions in such route. Or, the short-term information can be
obtained by cooperation with neighbors vehicles. For example,
two vehicles in opposite directions could exchange information
about access points in their upcoming route. For this purpose, a
vehicle stores the position of each access point in its traversed
route, and give them to another passing-by vehicle.
B. Architecture design
To achieve the expected properties, we propose the mod-
ular AD4ON architecture based on the ISO/ETSI standards.
Figure 4 shows such proposed DM architecture.
5) Applying decision
1) Requirement gathering
2) Monitoring
User
Adm.
Reg.
Context
Available 
Network 
& Path
Network 
Flow 
Context 
4) DM
Flow-Interface 
mapping
Filtering /
Hierarchy
Application 
middleware
Filtered 
Policies
Rank 
Alternatives
Decision (best)
Hierarchical 
solutions
GUI
GUI
GUI
Flows
c
c
c
Path 
3) near Future
Network 
database
Filtering 
potential 
Networks
Figure 4. Proposed AD4ON Architecture.
For a better understanding, we split the DM architecture in
ﬁve main parts, which are described below.
1) Requirement gathering: As mentioned before, different
actors are able to present theirs requirements in the decision
making process. In our proposed architecture we consider four
main actors: applications, users, administrators and regulator
bodies.
As deﬁned by [27], applications can be divided in four
different trafﬁc classes: conversational, streaming, interactive
and background classes. Each one of these classes has spe-
ciﬁc requirements in terms of Quality of Service (QoS). For
example, conversational class groups real-time services like
video telephony and VoIP calls, which are very delay sensitive
while background class represents services like background
downloads or e-mails, which are more delay tolerant. Services
from interactive class, e.g., an online end-user requesting
data from a remote server, usually have higher priority in
scheduling than services from background class.
Therefore, applications can have speciﬁc requirements in
terms of QoS. We deﬁned four key performance parameters
that each application should presents to the DM: the maximum
supported end-to-end delay, the sensibility for information
loss, the minimum required throughput and the security level,
i.e., if information is sensitive and therefore must be protected
from unauthorized access. A middleware enables applications
to send their requirements to the DM.
According to the deﬁned key performance parameters, ap-
plications do not need take care about underlying communi-
cation technologies, unless they explicitly need it. Instead, the
DM manages such communication, enabling applications to
take advantage of any available technology.
Users can have speciﬁc needs. Therefore, they can present
their preferences through a Graphical User Interface (GUI),
e.g., deﬁning service priorities, security level for a given
message or the amount of money they are willing to pay for
a given service. Administrators, i.e., industrial and mobility
service providers can present their policies, such as network
constraints and particular billing procedures. Each country or
region could deﬁne some speciﬁc rules, such as the prohibi-
tion of certain frequency ranges in certain areas. Therefore,
regulator bodies can also express their policies.
Requirements, preferences and policies from all actors are
stored in decision maker’s databases and used by the DM to
choose the communication interface that better matches the
actors requirements.
2) Monitoring modules: We deﬁned four monitoring mod-
ules. Network monitoring module - in this process, the network
monitoring module listens to the wireless interfaces and in-
forms DM about the available wireless networks and their per-
formances. Such monitoring module should be able to monitor
network information even if no speciﬁc monitoring functional-
ity, such as IEEE 802.21 [15], is implemented on the network
side. Context monitoring module - this module is responsible
for vehicle surrounding monitoring. It is responsible to monitor
information like location of the neighboring vehicles, trafﬁc
jam, vehicle’s speed, and others. These information are part
of the LDM functionalities, i.e., the conceptual data store
located within an ITS-S as outlined in [17]. Therefore, we
aim to rely this monitoring module on such conceptual data
store. Flow monitoring module - this module should inform
whether a ﬂow is alive or not and evaluate ﬂows’ performance,
like the currently used bandwidth, the currently latency, etc.
Path monitoring module - this module is responsible to obtain
various information (e.g., throughput, security level, latency,
etc.) about the controllable end points where packets will be
16
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

routed and to keep track of all the candidate and available
paths.
3) Near Future: As mentioned before, due the high vehicle
mobility, a connected vehicle changes their network environ-
ment constantly. A vehicle running in high speed can cross
low-range network (e.g., urban WiFi) rapidly. Therefore, an
available access network can be soon unavailable, or a vehicle
can rapidly reach new access technologies coverage. In a such
dynamic environment, if the DM is capable to anticipate net-
works conditions, it can perform a more ﬁne-grained decision,
as well as, offer a seamless communication. For example, if the
DM knows that a network connection will be soon unavailable,
it can decide in advance to reroute ﬂows to another access
network. Therefore, in dynamic environment, it is desirable
a proactive DM mechanism capable to make decisions based
on the near future about the network environment, which the
vehicle is going to cross.
In order to take into account the short-term prevision about
the network environment, we propose a network database that
store the historical information about the access networks (e.g.,
network performance and access point location) and a ﬁltering
entity that is responsible to analyze such network database
and, based on the context information of the vehicle (e.g.,
movement speed, vehicle position and movement direction), to
choose the potential networks to be considered in the decision
making process. Once the potential networks are listed, such
information is sent to the “Rank Alternatives” module to be
considered in the decision making process.
4) Decision making process: The decision making pro-
cess is responsible to take into account the application’s
requirements, user proﬁles, administrative rules (regulation
and policies) as well as different monitored information in
order to manage ﬂows and paths. The decision making process
is detailed in Section IV-C.
5) Applying decision: In the applying decision process, the
policies and information produced by the decision making
process are applied in the system. In this process, the decision
maker could interact with controlled entities in all layers of the
ITS station communication architecture. Once the best access
network and path is selected, i.e., the path and access network
that better match the communication requirements, the DM
request the “Flow-Interface mapping” module to enforce the
ﬂow routing decision. To enforce the decision’s polices at the
network layer in an IP-based environment, we are considering
NEMO and MCoA. These protocols allow mobile routers to
manage multiple access technologies simultaneously and to
improve path and ﬂow management.
Since the decision making process take into account the
short-term prevision about the network environment, proactive
decisions are enforced in order to maintain ﬂows always
best connected. However, unexpected changes can occur in a
wireless environment (e.g., a given access network can drops).
In order to adapt to the network conditions in real time, the
DM maintain an hierarchical solution database with all sub-
optimal solutions for each ﬂow. This database is used by the
“Flow-Interface mapping” module in case of emergency, i.e.,
when the best network solution drops unexpectedly and until
the DM ﬁnds another better solution.
C. Decision Making Process
As mentioned before, the decision making process takes
into account the application’s requirements, user proﬁles,
administrative rules as well as information from a variety of
monitoring modules in order to manage ﬂows and paths. We
split our decision making process in three modules, as shown
on Figure 4. Below we describe each one of these modules:
Hierarchy/Filtering: This module is responsible to receive
and manage requirements, preferences, and policies from
different actors. Since actors may have their own speciﬁc
preferences and requirements, we need to “ﬁlter” (in Computer
Science acceptation) the various values deﬁned for the same
parameter. Moreover, it is necessary to deﬁne a priority order
between actors in order to manage contradictory objectives.
For example, if the administrator sets a forbidden network
for a user, and the user set the same access network to
preferred, then it is necessary to deﬁne who has the priority.
The output of such module is a list of ﬁltered and hierarchical
requirements.
Rank Alternatives: This module is responsible to ﬁnd all
alternatives for ﬂow-interface mapping. It is a ﬁrst ﬁlter to
avoid forbidden networks or networks that do not match with
ﬂows’ requirements. Such module receives the coherent list
of requirements from “Hierarchy/Filtering” module, network
information (e.g., networks availability and networks perfor-
mance), and context information in order to ﬁnd the potential
solutions. The output of this module is a list of all potential
solutions for each ﬂow.
Decision Algorithm: This module receives the list of all
potential solutions created in the “Rank Alternatives” module
and apply decision making algorithm in order to evaluate the
matching degree of communication requirements with net-
works and path characteristics. An utility function calculates
a score, representing the matching degree for each solution.
Higher the score, better is the solution. The solutions are sorted
by descending order of score and stored on the hierarchical
solution database. Such database is used by the enforcement
module in case of emergency, i.e., when the best network drops
unexpectedly, the “Flow-Interface mapping” module redirect
the ﬂow through the ﬁrst available sub-optimal network while
the DM ﬁnds a new better solution.
As described by [25], several decision making algorithms
have been used in the network selection process. For example,
the ones based on the game theory, the ones based on Multi-
Objective Optimization (MOO) and the algorithm that uses
Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) techniques. The
most used are the MADM methods (e.g., Simple Additive
Weighting (SAW), Technique for Order Preference by Similar-
ity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) and AHP). Despite the MADM
techniques present advantage as relative low computation com-
plexity, this approach has some issues. For example, it is very
difﬁcult to choose the best weight for each attribute. Moreover,
MADM algorithms could present ranking abnormality, i.e.,
17
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

change in one of the parameters of the objective function could
determine a very different best solution.
The existing decision making algorithms do not meet our
needs. Therefore, we are working in a new decision making
algorithm that is capable to take advantage of the entire pro-
posed architecture. The new algorithm presents the following
properties. It can ﬁnd high-quality solutions in a reasonable
time. It is a memory-based algorithm, i.e., new solution can
take into account previous status of the network environment.
In this way, we can prevent full recalculation when only few
network parameters changes. The new algorithm is run-time
adaptable, i.e., it adapts to the network conditions and vehicle
context. Moreover, solutions are created smoothly over time,
i.e., the decision making algorithm is capable to prevent “ping-
pong” effect.
However, the design of a decision making algorithm is
outside the scope of this paper. Such topic will be addressed
in future works.
D. Integration in the ITS-S communication architecture
The ITS-S communication architecture functionalities could
be implemented into a single physical unit or distributed
into several physical units. The paper [28] presents a real
implementation into a single physical unit based on C-ITS
standards. Once applied to a vehicle, these functionalities
could be performed by different modules in the vehicle’s
electric/electronic architecture.
Moreover, the NEMO environment mainly separate the
applications and communications into MNN and MR. There-
fore, the ﬁve functions described in Section IV-B can also
be separated into such nodes. For example, the requirement
gathering can be implemented in the MNN, the monitoring
modules can be implemented in both MR and MNN, while the
near future, the decision making process and applying decision
are functions of the MR.
The AD4ON architecture is designed in an ISO/ETSI
standard compliant way. Figure 5 shows one way how we
can integrate such architecture in the ITS-S communication
architecture.
Management
Security
Applications
Facilities
Networking & Transport
Access
Other 
Media
802.15.4
Cellular
WLAN
 DM
Filtering /
Hierarchy
Rank 
Alternatives
Decision (best)
User
Adm.
Reg.
Context
(LDM)
Available 
Network 
& Path
Network 
Flow 
Context 
Flow-Interface 
mapping
Application 
middleware
Hierarchical 
solutions
GUI
GUI
GUI
Path 
Network 
database
Filtering 
potential 
Networks
Application 
1
Application
2
Application 
n
Flows
2) Monitoring
5) Applying decision
1) Requirement gathering
3) near Future
4)
Figure 5. Integration of DM Architecture in the ITS-S communication
architecture.
However, the standards give some guidelines to the devel-
opers, leaving some room in the way to implement the ITS-S
communication architecture.
The AD4ON can interact with controlled entities in all
layers of the ITS station communication architecture. Such
communication is performed towards standardized interfaces
between the different layers. In the following we describe two
of these interfaces: the MA-Service Access Point (MA-SAP)
– interface between the ITS-S application layer and the ITS-S
management layer; and the MN-Service Access Point (MN-
SAP) – interface between the ITS-S management layer and
the ITS-S network & transport layer.
ISO 24102-3 [29] classiﬁes Service Access Point (SAP)
in two types, according to who initiate the service. Services
initiated by the ITS-S management layer are known as “Com-
mands” while the ones initiated by the ITS-S application
layer or ITS-S network & transport layer are known as
“Request”. Furthermore, each one of such classiﬁcation has
two service primitives: one to trigger an action (i.e., “request”)
and another one to report the results of the performed action
(i.e., “conﬁrm”). Figure 6 depicts such classiﬁcation.
Management
Security
Applications
Facilities
Networking & Transport
Access
ITS-S application 
process
SME
(AD4ON)
Managed entity
MA-Request
MA-Request.request
MA-Request.conﬁrm
MA-Command
MA-Command.request
MA-Command.conﬁrm
MN-Request
MN-Request.request
MN-Request.conﬁrm
MN-Command
MN-Command.request
MN-Command.conﬁrm
Figure 6. Communication towards MA-SAP and MN-SAP.
The AD4ON is placed in the ITS-S management entity.
Therefore, in order to communicate with controlled entities
in other ITS-S layers, we use the service primitives deﬁned
by ISO. Such service primitives are detailed below.
1) MA-SAP: This service access point is used for com-
munication between ITS-S application layer and ITS-S man-
agement layer. As shown on Figure 6, the MA-SAP has four
service primitives: MA-Request.request, MA-Request.conﬁrm,
MA-Command.request, and MA-Command.conﬁrm. Since the
primitives follow the same framework, in the following we
show primitive structure only for MA-Request.request and
MA-Request.conﬁrm. The others are supposed to use similar
structure.
When an ITS application process needs to trigger an action
in the DM, it sends the MA-Request.request service primitive.
18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

For example, an application uses such primitive to present its
communication requirements to the AD4ON. The structure of
such primitive is showed on Figure 7, and the arguments used
by the MA-Request-request service are described on Table I.
applicationID
txInterfaceNo
requirements
parameterValue
parameterID
parameterValue
parameterID
...
MA-Request.request
MA-Request.No
MA-Request.Value
( commandRef
)
ITSSappCPReqReg
ITSSappReq
Figure 7. The structure of the MA-Request.request service.
Table I. Parameters of the MA-Request-request service
Name
Description
commandRef
Unique cyclic reference number of com-
mand
MA-Request.No
Reference number of the request
applicationID
Identiﬁer of an ITS-S application process.
Speciﬁed in ISO 24102-1 [30]
txInterfaceNo
Sink or source of an ITS-S application pro-
cess. Speciﬁed in ISO 17419 [31]
parameterID
Integer values predeﬁned for each parame-
ter. E.g., 15 indicates minimum throughput,
17 indicates maximum acceptable latency,
and 29 indicates priority ﬂow parameters.
Speciﬁed in ISO 17423 [32]
parameterValue
Values assigned for each parameter
Once the action requested by the application is performed by
the DM, it replies the application with the MA-Request.conﬁrm
service primitive. The structure of such service primitive is
showed on Figure 8, and its speciﬁcs arguments are described
on Table II.
applicationID
txInterfaceNo
confDetails
parameterValue
parameterID
parameterValue
parameterID
...
MA-Request.confirm
MA-ReqConfirm.No
MA-ReqConfirm.Value
commandRef
ErrStatus
(
)
ITSSappCPReqConf
ITSSappReqConf
Figure 8. The structure of the MA-Request.conﬁrm service.
Table II. Parameters of the MA-Request-conﬁrm service
Name
Description
MA-ReqConﬁrm.No
Reference number of the request. Same
value as MA-Request.No in related MA-
Request.request.
ErrStatus
Values predeﬁned in ISO 24102-3 [29]. E.g.,
(0) success, (3) invalid parameter value, and
(10) value not available.
Following the same reasoning, the MA-Command.request
service primitive allows the ITS-S management entity to trig-
ger an action at the ITS-S application layer. For example, such
primitive enables the AD4ON to alert adaptive application
about network conditions. The arguments used by the MA-
Command-request service are described on Table III.
Table III. Parameters of the MA-Command-request service
Name
Description
commandRef
Unique cyclic reference number of com-
mand
MA-Command.No
Reference number of command.
MA-Command.Value
Value of command.
Once the action is performed by the application, it replies
the DM with the MA-Command.conﬁrm service primitive.
2) MN-SAP:
This
service
access
point
is
used
for
communication between ITS-S network & transport layer
and ITS-S management layer. Similarly the MA-SAP, the
MN-SAP has four service primitives: MN-Request.request,
MN-Request.conﬁrm,
MN-Command.request,
and
MN-
Command.conﬁrm.
When modules in the ITS-S network & transport layer needs
to trigger actions in the DM, it uses the MN-Request.request
service primitive. For example, network monitoring module
located in the ITS-S network & transport layer uses such
primitive to send information about network performance to
the AD4ON in the ITS-S management entity.
The arguments used by the MN-Request-request service are
described on Table IV.
Table IV. Parameters of the MN-Request-request service
Name
Description
commandRef
Unique cyclic reference number of com-
mand
MN-Request.No
Reference number of the request. E.g., 2
indicates the FWTsetNot command, 3 in-
dicates the FWTupdateNot command, and
4 indicates the FWTdeleteNot command
MA-Request.Value
Value of the request
Once the action is performed by the ITS-S management en-
tity, it replies with the MN-Request.conﬁrm service primitive.
The management service primitive MN-Command.request
allows the ITS-S management entity to trigger an action at the
ITS-S network & transport layer. For example, such primitive
enables the AD4ON to enforce a decision in the network layer.
The arguments used by the MN-Command-request service are
described on Table V.
Table V. Parameters of the MN-Command-request service
Name
Description
commandRef
Unique cyclic reference number of com-
mand
MN-Command.No
Reference number of the command.
MN-Command.Value
Value of the command
Once the action is performed by the ITS-S network & trans-
port layer, it replies the DM with the MN-Command.conﬁrm
service primitive.
Therefore, using standardized service access points, the
AD4ON can interact with controlled entities in all layers
19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and select the most suitable communication proﬁle for each
application, i.e., select a collection of facilities protocols,
transport protocols, network protocols, access technologies and
communication channels that are used for a given data ﬂow.
For example, the AD4ON can request the “ITS-S Facilities”
layer to encode, decode or time-stamping a given message. It
can apply route decisions in the “ITS-S Networking & Trans-
port” layer and take advantage of IP mobility management
(e.g., using NEMO protocol and MCoA).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
According to the literature review, researchers have worked
to propose an architecture for network selection, in which ap-
plications can take advantage of available access technologies.
For example, some solutions propose to add new sub-layers
within the well-know OSI model in order to hide speciﬁcities
of wireless access technologies to applications. Moreover,
efforts have been made to performs more accurate decisions,
for example by cooperating with the network side (e.g., by
using IEEE 802.21 MIH).
In this paper we proposed the AD4ON, an ISO/ETSI-based
decision making architecture that is capable to choose the best
available communication proﬁle and path for each data ﬂow
in an heterogeneous and dynamic network environment.
Different actors are able to present theirs requirements in
the decision making process, e.g., applications, users, network
administrators, etc. And this wide variety of objectives could
be contradictory. The AD4ON architecture is capable of man-
aging these multiple objectives simultaneously. Moreover, the
DM receives information from a variety of monitoring mod-
ules (network, context information, path, and ﬂows monitoring
modules), that enable ﬁne-grained decisions.
According to the deﬁned key performance parameters, ap-
plications do not need to be aware about underlying commu-
nication technologies, unless they explicitly need it. Instead,
the AD4ON handles the communication side to maximise sat-
isfaction of all ﬂow sharing communication media. Therefore,
applications are not limited to a single access technology, but
they can take advantage of all available technologies.
Besides the access network selection, the proposed architec-
ture is able to choose the best path for a given ﬂow, i.e., the
route between two communicating nodes that best meets the
communication requirements (e.g., a local connection between
nearby devices or a global connection over the Internet).
The proposed architecture address the short-term prevision
about the network environment. This short-term prevision
allows proactive decisions, which is very useful in vehicular
environments that are characterized by its highly dynamic
mobility.
Once the best access network and path is selected for a
given ﬂow, the decision’s polices are enforced at the network
layer using standardized protocols, such as NEMO and MCoA.
These protocols allow mobile routers to manage multiple
access technologies simultaneously and to improve path and
ﬂow management.
The AD4ON architecture is based on the ISO/ETSI ITS-
S communication architecture, due the latter’s capability to
manage heterogeneous access technology. Since standards
leave some room in the way to implement such architecture,
in this paper we propose one way to integrate the AD4ON
in the ITS-S communication architecture. Moreover, service
primitives deﬁned in an ISO/ETSI standard way enable the
interoperability between controlled modules in different layers.
Based on the state of the art and in our previous work [1],
the most used decision making algorithms do not meet our
needs. Therefore, we are working in a new decision making
algorithm that present the following properties. It can ﬁnd
high-quality solutions in a reasonable time. It is a memory-
based algorithm, i.e., new solution can take into account
previous status of the network environment. In this way,
we can prevent full recalculation when only few network
parameters changes. The new algorithm is run-time adaptable,
i.e., it adapts to the network conditions and vehicle context.
Moreover, solutions are adapted smoothly over time, i.e., the
decision making algorithm is capable to prevent “ping-pong”
effect.
In order to meet such properties, the new decision making
algorithm is based on the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO)
algorithm, a swarm intelligence class of algorithms. This class
of algorithms are based on the collective and cooperative
behaviors of ants, which are capable to ﬁnd high-quality
solutions for complex combinatorial optimization problems in
a reasonable time.
We highlight the importance of the AD4ON architecture
validation. As future work, we will simulate the proposed
architecture using different scenarios and existing decision
making algorithms. We will also simulate our new ant-based
decision making algorithm, which is capable to take advantage
of the entire proposed architecture for smart and ﬁne-grained
decisions. Moreover, it will be valuable to performe extensive
evaluation of this architecture in a real test-bed.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Silva, J.-M. Bonnin, and T. Ernst, “An ITS-based Architecture for
Opportunistic Networking,” in VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and
Applications, Jul. 2017, pp. 91–96.
[2] “Cisco
Visual
Networking
Index
Predicts
Near-Tripling
of
IP
Trafﬁc
by
2020,”
https://newsroom.cisco.com/press-release-
content?type=webcontent&articleId=1771211,
[Accessed:
January
2018].
[3] “Gartner Says By 2020, a Quarter Billion Connected Vehicles Will
Enable New In-Vehicle Services and Automated Driving Capabilities,”
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2970017, [Accessed: June 2017].
[4] “ETSI ES 202 663 European proﬁle standard for the physical and
medium access control layer of Intelligent Transport Systems operating
in the 5 GHz frequency band,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[5] “IEEE 802.15.4 – Local and metropolitan area networks– Speciﬁc
requirements– Part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and
Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations for Low Rate Wireless Personal
Area Networks (WPANs),” Tech. Rep., 2006.
[6] S. Chakrabarti, G. Montenegro, and R. Droms, “IPv6 over Low-Power
Wireless Personal Area Network (6LoWPAN) ESC Dispatch Code
Points and Guidelines,” RFC 8066, 2017.
[7] “IEEE Guide for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE)
- Architecture,” IEEE Std 1609.0, pp. 1–78, 2013.
20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8] “Standard for Information technology–Telecommunications and infor-
mation exchange between systems local and metropolitan area networks
– Speciﬁc requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations,” IEEE Std 802.11, pp.
1–5229, 2012.
[9] “ISO 21217 Intelligent Transport Systems — Communications Access
for Land Mobiles (CALM) — Architecture,” Tech. Rep., 2014.
[10] A. Petrescu, R. Wakikawa, P. Thubert, and V. Devarapalli, “Network
Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol,” RFC 3963, 2005.
[11] H. Soliman, G. Tsirtsis, G. Giaretta, K. Kuladinithi, and N. Montavont,
“Flow Bindings in Mobile IPv6 and Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic
Support,” RFC 6089, 2011.
[12] L. Suciu, J. M. Bonnin, K. Guillouard, and B. Stevant, “Towards a highly
adaptable user-centric terminal architecture,” in The 7th Intl. Symposium
on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC), Italy, 2004.
[13] R. Ben Rayana, “A Smart Management Framework for Multihomed
Mobile Nodes & Mobile Routers,” Doctoral Dissertation, Jan. 2010.
[14] J. Santa, F. Pereniguez-Garcia, F. Bernal, P. Fernandez, R. Marin-Lopez,
and A. Skarmeta, “A Framework for Supporting Network Continuity
in Vehicular IPv6 Communications,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems Magazine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 17–34.
[15] “IEEE 802.21 – Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks –
Part 21: Media Independent Handover Services,” Tech. Rep., 2008.
[16] N. Varga, L. Bokor, and H.-J. Fischer, “LDM-based dynamic network
discovery and selection for IPv6 mobility management optimization
in C-ITS environments,” in International Conference on Models and
Technologies for Intelligent Transportation Systems (MT-ITS), Jun. 2015,
pp. 483–490.
[17] “ETSI EN 302 895 Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Com-
munications; Basic Set of Applications; Local Dynamic Map (LDM),”
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[18] “3GPP TS 24.312 Access Network Discovery and Selection Function
(ANDSF),” Tech. Rep. version 14.1.0 Release 14, 2017.
[19] M. Thaalbi and N. Tabbane, “Improving Vertical Handover over Het-
erogeneous Technologies Using a Cross Layer Framework,” in IEEE
Intl Conf on High Performance Computing and Communications, IEEE
6th Intl Symp on Cyberspace Safety and Security, IEEE 11th Intl Conf
on Embedded Software and Syst (HPCC,CSS,ICESS), Aug. 2014, pp.
1170–1176.
[20] N. Omheni, F. Zarai, M. Obaidat, and L. Kamoun, “Optimized MIH-
assisted P-NEMO design for vertical handover over heterogeneous net-
work mobility,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), Jun. 2014, pp. 2879–2884.
[21] Y. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Yuan, F. Liu, and G. Li, “Handover
Management in Enhanced MIH Framework for Heterogeneous Wireless
Networks Environment,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 52,
no. 3, pp. 615–636, Feb. 2010.
[22] B. D. Higgins, “Intentional Networking: Opportunistic Exploitation of
Mobile Network Diversity,” MobiCom, 2010.
[23] A. Ben Nacef and N. Montavont, “A generic end-host mechanism
for path selection and ﬂow distribution,” in IEEE 19th International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications.,
Sep. 2008, pp. 1–5.
[24] C. Roman, P. Ball, and S. Ou, “Performance Evaluation of Dynamic
Scheduler in Multiple Queue Shim Layer for Heterogeneous Vehicular
Communications,” in 2015 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
Dec. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[25] R. Silva, J.-M. Bonnin, and T. Ernst, “Opportunistic Networking for
ITS,” in Intelligent Transport Systems: Past, Present and Future Direc-
tions.
Nova publisher, 2017.
[26] “ISO/DIS 24102-6 Intelligent Transport Systems — Communications
Access for Land Mobiles (CALM) — ITS station management — Part
6: Path and ﬂow management,” Tech. Rep., 2015.
[27] “ETSI TS 122 105 V14.0.0 Digital cellular telecommunications sys-
tem (Phase 2+) (GSM); Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
(UMTS); LTE; Services and service capabilities,” Tech. Rep., 2017.
[28] R. Silva, S. Noguchi, T. Ernst, A. De La Fortelle, and W. Godoy Ju-
nior, “Standards for Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems: A
Proof of Concept,” in The Tenth Advanced International Conference on
Telecommunications (AICT), Jul. 2014.
[29] “ISO 24102-3 Intelligent Transport Systems — Communications Access
for Land Mobiles (CALM) — ITS station management — Part 3:
Service access points,” Tech. Rep., 2013.
[30] “ISO/DIS 24102-1 Intelligent Transport Systems — Communications
Access for Land Mobiles (CALM) — ITS station management — Part
1: Local management,” Tech. Rep., 2013.
[31] “ISO/TS 17419 Intelligent transport systems — Cooperative systems —
Classiﬁcation and management of ITS applications in a global context,”
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[32] “ISO/TS 17423 Intelligent Transport Systems — Cooperative systems
— Application requirements for selection of communication proﬁles,”
Tech. Rep., 2014.
21
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

