A Distributed Network Management Approach to WSN
in Personal Healthcare Applications
Karla Felix Navarro, Elaine Lawrence,
Doan Hoang
School of Computing and Communications
University of Technology Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Karla| elaine| dhoang@it.uts.edu.au
Yen Yang Lim
University of Technology Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Brian.lim@uts.edu.au
Abstract—This paper describes the development of a Wireless
Sensor Network personal health monitoring system called
Medical MoteCare which uses a combination of medical and
environmental sensors. SNMP and CodeBlue agents are
incorporated in the system as is the network management
software JaguarSX. Network management models and tools
provide an alternative, scalable and affordable solution to
WSN health monitoring applications that allow for data
storage correlation and dissemination as well as timely alerts
when parameters are breached. This work forms part of a
large grant aimed at providing assistive healthcare for the
elderly.
Keywords:
Wireless
Sensor
Networks;
Network
Management; Data Correlation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper describes the development of a Wireless
Sensor Network (WNS) Personal Healthcare application
capable of monitoring a patient’s vital signs such as
temperature, heart rate and blood oxygen level. The WSN
based medical application uses network management tools
and models to store and correlate the collected data and issue
warnings if thresholds are breached. The Medical MoteCare
prototype aims to assist all stakeholders in the personal
healthcare arena to improve the monitoring and, therefore,
the health outcomes for the aged, the chronically ill and the
infirm. It is the latest in a series of 4 prototypes that have
been developed so far [1], [2], [3], [4].
An ageing population trend is particularly noticeable
in developing countries and, overall it is forecast that,
between the years 1990 and 2020, the proportion of people
aged between 65– 74 will increase by 74% [5]. The impact
of these population changes means that governments and
relatives/caregivers will need to spend increasing amounts of
money and time to care for this cohort. Wireless sensor
networks offer some hope for decreasing the cost of
monitoring the elderly and sick in their own, or in nursing,
homes. Wireless Sensor network nodes (Motes) equipped
with sensors can be used to monitor such items as
temperatures in the environment or on the person, cameras
may be linked to motes to enable remote monitoring and
thresholds can be set to ensure that action is taken if a
particular limit is reached.
The justification for this research is spread across
economic
and
social
imperatives,
such
as
helping
governments to limit the rising costs for caring for the sick
and the elderly whilst not jeopardizing the standard of care.
One overarching area of interest of the healthcare industry is
in heterogeneous and autonomous data acquisition systems.
It is important to develop cost effective treatments which
optimize patient safety, while minimizing treatment cost and
the possibility of malpractice litigation.
This paper describes Medical MoteCare as a proof of
concept
of
a
network
management
based
healthcare
monitoring system and reports on the outcomes. The next
section provides background information while section 3
outlines health sensing and monitoring. Section 4 describes
the architecture of the Medical MoteCare based on an
adaptation of the Three-Tier and SNMP Proxy Network
Management Organizational Models, using the network
management tool JaguarSX. Section 5 describes the system
and a scenario setting is outlined in Section 6 and results are
displayed and discussed in Section 7. The conclusions are
drawn in Section 8.
II.
BACKGROUND
Given the increase in the numbers of the elderly and the
current
and
projected
nursing
shortages,
health
care
organizations must find ways to meet demands with fewer
resources [6]. The ability to integrate sensors for fall
detection, video surveillance, sleep disorder monitoring,
heart attack identification and problems with obesity, will
improve the usefulness of the Medical MoteCare prototype.
People will be able to move about in their own home secure
in the knowledge that they are being monitored. Just as
airplanes are monitored by air traffic controllers, our patients
may be monitored remotely by healthcare providers or carers
who will have access to the patient’s information via a web
server and, in the case of an emergency or at a predetermined
time, via audio and video links [7].
The following statistics illustrate the potential savings
that can be gained by using home monitoring systems that
allow patients to leave hospital early. Table I provides the
following figures from 2004 for the United Kingdom:
59
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

TABLE I.
ECONOMICS OF UK PATIENT CARE [8]
Explanation
Amount
Average cost of care per week/per person in a hospital
GB Pounds
805
Average cost of care per week/per person in a nursing
home
GB Pounds
337
Average cost of care per week/per person in own home
GB Pounds
120
Other statistics from [8] further illustrate the savings
that can be made if mobile health devices are used by early
discharged patients in Germany (Table II). The figures
exclude administrative costs that are also applicable if using
a mobile monitoring system.
TABLE II.
ECONOMICS OF GERMAN PATIENT CARE AND MOBILE
HEALTH DEVICES [8]
Explanation
Amount
Early discharged hospital patients (mobile services
(20% of total))
3.3 million
Euros
Average costs for one hospital day
150 Euros
Average number of hospital days saved through
early discharge
3 days
Total yearly cost savings through early discharge
1.5 billion
Euros
Thus health economics reveal that potential savings
can be made by using mobile and wireless home monitoring
devices. Hopefully patients will not be admitted to hospital
unnecessarily; they may be discharged earlier; the burden on
emergency services could be reduced; medical personnel
could remotely assess patients, the patient and relations
could reduce their travel times and home visits by experts
could be reduced.
III.
HEALTHCARE SENSING AND MONITORING
A sensor is a device that detects the presence and/or the
variation of some physical phenomena and converts the
sensed quantity into a useful signal that can be directly
measured and processed, such as voltage or current. A smart
sensor is a sensor that provides extra functions beyond those
necessary for generating a correct representation of the
sensed quantity. Often they possess processing, storage, and
decision making capabilities.
Table III below outlines
sensing properties and examples.
TABLE III.
SENSING PROPERTIES AND EXAMPLES [9]
Sensing
Examples
Physical
properties
pressure, temperature, humidity, and flow
Motion
properties
position, velocity, angular velocity, and
acceleration
Identification
by personal features
Biochemical
by biochemical agents
Contact
properties
strain, force, torque, slip and vibration
For health monitoring, wearable medical sensors are of
particular interest as these devices are used to monitor a set
of key ambulatory parameters in domains such as oncology,
paediatrics, and geriatrics. Some of these parameters include:
heart rate for cardiac function; acceleration during walking
and running for activity; body temperature for illness; virtual
capacity for severity of airway obstruction in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; blood glucose for vascular or
neurological complications; EEG for seizure disorders,
confusion,
head
injuries,
brain
tumours,
infections,
degenerative diseases, and metabolic disturbances that affect
the brain; ECG waveform for cardiac arrhythmias; blood
pressure; arterial oxygen saturation for sleep disorder; and
body weight [10].
The Medical MoteCare system sensing can be achieved
with on-body and off-body sensors. With on-body sensors,
the elderly can be mobile and the on-body sensors can form a
body area network (BAN) which reacts when the conditions
recorded imply that the elderly needs immediate assistance
(Fig.1). In Medical MoteCare, the network management
software suite Jaguar SX is utilized for correlating the data
and alerting the caregivers if problems arise.
Figure 1.
Body Sensors and Communications.
IV.
MEDICAL MOTECARE DESCRIPTION
USING JAGUARSX
The strength of the Medical MoteCare system is its
innovative deployment of a network management model in a
scalable, flexible way to manage multiple sensors and
networks of sensors reliably and securely. The building of
the Medical MoteCare system brings the integration and
testing of specialized sensors for healthcare monitoring
(pulse oximeters, light and temperature sensors with Zigbee
motes [10]) through the use of an enhanced version of the
Harvard CodeBlue software suite [11], a Simple Network
Management Protocol (SNMP) Agent, and the Network
Management
(NM)
tool
JAguarSX
for
scalability,
performance improvement and data correlation.
60
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

The Medical MoteCare system was based on the
adaptation of the Three-Tier and SNMP Proxy Network
Management Organizational Models [12]. The SNMP Proxy
enhancements enabled this system to improve the scalability,
modularity and flexibility of the system by potentially
bringing to the developer communities the freedom of
selecting from a vast range of existing SNMP based NM
tools to fit their specific WSN application requirements. The
adapted Three-Tier NM Organizational model can be seen in
Fig.2.
Figure 2.
Adapted Three-Tier NM Organization Model to the Medical
MoteCare System [12].
The enhancements in the adapted Three-Tier NM
Organization model with a tailored SNMP proxy agent
shown in Fig.2 allow for the natural implementation of any
SNMP-capable NM tool in the Medical MoteCare system.
This makes the system not only capable of having more than
one manager entity without the risk of over polling the
managed devices, but also makes it platform independent by
allowing SNMP standard communication with any number
of NM systems acting as Manager, Middle Manager or
Agent Entities.
The integration of an SNMP agent in conjunction with
the CodeBlue Communication module enabled the system to
be
accessed
via
any
network
management
tool
that
understands SNMP. This ensured that the system was able to
scale up easily and provide a robust and well tested,
standardized environment.
Figure 3.
System Process Overview for the Medical MoteCare System
[13].
The system process overview of the Medical MoteCare
System in Fig.3 depicts the high level system processes for
each of the system components (labeled in bold). A more
detailed explanation of these components and their processes
is further explained in this section.
The WSN architecture of this prototype was based on MicaZ
motes
[2]
which
added
robustness
to
the
system
communication (as a result of the use of the Zigbee
protocol). The sensors include the Pulse Oximeter, a medical
sensor from BCI, Inc. consisting of a standard finger or ear
sensor, a pulse oximetry module (BCI Micro Power
Oximeter board) and a mote [6].
Figure 4.
MicaZ Mote [10].
Blood
oxygen
saturation
(SpO2),
pulse
and
plethysmogram waveform data are relayed via a serial
interface to the MicaZ node. The pulse oximeter mote device
periodically transmits packets containing the measured
samples.
61
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Figure 5.
The Pulse Oximeter [14].
The MTS310CA flexible sensor board has a number of
sensors such as light and temperature which are incorporated
into the Medical MoteCare system, to illustrate the potential
importance of environmental impacts on the physical
condition of a monitored patient. For example, an elderly
depressed person might need adequate lighting to alleviate
mental health problems. The light sensor could prove that the
light is appropriate. Alternatively, if a person, who has
suffered a heart attack recently, suddenly starts sweating, the
symptoms could signal another attack or it may be that the
room is too hot.
The Data Acquisition Board is the Stargate Personal
Server processing board sourced from Crossbow. The
Personal
Server,
Stargate
has
the
ability
to
connect
wirelessly to other devices using Wi-Fi, GSM and GPRS.
This hardware allows a system to move from a centralized
network management system to a distributed one.
The Monitor Unit comprises the enhanced CodeBlue
software that incorporates log files of data recordings
captured by the sensors on the MicaZ motes and an SNMP
agent to enable it to deal with standardized network
communication using the SNMP protocol. The Monitor Unit
connects to the Gateway Mote either via a USB connection,
a serial connection or Internet Protocol (IP) [2].
On the Monitor Unit side CodeBlue captures the data and
stores it locally on log files. It is then sent through an SNMP
agent after a request is made by the Network Management
Server. The CodeBlue system with the incorporated SNMP
agent provides access to the widely accepted TCP/IP
protocol suite. As motes have extremely limited processing
power, battery life and transmission budgets, SNMP was not
implemented on the motes themselves as the additional
overhead would have dramatically reduced battery life [2]. In
the Monitor Unit of the Medical MoteCare system, using the
CodeBlue component, an SNMP agent was set up to act as
an IP-based Data Delivery Unit (DDU). The DDU is able to
act as an agent and deliver information collected on the
WSN into a TCP/IP based network [2]. In keeping with the
philosophy of the team to utilize as much existing and freely
available code and protocols as possible, several Object
Identifiers (OIDs) from RFC 1213 were used for the Medical
MoteCare system (see Table IV). An object identifier is a
label used to name an entity. Structurally, an OID consists of
a node in a hierarchically-assigned namespace, formally
defined using the ITU’s Telecommunication Standardization
Sector (ITU-T) Abstract Syntax Notation 1(ASN.1) standard.
Successive numbers of the nodes, starting at the root of the
tree, identify each node in the tree. Designers set up new
nodes by registering them under the node's registration
authority
[15].
Standard
and
customized
Management
Information Bases (MIBs) for the Medical MoteCare system
are set out in Table IV. The customized MIB was developed
by the mHealth team at UTS creating specific OIDs for the
polling of health and environmental data from the WSN
nodes [3].
TABLE IV.
OBJECT IDENTIFIERS USED FOR THE MEDICAL MOTECARE
OID
Variable
Name
Utilized for
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.1
ifIndex
mote ID as number
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.2
ifDesc
mote ID as string (mote-xx)
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.6
ifPhysAddress
mote ID as hex value
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.10
ifInOctets
pulse sensor value
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.11
ifInUcastPkts
light sensor value
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.16
ifOutOctets
oxygen sensor values
1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.17
ifOutUcastPkts
temperature sensor values
The Medical MoteCare system incorporated an SNMP
agent. The development of more sophisticated SNMP
versions such as SNMPv3 allows for more security which is
important when dealing with medical data. The benefits of
SNMPv3 for the Medical MoteCare system are that data can
be collected securely from SNMP devices without the fear of
the data being tampered with or corrupted. This is vital in
any healthcare system. As well, confidential information, for
example, the SNMP Set command packets that change a
router’s configuration, can be encrypted to prevent its
contents
from
being
exposed
on
the
network.
The
incorporation of the SNMP agent to the MoteCare Monitor
Unit was facilitated by the use of SNMP4J, an enterprise
class,
free
open
source
and
up-to-date
SNMP
implementation for Java [3].The system therefore utilized an
agent derived from the SNMP4J standard example which
provided a static SNMP table to hold the sensor data and
allow for SNMP requests [2].
The log file is used to communicate between the
CodeBlue component and SNMP agent in the Monitor Unit.
The structure of the files consists of time and data stamps,
Mote/patient ID and sensors available. The standard format
is as below:
<date stamp> <time stamp>:<Mote/patientID number
type of sensor = data from the sensor>
An example is set out below:
<14 Jan 2008 10:25:16.939 EST : <patientID= 102
PULSE= 92>
Upon detection, the motes will continuously send data
from the sensors with IDs on a first come, first served basis.
62
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

After the motes are detected, data with an ID code are sent
and logged into the Monitor Unit [2].
This Medical MoteCare system utilized commercial
software in the form iReasoning MIB Browser for MIB
browsing and MIB customisation and SysUpTime Network
Monitor and Jaguar SX for alert configuration and event
correlation. iReasoning MIB browser allowed the team to
load
standard
and proprietary MIBs for the Medical
MoteCare system and issue SNMP requests to retrieve
agents’ data, or make changes to the SNMP agent. JaguarSX
allowed for correlation of data so that alarms could be issued
on more than one parameter.
See Fig. 6 for a screen shot of the iReasoning MIB
Browser, which will be explained in the section describing
the implementation of the Medical MoteCare system.
Figure 6.
iReasoning MIB Browser.
With the iReasoning MIB Browser and SysUpTime
Network Monitor, all network information is stored in a
relational database such as FirebirdSQL, PostgreSQL or
SQL Server to enable easy and efficient device management
and reporting. In a similar manner, the data monitored from
the wireless sensor based healthcare application will be
stored in such a database to facilitate its manipulation and
provide secure storage, discrimination and fusion of data as
specified as a requirement of such a healthcare monitoring
system.
The SysUpTime Network Monitor can alert network
administrators or, in the Medical MoteCare implementation,
the health carer, by email, sound, the running of a script, or
triggering, as well as taking corrective actions such as
executing remote Windows or Linux commands. The data is
stored in a relational database that can be accessed via the
Internet. Refer to Fig. 7 for a graphical overview of
SysUpTime Network Monitor.
Figure 7.
Overview of SysUpTime Network Monitor. Source:
http://www.ireasoning.com/sysuptimeoverview.shtml
Using SysUpTime Network Monitor as a NM tool further
illustrates the flexibility of using a variety of NM software
packages in the Medical MoteCare system. Fig. 8 illustrates
the user interface of SysUpTime Network Monitor. In the
Performance Graph section of the screen shot, the heart rate
of the tester is shown increasing and decreasing in value –
the horizontal line indicates the pre-set threshold that will
ensure that a warning is given once the threshold is reached.
The remote SNMP agent properties are displayed on the
right
hand
side
of
the
screen
and
show
the
OID
1.3.6.4.1.4976 that corresponds to the pulse oximeter sensor
on the mote as well as the name and IP address of the host
(Satellite and 138.25.13.209 respectively) where the agent is
residing. It also shows the SNMP version number.
Figure 8.
SysUpTime Network Monitor.
As can be seen in Fig. 8 the Medical MoteCare system
using
the
NM
tools
iReasoning
MIB
Browser
and
SysUpTime Network Monitor was able to display medical
data in graphical form in real time as well as provide alarm
triggering. However the author wanted to illustrate some of
the data fusion aspects of NM tools by implementing
correlation of medical data and alarm triggering and for that
the author used the NM tool Jaguar SX. This will be further
discussed in the following section.
63
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Event
correlation
techniques
embedded
in
various
network management tools are expected to allow for the
development of personalized applications specific to certain
health conditions. Current techniques such as rule-based
reasoning (RBR), code-based reasoning (CBR) and case-
based reasoning [12] are utilized to add intelligence to
system and network management tools by correlating
variables and prioritizing them based on thresholds for
labeling, various algorithms and hierarchical structures
associated to them. For instance if a sufficient number of
‘events’ in the system are triggered at the same time, e.g.
temperature
of
the
person
and
temperature
in
the
environment, the system will check correlation and prioritize
in order to trigger an alarm, message or action [16].
The NM tool Jaguar SX was implemented in the Medical
MoteCare prototype with the purpose of adding intelligence
to the system by making use of network management
correlation techniques to interpret multi-variable collected
data and automatically react or prevent harmful health
conditions. The system was tested for alarm triggering
functionality. Fig. 9 shows a partial view of the Jaguar SX
Monitor Exceptions window in which the multi-variable
alarm triggering conditions are configured. The compared
values and conditions from variables identified by Object ID
on column five can be correlated by grouping them into the
same Object Group in column four. In order for Jaguar SX to
trigger an alarm or notification, all the compared value
conditions with the same Object Group have to be “True”
(refer to Compare Value and Compare Type on columns six
and seven).
Figure 9.
Partial View of Jaguar SX Monitor Exceptions Window.
V.
MEDICAL MOTECARE SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
In Fig. 10 below the implementation of the Medical
MoteCare System is illustrated. For the implementation of
Medical MoteCare the researcher set up the system as
follows. A tester was fitted with pulse oximeter device,
which was connected to the sensor board on the mote via a
serial cable. As the data are being collected it is sent
wirelessly to the Stargate Personal Server. The Stargate then
sends the data through an Ethernet port to the monitor unit
where it is stored in the form of log files created by the
CodeBlue component. This step enables the agent to access
the collected data and transform it into a SNMP format
which makes it accessible to any network management tool
that is SNMP-compatible, such as the iReasoning MIB
Browser, SysUpTime Network Monitor, Jaguar SX or any
other commercialized or open source network management
tool.
Figure 10. System Overview for the Medical MoteCare System [13].
This step enables the agent to access the collected data
and transform it into a SNMP format which makes it
accessible to any network management tool that is SNMP
compatible, in this instance with iReasoning MIB Browser,
SysUpTime Network Monitor and JaguarSX.
See Fig. 11
for advantages of this system.
Figure 11. Advantages of Medical MoteCare System [2].
VI.
SCENARIO SETTING
In this section, a typical clinical scenario that serves for
the testing and simulation of the system is described. A
middle aged woman has recently recovered from the after-
effects of a severe car accident. She had to spend two months
in hospital and has now returned to her home. She
immediately began to experience flashback and panic attacks
as she relived her accident. The doctor suspected tachycardia
and suggested she wore a pulse oximeter while resting
during the afternoon and at night so that he can monitor her
condition and ascertain whether the medication he has
64
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

prescribed is succeeding in regulating her heart rate. The
doctor has asked her to use the pulse oximeter for one week
so that he can establish enough evidence to decide whether
he needs to change her medication or test for other
conditions such as Wolff Parkinson White syndrome. Wolff-
Parkinson-White
syndrome
(WPW)
represents
an
abnormality of the heart's electrical system. In patients with
WPW, there is an extra electrical connection between the
atria (the upper chambers) and the ventricles (the lower
chambers). This abnormal electrical connection can cause
episodes of rapid heart rhythms called paroxysmal atrial
tachycardia, pre-existed tachycardia, or pre-existed atrial
fibrillation [17]. The aim of the monitoring is to ascertain if
the heart rhythm reverts to normality during this week of
monitoring and medication.
VII.
TESTING
In order to test the above scenario in a laboratory setting
the author set up the following implementation using five (5)
participants to test the Medical MoteCare system (refer to
Fig. 10). The participants ranged in age from 20 to over 60
years old.
With the testing, the author was attempting to establish
that the system would detect the variations in the heart rate
and blood oxygen levels as if the monitored person was
starting to experience a panic attack. The system would send
a critical alarm via a red flashing screen and an email to the
carer notifying them that a particular threshold was reached.
The author tested the system on five participants performing
a variety of activities that could change the heart rate while
connected to the system in a testing setting as described
below.
The system captured the readings of the heart rate and
blood oxygen levels as the participants carried out the
different activities. Furthermore the system was expected to
react to predefined thresholds and alert the carers to potential
problems. The system was able react to a series of correlated
thresholds – for example if the heart rate is over a particular
threshold but the blood oxygen level is normal a warning
notification is generated whereas if the heart rate is high and
the blood oxygen is low a critical alarm is produced.
A.
Experiments to Simulate Increased Heart Rate
In this scenario, two testers were each attached to a pulse
oximeter and given the following instructions. For the first
minute they had to sit calmly while the resting heart rate
figure was established. They then were asked to stand and
walk on the spot slowly while still attached to the system.
Pulse oximeters are supposed to be used on a patient at rest
but to increase the heart rate artificially, the researcher had
the testers walk quickly on the spot. At the end of these two
minutes they were instructed to walk quickly for two
minutes. The graph in Fig. 12 below shows the changes in
the heart rate with the threshold marked to show when the
system was to react – in this case, for the purposes of testing,
the figure of 110 bpm was selected.
Fig. 12 illustrates the results of one experiment where the
heart rate went over the 110 bpm and the alarm trigger
screenshot is shown in Fig. 13.
Figure 12. Graph from iReasoning MIB Browser.
In Fig. 13 a list of triggered alarms, illustrating different
levels of severity, is shown. In the top row alarm, a critical
event, highlighted in red, is shown. Column Severity can
indicate ‘Critical’, ‘Normal’ or ‘Warning’. The next column
indicates the IP address of the source where the event was
polled. Time and date stamps are indicated in the next
columns and in the last column, the current value of the heart
rate plus a description of the alarm is located.
Figure 13. SysUpTime Network Monitor Alarm Triggering.
The screen shot of Fig. 14 shows the Simple Mail
Transfer Protocol (SMTP) configuration window used by
65
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

SysUpTime Network Monitor to send email alerts once a
preset threshold has been reached.
Figure 14. SysUpTime Network Monitor Email System Alert.
Fig. 15 shows the email sent to the carer indicating that a
heart rate warning has been triggered and shows the current
heart rate value (in this case 118 – well over the threshold of
110 bpm)
Figure 15. SysUpTime Network Monitor Email System Alert Scenario to
Simulate Increased Heart Rate.
The author was able to demonstrate that the Medical
MoteCare was
capable achieving
the requirements
of
monitoring healthcare variables via network management
tools. However to make the system more robust and useful
the
author
utilized
Jaguar
SX
to
demonstrate
event
correlation for more than one healthcare variable.
B.
Data Fusion with NM Event Correlation
The Medical MoteCare system implemented Jaguar SX
by incorporating a customized MIB in the system engine of
Jaguar SX and by performing the appropriate discovery and
polling of the medical and environmental motes via the
SNMP proxy. See Fig. 16 for a view of the discovered
system devices via JaguarSX and refer to Fig. 17 for a
graphical view of the collected medical data in real time.
Figure 16. JaguarSX WebUI Discovery of the Motes.
Figure 17. JaguarSX WebUI Data Collection of Heart Rate and Oxygen
Level in Real Time.
As can be seen in Fig. 17 both blood oxygen level and
heart rate measurements are being measured in real time with
the resulting graphs being refreshed every five seconds. A
false sensor was used to generate extreme variations of data
to
test
the
responsiveness
of
the
system
to
sudden
fluctuations in the monitored data. There may be limitations
regarding security here. As in real world scenarios, there
could be falsification of measurement values. If falsified data
is delivered to the sensor (like higher temperatures, etc.) a
consistency check may need to be done. This will be
explored
further
in
our
next
iteration.
The
Monitor
Exceptions module of Jaguar SX was used to setup the
conditions for multiple variable event correlation. In Fig.8
the monitor exceptions from the variables oxygen, pulse,
light and temperature have been configured to trigger an
alarm in the event of their preset conditions, corresponding
to the “Compare Values” in column six and “Compare
Types” in column seven.
66
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Figure 18. Jaguar SX WebUI Monitor Exceptions Configuration Page.
Alarm triggering is colour coded depending of its level of
criticality, for example a critical alarm is bright red whereas
a minor or warning alarm is colored yellow or blue
respectively (Fig. 19).
As can be seen in Fig. 20, the Medical MoteCare system
triggering alarm module from the Jaguar SX window shows
a diverse set of alarm notifications generated from preset
multi-variable conditions.
For example, long term reports
show a patient’s history of oxygen saturation levels for a
predefined period of time, such as, in this case for the last
hour. Different types of graphs can be selected by the
medical personnel as can a number of different reporting
styles. We are now able to customize the triggers and alarms
of the Jaguar SX system to individualize alarm triggering,
based on a patient’s medical history and their current
medical condition.
With a ubiquitous Medical Monitoring System, we can
use data mining techniques to create models and templates
to assist in the prediction, prevention and treatment
of a
wide variety of possible medical conditions. This will form
the focus of our ongoing work.
Figure 19. Jaguar SX Alarm Triggering for Heart Rate & Oxygen Level.
Figure 20. Jaguar SX Reports Module for Oxygen Saturation.
To further illustrate the versatility of the system, the users
can access the Medical MoteCare system through the use of
a PDA or a smart phone (Fig. 21). This would enable carers
to move around while still being able to monitor patients
remotely.
Figure 21. Mobile Medical MoteCare.
Fig. 21 shows that JaguarSX has discovered the Medical
MoteCare system via SNMP and is able to push this
information to a smart phone or PDA.
67
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

VIII.
CONCLUSION
The
Medical
MoteCare
system
demonstrates
the
feasibility of using traditional network management systems
for monitoring personal health parameters in an inherent NM
distributed
environment.
The
incorporation of
medical
sensors to the prototype allowed for the feasibility testing of
the system for the handling of medical data. The use of an
SNMP agent and a tailored MIB enhanced the scalability,
modularity and flexibility of the system by potentially
bringing to the researcher or developer communities the
freedom of selecting from a vast range of existing SNMP
based NM tools to fit their specific WSN application
requirements. This was exhibited by the implementation and
testing of NM tools of varied complexity and purpose,
namely iReasoning MIB Browser, SysUpTime Network
Monitor and JaguarSX.
The Medical MoteCare System
developed is a proof of concept that the use of standard
network management tools and models. iReasoning MIB
Browser, SysUpTime Network Monitor and Jaguar SX can
assist in the development and implementation of robust
distributed, wireless sensor networking applications for
monitoring healthcare parameters for patients. This NM tool
and, consequently any other NM tool that utilizes the SNMP
NM standard protocol, can be successfully integrated into
WSN applications, and, in this case, of a personal health care
monitoring nature. The implementation of JaguarSX added
intelligence to the system by utilizing NM correlation
techniques to interpret the collected events automatically and
react, or sometimes even anticipate from the collected
statistical data, harmful health conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank to the present and former
research
assistants,
group
members
and
research
collaborators of the multicultural M-Health Research Group
in the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology at
UTS
for
their
hard
work,
team
spirit
and
brilliant
contributions, Professor Elaine Lawrence, Josep Riudavets,
Marco Messina, Einstein Lubrin, Brian Lim, Leena Kowser
Ganguli, Martin Fischer from Koblenz University and Dr.
Frank Kargl from the Institute of Media Informatics at Ulm
University in Germany. Particular thanks must also go to
Professor Matt Welsh from the School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences at Harvard University, Nicholas Saparoff
from ByteSphere and Professor Victor C.M. Leung from the
University
of
British
Columbia
in
Canada
for
their
invaluable collaborations
in
the
accomplishing
of the
research objectives of this project.
REFERENCES
[1]
Lubrin, E., Lawrence, E. & Navarro, K.F.: Wireless Remote
Healthcare Monitoring with Motes. IEEE
International Conference
on Mobile Business 2005, Sydney. pp. 235 - 241. 2005,
[2]
Lim, YY., Messina, M., Kargl,F., Ganguli, L, Fischer,M. and
Tsang,T.:, SNMP-Proxy For Wireless Sensor Network, IEEE ITNG
Conference, Las Vegas, 7-9 April, 2008
[3]
Fischer, M., Lim, Y.Y. Lawrence, E., Ganguli, L.: ReMoteCare:
Health
Monitoring
with
Streaming
Video,
IEEE
International
Conference on mBusiness, Barcelona, July 9-11, 2008.
[4]
Felix Navarro, K, Lawrence, E and 2. Lim, B.: Medical MoteCare:
A Distributed Personal Healthcare Monitoring System, submitted to
IEEE Telehealth Conference, IEEE Iaria, Cancun 2009
[5]
Dipert, B. The Human Touch keeps the Elderly and Disabled
Technology connected. EDN, pp. 47-57. 2004 From: www.edn.com
[6]
Messina, M., Lawrence ,E., Felix Navarro, K and Lubrin, E.:
Towards Assistive Healthcare: Prototyping Advances In Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN) Systems Integration And Applications,
IADIS International Conference e-Society 2007 Lisbon, Portugal 3-6
July 2007
[7]
Peter Leijdekkers, Valérie Gay, Elaine Lawrence: Smart Homecare
System for Health Tele-monitoring. IEEE International Conference
on Digital Societies CDS 2007: 3 Guadaloupe, January 3-9 2007
[8]
Healthservice24. (2007).
http://www.healthservice24.com/healthservice24/images//HS24_Proj
ect%20Presentation.pdf.
[9]
Hoang, Doan and Lawrence, Elaine: An Active Grid Infrastructure
for Elderly Care, Tromso telemedicine and eHealth Conference
(TTeC08) Tromso, Norway 9-11 June 2008
[10] Crossbow Technology Inc. 2005, [http://www.xbow.com].
[11] Malan, D., Fulford-Jones, T., Welsh,,M and Moulton, S.: (CodeBlue:
An Ad Hoc Sensor Network Infrastructure for Emergency Medical
Care, In Proceedings of the MobiSys 2004 Workshop on Applications
of Mobile Embedded Systems (WAMES 2004), Boston, MA, June,
2004. (Also presented at the International Workshop on Wearable and
Implantable Body Sensor Networks, London, April 2004.)
[12] Subramanian, M. Network Management:Principles and Practice,
Addison Wesley, 2000.
[13] Lawrence, E.M., Felix Navarro, K.M., Hoang, D.B. & Lim, Y., 'Data
Collection,
Correlation
and
Dissemination
of
Medical
Sensor
Information in a WSN', Fifth International Conference on Networking
and Services Valencia, IEEE, Australia, pp. 402-408, April 2009.
[14] Felix Navarro, K.M., Lawrence, E.M. & Lim, B., 'Medical Motecare :
A Distributed Personal Healthcare Monitoring System', International
Conference
on
eHealth,
Telemedicine,
and
Social
Medicine
eTELEMED 2009, Cancun, IEEE Computer Society Conference
Publications, Piscataway, USA, pp. 25-30, February 2009.
[15] Anon, .A Brief Guide to OIDs, middleware.internet2.edu/a-brief-
guide-to OIDs.doc
[16] Felix Navarro, K, Lawrence, E & Lubrin, E, ‘A network management
approach
to
wireless
sensor
networks
in
personal
healthcare
environments’, Communication Systems and Networks, p. 543, 2006.
[17] Medicinenet,
http://www.medicinenet.com/wolff-parkinson-
white_syndrome/article.htm, 2007.
68
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

