138
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Low Energy Adaptive Clustering in Wireless Sensor
Network Based on Spectral Clustering
Ali Jorio∗, Sanaa El Fkihi †, Brahim Elbhiri‡, and Driss Aboutajdine∗
∗LRIT, Research Unit Associated to the CNRST (URAC 29), FSR, Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco
jorio.ali@gmail.com, aboutaj@fsr.ac.ma
†ENSIAS Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco
elfkihi@ensias.ma
‡EMSI Rabat, Morocco
elbhirij@emsi.ac.ma
Abstract— Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are composed of
large number of sensor nodes that are randomly distributed in
a region of interest. The nodes are responsible of the supervision
of a physical phenomenon and periodic transmission of results
to the sink. Energy saving results in extending the life of the
network, which presents a great challenge of WSNs. This paper
focuses primordially on reducing the power consumption of
WSN. To deal with this, a hierarchical clustering scheme, called
Multi-Relay K-way Spectral Clustering Algorithm (MR-KSCA),
is proposed. This algorithm is based on spectral classiﬁcation
and graph theory with the aim to cluster the network in a ﬁxed
optimal number of clusters. Thus, our approach ensures an
ideal distribution of sensor nodes in clusters, and proposes new
features to elect the appropriate cluster-heads, which guarantee
an uniform distribution load of energy among all the sensor
nodes. Furthermore, We present three metrics to deﬁne the
WSN lifetime. In term of extending the network lifetime and
minimizing the energy consumption, the simulation results show
an important improvement on the network performances with
MR-KSCA compared to other existing clustering methods.
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Network; Clustering; Graph theory;
Spectral classiﬁcation; Energy consumption.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a wireless network
consisting of spatially distributed autonomous devices using
sensors to cooperatively monitor physical or environmental
conditions at different locations, such as temperature, sound,
and vibration. It contains a large number of nodes, which sense
data from an inaccessible area and send their reports towards
a processing center called Base Station (BS) or Sink. WSNs
have many advantages, such as the ease deployment and the
capacity of self-organization. However, their main challenges
are the limited resources in terms of radio communication
capabilities and energies. This article addresses this last point.
it is based on [1] that was presented in SENSORCOMM 2013.
WSN has been widely used in many areas especially for
surveillance and monitoring in agriculture and habitat monitor-
ing. Environment monitoring has become an important ﬁeld of
control and protection, providing real time system and control
communication with the physical world [2]. In this paper, we
propose an energy efﬁcient cluster based routing algorithm for
environmental monitoring system.
Even if the sensors are usually powered by batteries, it is not
practical to recharge or replace them, because they are often
deployed in hostile environments. Furthermore, in a WSN, a
large part of energy is consumed when communications are es-
tablished [3]. Hence, frequent and long distance transmissions
should be minimized to extend the lifetime of the network. One
way to reach this result consists in dividing the network into
multiple clusters; each cluster has a cluster-head (C-H) [4].
The C-H node collects data from nodes of its same cluster,
aggregates them and transmits them to the BS. Nevertheless,
the main problem of many proposed clustering protocols is the
random selection of the C-H nodes [5]. Indeed, all C-Hs can
be located in a small region of the network, and some ordinary
nodes will be isolated. Also, the nature of the clustering
problem is such that the ideal approach is equivalent to ﬁnding
the global solution of a non linear optimization problem. This
is usually a difﬁcult task to achieve. In actual fact, this is an
NP-hard problem [6]. To tackle the clustering problem and
to fairly localize C-H nodes, we propose to consider spectral
clustering methods and the sensor’s residual energies.
Spectral clustering has become one of the most popular
modern clustering algorithms. It is based on graph theory,
can be solved efﬁciently by standard linear algebra software.
It also outperforms traditional clustering algorithms such as
the k-means algorithm [7]. Spectral clustering is refereed to
a class of techniques, which rely on the eigen-structure of a
similarity matrix to partition points into disjoint clusters (i.e.,
points in the same clusters have high similarity and points
in different clusters have low similarity [8]. These spectral
clustering algorithms have attracted attention over the past few
years in many applications, such as image segmentation [9]
and social network analysis [10]. The K-way approach is one
of these methods. It consists to divide points into K disjoint
classes. This method is based on the K eigenvectors related
to the K largest eigenvalues of Laplacian matrix [11].
Following this approach, we present a Multi-Relay K-way
Spectral Clustering Algorithm (MR-KSCA) in Wireless Sensor
Networks. MR-KSCA consists in partitioning the Wireless
Sensor Network into a set of clusters based on spectral
classiﬁcation. Besides, it determines the C-H nodes and super
cluster-head node (super C-H) based on the residual energy

139
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of each node of the network. Some other properties will be
explained in Section IV.
Thus, MR-KSCA has four main goals: (i) extending the
network lifetime by distributing energy consumption, (ii)
running the clustering process within a constant number of
iterations/steps, (iii) minimizing control overhead (to be linear
in the number of nodes), and (iv) producing well-distributed
C-Hs and compact clusters. MR-KSCA does not make any
assumptions about the distribution or density of nodes, neither
about node capabilities.
We test the proposed algorithm through simulations and
compare the results with other clustering algorithms. Results
show that our proposed method is far better than the others
With respect to energy consumption and network lifetime.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, we give a brief overview of some related research
work. Section III describes the network model and states the
addressed problem in this work. Details and properties of the
proposed algorithm are given in Section IV while Section V
presents the simulations and the results. Finally, conclusion
and some perspectives are drawn in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Many routing protocols have been designed based on clus-
tering [5][12][13], While there are advantages to use dis-
tributed cluster formation algorithms, these protocols offers
no guarantee about the placement and the number of the C-
H nodes. However, using a central control algorithm to form
the clusters may produce better clusters by dispersing the C-
H nodes throughout the network. This is the basis of our
proposed algorithm.
Moreover, the most commonly used approach for clustering
is the Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH)
algorithm [14]. LEACH is an energy-efﬁcient communication
protocol, which employs a hierarchical clustering. Besides,
many clustering protocols based on the principle of this
algorithm have been developed, such as LEACH-Centralized
(LEACH) [15], Energy-Kmeans [16], DECSA [17], EECS [18]
and SECA [19].
In LEACH, nodes organize themselves into clusters using
a distributed algorithm. Its main idea is to randomly and
periodically select the C-H nodes. The probability of becoming
a C-H for each round is chosen to ensure that every node
becomes a C-H at least once within N/K rounds, where N
is the number of nodes in the network and K is the desired
number of clusters. Thus, In order to select C-H nodes, each
node i determines a random number between 0 and 1 if the
number is less than threshold T(i), the node becomes a C-H
for the current round. The threshold is set as follows:
T(i) =
{
K
N−K∗(r∗mod( N
K ))
:
C(i)=1
0
:
C(i)=0
(1)
C(i) is the indicator function determining whether or not node
i has been a C-H in the most recent
(
r ∗ mod
( N
K
))
rounds
(i.e., C(i) = 1 if node i has been C-H and zero otherwise).
After the election of C-H nodes, each ordinary node in the
wireless sensor network determines its cluster by choosing
the C-H that requires the minimum communication energy,
based on the received signal strength of the advertisement
from each C-H. Each ordinary node will choose to join the
C-H which has the highest signal quality. Once the clusters
are formed, each C-H node creates Time Division Multiple
Access (TDMA) schedule. The C-H collects and aggregates
information from sensors in its own cluster and passes on
information to the BS. Although LEACH distributed clustering
algorithm has advantages, using a central control algorithm to
form clusters may produce better clusters by dispersing the
C-H nodes throughout the network [14].
In LEACH-Centralized (LEACH-C), also described in [15],
uses a centralized algorithm to form clusters. The BS deter-
mines the C-H nodes by computing the average node energy.
The node with energy below this average can not be C-
Hs for the current considered round. This ensures that the
energy consumption will be effectively distributed among all
the nodes.
Yong and Pei [17] present a Distance-Energy Cluster Struc-
ture Algorithm (DECSA) based on the classic clustering
algorithm LEACH. This proposed approach considers both
the distance between the nodes, the position of the base and
residual energy of nodes. Its main idea is to partition the
network into three levels of hierarchy to reduce the energy
consumption of the C-H nodes. This results from the non-
uniform distribution of nodes in the network and thus avoid
direct communications between BS and C-H node that has
minimal energy and is far away from the BS.
Elbhiri et al. [20] propose a new approach called the
Spectral Classiﬁcation based on Near Optimal Clustering in
Wireless Sensor Networks. This approach is based on spectral
bi-section for partitioning a sensor network into two clusters.
Spectral bi-section method is based on second eigenvalue λ2
of the Laplacian matrix of the graph to be partitioned. Median
value of corresponding eigenvector of λ2 is used to bi-part
the graph [11]. The authors apply this method recursively to
obtain the desired number of clusters. Then, for each cluster,
a C-H is also elected. This task is assigned by rotating way
between nodes without considering the residual energy of the
nodes. Hence, this method cannot partition the network into
any desired number of clusters and do not ensure an equitable
distribution of energy consumption between sensor nodes.
III. RADIO MODEL AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
This paper discusses the periodical data gathering applica-
tion [21], for which LEACH is proposed. Thus, the proposed
clustering algorithms usually produce clusters of the same size.
The C-H node consumes the same amount of energy during
intra-cluster communications. Moreover, C-H election method
based essentially on residual energy can obtain better energy
efﬁciency than the method in which cluster heads are elected
in turns or by probabilities. For this, we use the spectral
classiﬁcation that is widely used to solve graph partitioning
problems. The spectral methods get their name from the spec-
tral theories of linear algebra. This theories allows afﬁrming

140
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the diagonalization of real symmetric matrices. It also justiﬁes
the decomposition of real symmetric matrices into eigenvalues
in an orthonormal set of eigenvectors. Besides, the graph
partitioning problem can be reduced to the resolution of a
numerical system Mx = λx. Solving this numerical system
consists in seeking an orthogonal base of eigenvectors of the
matrix M [11].
In our approach, the BS constructs the graph corresponding
to the WSN based on the spectral clustering principle. Let
x be an observation vector composed of the sensor network
nodes. This vector can be represented by an undirected graph
G (V, E); where V
is the set of vertices (sensor nodes)
identiﬁed by an index i ∈ {1, · · · , N} (let N be the number
of nodes) and E is the set of edges that link each two vertices
(communication link). Let A ∈ ℜN×N be the similarity matrix
of the graph G. Each value of A is associated to each pair
of the graph nodes (i, j). The total weight of incident edges
to node i is given by dii = ∑j=N
j=1 aij. The degree matrix
D ∈ ℜN×N of G is a diagonal matrix deﬁned by D = [dij].
Finally, the Laplacian matrix of the graph, as illustrated by
[11], is expressed as follows :
L = D− 1
2 ∗ A ∗ D− 1
2
(2)
To simplify the network model, we make some assumptions
that are:
• All nodes are homogeneous and have the same capacities.
• Each node is assigned a unique identiﬁer (id) that in-
cludes the cluster identiﬁer to which the node belongs.
• The network topology remains unchanged over time.
• The BS is placed far away from the network.
In addition, we use the model of the radio hardware energy
dissipation presented in [14][15], as illustrated in Figure 1.
In this model, the multipath fading channel is used when
the distance between the sender and the receiver is more
than threshold d0; otherwise the free space model is used.
Therefore, in order to transmit an L − bits message with
Fig. 1. Radio energy dissipation model.
distance d there would be:
ET x (L, d) =
{ L ∗ Eelec + L ∗ Efs ∗ d2
if d < d0
L ∗ Eelec + L ∗ Emp ∗ d4
if d ≥ d0
(3)
To receive this message, the required amount of energy
would be:
ERx (L, d) = L ∗ Eelec
(4)
where Eelec is the energy consumption per bit in the transmit-
ter and receiver circuitry, Efs or Emp is the energy dissipated
per bit to run the transmit ampliﬁer. The threshold’s value (d0)
is expressed as follows:
d0 =
√
Efs
Emp
(5)
IV. MR-KSCA DETAILS
In this section, we give details of the proposed MR-KSCA
algorithm (Figure 2). MR-KSCA considers the following
clustering model: The sensor nodes are divided into several
clusters by using spectral clustering method. For each resulting
cluster, one sensor node is selected as a cluster-head. Then,
from this set of C-H nodes, one node is selected as super C-H
node. This super C-H node plays the role of virtual BS. Thus,
the C-H nodes collect data from other sensor nodes in the
cluster and transfer the aggregated data to the super C-H node
or the BS, and the super C-H node collect data from the C-H
nodes and transfer the aggregated data to the BS. Therefore,
the data which are collected by the cluster head far away from
the BS must be forwarded by the other C-H nodes that are
close to the BS. Since data transfers to the BS dissipate much
energy, the nodes take turns with the transmission: the role
of cluster-head and super cluster-head ”rotate”. This rotation
leads to a balanced energy consumption of all nodes and hence
to a longer lifetime of the network. Some other properties and
details will be explained in the subsections.
Fig. 2. Flowchart of the proposed algorithm.
The spectral classiﬁcation algorithm proposed here consists
of three steps, as illustrated in Figure 3.
A. The Pre-Processing step
First, each sensor node determines its position by using
a number of different technologies, e.g. exploiting radio or

141
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 3. Spectral clustering scheme of the MR-KSCA approach.
sound waves [22]. After that, it transmits the derived position
to the BS in a short message. Based on the spectral clustering
principle, the BS constructs the graph G and the similarity
matrix A which represents the network. There are several
popular constructions to transform a given set of data points
with pairwise similarities into a graph. When constructing
similarity graphs the goal is to model the local neighborhood
relationships between the data points [7]. Here we simply
connect all points with positive similarity with each other, and
we weight all edges by aij. In our approach we consider the
similarity function as a Gaussian similarity function. Hence,
similariy matrix is constructed as follows:
A = [aij] =
{
exp
( −1
2σ2 ∗ d2 (i, j)
)
if i ̸= j
0
otherwise
(6)
with d(i, j) is the Euclidean distance between nodes i and j.
It should be noted that aij is large when points indexed by i
and j are likely to be in the same cluster.
Thereafter, the BS must deduce the Degree Matrix and the
Laplacian one. Then, it computes the eigenvalues and the
eigenvectors of the last matrix.
B. Clustering step
The objectives of the current step are to deﬁne the optimal
number of clusters and to form them.
As indicated in [15], the optimal number of clusters can be
determined as follows:
K =
√
N
√
2π ∗
√
Efs
Ems
∗
M
d2
toBS
(7)
where N is the number of sensor nodes, M is the area of
sensor nodes deployment, and dtoBS is the average distance
of the nodes from the BS.
We construct a new matrix U from the K eigenvectors
related to the K largest eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix.
In order to determine the K clusters of the WSN, we apply
the classiﬁcation algorithm k-means to the matrix U. We deal
with each row of U as a point in ℜK×N. We cluster the WSN
into K clusters via k-means. The sensor node i is assigned to
cluster Cj if and only if row i of the matrix U was assigned
to cluster Cj.
We notice that in the proposed algorithm we determine the
clusters before specifying the C-Hs and the optimal number
of clusters is as well deﬁned automatically. So, our algorithm
is different from the others (such as LEACH, LEACH-C,
DECSA, etc.) that determine the C-H nodes before the clus-
ters. In addition, in order to deﬁne the number of cluster heads,
the latter protocols run the same technique in each iteration
and by the way consume more energy.
C. Cluster head election step
Once the clusters are determined, the next step of the MR-
KSCA consists to select the C-H nodes. The C-H nodes
are responsible of the coordination among the nodes within
their clusters, as well as for the aggregation of the received
information and the communication with the BS or the super
C-H node. In our algorithm, the C-H is determined by taking
into account the id of the node in the cluster and its residual
energy (Algorithm 1). The id is deﬁned without considering

142
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the position of the node in the cluster. The C-H in each
round of communication will be at a random position on the
cluster. Thus, the probability of uncovered area will decrease
extremely.
Indeed, for each round r of the simulation, we use the
number Ck = (r mod |Sk|) to elect a C-H for the appropriate
cluster; |Sk| is the total number of nodes in the cluster k.
The node with id = Ck and residual energy Er greater than
threshold Ermin will be the C-H of the cluster k in the round
r. Ermin is the minimum residual energy required for a given
node to be a C-H. It is the summation of the energy needed to
receive and process data coming from the appropriate cluster
nodes (data aggregation), and to transmit data towards the BS.
This energy Ermin is given by:
Ermin = |Sk| ∗ (ERx (L, d) + EAggregation) + ET x (L, d)
(8)
with
• ET x (L, d)is the energy consumed when the C-H trans-
mits L − bits data to the BS by a distance d.
• EAggregation is the energy needed by the C-H to process
data:
EAggregation = L ∗ EDA
(9)
EDA is amount of energy for data aggregation.
• ERx (L, d)is the energy consumed when the C-H receives
data from one node.
Hence,
Ermin = L ∗
(
(|Sk| + 1) ∗ Eelec + |Sk| ∗ EDA + ϵmp ∗ d4
i
)
(10)
Nevertheless, if the residual energy Er is less than Ermin this
node must broadcast a short message informing the node with
id = Ck + 1to its residual energy and so on. Thus, the energy
consumption will be distributed with more equitable between
all nodes.
Algorithm 1 Cluster Head Election
• For each round r
– For each cluster k in {1, 2, · · · , K}
∗ Each node i of the cluster k with the id in
{1, 2, · · · , |Sk|} computes the value idCH
=
(r mod |Sk|)
∗ While Er(idC−H) ≤ Ermin
· idC−H = idC−H + 1
End While
∗ Node with id = idC−H will be the C-H for the
current round r
End For
End For
D. Super cluster head election step
This step consists of selecting the super C-H node from
the set of C-H nodes. In our approach, the ordinary nodes
report their data to the respective C-H nodes. The C-H nodes
aggregate the data and send them to the BS through the super
C-H node. If the C-H nodes transmit data over longer distance
to reach the BS directly, they lose more energy compared to
ordinary nodes. Hence, the super C-H node play the role of
the second BS. We also assume that if the distance between
the C-H node and the BS is lower than the distance between
the C-H node and the super C-H node. Then, the C-H node
transmits its data directly to the BS.
Thus, in our algorithm the super C-H is determined by
taking into account the residual energy of the nodes. The super
cluster head will be the C-H with the highest level of the
residual energy.
E. Data Transmission
Based on the id and the numbers of nodes in the cluster,
the C-H node creates a schedule TDMA to assign to each
member’s node a time when it can transmit its data to its own
C-H. If we suppose that the node with the id = i is elected
as a C-H, the node with id = ((i + 1 + |Sk|) mod |Sk|) is
assigned the ﬁrst round to transmit its data.
One of the most important challenges in our approach
consists in reducing the total consumed energy of each round.
Hence, we avoid energy consumption due to synchronization
of the cluster nodes when the C-H is elected to assign the
TDMA. Indeed, this technique ensures not having collisions
between data messages. It also allows the radio components of
each non-C-H node to be disabled at any time, except during
the time it is allocated for transmitting these data. this reduces
the energy consumed by the nodes. However, the C-H must
keep its receiver ”ON” in order to receive data from other
nodes [23]. In addition, to save more energy in a WSN, we
assume that if the distance between a node and the BS is lower
than the distance between this node and its C-H. Then the node
transmits its data directly to the BS. Moreover, each node can
move in the standby mode to reduce energy consumption.
Also, to avoid unnecessary node s control messages trans-
mission and control overhead of the BS, the clusters are
created only when the sensor nodes are deployed in the ﬁrst
round. So, the calculating overhead is only C-H selecting and
super C-H selecting in the most set-up phase.
V. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
In this section, we present the results of the evaluation
experiments of the proposed MR-KSCA algorithm. We used
the MATLAB software to simulate and analyze this algorithm.
Besides, we consider the radio model presented in Figure 1.
The different parameters used in our simulations are shown in
Table I.
A node that runs out of energy is considered dead and can-
not transmit or receive data. For these simulations, the energy
of a node decreases each time it sends, receives or aggregates
data according to the model radio parameters. Also, we ignore
the effect caused by the signal collision and the interference
in the wireless channel. Furthermore, each simulation result
shown below is the average of 100 independent experiments,

143
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Algorithm 2 Data Transmission
• For each round r
– For each cluster k in {1, 2, · · · , K}
∗ The C-H node creates Time-Slot assignment
TDMA.
∗ The C-H node collects measurement from clus-
ter’s nodes.
∗ If the distance between C-H and BS is lower than
the distance between C-H and super C-H
· The C-H node sends aggregated data to the BS.
Else
· The C-H node sends aggregated data to the
super C-H node.
End If
End For
End For
TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameter
value
Eelec
50nJ/bit
Efs
10pJ/bit/m2
Emp
0.0013pJ/bit/m4
Initial energy E0
0.5J
EDA
5nJ/bit/message
Area of Network
200m ×200m
Sink coordination
(100m, 250m)
d0
88m
Message Size
4000bytes
Number of Nodes
500
where each experiment uses a different randomly-generated
uniform topology of sensor nodes.
As illustrated in Figure 4, an example of WSNs with
N
=
500 nodes randomly distributed in a 200m ×200m
area. The BS is located far away from the sensing area
(xSB = 100m ; ySB = 250m).
In order to evaluate the performances of the new proposed
protocol, we propose to compare it to:
• K-way Spectral Clustering Algorithm (KSCA) [1].
• Spectral Classiﬁcation based on Near Optimal Clustering
(SCNOC) [20].
• Distance-Energy Cluster Structure Algorithm (DECSA)
[17].
• Low Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy Centralized
(LEACH-C) [15].
Also, we use two metrics to analyze and compare the
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
BS
Sensor nodes
Fig. 4. Random deployment of 100 nodes over an area of size 200m
×200m.
performances of the protocols:
• Network lifetime: It is necessary that all nodes stay alive
as long as possible. Network quality decreases consider-
ably as soon as one node dies. Thus, it is important to
know when the First Node Died. Furthermore, sensors
can be placed in proximity to each other. Thus, adjacent
sensors could record related or identical data. Hence, the
loss of a single or few nodes does not automatically
diminish the quality of service (QOS) of the network.
In this case, the metric First Node Died (FND) denotes
the time elapsed until ﬁrst node depletes its energy. The
metric Half of the Nodes Died (HND) denotes the
time elapsed until half of the nodes in the network are
dead. Finally, the metric Last Node Died (LND) gives
an estimated value for the overall lifetime of a sensor
network.
• Energy consumption: Uniform energy consumption is
very important for network load balancing: More uniform
energy consumption, less possibility for node premature
death. Less energy consumption per round, better network
performance.
As illustrated in Figure 5, the main problem of LEACH-C
and DECSA protocols are the random selection of the C-H
nodes. It is obvious that a stochastic C-Hs selection will not
automatically lead to minimum energy consumption during
data transfer for a given set of nodes. All C-H nodes can be
located near the edges of the network or adjacent nodes can
become C-Hs simultaneously. In these cases some nodes have
to bridge long distances to reach a C-H.
In SCNOC algorithm, when we use only the second eigen-

144
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 5. Illustration of the critical area in the LEACH-C clustering algorithm
with 500 nodes.
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
Fig. 6. Clustering results of the MR-KSCA algorithm with 500 nodes.
vector of the Laplacian matrix in the clustering setup, we may
lose the connectivity information about the network [11] and
obtain a poor clustering setup.Also, we cannot partition the
network into the optimal number of clusters. On the other
hand, the rotation selection of the C-H nodes may obtain a
poor C-H selection setup, the distribution of C-H nodes is
not uniform and some sensor nodes have to transfer data
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Round
Number of nodes alive
 
 
MR−KSCA
KSCA
SCNOC
DECSA
LEACH−C
Fig. 7. Number of nodes alive over time of the compared protocols.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
50
100
150
200
250
Round
Residual Energie of the Network
 
 
MR−KSCA
KSCA
SCNOC
DECSA
LEACH−C
Fig. 8. Evolution of the remaining energy in the network when the
transmission rounds.
through a longer distance. Hence, reasonable energy saving
is not obtained.
In KSCA, all C-H nodes transfer their data directly to the
BS. Hence, some C-Hs which are far away from the BS
consume exhaustive energy.
Figure 6 presents an example of clustering setup for the
MR-KSCA. We note that the network is subdivided into

145
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
(a) N=100
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
(b) N=200
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
(c) N=300
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d) N=400
Fig. 9. Clustering results of MR-KSCA algorithm for different number of nodes.
Fig. 10. Impact of the node density on the ”First Node Died”.
six clusters, and the nodes are correctly distributed over
the sensing area. Also, there is no intersection between the
different clusters.
Figure 7 shows a signiﬁcant improvement for MR-KSCA
in terms of numbers of periods relating to FND, HND, and
LND. In the proposed method, FND occurs at the round 641
while it occurs at the round 520 for KSCA, at the round 378
for SCNOC, at the round 21 for LEACH-C, and at the round
74 for DECSA protocols. HND occurs at the round 960 while
it occurs at the round 867 for KSCA, at the round 817 for
SCNOC, at the round 89 for LEACH-C, and at the round 368
for DECSA protocols. Finally, LND occurs at the round 1865
while it occurs at the round 1171 for KSCA, at the round 1080
for SCNOC, at the round 568 for LEACH-C, and at 541 for
DECSA protocols.
Figure 8 gives the total network energy remaining in every
transmission round. The energy remaining decreases more
Fig. 11. Impact of the node density on the ”Half Node Died”
rapidly in KSCA, SCNOC, LEACH-C, and DECSA than in
MR-KSCA. In the ﬁrst 500 transmission rounds, approxi-
mately 51.3% of the total energy is consumed in case of MR-
KSCA. Whereas, 60% in KSCA, 65% in SCNOC, 98% in
DECSA, and 100% in LEACH-C.
Figure 9 presents the clustering setup for different number
of nodes. In each case, we note that the network is subdivided
into an optimal number of clusters. There is no intersection
between the different clusters. Also, the C-H nodes will be
distributed over the sensing area.
In Figures 10-12, we show the effects of the node density on
the compared clustering techniques as well as on the network’s
stable regions (”FND”, ”HND”, ”LND”). For different values
of N equal to 100, 200, 300, and 400, our algorithm presents
an improvement of performances compared to the other al-
gorithms. It follows that even if the node density increase the
new proposed approach still gives best results compared to the

146
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 12. Impact of the node density on the ”Last Node Died”
Fig. 13. Impact of the initial energy quantity on the ”First Node Died”.
other ones.
In Figures 13-15, we show the performances of the different
compared protocols by using different initial energies. It gives
respectively the ”FND”, ”HND”, and ”LND” depending on
the quantity of the nodes initial energy.
Once more, it is shown that for different values of the
energy, the new proposed approach presents a signiﬁcant
improvement compared to the others. We conclude that the
MR-KSCA algorithm gives a signiﬁcant performance improve-
ment; in terms of energy and lifetime gains, compared to
Fig. 14. Impact of the initial energy quantity on the ”Half Node Died”.
Fig. 15. Impact of the initial energy quantity on the ”Last Node Died”.
the KSCA, the SCNOC, the LEACH-C, and the DECSA
protocols. The best results of the MR-KSCA approach can
be explained by the three points: (i) The proposal starts by
selecting the clusters (similar nodes) before the election of
the C-Hs. (ii) The approach considers the residual energies of
the nodes when we select the C-H nodes. (iii) The C-H nodes
are distributed in the WSN.

147
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Energy saving is an important challenging issue in a WSN.
To ensure more effective energy distribution and extend the
lifetime of the network, energy-efﬁcient saving scheme is
developed in this paper. We have proposed a new method
of clustering (MR-KSCA), based on spectral classiﬁcation
(K-way) that has been widely used to solve graph partitioning
problem. Our approach starts by determining similar nodes
(clusters) and after that, selects C-H nodes. Furthermore,
MR-KSCA considers the energy of the nodes when selecting
C-H nodes and the super C-H node, so the nodes with more
energy have more chance to be the C-Hs or super C-H.
Hence, balancing energy consumption is guaranted. Indeed,
simulation results show that our approach ensures the low
energy consumption and improves the network lifetime.
Further directions of this study will be deal with clustered
sensor networks with more than two levels of hierarchy and
more than three types of nodes.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Jorio, S. El Fkihi, B. Elbhiri, and D. Aboutajdine, “A new clustering
algorithm in wsn based on spectral clustering and residual energy,” Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies
and Applications (SENSORCOMM), pp. 119-125, 2013.
[2] M. F. Othman and K. Shazali, “Wireless sensor network applications: A
study in environment monitoring system,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 41,
pp. 1204-1210, 2012.
[3] I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A survey
on sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, no. 8,
pp. 102-114, 2002.
[4] J. Al-Karaki and A. Kamal, “Routing techniques in wireless sensor
networks: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 6-28, 2004.
[5] M. M. Afsar and M. H. Tayarani-N, “Clustering in sensor networks: A
literature survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol.
46, pp. 198-226, 2014.
[6] G. Fung, “A comprehensive overview of basic clustering algorithms,”
2001.
[7] U. Von Luxburg, “A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statistics and Com-
puting, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 395-416, 2007.
[8] F. R. B. M. I. Jordan and F. R. Bach, “Learning spectral clustering,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 16, pp. 305-
312, 2004.
[9] J. Shi and J. Malik, “Normalized cuts and image segmentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 22, no.
8, pp. 888-905, 2000.
[10] M. E. Newman, D. J. Watts, and S. H. Strogatz, “Random graph models
of social networks,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 99, no. suppl 1, pp. 2566-2572, 2002.
[11] A. Ng, M. Jordan, Y. Weiss et al., “On spectral clustering: Analysis and
an algorithm,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol.
2, pp. 849-856, 2002.
[12] A. A. Abbasi and M. Younis, “A survey on clustering algorithms for
wireless sensor networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 30, no. 1415,
pp. 2826-2841, 2007.
[13] O. Boyinbode, H. Le, and M. Takizawa, “A survey on clustering
algorithms for wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of Space
Based and Situated Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 130-136, 2011.
[14] W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Energy efﬁ-
cient communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks,” IEEE
Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
pp. 1-10 , 2000.
[15] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “An
application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for wireless microsensor net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 660-670, 2002.
[16] S. Jerusha, K. Kulothungan, and A. Kannan, “Location aware cluster
based routing in wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of
Computer & Communication Technology, vol. 3, no. 5, 2012.
[17] Z. Yong and Q. Pei, “A energy-efﬁcient clustering routing algorithm
based on distance and residual energy for wireless sensor networks,”
International Workshop on Information and Electronics Engineering, vol.
29, pp. 1882-1888, 2012.
[18] M. Ye, C. Li, G. Chen, and J. Wu, “EECS: an energy efﬁcient
clustering scheme in wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE
International Performance Computing and Communications Conference
(IPCCC), pp. 535-540, 2005.
[19] J.-Y. Chang and P.-H. Ju, “An efﬁcient cluster-based power saving
scheme for wireless sensor networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless
Communications and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2012.
[20] B. Elbhiri, S. El Fkihi, R. Saadane, and D. Aboutajdine, “Clustering in
wireless sensor networks based on near optimal bi-partitions,” 6th EURO-
NF Conference on Next Generation Internet(NGI), pp. 1-6, 2010.
[21] C. F. Garca-Hernndez, P. H. Ibarguengoytia-Gonzalez, J. Garca-
Hernndez, and J. A. Prez-Daz, “Wireless sensor networks and applica-
tions: a survey,” International Journal of Computer Science and Network
Security, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 264-273, 2007.
[22] G. Mao, B. Fidan, and B. Anderson, “Wireless sensor network local-
ization techniques,” ACM Computer networks, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 2529-
2553, 2007.
[23] G. Anastasi, M. Conti, M. D. Francesco, and A. Passarella, “Energy
conservation in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 537-568, 2009.

