Delivery of CCNA as part of a Distance Degree Programme
Nicky Moss 
Faculty of Mathematics Computing and Technology 
The Open University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
n.g.moss@open.ac.uk 
Andrew Smith 
Faculty of Mathematics Computing and Technology  
The Open University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
a.smith@open.ac.uk
 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports upon the success that The Open 
University of the United Kingdom has had in delivering the 
Cisco 
Exploration 
Curriculum, 
as 
an 
option 
in 
an 
undergraduate BSc degree, using a Blended Distance Learning 
Model. It is argued that a constructivist learning approach was 
taken when designing this course, which is demonstrated by this 
blended learning model. This is an important pedagogical 
distinction, as many would see the practical focus of this course 
as training. The importance of Supported Open Learning as a 
method of teaching students, and the key role of simulators, 
remote access tools and day schools are also discussed as 
contributors to the pedagogy. Bended delivery has proven to be 
an excellent way of delivering Cisco courses to adult learners, as 
supported by student feedback and attainment. Distance 
teaching offers the Cisco Networking Academy program an 
opportunity to extend reach in both existing and new markets. 
Keywords-Cisco Networking Academy; Blended Distance 
Learning 
(BDL); 
Supported 
Open 
Learning; 
Netlab; 
Constructivism; CCNA; Distance Teaching; Pedagogy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Open University of the United Kingdom (UKOU), 
as a member of the Cisco Networking Academy program, 
delivers the Cisco curriculum to students who study on-line 
at home. These courses provide them with degree level 
qualifications and the preparation necessary to take the 
Cisco certification examinations, which are widely accepted 
as an industry standard, offering students the opportunity to 
gain employment in the information technology and 
telecommunications sector. A shortened version of this 
paper was presented at the IARIA conference [1] in Cancun, 
Mexico in March 2010. 
The UKOU has been providing higher education at a 
distance since 1969. At the time of writing it had 180,000 
[2] students studying undergraduate and postgraduate 
courses, mainly in the UK, but also considerable numbers in 
Continental Europe and some other Countries. The faculty 
of Mathematics Computing and Technology also has a 
history of providing courses relevant to employer needs. In 
comparison, the Cisco Networking Academy currently has 
470,000 [3] registered students in 160 Countries. Just in 
terms of outreach, both organizations have been successful 
in bringing education opportunities to very large numbers of 
people, and often to groups that do not have access to other 
types of education. Both have been successful in developing 
the courses and information systems to support their 
learners, and both provide courses that are valued by 
employers and employees. 
The UKOU became a Cisco Networking Academy in 
2003, and delivered its first CCNA (Cisco Certified 
Network Associate) course in 2005. Since then it has 
recruited more than 3000 students to study the CCNA, and 
is currently enrolling about 600 per year to study CCNA 
Exploration. The UKOU also started to deliver the CCNP 
(Cisco Certified Network Professional) curricula in 2009, 
and has already recruited 300 students to study the first 
CCNP modules. All UKOU students study the CCNA and 
CCNP using blended distance learning (BDL), or more 
precisely, a variation on what the University calls 
‘supported open learning’. 
The UKOU has been a very successful University that 
has enjoyed growth, year on year, since it opened its virtual 
doors to students forty years ago. Much of the success can 
be attributed to the ability to offer learning opportunities to 
students who find it difficult to access traditional classroom 
based educators. For example, students in full time 
employment, those with family commitments at home, those 
in the military and those with disabilities. It is these same 
groups of students who have enrolled in the Cisco courses at 
the UKOU, and this has brought about 5% extra students to 
the CCNA program in the UK, at a time when the overall 
program appeared to have reached saturation. 
This paper will expand upon the model of supported 
open learning (BDL) that the UKOU is using, arguing that 
the CCNA program is ideally suited for this form of 
delivery, and that BDL offers opportunities to extend the 
reach of the Cisco Academy Program to students in existing 
and new markets. Attention is also given to the experience 
of the students as learners, with consideration of the 
possible learning style being used by these courses. Specific 
reference is made to UKOU course T216, which delivers the 
CCNA. 
370
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
CISCO NETWORKING ACADEMY 
The Cisco Networking Academy was first established in 
1997 with the specific aim of helping educators to develop a 
sustainable way to design, maintain, troubleshoot and 
updates their networks [4]. In line with the original ethos 
Cisco still provide a complete curriculum free to schools, 
colleges and universities that join the academy program. All 
of the teaching and assessment material is provided on-line 
via the academy VLE. The on-line material is content rich 
making extensive use of animations, rich pictures, inter-
active quizzes and of course text. A typical page is shown in 
Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Example VLE page 
Each page is normally divided with the text on the left 
and animation and other rich media on the right. Generally 
the text will explain an idea of concept, and the activity on 
the right will aim to deepen the student’s understanding by 
engaging them. In this example a common network is used 
to illustrate two views, one focusing on quality of service, 
the other on security. Users can select either view using the 
active buttons, enabling them to compare the differences 
when applied to the same base network. 
Laboratory activities are provided at the end of each 
chapter to enable the student’s to develop understanding 
through a series of practical exercises. Many of these can be 
carried out using a simulation tool called Packet Tracer that 
is explained later.  
There are also on-line tests and exams that allow 
students to assess their progress. These also provide 
feedback and direct students to the relevant part of the 
curriculum. 
As well as the assessment that is built into the courses 
Cisco also provide a series of certification examinations that 
can be taken at local testing centers. Students who 
successfully pass these exams gain a qualification that is 
widely recognized by employers as they provide evidence of 
networking competences that are directly relevant to the 
work place. Cisco CCNA and CCNP certification is highly 
valued in the workplace.  
III. 
SUPPORTED OPEN LEARNING 
The style of distance learning used by the UKOU is 
often described as supported open learning. The key features 
and pedagogical aspects of this style are described below, 
followed by the specifics of how this style has been adapted 
in the case of students’ studying the Cisco Networking 
Academy program using BDL. 
A. The UKOU Model 
In the UKOU model students study at a distance, 
normally at home in their own time, using material provided 
by the University. Course related support is provided 
centrally by the University and by the student’s own tutor. 
The materials the students’ use for their studies can be 
broadly divided between teaching and assessment. Teaching 
materials make up the bulk, can be either electronic or print, 
and are often a mixture of both. Most of this material is 
produced in house by the University, although some third 
party material, such as books, journal articles, video or 
software is used. Teaching texts, books and DVDs are sent 
to the student’s home, and on-line materials are accessed via 
the student’s home page, using the usual password access 
controls.  
The front page of the student’s course home page is 
shown in Fig. 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Student home page 
The home page provides access to all of the course 
components, for example, a course calendar, the resource 
centre (library), course assessment, the academy curriculum 
and links to download Packet Tracer. Students can also 
371
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

login to a discussion forum and follow various links to 
useful University wide resources via link at the top of the 
page. This will include formal rules about assessment or 
raising issues, for example. 
Each group of 20 students is allocated to a dedicated 
tutor, who in the case of students studying the Cisco 
program is also a qualified Cisco instructor. Each group 
share a class within the academy. Tutors support the 
students with their study by managing the academy 
assessments, providing on-line and telephone support and 
by providing feedback when they mark each student’s work. 
Broadly three types of assessment are used, tutor marked 
assessment (TMA), computer marked assessment (CMA) 
and examinations. Each course will have more that one 
TMA or CMA and a single exam at the end. 
The TMA is piece of written work that is completed by 
all students on the course. The work is submitted by the 
student to the University using an electronic handling 
system, and is marked by their tutor, and returned via the 
same system. Marked work is returned to the student with 
personal written feedback provided by their tutor. Marks are 
collected centrally for assessment purposes. The TMA 
provides a good opportunity for students to complete an 
extended piece of course work, one that tests both their 
theoretical grasp of the subject and their practical skills. Fig. 
3 shows a network that has been used to tests students skills 
to plan, implement and test a network through a scenario. 
 
Figure 3.  Network used in TMA 
The network in Fig. 3 includes routers, switches and 
PCs. Students are provided with a scenario that states the 
organizations requirements and gives basic address ranges. 
Using this information students have to plan and configure 
all of the network devices and implement them using Packet 
Tracer. They are then required to demonstrate compliance 
by running various testing parameters. Their completed 
answer will have to be supported with written evidence to 
demonstrate their thinking as well as their implementation 
skills. Scenarios of this type are typical of what may be 
encountered in a work situation and for this reason provide 
an excellent test of student progress. 
The CMA takes the form of multiple-choice questions 
that are completed by the student on-line. Marks and 
feedback are provided to the student immediately if these 
are used formatively, and after a common cut off date if 
summative. 
The final examination can take one of two forms, an 
extended piece of course work, which is managed as the 
TMA, or a formal written exam held in an examination 
centre local to the student’s home. Students are given an 
overall course result once the exams have all been marked. 
Students are free to go on and take the Cisco certification at 
any time. 
Guidance on studying course material is provided using 
an electronic calendar that provides all key dates, especially 
the cut-off dates for the various forms of assessment, 
recommended start and completion dates for individual 
modules and the dates for day schools. The calendar is 
however only a guide to student study patterns, as flexibility 
about how and when students study is essential for those in 
work or with demanding home lives. Students are provided 
with general study support via their university and course 
specific home pages. Additional course specific support is 
provided via on-line forum, moderated by professional 
teachers (tutors). Students can also call upon their tutor for 
support using e-mail or phone, and tutors can use their own 
home page to monitor their student progress and take action 
pro-actively. 
The University also has a long history of providing 
stand- alone week residential schools (called summer 
schools) for many of its courses, especially those that are 
science or technology based. These are now less common, 
as modern on-line tools and simulations have provided good 
alternatives for these summer schools, even in subjects such 
as engineering [5]. When studying T216 students attend 
four separate day schools. 
B. Blended Delivery of CCNA 
There are some obvious parallels between the way the 
CCNA curriculum is delivered through the Cisco 
Networking Academies and the UKOU’s supported open 
learning model. Looking within the Cisco CCNA program 
for parallels, these include student home, an on-line 
curriculum, the use of simulation tools such as Packet 
Tracer, and on-line assessment, both formative and 
summative. The one obvious difference is that the CCNA 
has mostly been delivered in a classroom setting, one where 
372
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a teacher can guide students through the curriculum and 
labs. The experience of the UKOU suggests that classroom 
need not necessarily continue to be the de-facto option, 
although it will continue to be the dominant for most 
students. 
Teaching the practical skills using real equipment is an 
essential learning outcome for the CCNA curriculum. The 
integrity of the final examinations is important for 
maintaining the credentials of the program. Maintaining 
both of these features is therefore critical, even if blended 
teaching is used. Both of these provided a challenge for the 
UKOU, where normal practice is for students to take much 
of their formative assessment at home unsupervised, and 
when the use of residential schools was diminishing as a 
result of advances in on-line labs. On the other hand, the 
ordered structure of the curriculum and the end of chapter 
tests, both fitted naturally with the flexible timetabled 
teaching used on other courses. Fig. 4 shows some of the 
assessment pages from the academy VLE. 
 
Figure 4.  Assessment pages on VLE 
Each student has a gradebook that shows all of their 
marks for the assessment taken within the academy class. 
The example in the background is the tutor version that 
shows the results for all students in that class. Students (and 
tutors) are able to review the results of any question taken, 
and see the question in full, with the answer. This is shown 
in the second pop up window. The feedback directing 
students to the curriculum areas they need to revise, based 
on their individual performance in a given exam, is shown 
in the third pop up. 
This comprehensive assessment and feedback system 
allows students to reflect and learn from the results of their 
exams. As tutors can see the performance of the whole 
class, it also allows them to target additional teaching to 
areas of shared difficulty. 
The final solution, that enabled the UKOU to make full 
use of its experience in supported open learning and meet 
Cisco’s requirements for hands-on practical and proctored 
final exams were achieved with the use of dedicated day-
schools and Netlab [6]. The opportunity for students to 
develop and practice their skills with configuring networks 
has also been enhanced by the rapid developments of Packet 
Tracer. How the UKOU has used each of these elements to 
deliver the CCNA Exploration curriculum is explained 
below. 
1) Day Schools 
Students who wish to study the CCNA Exploration 
courses with the UKOU can only do so as part of an 
undergraduate degree program. Currently all four CCNA 
Exploration courses are offered as a single undergraduate 
course titled Cisco networking, given the designated 
university code T216. Because this course is part of a degree 
program students are expected to have some prior 
knowledge of networking computers, their use in the 
workplace and basic study skills; what is termed 
experienced learners in the Cisco Academy. 
On the understanding that our students were experienced 
learners, together with recognition that T216 would also 
include Netlab, it was agreed with the UK Cisco 
Networking Academy managers that there would be four 
days dedicated to practical skills development. As UKOU 
students live all over the country, it is not practical to get 
them to all attend one centre, so students are given a choice 
of dates and venues. Generally each day school follows the 
completion of one part of the CCNA (there are four) as this 
allows maximum use to be made of Packet Tracer and 
Netlab to prepare the students for the day, enabling them to 
gain maximum benefit from getting to work with real 
equipment. 
Partnerships have been established with seven Cisco 
Networking Academies in the UK and one in the Republic 
of Ireland to deliver the four schools. This co-operation has 
brought benefits to both students and academies. Students 
can now attend day schools closer to their homes, they are 
taught by experienced Cisco qualified instructors, and in 
some of the best equipped UK academy labs. The academies 
have gained extra business on a Saturday, which is not a 
normal teaching day in the UK, allowing them to use 
facilities that would normally be dormant, leveraging extra 
benefit from the investment in networking equipment 
needed for teaching their normal academy students. 
Students are able to book each of their day schools, from 
a selection of venues and dates, using an on-line booking 
system developed from the normal UKOU residential 
management system that now allows for four separate days. 
This system also feeds an attendance mark, necessary to 
373
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

check the student meets the course requirement for 
compulsory day schools, to each student’s assessment 
record. A written handbook is produced for each day school 
setting out the learning outcomes and activities to be carried 
out. This is supplied to all students and day school centers, 
and aims to ensure that all students gain a similar learning 
experience. 
2) Netlab 
The Netlab Academy Edition provides remote access to 
Cisco networking equipment such as routers and switches. It 
has been specifically designed by NDG to host Cisco 
training equipment on the Internet for student and instructor 
use, and is particularly well suited for blended distance 
learning [7]. It is important to remember that Netlab is not a 
simulator, and allows students to access the console ports of 
real networking equipment, such as routers and switches. 
Once logged into a booked session the users sees a topology 
such as the one shown in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Netlab topology 
This topology is a popular multi-purpose configuration 
consisting of 3 routers, 3 switches and 3 virtual PCs. This 
allows a wide range of scenario to be investigated by 
students. The right hand screen is the command line 
interface for one of the network devices, in this example 
router 1. It is this interface through, which the users set up 
the various devices. The script in the window is a list of 
commands to configure the router, and it is proficiency with 
the full range of Cisco commands that is one of the key 
learning outcomes in this program. A window can be 
opened for each of the nine devices shown in the topology, 
enabling the whole network to be configured. Netlab will 
save students configuration files so that they can continue 
with their work in another session. 
All UKOU academy students are given access to Netlab 
for the full duration of their study, normally 9 months. 
Student’s accounts on Netlab are organized in tutor groups 
to enable tutors to monitor student use and lead teaching 
sessions as necessary. Some will have accounts on the 
UKOU’s own Netlab, others will use systems belonging to 
our partner academies, who lease access to the UKOU. 
Student access is provided 24/7 using the self booking 
facility provided by the system. 
Students can access Netlab at any time to undertake labs 
as specified in the curriculum, or just to practice and 
develop their configuration skills. All students are required 
to use Netlab and not to rely entirely upon Packet Tracer. 
Activities specific to Netlab are included in the UKOU’s 
assessment to ensure that students complete practical work 
that can be assessed by their tutor and counted towards their 
assessment score. 
3) Assessment 
Students study the Cisco Exploration curriculum in the 
recommended order, starting with Network Fundamentals 
and finishing with Wide Area Networks. Students take all 
the chapter exams, normally at their own pace, although 
working within certain limits set by the study calendar. 
Their practical work is assessed at the day schools and 
through specific additional activities using Netlab and 
Packet Tracer. Each day school is scheduled to take place 
when all students have completed each course. For example, 
the first day school is at the end of the study period 
allocated to Network Fundamentals. Students also take their 
Cisco final examinations at the day school. Students who 
successfully graduate from each Cisco course gain the 
appropriate certificate and/or letter from the Cisco 
Academy. 
The UKOU awards credit towards a BSc Hons degree to 
all students who complete the four Cisco Exploration 
courses and pass the additional assessment set by the 
university. This assessment consists of five assignments 
(TMA) taken during the course, and the final written 
examination. Students must also gain a satisfactory 
attendance for each of the four, day schools. Successful 
completion of this course gives the student the equivalent of 
¼ of a full years graduate study. 
Each TMA is completed by all students and submitted to 
the same deadline. All students complete the same tasks in 
the TMA, which is then marked by their tutor. A range of 
question types are used, for example, written explanations, 
sub-netting calculations, Netlab activities and network 
design and implementation activities using Packet Tracer.  
The final written examination lasts for 3 hours and 
draws upon the entire CCNA Exploration curriculum. Again 
a full range of questions are set that aim to test the students 
understanding, by asking them to explain, calculate and 
problem solve under closed book examination conditions. 
374
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The combination of Cisco Academy exams and the OU 
assessment provides a well-designed assessment strategy for 
the students. Assessment has long been seen as an essential 
part of teaching and learning [8], especially when it plays a 
vital part in getting the students to engage with the study 
material and keep them motivated. All students are 
encouraged to take the CCNA certification exams and full 
use is made of the preparation exams in the gradebook. 
Anecdotal data suggest that those that do well in the course 
go on and gain the certification exam. 
4) Supported Learning 
In many respects the CCNA curriculum is ideal for 
students to study on their own at a distance. For example, all 
of the teaching material is on-line, so easily available at 
home or work, it has embedded simulations and activities 
that engage the students, it can be studied linearly without 
teacher direction, also Packet Tracer can be used to develop 
practical skills and there is assessment with feedback, which 
allows students to assess their own progress. 
Unfortunately, providing students with easy on-line 
access to good study materials, with optional access to tools 
and assessment does not often lead to successful study. 
Technology alone is not sufficient [9], and students benefit 
immensely from a learning environment that offers support 
and fosters ambition to learn. 
A central feature of the UKOU’s supported open 
learning model is the role of the tutor (associate lecturer). 
Each student is assigned to a tutor group, nominally with 19 
other students. Tutor groups are based on the student’s 
geographical location, and this allows for face-to-face 
meetings, although these are not central to the teaching 
model. Tutors will make early contact with their students 
using e-mail or telephone. Students will also receive their 
login information for the academy, login detail to their OU 
home page and a welcome letter from the chair of T216. 
Together these contacts should give the student a sense of 
belonging, in some ways similar to their first day at a 
conventional college. Students will also have contact details 
for their tutor on their home page, and are free to contact her 
if they have any queries. 
During the first two weeks of the course students are 
allowed time to explore the UKOU learning resources and 
familiarize themselves with the academy site and materials. 
Additional study materials have been produced to assist the 
students in getting to grips with the basics of the academy 
gradebook and Netlab. A local face-to-face session is also 
arranged where each tutor can meet their students and go 
through all of the on-line learning materials and tools. Very 
few students have any difficulty in getting on with studying 
the course once they have reached this point.  
Additional study support is provided through a national 
on-line forum. This is open to all students studying the 
course, and is primarily intended as self-help, where 
students are encouraged to exchange ideas, ask each other 
questions, and generally build up a sense of belonging to the 
UKOU and the Cisco Networking Academy. The forum is 
moderated by tutors, who provide an input to discussions 
when necessary, perhaps to correct a thread started by a 
student that is re-enforcing misinterpretation, or just giving 
wrong information. They also ensure, through a light touch 
that students behave appropriately in their exchanges with 
other members of this on-line community, an example of an 
exchange is shown in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Forum discussion 
This is a good example of a thread where one student is 
asking a question and other students are providing the 
answer. This self-help benefits all students - the one that 
asked the question because he gets a quick answer, within 2 
hours in this case; the students that provide the feedback as 
they are rehearsing and developing their own understanding 
by putting it in their own words; and the many students who 
were stuck on the same point but had not asked. This is an 
example of a short thread, and there are many that extend to 
20 or more replies. Moderators regularly review the forum, 
mainly to make sure that no thread is developing in a way 
that would be misleading to the students, but also to answer 
more specific questions such as clarification for assignment 
questions. By using the forum for this type of interchange 
between tutor and student all benefit from the answer and 
not just the one that asked. 
All tutors are also trained academy instructors, and each 
one has an academy class with the same membership as 
their tutor group. This means that each tutor can see the 
progress of their students by checking their chapter exams in 
the academy gradebook. The tutor’s own home page on the 
UKOU site also has the progression and assessment 
particular to the university study path. This information 
allows tutors to be pro-active in supporting their students if 
they are falling behind, or having other difficulties with 
375
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

their studies. Tools on their homepage also allow tutors to 
send e-mails to all or some of their students as they choose. 
This provides a very easy means of contacting groups of 
students, for example, a sub-group that all had difficulty 
with a particular set of questions in an end test. 
Students have to submit a TMA about every six weeks. 
This process establishes a dialogue between each student 
and their tutor that is particular to that student at that time. 
The student’s performance in the TMA will give the tutor a 
clear idea of how he is progressing. This will allow the tutor 
to tailor the feedback to the needs of that student. Some 
examples of feedback include explanation of sub-netting, or 
the suggestion to try a lab again, or perhaps just reassuring 
the student that they are coping with the course, or 
explaining what might happen at a day school if they 
express some anxiety. 
There is good synergy between the Cisco Networking 
Academy and the UKOU as all tutors are also qualified 
Academy Instructors, and many of these also teach at day 
schools. As a result of this partnership the UKOU now 
employs more than 30 academy instructors on a part time 
basis, and role that most see as an enhancement to their 
CVs. 
Following the success of delivering the Cisco Academy, 
as distance learning courses at undergraduate and post 
graduate level, the UKOU has started to include material 
from other vendors in our degrees. Vendor related courses 
being delivered, or planned to start soon, include Linux, 
Microsoft and VMware. 
5) Packet Tracer 
Packet Tracer provides students and teachers with a vast 
range of learning opportunities, from helping students to 
learn the basics of configuring routers, through to the 
design, implementation and fault finding of complex 
internetworks. The UKOU has used Packet Tracer 
extensively, both by actively encouraging students to 
attempt all of the labs, and by including scenarios as part of 
the TMA assessment as described earlier. 
Packet Tracer is a very powerful simulation tool that 
enables users to build, configure and test many types of 
networks from one containing only two devices joined by a 
single cable, through extensive networks containing many 
different types of devices and connection types and finally 
networks containing many sub-networks. Perhaps the limit 
is only the imagination of the user. 
An example screen taken from Packet Tracer is shown in 
Fig. 7. 
 
Figure 7.  Packet Tracer screen 
A network layout is shown on the left hand side of the 
figure is easily constructed by the user dragging the 
appropriate icons onto the screen and joining them with the 
appropriate connection types. In this example a router, 
switch, server, wireless access point and an IP phone are 
shown, variously connected using serial or twisted pair 
cables. Once a device is put on the desktop it can be 
accessed by a window that gives access to the command line 
interface and other choices. In the figure a physical 
representation of the device is shown. This allows the user 
to carry out function such as power on or off. This may at 
first seem a little artificial, but actually replicates the 
requirement in the real world of taking account whether 
equipment is powered before connecting or disconnecting 
cables. There is also a rear view of the device, which is 
important as recognizing a device from the rear is necessary 
when making connections. Packet Tracer also has an 
advanced facility for tracing data packets through the 
network, allowing users to analyse protocols at different 
points in their travel across the network. 
It is important to fully appreciate how powerful a 
learning tool Packet Tracer is. While it is a simulator it does 
support the full command line for many devices and 
therefore offers students a very real experience when 
building networks. This effectively gives students the 
opportunity to build networks that would cost many 
thousands of dollars using real devices, and explore 
scenarios that would only normally be within the scope of 
the largest networking companies.  
IV. 
STUDENT LEARNING 
Having looked at the essential elements that are 
available to the students to learn about networking and 
seeing how these are combined into a blended distance 
learning package, it is important to consider how this 
blended delivery of the CCNA can be understood in terms 
376
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of learning theory. For example, is the pedagogy 
predominantly instruction based, that is where student’s 
mainly focus on what is presented to them, checking their 
understanding through tests that confirm whether they got 
the right or wrong answer. Or is there evidence of deeper 
learning, where students engage with the learning materials 
in a way that enables them to reflect upon the goal and their 
action in working towards it.  
It will be argued that the latter is the case, and that there 
is evidence of deeper learning that may be explained in 
terms of constructivism [10]. There is also evidence of 
socio-cultural learning through forum and collaborative 
learning, primarily at day schools. 
It is equally important to find out how the students view 
the learning experience and how well are they think they are 
learning? In this respect student feedback can confirm, or 
provide contrary evidence, that they are learning at a deeper 
level, although it is unlikely that students would express 
their experience in terms of learning theories, but they are 
likely to use the kinds of language that can be associated 
with a particular theory.  
A. Learning Theory 
The CCNA curriculum uses a media rich presentation of 
the learning materials together with self-assessment 
activities and end of module on-line multiple-choice 
examinations with personal feedback. The UKOU also 
provides additional teaching material and assessment in the 
form of written tutor marked assignments. In summary these 
can be divided into two classes, on-line study materials and 
assessment. In addition to these teaching and assessment 
material there are also practical activities in the form of labs, 
some embedded in the curriculum and others associated 
with assessment. There are also the intensive day schools 
and supported learning provided by tutors and the forum. 
The division of study time between learning materials, 
assessment and labs is approximately even, that is 1/3 of the 
available time on each. Although a distinction is drawn 
between the different classes of activity it is important to 
recognize that the essence behind supported learning is to 
make sure that all of the activities are integrated together, 
and it is the context of the overall course that learning 
should be judged. 
In the context of learning the key question is whether 
learning is what is termed surface or deep. In the former the 
student’s understanding is typified by rote learning, with 
success being measured by them knowing the correct 
answers to questions that they encounter in the course of 
their study. This can be referred to as instuctionalism, where 
the priority is for the teacher to deliver and correct the 
students. In the latter a deeper understanding is achieved by 
engaging the student actively in the goal and feedback path 
so that they can not only judge right and wrong, but also see 
how they can work towards the goal. This process leads to 
students who can apply what they have learned to novel 
situations, for example. In some ways more importantly, 
they actually learn to learn for themselves. 
Constructivism is a theory that can be traced back to 
Piaget [11], although there has been significant development 
in thinking about this topic since [12], including the 
application of the theory to distance learning as well as the 
more conventional face-to-face situation. Constructivism 
proposes that learning is achieved through the forming and 
modification of internal mental representations, and in this 
context encourages teaching to focus in a way that draws on 
various 
cognitive 
processes 
that 
underlie 
learning. 
Significantly, this approach allow learners to accommodate 
their new learning into the context of their existing view of 
the subject, or even more broadly into their general view of 
the world, which is particularly pertinent if their newly 
acquired learning is to be applied in the workplace. A 
central tenet of constructivism is to get students to take 
responsibility for their learning, what is termed active 
learning. This requires a shift in the role of the teacher 
towards facilitation.  
It has been argued [13] that a teaching approach based 
upon constructivism alone may not be the most effective, 
that the transmission of knowledge is still a key overall part 
of learning. The authors’ believe that the components of this 
BDL model provide this balance between giving the 
necessary knowledge and providing them with the tools for 
the cognitive integration of this knowledge. For example, 
the on-line curriculum sets out the basic knowledge for 
student to build upon and creative assessment, with 
feedback, informs students whether they are gaining a deep 
or shallow understanding. For example, the feedback on the 
multiple choice questions in the Cisco academy allows 
students to try the question again before giving them the 
answer. It also directs them to the relevant learning material 
so that they can revise a topic to see where they have gone 
wrong. The tutor marked assignments, provided by the 
UKOU, set challenging practical based scenarios, where 
written individual feedback is provided with the specific 
aim of helping students understand where they have gone 
wrong, not just correcting their answer. A certain percentage 
of the feedback given is of a type called feed-forward, 
which is more general and specifically aims to help students 
with general learning that they can apply to future 
assignments. 
The taking of labs, using packet tracer or Netlab, 
challenge students and build their confidence, as they put 
the knowledge they have gained from the curriculum into 
practice. One of the key features of the labs is the extensive 
practice using the command line interface. Students need to 
377
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

become fluent with a wide range of commands that enable 
them to configure various networking devices such as 
routers, switches and servers. Configuring a network is not 
simply a matter of following a menu, the choice of routing 
protocol, addresses and other network parameters needs to 
be worked out before choosing a particular sequence of 
commands to achieve the planned aim. If an error is made it 
is then necessary to carry out detailed fault finding 
diagnostics to identify the error and take corrective action. It 
is this combination of using knowledge, planning, 
implementing and testing that take students repeatedly 
through the loop between the task, their conception of the 
task and the learnt concepts that develops their deep 
understanding. It is this combination of theory and practice 
that allows the claim that a constructivist learning is taking 
place. 
On-line forum allow students to exchange ideas and 
support each other, and day school activities are organized 
around group activities. These two provide opportunities for 
the social and co-operative aspects of learning. Tutors and 
conference moderators take on the role of a facilitator as 
they guide student discussion within the forum and help 
them to clarify their thinking when they are experiencing 
difficulty with some aspect of learning or doing labs. The 
challenging network scenarios in TMAs push students to 
consolidate their learning in the context of real network 
design problems. Overall, this combination of components 
ensures that independent learners become successful in 
achieving the learning outcomes of the course. 
More work is required to fully understand and support 
the claim that courses like this one, courses that have an 
emphasis upon the development of practical skills, lead to 
deep learning because the underlying pedagogy is 
constructivist. In fact many educators may well be 
surprised, and even disagree, with this argument, as many 
have dismissed the CCNA as training, and therefore not 
really fit for inclusion in a degree program at all. The 
emphasis upon training would definitely point towards 
instructionism as the underlying pedagogy. The point, 
which a crude classification between training and education 
misses, is the level of knowledge that is needed to carry out 
some of the practical activities and the recognition that 
situating these activities in real world examples enhances 
the students ability to recall and use their knowledge in 
other 
real 
world 
situations, 
exactly 
the 
goal 
of 
constuctivism. 
B. Student Achievement and Feedback 
Students were surveyed during the 2008 presentations of 
T216, and 71 students responded. The statements in table I 
compare student satisfaction with the normal for all level 2 ICT 
(information communication technologies) courses. 
TABLE I.  
STUDENT SATISFACTION 
Student Satisfaction Question 
T216 
ICT 
Overall, I am satisfied with the quality of the course. 
94.4% 
88.8% 
The course met its stated learning outcomes. 
97.1% 
88.5% 
I enjoyed studying this course. 
91.6% 
81.2% 
The workload on this course was higher than I 
expected 
66.2% 
37.9% 
I would recommend this course to other students 
91.6% 
82.1% 
As can be seen from the first three entries in table I, 
students rated the course very highly in terms of their 
satisfaction with quality of the course (94.4%), the fact that 
it met the stated learning outcomes (97.1%) and that they 
enjoyed their study (91.6%). These are very good scores, 
especially when set against the fact that the UKOU is one of 
the highest rated Universities in the UK in terms of student 
satisfaction. 
The fourth entry in the table did show a higher 
percentage (66.2%) of students who stated that the workload 
was higher than they expected. Discussions in the forum 
suggest that this may be because of two reasons. First, 
because of the frequent formative assessment, students are 
continually checking their understanding and reviewing 
topics where they have not gained a high score in the exam. 
Second, because of the very large number of labs that must 
be completed if students are to become proficient with the 
practical skills. Although rated with a higher workload, 
overall student performance is good, with many students 
gaining high marks.  
Perhaps the last entry is the most significant, with 91.6% 
of students saying that they would recommend this course to 
a friend. 
During the survey students were also asked to make their 
own comments. These were then collated and other students 
were asked to respond, either as agreeing or not agreeing 
with the statement of another. Table II show student’s 
ratings for statements generated by other students. 
TABLE II.  
STUDENT RATINGS 
Student Question 
Response 
TMAs and continual assessments were essential to 
keep studies on track. 
Mostly agree. 
The 
simulation 
software 
Packet 
Tracer 
was 
excellent. 
Definitely agree. 
The combination of Cisco Academy material with 
OU's support material and assessments worked very 
well for me. 
Definitely agree. 
The responses to statements generated by other students 
are very insightful as it states what is important to them, 
rather than asking what is important to the teacher or the 
institution. Definitely agree is the highest endorsement that 
378
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

student’s can give, and they valued the general approach 
taken by the UKOU, that is a combination of Cisco and OU 
teaching and assessment. The success of this approach is 
further endorsed by support for packet tracer and the day 
schools. It can be seen that not every student agreed that 
assessment was essential to keeping on track with their 
study, but that is not surprising as few really look forward to 
assessment even if it does enhance their learning overall. 
Perhaps the best overall feedback is the type shown in 
table III, sent unsolicited from a student at the end of 2009. 
TABLE III.  
STUDENT FEEDBACK 
By passing the course I managed to pick up a degree and a new job - yipee. 
No longer am I a technician in the Royal navy but now working in 
industrial networking for a company called GarrettCom - they manufacture 
industrial strength switches, routers and media converters. The networking 
theory is the same but the command lines are different. Hopefully I can 
find the time to start CCNP next year. 
This student’s comments neatly summarise the strength 
of the Cisco CCNA when combined with distance learning. 
This student has had a full career in the navy and has 
prepared for the day that he has to leave by studying 
towards a degree with the UKOU. His success is testimony 
to the flexibility of this study method, as it cannot be easy 
for a full time member of the armed forces. His choice to 
complete his degree with the CCNA has provided him with 
both the academic qualifications and the skills to start a new 
career in networking. 
Overall, students are successful with their study of 
UKOU course T216, with most completing all four 
Exploration modules and passing the final exam. These 
students generally also go on to take the UKOU 
examination and gain credit towards their University study. 
Based upon anecdotal evidence from the student forum, a 
significant number go on to take the CCNA certification. 
Some claimed to have passed with a mark of 100%. 
Students who study with the UKOU are adults (over 18 
years), and more than 75% on T216 are over 25 years. Most 
are studying to further their careers. These factors give this 
group a high level of motivation, and they may do better 
with this type of learning than other groups. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The decision taken by the UKOU to offer the CCNA 
curriculum as a blended distance course has been 
rewarded with high student numbers and good student 
feedback. This success has shown that this model of 
delivery is well suited for adult learners, and may well be 
suited to all learners. It must however be recognized that 
BDL involves much more that just enrolling students and 
offering them access to the Cisco curriculum. It is vital to 
support learners in a way that facilitates learning, and to 
make maximum use of Packet Tracer and Netlab to 
develop student’s practical skills. Day schools are also 
essential as they give students the chance to get their 
hands on real equipment. Overall, it is the management of 
the students and resources, in a way that facilitates active 
learning, that lead to successful students. On-line forum, 
good information systems and tutor support all play an 
important role in this management. A well planned and 
managed BDL form of the Cisco Academy Program 
offers an opportunity for educators to reach new students 
in established and developing markets. 
Some arguments have also been put forward that a 
course that focuses on teaching practical skills as well as 
knowledge does engage students in deep learning. 
Particularly, that the pedagogy that underpins this course 
is constructionist. A conclusion that may surprise many 
educators who have tended to draw a line between 
education and training, and may have neglected to give 
credit for the situated nature of practical learning and 
hence its contribution to the overall learning of the 
student. 
The UKOU looks forward to building upon the 
success of the CCNA as they move forward with a 
Masters qualification built around the blended delivery of 
CCNP. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the many people who 
have worked with them in establishing and running this 
BDL version of CCNA. They are too numerous to 
mention individually, but include people from Cisco UK, 
CLI, the UKOU, the UK central academy and our other 
day school partners. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Moss, N. and Smith, A. (2010). Large Scale Delivery of Cisco 
Networking Academy Program by Blended Distance Learning. 
LMPCNA 2010, March 7-13, 2010 – Cancun Mexico. 
[2] 
The Open University. http://www3.open.ac.uk/about/ Accessed on 
22/12/10. 
[3] 
Cisco Networking Academy. http://www.netaced.net Accessed on 
22/12/10. 
[4] 
Hernandez-Ramos, P et al. (2000). Changing the Way We Learn: 
How Cisco Systems is Doing It. International Workshop on 
Advanced Learning Technologies, December 4 – 6 Palmerston North, 
New Zealand 
[5] 
Bissell, C.C. and Endean, M. (2007). Meeting the growing demand 
for engineers and their educators: the potential for open and distance 
learning. Meeting the Growing Demnds for Engineers and Their 
Educators 2010-2020, Munich, Germany, 9-11 November 2007. 
[6] 
NDG. http://www.netdevgroup.com/home.htm Accessed on 22/12/10. 
[7] 
Prieto-Blázquez, J. et al. (2008). An Integrated Structure for a Virtual 
Networking Laboratory. In IEEE transactions on Industrial 
Electronics, Vol 55, no 6, pp 2334-2342  
379
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8] 
Papert, S. (1991). Situating constuctivism. In Harel I & Papel S 
(Eds.), Constuctivism: research reports and essays, 1985-1990 (pp 1-
11). Norwood, N.J: Ablex Publishing Corporation.  
[9] 
Heap, N.W., Kear. K.L. and Bissell. C.C. (2004) An overview of 
ICT-based assessment for engineering education. European Journal of 
Engineering Education, Vol 29, no 2, pp 241-250. 
[10] Laurillard, D. (2002) Rethinking University Teaching: a framework 
for the effective use of educational technology (2nd edition) London, 
Routledge Falmer. 
[11] Piaget, J. (1978). Success and Understanding. London: Routledge & 
Kegan. 
[12] Brophy, J. (2002). Social Constructivist Teaching: Affordances and 
Constraints. Oxford: Elsevier Science.  
[13] Laurillard, D. (2009). The pedagogical challenges to collaborative 
technologies. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (2009) 
4:5–20. 
 
380
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

