Evaluation of Outdoor RSS-Based Tracking for WSNs Aiming at                  
Topology Parameter Ranges Selection 
 
Fotis Kerasiotis, Tsenka Stoyanova, George Papadopoulos 
Applied Electronics Laboratory, Dept. of ECE, University of Patras, 26504 Rio-Patras, Greece 
Industrial Systems Institute, Stadiou Str., 26504 Platani, Patras, Greece 
{kerasiotis, tsstoyanova, papadopoulos}@ece.upatras.gr 
 
 
Abstract— The localization and tracking applications are 
among the most challenging applications, especially when the 
received signal strength (RSS) is utilized. The RSS is known to 
be a noisy signal and difficult to use in localization and 
tracking applications. In the present study we investigate the 
possibility a target tracking task to be performed with the 
resources of WSN technology, when using only the RSS of the 
exchanged messages. We demonstrate that RSS can be used for 
outdoor localization and tracking application under well-
defined topology constraints. The present work presents 
detailed study about the topology parameter selection when a 
tracking application is considered. Moreover, the RSS 
uncertainty is defined in order to be included in the simulation 
of a tracking scenario. The target tracking considerations by 
means of tracking techniques, topology parameters and factors 
influencing the tracking accuracy are combined in simulation 
examples to evaluate their significance concerning the 
performance 
of 
the 
tracking 
task. 
Furthermore, 
the 
propagation model and the topology parameters being 
identified are used in real outdoor tracking test. 
Keywords – wireless sensor networks, tracking, received 
signal strength, simulation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless sensor network (WSN) is a technology aiming 
at providing observation of the environmental events and 
objects with minimal human supervision. The field of WSN 
encompasses a very broad array of applications including 
monitoring systems, smart environments, target localization 
and tracking and a lot of others.  
The base of any localization and tracking system is the 
mechanisms used to determine the position of a fixed or a 
mobile object by measuring physical distances in indirect 
way. Different techniques, which provide relation between 
the distance and some measurable parameter of the 
transmitted signal, such as time of flight, time difference of 
arrival, angle of arrival and the strength of the measured 
signal, can be utilized. 
The target tracking applications are based on localization 
information exchange among the sensor network nodes, 
which require collaborative sensing, communication and 
computation among multiple sensors that observe the target 
objects. The network topology and the influence of the 
environment on the in-network communication and on the 
signal used for tracking are also important factors that need 
consideration [1]. In general, the target tracking application 
scenario is composed of four functional components, namely 
deployment, localization, target tracking and information 
exchange. 
Sensor nodes’ deployment reflects two main aspects of a 
WSN, namely sensing and communication. The main sensor 
network problems that the deployment addresses are related 
to optimal area coverage and network connectivity [2]. When 
tracking application is concerned, defining of the deployment 
constraints and the topology parameters is also part of the 
deployment phase. After the network topology is formed the 
localization task begins. Various localization methods, 
presented in the literature, are generally divided in range 
measuring algorithms [3-5] and range-free algorithms [6-8]. 
When the positions of all sensor nodes within the network 
are determined, the tracking task can be implemented. Since 
the main goal of tracking is localization of moving objects, 
some of the above mentioned localization methods, mostly 
the range measuring algorithms, could be also utilized. 
Additionally, tracking oriented algorithms and protocols, 
based on mobile agents and its data fusion or using binary 
detection have been also developed [9-11].  
The RSS-based localization-tracking techniques that deal 
with position estimation mainly belong to two categories, 
namely trilateration or multilateration, which depends on the 
number of used beacon nodes, and fingerprinting. 
Trilateration uses a signal propagation model to extract the 
RSS/distance relation, and together with the beacon nodes’ 
position to estimate the position of a mobile object. On the 
other hand, the fingerprinting approach is based on acquiring 
reference points within the target area. To these reference 
points signature vectors are associated consisting RSS data 
taken by each of the beacon nodes. The signature vector is 
formed either by real measurements in the target 
environment, either by simulation performed with an 
appropriate for the environment RF propagation model. All 
reference points’ positions and their signatures construct a 
database. 
During 
the 
localization 
phase, 
the 
RSS 
measurements, taken from the beacons for a particular 
mobile object, form a tested signature. The tested signature is 
compared with the signatures in the database to find the 
likeliest one and the corresponding reference point location 
is accepted as a location for the mobile object.  
Most of the RSS-based state-of-the-art localization and 
tracking algorithms for outdoor environment utilize a 
propagation model to discover the distance, relying on that 
the RSS decreases with the distance by well-known physical 
140
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

low.  However, most of the proposed tracking algorithms use 
simplistic models, usually supposing an ideal exponential 
characteristic of the RSS variation due to distance, without 
taking into consideration the influence of the environment 
and the topology parameters to the propagation characteristic 
[5, 6, 9]. Thus, the present state-of-the-art localization and 
tracking techniques do not offer satisfying solutions to major 
localization/tracking 
problems 
and 
applying 
them 
successfully in real outdoor tracking applications is doubtful.  
In general, many factors have to be considered when a 
RSS-based tracking application is designed, starting from 
selection of proper propagation model, which has to 
represent in a relatively accurate way the interaction between 
the RF signal and the environment. The topology parameters, 
such as number of beacons, beacons’ height and optimal 
beacons’ distance, have to be also evaluated for their optimal 
values.  
The study in previous work on RSS behavior for varying 
impact factors [12], has led to important conclusions that 
drove the research presented in [1] and extended in the 
present work. In the present study we investigate the 
possibility a target tracking task to be performed with the 
resources of WSN technology, when utilizing only the radio 
signal strength (RSS) of the exchanged messages. RSS is 
notorious for being a noisy signal that is difficult to use for 
ranging-based localization and tracking applications. In this 
study, we demonstrate that RSS can be used for outdoor 
localization and tracking application under well-defined 
topology constraints. 
The present work elaborates on [1], by means of 
presenting more detailed study about the topology parameter 
selection, the RSS uncertainty identification and including it 
in the simulation of tracking scenario, more simulation 
examples and finally, performing of real outdoor tracking 
test. All real measurements were performed with Tmote Sky 
[14] or TelosB [21] sensor nodes, which both have CC2420 
radio chip. Their working frequency is at 2.4GHz band. 
Taking advantage of the measurements performed for [23] 
we selected the central frequency of channel 26, i.e., 
2.48GHz, as working frequency due to not overlapping with 
the available in the areas WLANs. All simulations were 
performed with the selected radio frequency. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II, the most important problems encountered in a tracking 
application are presented, including the influence of the RF 
propagation, the deployment constrains and the topology 
parameters on the tracking performance. Section III 
discusses the influence of the mobile node position on the 
RF signal propagation in order to identify the most 
promising ones. The target tracking considerations by means 
of tracking techniques, topology parameters and factors 
influencing the tracking accuracy are presented is Section IV 
followed by simulation examples.  In Section V the 
propagation 
characteristics 
and 
topology 
constraints 
identified in the previous sections are used in real outdoor 
tracking test. Finally, Section VI concludes this work. 
II. 
ANALYSIS OF TRACKING PROBLEM DIMENSIONS 
The tracking application scenario under consideration is 
based on a triangular topology of fixed nodes and has two 
main objectives: (1) localization of the triangle, inside which 
the mobile node moves and (2) tracking the position of the 
mobile node, which is placed on human body. The tracking 
application approach is based on the assumption that the 
mobile node transmits packets periodically and the fixed 
nodes determine the mobile node’s position by measure the 
RSS of the packets. Such a tracking algorithm has been 
implemented making use of mobile agents [9]. 
The tracking application scenario under study is shown in 
Fig. 1. It concerns outdoors target-tracking, using the widely-
used Tmote Sky or TelosB sensor nodes. The fixed sensor 
nodes, named also beacons, are deployed in triangular grid. 
The server, which is to be placed probably in a building, 
receives information from the fixed WSN nodes about the 
position of the mobile nodes, i.e., the people, as well as 
additional information such as: patient vital signs. The 
application under consideration should satisfy specific 
constraints: 
• Accuracy of the tracking process: up to 10m 
• Sampling period of the target node location: 1sec 
• Topology: fixed nodes in triangular grid at 
approximately 50m distance. 
The study in the present work is focused on the second 
objective mentioned above, i.e., tracking the position of the 
mobile node inside the triangle, and more specifically, on 
identifying the most crucial RSS-based tracking problems, 
and determining and evaluating the topology parameters that 
can guarantee successful tracking. Based on this, the aims of 
the present study can be formulated as follows: (1) 
evaluation of the behaviour of the propagated RF signal in 
order to identify the important RSS-based tracking problems, 
(2) selection of the topology related parameters, when taking 
into consideration the tracking task requirements and the 
deployment constraints, (3) use of the selected propagation 
model and topology parameters to simulate a target tracking 
task, and (4) keeping the proposed topology parameters to 
perform real outdoor tracking test.  
In the following sections the factors that may cause 
tracking problems, i.e., impossibility to perform tracking, are 
discussed. 
 
 
Figure 1. Tracking application scenario 
141
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

A. Basic characteristics of the behavior of the propagated 
signal 
As shown in [12], theoretical models can describe the 
behaviour of a transmitted signal from the receiver side, 
considering free space and ground surface reflections. The 
main parameters affecting the RF signal propagation are the 
height from the ground for the transmitter-receiver pair (T-
R), the frequency of the transmitted signal and the type of the 
ground (e.g. grass), assuming that the environment is open 
space without obstacles. In another work [18] we introduced 
FOM, a model for free space outdoor environments, where 
the effect of some other important parameters on propagated 
signal such as variation of transceivers, radio frequency gain, 
antenna pattern irregularities, and RSS uncertainty, are also 
considered. Fig. 2 presents real outdoor measured data and 
simulated 
data, 
performed 
with 
FOM. 
For 
these 
measurements and simulations the receiver height is at 2m 
and the transmitter height is at 1.1m in Fig. 2(a) and at 0.08m 
in Fig. 2(b). The results show a good correspondence 
between real measurements and simulation. The results 
presented here as well as those in [18] confirm that this 
model can be used during the evaluation of the topology 
parameters with sufficient accuracy of the tracking task for 
the target application.  
The model described in [18], i.e., FOM, is used in the 
rest of the paper, when a simulation of the RF propagation is 
mentioned. Its formulation is given with (1) and (2).  
 
where PR is the received power,  PT is the transmission 
power, d is T-R distance, λ is the wavelength, Γ is the 
ground reflection coefficient, ΔL is path length difference 
between the direct and the reflected signals, coefficients K1 
and K2 are antenna specifics representing the gain in 
particular antenna orientation, which are described in detail 
in [18]. The RSS uncertainty is given as a Gaussian random 
variable X with distribution 
)
(
σ PR
.  
Fig. 3 shoes three simulations of the RF propagation, 
when the fixed node is at 2m, and the mobile node is at 
0.1m, 0.5m and 1.4m. One important observation regarding 
the effect of the ground reflection phenomenon on the RSS is 
that the reflected and the direct signals interact and create 
‘nulls’, where the RSS is very low and quite variable, as we 
observed in [12], [18] and [22]. Another observation is that 
the ‘null’ areas move with the change of the height, which is 
connected with the change of the path length of the direct 
and reflected signal and phase difference. 
From the tracking algorithm point of view, one could 
conceivably take advantage of these ‘nulls’ and through 
trilateration, combine the RSS levels of the three fixed nodes 
to distinguish the possible positions of the mobile node in a 
triangular region. The pattern effect on the RSS-based 
tracking scheme of Fig. 3 is investigated in Section III, so as 
to highlight the risks and uncertainties that it may produce. A 
more promising approach is to ensure that the RSS 
characteristic is “smooth”, that is to have as few as possible 
‘nulls’. This can be achieved by judicious selection of the 
heights at both transmitter and receiver.  
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
Δ
Γ
Γ +
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
L
K
K
K
d
P
d
P
T
R
λ
π
π
λ
cos 2
2
4
)
(
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
 
where 
PR (d)
 is average value of the received power. 
When 
R
P is expressed in decibels with RSS 
uncertainty included as
)
(
Xσ PR
, then the formulation 
is:  
( )
)
(
R
P
R
R
X
P d
P
σ
+
=
 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Simulation vs. experimental RSS characteristic for 
receiver at 2 m and transmitter at: a) 1.1m and b) 0.08m 
 
 
Figure 3. Propagated signal for different mobile node heights and 
fixed nodes at 2m 
142
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
B. Deployment constraints 
Based on experiments and simulations performed in 
previous work [22], we discovered that the combination 
between the fixed node’s height and distance is limited, 
considering the fact that the communication among them has 
to be as robust as possible with respect to minimum packet 
loss. This limit, also named safe RSS threshold, is defined by 
that RSS level, at which the packet loss increases more than 
5%, and this is about -80dBm. Therefore, the heights which 
can be chosen for the fixed nodes are defined according to 
this RSS level. Fig. 4 shows simulation, where the RSS is 
simulated with respect to the fixed nodes heights (between 
0.10m and 3m) for distance at 50m, which is one of the 
topology requirements. The red doted horizontal line 
expresses the safe RSS value, which is the minimum value 
for reliable communication among the fixed nodes. 
Therefore, the selected heights of the fixed nodes for reliable 
communication among them at distance of 50m are: (a) 
0.50m–1.65m, (b) 1.85m–2.35m, and (c) 2.55m–2.90m.  
 
C. Mobile node positions on the human body 
Having assured a robust communication for the fixed 
nodes by heights selection as described above, the next 
parameter under consideration is the height of the mobile 
node. Possible positions of the mobile node on the human 
body are: ankle, knee, waist, wrist, chest and arm, shown in 
Fig. 5. Table I shows the correspondence of each of these 
positions with the average heights from the ground including 
also the variation which may be introduced due to 
movements of the human. There are small height variations 
for some body parts such as knee and ankle and greater ones 
for others such as waist, chest and arm and even greater 
considering the movement of the wrist when raising. These 
variations are caused by every possible movement the human 
target can perform, such as walking, running, sitting, bending 
and raising his/her hands. 
 
 
D. RSS-based mobile node position estimation  
When the tracking task is performed through beacon 
nodes, the position estimation of a mobile object can be 
performed 
via 
two 
techniques: 
fingerprinting 
and 
trilateration. Trilateration uses the signal propagation model 
and the beacon nodes positions to convert RSS values to a 
distance measurement so as to estimate the position of a 
mobile object with trilateration techniques. On the other 
hand, the fingerprinting approach is based on acquiring 
reference points within the target area (the triangle in our 
case). To these reference points are associated signature 
vectors consisting of RSS data taken by each of the beacon 
nodes. The signature vector is formed either by real 
measurements in the target environment, or by simulation 
performed with an appropriate for the environment RF 
propagation model. All reference points positions and their 
signatures construct a database. During the localization 
phase, the RSS measurements taken from the beacons for a 
particular mobile object form a tested signature. The tested 
signature is compared with the signatures in the database to 
find the likeliest one and then the corresponding reference 
point location is accepted as a location for the mobile object.  
TABLE I.  
MOBILE NODES POSITIONS ON THE HUMAN BODY 
AND VARIATION DUE TO MOVEMENTS 
Position on 
Human Body 
Standing 
Position 
Height 
Height Variation Including Body 
Movement 
Chest 
1.4 m 
from 0.9 to 1.45 m 
Arm 
1.4 m 
from 0.9 to 1.45 m 
Weist 
1.1 m 
from 0.5 to 1.20 m 
Wrist 
1.0 m 
from 0.5 to 2.00 m 
Knee 
0.55 m 
from 0.45 to 0.70 m 
Ankle 
0.15 m 
from 0.15 to 0.30 m 
 
 
Figure 5. Possible positions of the mobile node on the human body 
 
 
Figure 4. Deployment constraints for the choice of fixed nodes’ 
height 
143
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

For the purpose of this work the fingerprinting approach 
is considered and two techniques for defining the locations 
of the reference points are evaluated, namely quantized 
levels and square grid. In the quantized levels, the RSS in the 
range between -40dBm and -90dBm is divided in discrete 
levels, to which correspond different distance regions. Using 
the RF propagation model to simulate the propagation within 
the triangle, the location of the reference points is chosen so 
that at least one reference point can exist in each region, 
differentiated by the discrete levels. The square grid 
approach for positioning of the reference points is quite 
simple. The target area is divided out in small squares, the 
size of which determines the minimum localization accuracy.  
Detailed analysis of these two techniques is offered in 
Section IV. 
Summarising the issues discussed in this section the 
following conclusions were derived: 
• 
The RF signal propagation has to be considered 
while choosing the topology parameters, such as 
beacons’ distance and height, in order to assure reliable 
communication between the beacons. 
• 
The position of the mobile node on the human body 
should be selected so as to minimize the node’s height 
variation due to body movement and exclude the ‘nulls’ 
from the propagation curve. 
• 
When using fingerprinting approach the selection of 
the reference points’ locations needs preliminary 
evaluation according to well defined criteria such as: 
number of reference points, accuracy, simplicity of 
generation, etc. 
III. 
MOBILE NODE POSITION EVALUATION 
In previous work [12, 18], it has been shown that the 
height of the sensor nodes heavily affects the behavior of the 
propagated signal. Moreover, the deployment constraints for 
reliable communication limit the possible fixed nodes’ height 
within the ranges determined in the previous section as 
0.50m – 1.65m; 1.85m – 2.35m, and 2.55m – 2.90m, for 
50m distance between the beacon nodes. Therefore, in this 
section, the RSS behaviour is studied with respect to the 
possible mobile node positions listed in Table I.  
A. Analysis of the mobile node at upper heights 
Assuming that higher placements are selected for the 
mobile node on the human body e.g. chest, arm, wrist and 
waist, we select the height at 1.1m as a representative height 
for the mobile node. The corresponding behaviour of the 
propagation signal when the mobile node is at 1.1m is shown 
in Fig. 6. The simulation is performed through (1) for four 
fixed nodes’ heights selected from the regions suggested by 
the deployment constraints for fixed nodes, as follows: 
0.55m and 1.40m are from region (a), 2.10m is from region 
(b) and 2.7m is from region (c) in Fig. 4. Analysing the 
results shown in Fig. 6, it is noticeable that when the mobile 
node is placed at 1.1m and the fixed nodes’ height is 2.10m 
or 2.70m, the RF propagation between 1m and 50m is full of 
‘nulls’ 
and 
to 
extract 
distinguishable 
RSS/distance 
combinations for the quantizing tracking technique is 
impossible. The case when the fixed nodes are at 1.40m 
height presents less ‘nulls’, but the problem with separating 
the signal propagation on distinguishable RSS/distance 
combinations still exists. The last beacons’ height of 0.55m 
is more promising in the sense that the RSS curve is smooth 
and some distinct regions can be derived for the distances 
between 15m and 50m. The drawback is that the difference 
between the RSS in 15m and the RSS in 50m is only 12dBm, 
which implies separation in no more than two regions. Using 
only two regions cannot provide acceptable tracking 
accuracy.  
As a conclusion of this analysis, when the mobile node is 
at about 1.10m height, there is no appropriate height for the 
beacon nodes so as to guarantee reliable communication 
between the beacon nodes and consequently successful 
tracking.  
B. Analysis of the mobile node at low heights 
According to Fig. 5 and Table I the lower heights for 
placement of the mobile node on the human body are: the 
knee at height of 0.55m and the ankle at height of 0.15m. To 
analyse the behaviour of the propagated RF signal when the 
mobile node is at 0.55m and 0.15m, simulations are 
performed. The results for the mobile node height at 0.55m 
are shown in Fig. 7(a), and for the mobile node height at 
0.15m in Fig. 7(b). For both mobile node’s heights the fixed 
nodes are at heights selected from the regions suggested by 
the deployment constraints for fixed nodes, i.e., 0.55m and 
1.60m from region (a); 2.10m from region (b) and 2.7m from 
region (c) in Fig. 4. 
Referring the results in Fig. 7(a) for mobile node at 
0.55m, the RF propagation results for the beacons’ height at 
2.7m, 2.10m and 1.60m show similar problems to those of 
the waist case. This makes the particular beacon heights 
inappropriate for a successful tracking task. The smallest 
beacon height of 0.55m seems more promising for the 
distances between 6m and 50m. The propagation curve has 
good slope, which gives variance between the RSS at 6m and 
the RSS at 50m of about 25dBm. This variance suggests the 
use of the traditional tracking methods with linear models 
and filters as well as the quantized levels technique. 
 
 
Figure 6. Behavior of the propagated signal or RSS concerning 
different heights for the fixed nodes and waist mobile node position 
144
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Almost the same applies to the ankle case for which RF 
propagation results for the beacons’ heights at 2.7m, 2.10m, 
1.60m and 0.55m are shown in Fig. 7(b). The propagation 
curves are without ‘null’ regions and resemble the 
propagation of the widely used long-distance path loss model 
[13]. The beacons height at 0.55m seems the most suitable 
due to the most inclined curve slope. However, considering 
that the Tmote-Sky radio sensitivity level is about -90dBm,, 
then the communication between the mobile node and the 
beacons, when the distance is approximately 45m-50m, 
could be seriously limited or totally fail, which results in 
insufficient received packets for performing the tracking 
task.  This implies that, for the ankle case, the fixed nodes 
should be placed at a height above 1.00m in order to 
maintain an “effective” RSS level at 50m assuring robust 
communication between the mobile node and the beacons. 
As a conclusion of this analysis, the combinations of 
0.55m mobile height with 0.55m beacon height, and 0.15m 
mobile height with beacon height above 1.00m present high 
potential for successful tracking. 
C. Analysis of the mobile node height variability due to 
movement 
From the analysis performed in the previous two 
sections, some of the mobile-node-height/beacon-height 
combinations are selected for further investigation for their 
approval like appropriate topology parameters. These 
combinations are: 
• 
height of 0.55m for the mobile node and height of 
0.55m for the beacon nodes, i.e., knee case, 
• 
height of 0.15m for the mobile node and height 
above 1.00m for the beacon nodes, i.e., ankle case. 
Another factor that may influence the behaviour of the 
propagated signal is the height variation of the mobile node 
due to the movement of the human body. Depending on the 
mobile node position, its height varies during the body 
movement as shown in Table I. This variance ranges from 
10cm at the knee to 1 m at the wrist. Since the knee and 
ankle positions, were selected as the most promising 
positions, only the variation of these two positions will be 
analysed.   
According to Table I the ankle movement varies between 
0.15m and 0.30m during walking. In order to study the 
behaviour of the propagated signal due to the variation of the 
mobile node height, several simulations are performed. The 
height of the beacons is chosen at 1.50m, and for the mobile 
node three heights are selected: 0.10m, 0.20m and 0.30m. 
The simulated results for the three mobile heights are shown 
in Fig. 8(a). If we suppose that the ankle can change its 
height within 20cm during walking, then this corresponds to 
about 10dBm variation of the RSS measurements. If the RSS 
is measured during walking, this variation will be expressed 
like spikes up and down around the average propagation 
curve.  
The average value for knee height is selected at 0.55m. 
During walking the knee height does not change more then 
±5cm. However, there is another factor that imposes more 
variability of the knee height namely the difference among 
the people’s body heights. Taller people have knee height 
approximately at 0.65m, while short people about 0.45m.  
Based on this, for the simulation about the influence of the 
knee height on the RF signal propagation we select four knee 
heights: 0.40m, 0.50, 0.60 and 0.7m. The selected values are 
a bit lower or higher that the real ones, so as to assure that 
we do not underestimate the knee-height variability effect 
over the RF propagation. Fig. 8(b) depicts the RF 
propagation results for the four knee heights when the fixed 
node is at 0.65m. The results show that the knee case is less 
influenced by the knee height variation, as a variation of 
30cm causes the RSS-level to vary about 5 dBm. As in the 
ankle case, the height variation due to walking will be 
expressed like spikes up and down around the average 
propagation curve, which is discussed in Section V. 
Considering the analysis in this section, obstacles are 
either absent or have an equal effect on all cases. In any 
other case, obstacles should be modeled appropriately. 
Figure 7. Behavior of the propagated signal or RSS concerning different heights for the fixed nodes and: 
a) knee and b) ankle mobile node position 
145
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

IV. 
TARGET TRACKING CONSIDERATIONS AND 
SIMULATIONS 
The analysis in Section II and in Section III clarified that 
knowing the RF propagation of the target environment and 
making careful selection of the heights and positions of the 
beacons and the mobile nodes, theoretically present 
possibility for performing RSS-based tracking with WSNs 
successfully. 
In this section, the tracking technique, the factors 
influencing the tracking accuracy and the simulation 
procedure are discussed.  
A. The Tracking Technique 
As it was mentioned in Section II the fingerprinting 
approach is utilized in the present work. It is based on 
acquiring reference points within the target area (the triangle 
in our case). To these reference points are associated 
signature vectors consisting RSS data taken by each of the 
beacon nodes. The signature vector is formed by simulation 
performed with (1), i.e., FOM. All reference points positions 
and their signatures construct a database. During the 
localization phase, the RSS measurements, taken from the 
beacons for a particular mobile object, form a tested 
signature, which is compared with the signatures in the 
database to find the likeliest one and then the corresponding 
reference point location. Two techniques for defining the 
locations of the reference points are evaluated, namely 
quantized levels and square grid.  
(a) Quantized Levels Approach 
The quantized levels approach is based on dividing the 
RSS range between -40dBm and -90dBm in discrete levels, 
to which correspond different distance regions. The division 
is made so that each level can have almost the same width in 
dBm, and at the same time the width to be approximately 
10dBm. In this sense, five RSS levels are chosen for the RF 
propagation curve when the fixed node height and the mobile 
node height are at 0.55m, as shown in Fig. 9(a). The 
corresponding distance ranges suppose tracking accuracy of 
10m. It is observed that at short distances, up to 10m, the 
signal is a bit variable with small and narrow ‘nulls’, which 
 
Figure 8. RSS behavior for different fixed node heights and: a) 0.1m or b) 0.5 m for the mobile node 
 
 
Figure 9. Quantized levels topology at 0.55 m (knee position) and fixed node at 0.55 m:  
a) RSS vs. distance and RSS-levels, b) separation in recognizable RSS levels  
146
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

may impose difficulty when estimating the mobile object 
position. Nevertheless, it can be filtered or handled by the 
use of an additional sensor such as ultrasound or passive 
infra-red (PIR) with respective techniques proposed [15].  
 The location of the reference points is chosen so that at 
least one reference point can exist in each region, 
differentiated by the discrete levels. An example of 
separation of the triangle area in recognizable RSS regions is 
shown in Fig. 9(b). According to this simulation 13 
distinguishable regions are identified and hence 13 reference 
points are selected. The topology of the 13 reference points 
is shown in Fig. 10(a). The positions of the reference points 
have to be recalculated for each beacons-height/mobile-
node-height combination. 
The tracking task takes place inside the triangle when the 
RSS level provided by each of its fixed nodes is above level 
L5. If one of the fixed nodes receives RSS level 5, then the 
triangle may have to be changed and the tracking task to be 
transferred to the neighbourhood triangle. Concerning the 
interior of each triangle, there are some well-defined regions 
being characterized by different combination of each fixed 
node RSS. Using these regions, the position of the mobile 
node can be tracked with accuracy of about 10m at the centre 
of any of these regions. 
(b) Square Grid Approach 
The square grid approach for generation of the reference 
points is quite simple. The target area is divided out in small 
squares, the size of which determines the minimum 
localization accuracy.  Such a reference-point grid is shown 
in Fig. 10(b). The size of the squares could be 1/10, 1/20, 
1/25 and 1/50 of the beacons’ distance to which correspond 
the following number of reference points: 81, 289, 441 and 
1764. 
During the tracking task, to every reference point is 
associated a vector-signature, consisting of the simulated 
RSS between the reference point and each beacon. The 
positions of all reference points as well as their signatures 
compose the signature database.  
 
 
(c) Extension of the 50m Topology 
 The above analysis is based on the assumption that the 
distance among the beacon nodes in a triangle is 50m. 
Having selected the maximum transmission power of 0dBm, 
a combination of heights for both fixed and mobile nodes is 
required for guaranteeing fulfilment of the tracking task 
requirements. However, this particular analysis can also be 
held for other dimensions, since the combination of heights 
can be matched to the new required distances in order to 
produce similar RF signal propagation as for 50m. The same 
behavior can be achieved by increase of the beacons’ height 
or by increase of the transmission power through connecting 
an external antenna with higher gain or through using 
another platform with greater transmission power. Fig. 11 
shows simulations of the RF signal propagation, when the 
mobile node height is at 0.55m, i.e. knee. Three cases are 
presented: fixed node at 0.55m and 0dBm transmission 
power, fixed node at 0.55m and 4.5dBm transmission power, 
and fixed node at 1m and 0dBm transmission power. 
 The aim of these simulations is to investigate the 
situation where the communication distance between the 
beacons has to be increased, for instance to 70m, and thus 
how the topology parameters have to be modified in order 
 
 
Figure 10. Reference points topologies for: (a) quantized levels techniques with 13 points, and (b) square grid technique with 289 points 
 
 
Figure 11. Extension of the 50m topology to a 70m topology 
147
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

the new RF propagation to fit the one produced by the 
topology of 50m beacons’ distance. The results from Fig. 11 
show that it may not be necessary any parameters to be 
modified, since the RSS in 70m is around -85dBm, which is 
above the sensitivity threshold of the radio chipCC2420. 
Nevertheless, this value is lower than the adopted safe 
threshold level of -80dBm and according to [22] doubles the 
percentage of the packet loss. Therefore, it is advisable the 
RSS in the end distance of 70m to be around -80dBm, which 
require some parameter modifications.  
The first and easier solution is to increase the beacons’ 
height, since the mobile is fixed at the knee. As it is shown in 
Fig. 11, if the beacons’ height is 1m, then the propagation 
curve shifts up and the RSS at 70m is around -80dBm. 
Unfortunately the last ‘null’ now is deeper and wider, and it 
is located at greater distance. In addition, the curve slop is 
not that inclined, which may worsen the tracking accuracy. 
The second solution, which requires other sensor node 
platform, or more powerful antenna, is to increase the 
transmission power. As it is shown in Fig. 11 if the 
transmission power is 4.5dBm the propagation curve is 
exactly like the one for 0dBm, but up-shifted.  This shift is 
enough so that the RSS at 70m to be -80dBm. 
 The two solutions have advantages and disadvantages. 
The first uses the same hardware, but may have less 
accuracy, while the second keep the same accuracy as for 
50m distance but require hardware modification and will 
have more energy consumption.   
B. Other Factors Influencing the Tracking Accuaracy 
In the sections above we analysed the most important 
topological parameters to determine their importance and 
effects on the tracking task performance. However, knowing 
them is not enough for realistic tracking simulation or for 
contracting a reliable tracking algorithm. There are two 
factors that also have to be known and included during the 
simulation procedure or to be used for designing a tracking 
algorithm, and these are:  
• 
The variability of the RSS due to its noisy nature 
and due the movement of the human body, and  
• 
The sensor nodes’ hardware variability, which may 
cause difference of 10dBm in the RSS measurements for 
the same parameters distance, height and transmission 
power.  
(a) RSS uncertainty 
 As it is well known, RSS does not have a deterministic 
behavior, but presents random variation. This is most likely 
due to the radio hardware, nodes movement and incomplete 
description of the RF communication link. It is of great 
importance for the localization and tracking applications to 
identify and characterize the RSS uncertainty sources as well 
as to model them for more realistic tracking simulations [23]. 
In order to investigate the RSS variability when the 
transmitter and receiver are static, and when the transmitter 
is mobile and the receiver is static, several outdoor 
measurements were performed.  Detailed description of the 
measuring setup and modelling procedure are given in [23].  
The measurements for static transmitter and receiver 
were performed for different heights from the ground and 
distances in order to have more distinct RSS levels. Then the 
mean value μ and the standard deviation σ were calculated. 
Since the noise is considered to derive from multiple factors 
we assume Gaussian distribution. Fig. 12 presents RSS 
measurements for four different μ/σ combinations in dBm: -
42/0.40; -63/0.58; -71/1.10 and -83/2.62. As Fig. 12 presents, 
the strongest signal, i.e., highest μ, has the smallest 
deviation, and the lowest signal has the highest deviation, 
i.e., the measured values are more dispersed regarding the 
mean value. It is noticeable that with the decrease of the 
signal strength the standard deviation increases, which could 
be expressed as σ = f (μ).  
The measurements for fixed receiver and mobile 
transmitter were performed during human walking along a 
circle arc of 20m and 30m for the knee position case and of 
15m and 25m for the ankle position case with speed of 
approximately 1m/s. The fixed node is in the centre of the 
circle arc and receives the transmitted signals of the mobile 
node positioned above the knee. In Fig. 13, we present the 
results for the RSS variation due to the movement of the 
Figure 12. RSS measurements for four different combinations of μ and σ 
 
 
Figure 13. RSS measurements for (a) knee and (b) ankle transmitter position
148
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

transmitter, while the human walks. These plots have three 
distinguishable regions: (1) two seconds in immovable state, 
(2) walking state and (3) three to four seconds in immovable 
state. The average RSS value corresponds to the steady 
position of the human body, where the mobile node has 
stable height 0.55m from the ground. As it was expected, 
except for the RSS uncertainty owning to the RSS nature, 
there is an additional uncertainty introduced by the motion of 
the mobile node. The RSS variation due to the body 
movement is periodical and can be correlated with the 
trajectory of the legs movement. In particular, during 
walking, the height and antenna orientation change in a 
periodic manner, which results into periodic variations, i.e., 
spikes up and down around the mean value, of the RSS. 
The modeling of the relation σ = f (μ) consists of data-
to-curve-fitting approximation over the measured data [23]. 
The modeling equations for static transmitter, shown in 
Fig.12, and for mobile transmitter, shown in Fig. 13, are (3) 
and (4) respectively. 
 
Equation (3) is to be used in RSS uncertainty generation 
process depending on the mean value when the sensor nodes 
are fixed in outdoor unobstructed environment, while (4) 
includes both the uncertainty due to RSS nature and the 
uncertainty due to movement and it is to be used in noise 
generation process depending on the RSS mean value when 
the transmitting node is mobile. 
(b) Sensor Node  Hardware Variability  
It is well known that there are differences in the radio 
circuits among the same type of transceivers. This hardware 
variability, due to production tolerance, leads to difference 
among actual transmission powers for the same sensor node 
types. To study the transmitter and the receiver variability 
several experiments were conducted [12]: 
• 
one receiver and five different transmitters, and  
• 
one transmitter and five different receivers.  
The orientation and the position of the receivers and the 
transmitters are exactly the same. The height from the 
ground of the receivers and the transmitters is 0.70m. The 
experiments are performed for three different transmission 
powers of 0dBm, -3dBm and -11dBm at 50m, 30m and 15m 
T-R distances, respectively. The results are shown in Fig. 14. 
The hardware variability of the transmitters and 
receivers results in difference of the measured RSS when 
five transmitters send and one receiver receive, as shown in 
Fig. 14 in the first column, and when one transmitter sends 
and five receivers receive, as shown in Fig. 14 in the second 
column. Moreover, the results present that the variation of 
the RSS among the five transmitters and receivers does not 
follow the same logic when change the transmission power. 
For instance, the node with ID 3, as a transmitter, has the 
highest RSS value for transmission power -3dBm at 30m in 
Fig. 14(c) and the lowest RSS value for transmission power -
11dBm at 15m in Fig. 14(e). Similar observations hold for 
the results of the five receivers.  
Taking into account the results from Fig. 14, there is one 
more parameter to be included in (1), which represents the 
offset that the hardware imposes, and that is the Poffset. Thus, 
the received power can be expressed as: 
 
where Poffset is given in mW in this equation and expresses 
the difference between the RSS produced by simulation with 
(1) and the real measured RSS. Therefore, the hardware 
variability strongly requires a calibration procedure before 
any tracking task. 
C. Simulation procedure 
The simulation process aims at simulating a target-
tracking scenario considering all the topology parameters 
and factors that influence the tracking performance which 
have been discussed in the previous sections. As a location 
positioning technique the fingerprinting approach is utilized. 
It is based on acquiring reference points within the target 
area. The reference point topology is either constructed as a 
square grid with eligible square size, or is based on the points 
extracted by the quantized levels technique. Both of them 
were discussed in Section IV A and will be evaluated during 
the simulation procedure. Furthermore, in order to deal with 
the uncertainty of the propagated curve introduced by the 
first 10 meters, as shown in Section III, an additional sensor 
is assumed providing almost 10m range detection around a 
fixed node. 
offset
T
R
P
L
K
K
K
d
P
P d
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
Δ
Γ
Γ +
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
λ
π
π
λ
cos 2
2
4
)
(
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
 
(5) 
c
b
a
+
−
=
. )
.exp(
( )
μ
σ μ
,  
where  a = 0.04,  b= -0.045, c = 0.2 
(3)
 
b
a
+
=
μ
σ μ
.
( )
,  
where  a = -0.029  and  b = 0.48. 
(4)
 
Figure. 14   Variation of the transceivers 
 
149
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

In general, the simulation procedure is divided into two 
parts: (1) defining the needed functions, and initialization of 
the input parameters and the topology of the reference points 
named as virtual grid points; and (2) tracking of a mobile 
node on preliminary generated path. The pseudo code of the 
simulation procedure is given in Fig. 15 and Fig. 16 for its 
two parts respectively and is described briefly as follows. 
Part 1: From step 1 to step 5 all needed parameters 
concerning the deployment are initialized, where reference 
height for RSS signature definition is the average height 
obtained by the corresponding to the knee or ankle 
movement presented in Table I. In Step 6, the coordinates for 
the virtual grid points are calculated. With steps 7 to 14, for 
all grid points, a signature consisting of three RSS 
measurements from the fixed anchor nodes is calculated and 
stored in {RSS_Signature}. Steps 15 to 17 initialize and 
create a probabilistic neural network (PNN) representing the 
search and matching algorithm used by the particular 
fingerprinting tracking scheme. PNN combines non-
parametric probability density estimation with minimum risk 
decision making [20]. The density estimation implements the 
Parzen window estimator [19] by using a mixture of 
Gaussian basis functions.  
After the estimation of the probability density functions for 
all signatures in {RSS_Signature}, the posterior probabilities 
are computed, and then the Bayes’ optimal decision rule is 
applied to select the index of the winning signature. Finally, 
the last steps 18 and 19 create or load the mobile node path 
as RealCoord(X,Y) and calculate the mobile node movement 
positions. This part concluded the initialization of 
deployment parameters, functions and grid point attributes, 
forming the input to part 2. 
Part 2: In steps 24 to 28, for each position of the mobile 
node track, the distance Dist with respect to each of the three 
beacon nodes is calculated. In the steps 29 and 30, this 
distance is used as a parameter in the RF propagation model, 
which generates the respective RSS including the uncertainty 
Part 1: Initialization of the  input parameters 
1. Load antenna model: (InvertedF_model)  
2. Define input parameters: f (working frequency), c (velocity of 
light), λ (wave length), εr (relative permittivity of the ground), 
PTX (transmission power) 
3. Define model input parameters:  
       (1) Href : Reference Height for RSS signature definition  
        (knee or ankle) 
       (2) Hr : Height for the fixed nodes (anchors)  
       (3) Ht : Height for mobile node (knee or ankle)  
       (4) Hvar : Height variance due to movement  
       (5) Rangesensor : Additional sensor range detection  
4. Define area input parameters: 
       (1) Distance X (e.g. FieldX=50m or 70m) 
       (2) Distance Y (e.g. FieldY=50m or 70m) 
       (3) Number of anchors (AnchorsNumb=3) 
5. Calculate anchors coordinate: 
   Anchor3Y= round (FieldY*sqrt(3)/2);    
   X_Anch=[0,FieldX,FieldX/2];  
   Y_Anch=[0,0,Anchor3Y]; 
6. Define localization input parameters: 
    Define number of grid points (NumbGrPoints) 
    Define grid points coordinates 
 
Calculation of the point’s signature 
7. for i=1:NumbGrPoints 
8.     for m=1:AnchorsNumb 
9. 
Compute distance between anchors and the  
               points: AnchDist 
               (Compute  RSS)  
10.          RSS = RSSmodel (Hr, Href, AnchDist, εr, PTX, λ) 
11.          Save X, Y, AnchDist, RSS  in {GridPoints} 
12.          RSS_Signature (i, m) = RSS; 
13     end for  
14. end for  
 
Neural Network initialization & creation 
15. [rows,columns] = size (RSS_Signatures); 
16. T = [1: rows];   
17. net = PNN (RSS_Signatures,T); 
 
Generate mobile node path 
18. Create mobile node’s path, or load mobile node’s path 
       as  RealCoord (X,Y) 
19. Compute the number of the mobile positions, 
      NodesNumb    
 
Figure 15. Pseudo code for Part 1: Initialization 
Part 2: Mobile node tracking 
20. for i=1:NodesNumb 
21.     Xn=NodesCoord (i, 1); 
22.     Yn=NodesCoord (i, 2); 
23.     HtVar=Ht+sign* Hvar *rand (1); 
24.     for m=1:AnchorsNumb 
25.         Compute Dist (X_Anch, Y_Anch, Xn, Yn) 
26.          if  Dist < Rangesensor  
27.                 CloserAnchorID = m;  FlagCloserAnchor = 1 
28.          end if 
               (Compute RSS) 
29.          RSSnoNoise = RSSmodel( Hr,HtVar, Dist,εr,PTX,λ); 
               (Include noise to RSS)  
30.          RSSmeasured = noise(RSSnoNoise);  
31.          MobileNodeRSS_signature (1,m)= RSSmeasured; 
32.      end for 
33.      [S, P] = PNNsim(net, MobileNodeRSS_signature ); 
           (Filter signatures-probabilities if an anchor is close) 
34.      if  FlagCloserAnchor==1 (An anchor is close)  
35.             [S, P] = Filter (S, P, CloserAnchorID); 
36.      end if 
           (Acquire the maximum probability index) 
37.      index = maxProbability (P); 
           (Obtain the coordinates of the estimated position) 
38.      MobileNodeCoord (i,1)=GrPoints(index,1); 
39.      MobileNodeCoord (i,2)=GrPoints(index,2); 
40. end for 
41 (Possible use of Filtering algorithm, such as Kalman 
      filtering) 
42. for i=1: NodesNumb 
         (Compute absolute distance errors for each position) 
43.    ErrorDist (i) = (MobileNodeCoord, RealCoord); 
44. end for 
      (Compute RMSE) 
45. RMSE = sqrt (mse (ErrorDist)); 
 
Figure 16. Pseudo code for Part 2: Tracking 
150
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

due to movement variance calculated with (4). The variable 
height, HtVar, which the mobile node has in each position of 
the corresponding track, is calculated on the mobile node 
height Ht (ankle or knee) base within ±Hvar deviation range 
because of the movement. In step 31, the RSS values from 
the 
three 
fixed 
nodes 
are 
stored 
as 
MobileNodeRSS_signature for further processing with PNN. 
The latter is used to discover the best matching signatures 
(vector S) from RSS_Signatures to the mobile node by 
computing their respective probability (vector P). In steps 34 
to 36, depending on the presence of the mobile node in the 
detection range of the additional sensor attached to the fixed 
nodes, an appropriate filtering to the RSS signatures is 
applied selecting those corresponding to points close to a 
particular fixed node. Steps 37 to 39 gives the index ID of 
the signature with the highest probability and its 
corresponding coordinates, extracted from the GrPoints 
database, are coordinates for the mobile node. After the 
coordinates of the mobile node are identified it is possible of 
using filtering algorithm, such as Kalman filtering [24] in 
order to improve the tracking performance. Finally, the 
absolute distance error is computed for every mobile node 
position in the track as well as the root mean square error 
metric (RMSE) of the whole track. 
D. Simulation results 
The simulated area is an equilateral triangle with three 
fixed nodes on its vertices acquiring the RSS values of the 
received message from the position of the mobile node being 
tracked. The simulated path of the latter is comprised of 
points inside the triangle considering the fact that for real 
deployments if the mobile node inserts an adjacent triangle 
area, then the tracking task is undertaken by the respective 
fixed nodes. Moreover, for more realistic simulation over the 
simulated RSS, noise is added, calculated with (4), to 
represent the RSS variability due to human walking.  
The main objective of the performed simulations is to 
obtain the tracking accuracy expressed by the RMSE metric 
in order to evaluate the selected topology parameters. The 
evaluation includes: 
• 
the ankle and the knee positions’ accuracy, 
• 
the number and topology of the reference points, 
• 
the filtering of the mobile node localization 
positions to perform tracking. 
(a) Mobile Node Localization without Filtering 
The first simulation performs localization of a mobile 
node located at 0.55m height in triangular area. For more 
realistic simulation over the simulated RSS, noise is added, 
calculated with (4), to represent the RSS variability due to 
human walking. The results from the simulation are 
presented in Fig. 17 for the two reference points’ topology: 
square grid in Fig. 17(a) and quantized levels in Fig. 17(b). 
The located positions of the mobile node in these simulations 
are not filtered and it is difficult to estimate the simulated 
track. However, the average accuracy for both reference 
points’ topologies is expressed as RMSE over the entire path 
and could be improved with any filtering algorithm. The 
RMSE is calculated over the entire mobile path for each 
point. The mobile path is calculated so as to represent 
walking with 1m/s. The results present that the localization 
accuracy is a bit better with the quantized levels reference 
point topology, than with the square grid topology. In this 
sense, the more the number of reference points increases, the 
less accuracy is obtained. Hence, we can conclude that 
without filtering algorithm the quantized levels reference 
point localization is better as a choice. To confirm this, more 
simulations are performed with square grid reference point 
topology for different points’ number, presented in Table II. 
The results presented in Table II may vary within 5% from 
one simulation to another due to the randomness of the noise. 
However, the results show clearly that the number of 
reference points when the walking noise is included is minor 
factor for the accuracy of the localization process. But, if the 
computation 
time 
and 
computational 
resources 
are 
considered, then less points produce better performance. 
 
Figure 17. Tracking accuracy distribution for virtual grid density of: a) 
289 points and b) 13 points 
151
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
(b) Mobile Node Tracking with Kalman Filtering 
The second simulation repeats the first but with Kalman 
filtering [24, 25] performed on the localized mobile node 
positions, in order to complete the tracking task. The results 
are presented in Fig. 18 for the two reference point 
topologies. 
The results present that the quantized-levels-reference-
point topology, shown in Fig. 18(b) does not have resources 
for better tracking performance with Kalman filtering due to 
irregular location and small number of the reference points. 
Referring again the Table II, for reference point topology 
with squares’ size smaller than 1/10 of the beacons’ distance, 
i.e., more than 80 number of reference points, the tracking 
task can be completed through Kalman filtering with 50% 
improvement of the RMSE. Therefore, when tracking 
application is implemented through any filtering algorithm, 
the square reference point topology is preferable due to the 
uniform location and sufficient number of the reference 
points, unless more reference points are associated to the 
quantized levels topology.  
(c) Ankle and Knee Positions’ Accuracy 
The input parameters for the last simulated scenarios are 
presented in Table III. The main goal is to study the 
localization accuracy, expressed as RMSE, depending on the 
mobile node positions, the beacon nodes height and the 
reference point topology.  
According to Table III, the knee position is simulated for 
a 50m beacons’ distance and for various fixed node heights. 
The signature of the reference points is calculated for the 
average knee position of 0.55m. However, during the 
simulation, the mobile node height varies from 0.45m to 
0.65m, to represent the difference in the people’s height. Ten 
simulations per each height are performed and the RMSE is 
averaged. The same reasoning implies also for the ankle 
case, the average height in which is considered as 0.20m and 
varies from 0.15m to 0.30m. The simulation results are 
presented in Fig. 19 and present the change in tracking 
accuracy, represented as average RMSE, for the two 
reference-points topologies. The average RMSE is produced 
by the localization procedure without Kalman filtering. The 
reference points are either 289 or 13 depending on the 
corresponding strategy used.  
Fig. 19(a) and (b) present the situation when the mobile 
node is at knee position, i.e., 0.55m. The average RMSE is 
calculated for each of the allowed beacons’ heights, 
discussed in Section II, when the heights of the mobile node 
TABLE II.  RMSE FOR DIFFERENT REFFERENCE POINTS NUMBER 
Number of reference 
points 
RMSE 
without filtering 
algorithm 
RMSE 
with filtering 
algorithm 
81 
6m 
2.8m 
289 
5.8m 
2.7m 
441 
5.9m 
2.6m 
1764 
6m 
2.8m 
 
Figure 18. Tracking accuracy with Kalman filtering for reference point 
density of: a) 289 points and b) 13 points 
 
TABLE III.    INPUT PARAMETERS FOR THE SIMULATED 
SCHENARIOS 
Scenario 
No 
Mobile 
Node 
Reference 
Height 
Fixed Node 
Height 
Triangle 
Edge 
Size 
Tx Power
Grid 
Points 
Number
1a 
0.55m 
(knee) 
0.55-1.60m 
50 m 
0 dBm 
289 
1b 
0.55m 
(knee) 
0.55-1.30m 
50 m 
0 dBm 
13 
2a 
0.20m 
(ankle) 
1.30-2.85m 
50 m 
0 dBm 
289 
2b 
0.20m 
(ankle) 
1.25-2.75m 
50 m 
0 dBm 
13 
152
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

change from 0.45m to 0.65m. Fig. 19(a) presents the square 
grid topology with 289 reference points, while Fig. 19(b) 
presents the quantized levels topology with 13 reference 
points. As it is shown, there is an increase in the loss of 
accuracy as the fixed node height increases. This observation 
stands for both the fingerprinting schemes of different 
reference point numbers having also similar accuracy values. 
As a conclusion, if the beacons’ height is between 0.55m and 
1m, then the localization accuracy is within about 6m for 
both the reference points’ topologies.  
In the second case, the ankle position is simulated in the 
same triangular area when the height variation of the mobile 
node ranges from 0.15m to 0.25m, while the beacons’ node 
height ranges from 1.25m to 2.85m, according to the results 
from Section III B. The results are presented in Fig. 19(c) for 
square reference point topology and Fig. 19(d) for quantized 
levels topology. As in the knee case, the results for the two 
reference points’ topologies present similarities. However, 
the case of the square grid topology with 289 reference 
points presents smaller RMSE than the case with the 
quantized levels topology with 13 reference points. 
Nevertheless, analyzing both topologies results, the obvious 
conclusion is that the RMSE is noticeably smaller when the 
beacons’ height is in the range of 1.25m-1.65m. 
V. 
PRACTICAL TRACKING EXPERIMENT 
In this section, a real experiment is presented keeping the 
proposed topology parameters such as beacons’ height and 
distance, and knee or ankle position for the mobile node, so 
as to perform a real outdoor tracking test.  
A. Experimental Setup 
From experiments performed for defining the variance of 
the RSS due to the body movement, we conclude that if the 
mobile node has not line-of-sight communication with 
beacon, for instance if it is attached to the inner side of a leg, 
the RSS drops about 20dBm compared to the value taken 
when the node is attached to the outer side of a leg. To 
overcome this problem, we attach one sensor node to each 
knee, as it is shown in Fig. 20. Thus, we take measurements 
from both mobile nodes and keep the strongest ones for the 
tracking task. The real results are much worse than the 
simulated ones. According to our understanding, this 
happens due to the offset that each node, mobile or beacon, 
imposes on the RSS measurements, and also due to rotation 
of the antenna, i.e., the mobile node and the non-equivalent 
antenna radiation in all directions.  
 
 
 
Figure 19. Tracking simulation RMSE distance based on different mobile node position on human body and number of RSS fingerprinting 
signature points:  a) knee / 289, b) knee / 13, c) ankle / 289, and d) ankle / 13 
153
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
The start-up requirements are: 
• 
beacon nodes’ distance of 45m, 
• 
beacon nodes at 0.7m height, 
• 
two mobile nodes (one at each knee) at 0.55m, 
• 
walking with approximate speed of 1m/s, 
• 
seven different measurements on the same walking 
trajectory, 
• 
calibration measurements. 
B. Measuring Process 
During the tracking measurements a person with attached 
mobile nodes to his knees walks on preliminary drawn 
trajectory with speed of approximately 1m/s. The two mobile 
nodes send, one by one, a packet every second to the beacon 
nodes. The beacons send, within the time frame left of one 
second, their messages to the base station, including the RSS 
of the mobile nodes’ packets.  
After the tracking measurements, we perform also 
calibration measurements to evaluate the variability 
concerning the node hardware. The beacon nodes and the 
mobile nodes are located at 0.7m height and at distance of 
20m. The two mobile nodes send 150 packets to the three 
beacons. From the measurements the average RSS value is 
calculated for each beacon. The difference between this 
value and the value produced through simulation with the 
propagation model (1) at 20m distance and 0.70m height 
gives the offset which can be included in (5). In addition, we 
compare the RSS measurements taken from each beacon 
during the walking with the RSS generated for the same 
node with the simulator (including the walking noise) to 
evaluate the offset. Finally, the results have shown that the 
beacons 1 and 3 have offset of about 5dBm regarding the 
ideal simulation and beacon 2 about 10dBm.  
According to the specific results, an experimental system 
is not ready for real time filtering and tracking without 
dealing first with the calibration problems. Because of the 
hardware difference and the antenna radiation asymmetry the 
development of a generic calibration algorithm is extremely 
challenging. Therefore, the parameters for the calibration in 
the particular experiment have been calculated post-process. 
C. Kalman Filtering 
The next step is to apply Kalman filtering on the 
localized mobile coordinates in order to perform tracking. In 
order to use the standard Kalman filter to estimate a position, 
the process under consideration has to be able to be 
described by linear system equations. A linear system is a 
process that can be described by the following equations 
[25]: 
Equation (6) is a state equation, while (7) is an output 
equation.  
Here x(k) is state vector and consists of the x, y positions and 
the corresponding velocities, w(k) is the process noise with 
normal probability p(w)~N(0,Q), v(k) is the measurement 
noise with normal probability p(v)~N(0,R), F is state 
transition matrix, H is observation matrix, Q is process noise 
covariance matrix and R measurement noise covariance 
matrix. 
The implemented Kalman filter for the purpose of this 
work is based on the Kevin Murphy's toolbox [25]. The input 
parameters and the initialization of the needed matrices for 
the Kalman filter are shown in Fig. 21. A brief description of 
the code is as follows:  
From Step1 to Step10 the state matrices are initialized. 
Step 13 and Step 14 calculate the process noise and 
measurement noise covariance matrices. Usually the process 
noise represented as varianceQ is small with values 0.1 or 
0.01. The value varianceR represents the uncertainty in the 
measurement process and we accept that varianceR is 6 or 7, 
representing 6m/7m of measurement error. The matrices Q 
and R may change with each time step or measurement. Step 
15 and 16 call the kalman_filter and kalman_smoother 
functions, which are from the Kevin Murphy's toolbox, and 
return the filtered coordinates as xfilt, Vfilt and xsmooth, 
Vsmooth, respectively. The new coordinates are saved in 
Kalman_localized and Kalman_smooth matrices during the 
Step 17 to Step 20. Step 21 plots the result and from Step 22 
to Step 32 the RMSE of the results for pure localization, the 
filtering and the smoother are calculated. 
D. Tracking Results 
As 
it 
was 
mentioned 
above, 
seven 
different 
measurements on the same walking trajectory have been 
performed. The calibration of the beacons are fulfilled 
through comparison of the RSS measurements taken from 
each beacon during the walking (only for one measurement) 
with the RSS generated for the same node with the simulator 
(including the walking noise) to extract the offset for each 
beacon.  
The tracking test has been performed for the two 
reference point topologies with the same input measurements 
and calibration values. For the square grid topology, 289 
points are generated. For the quantized levels, this time, 
more regions are identified and consequently the number of 
the reference points is 19, instead of 13 in the simulation 
example. The calculated RMSEs for all seven measurements, 
( )
 ( )
)1
(
w k
F x k
x k
+
=
+
,  
(6)
( )
 ( )
( )
v k
H x k
y k
+
=
,  
(7)
 
Figure 20. Positioning of two mobile nodes on the human body 
 
154
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

for the two reference points’ topologies are presented in 
Table IV. Two columns for each topology case are given to 
illustrate the difference in the RMSE when only localization 
of the node is required and when the tracking with filtering is 
implemented. As it is obvious, the filtering improves the 
accuracy. Another observation is that the quantized levels 
topology presents a bit better results most likely due to the 
careful selection of the position of the reference points. 
Visually there is no big difference between the tracked path 
from the one or the other reference point topologies, as it is 
shown in Fig. 22. Fig. 22(a) presents the real path and the 
tracked path from measurement 4 with square grid topology, 
while Fig. 22(b) presents the real path and the tracked path 
from measurement 2 with quantized levels topology. 
  The RMSE of all seven measurements, for the two 
reference point’s topologies, presents relatively stable 
tracking accuracy, which is within the application 
requirements of 10m. However, without proper topology 
parameter selection and proper calibration procedure, the 
RSS-based tracking is impossible. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The present study investigates the possibility a target 
tracking task to be performed with the resources of the WSN 
technology, when using only the RSS of the exchanged 
messages. In order to evaluate such a possibility the present 
study was focused on identifying the most crucial RSS-based 
tracking problems and to determine and evaluate the 
topology parameters that can guarantee successful tracking. 
More specifically we aimed at: (1) evaluation of the 
behaviour of the propagated RF signal in order to identify the 
important RSS-based tracking problems, (2) selection of the 
topology related parameters, when taking into consideration 
the tracking task requirements and the deployment 
constraints, (3) use of the selected propagation model and 
topology parameters to simulate a target tracking task, and 
(4) use of the proposed topology parameters to perform real 
outdoor tracking test. Hence, summarizing the obtained 
results the following conclusions were derived:  
• 
During the modelling of the RF signal propagation 
several factors have to be considered, such as the height 
from the ground of the transmitter and the receiver, the 
frequency of the transmitted signal, the type of the 
ground (e.g. grass, road, etc.), the sensor nodes’ 
hardware variability, the difference of the antenna gain 
for each of the supported frequency bands, the antenna 
pattern irregularities, and the RSS uncertainty.  
• 
The RF signal propagation has to be considered 
when choosing the topology parameters, such as 
beacons’ distance and height, in order to assure reliable 
communication between the beacons. The combination 
between the fixed node’s height and distance is 
constrained by the fact that the communication among 
them has to be as robust as possible with respect to 
minimum packet loss. Therefore, the selected heights of 
the fixed nodes for reliable communication among them 
at distance, for instance of 50m are: 0.55m–1.60m; 
1.85m–2.35m; and 2.55m–2.90m.   
• 
The position of the mobile node on the human body 
should be selected so as to minimize the possibility for 
great node’s height variation due to body movement in 
order to minimize the variability on the RSS due to this 
movement.  
Kalman filtering  
(input matrixes: NodesCoord_real and  NodesCoord_localized) 
1. X0=10;        
%  X beginning coordinate 
2. Y0=0;          
%  Y beginning coordinate 
3. Vx0=0;  
% 
4. Vy0=1;  
% 
5. ss = 4;             
%  state size 
6. os = 2;           
 %  observation size 
7. x = zeros (ss, T); % T -number of the measurements 
8. y = zeros (os, T); 
9. initx = [X0 Y0 Vx0 Vy0]'; 
 
10. initV = 1*eye (ss); 
11. F = [1 0 1 0; 0 1 0 1; 0 0 1 0; 0 0 0 1];  
12. H = [1 0 0 0; 0 1 0 0]; 
13. Q = varianceQ *eye (ss);     % Process noise covariance 
14. R = (varianceR)^2*eye(os); % measurement noise covariance 
15. [xfilt, Vfilt, VVfilt, loglik] =  
                              =kalman_filter(y, F, H, Q, R, initx, initV); 
16. [xsmooth, Vsmooth] =  
                              =kalman_smoother(y, F, H, Q, R, initx, initV); 
17. Kalman_localized(:,1)= xfilt(1,:)'; 
18. Kalman_localized(:,2)= xfilt(2,:)'; 
19. Kalman_smooth(:,1)= xsmooth(1,:)'; 
20. Kalman_smooth(:,2)= xsmooth(2,:)'; 
21. plot(Kalman_smooth(:,1), Kalman_smooth(:,2),'ks'); 
22.  yR=[NodesCoord_real(:,1), NodesCoord_real(:,2)]'; 
23. y=[NodesCoord_localized(:,1), NodesCoord_localized(:,2)]'; 
24. allsr=length(NodesCoord_localized(:,1)); 
25. alls=length(Kalman_localized(:,1)); 
26. dReal = yR([1 2],:) - y([1 2],:); 
27. rmse_real = sqrt(sum(sum(dReal.^2))/allsr); 
28. dfilt = yR([1 2],:) - xfilt([1 2],:); 
29. rmse_filt = sqrt(sum(sum(dfilt.^2))/alls) 
30. dsmooth = yR([1 2],:) - xsmooth([1 2],:); 
31. rmse_smooth = sqrt(sum(sum(dsmooth.^2))/alls) 
 
Figure 21. Tracking with Kalman filter 
TABLE IV.  RMSE FOR SEVEN MEASUREMENS  
Number  
RMSE 
Square grid, 289 points 
RMSE 
Quantized levels, 19 points 
Localization
Filtering 
Localization 
Filtering 
1 
13.2m 
10.8m 
11.8m 
10m 
2 
13m 
9.5m 
10.3m 
8.2m 
3 
12.3m 
9.2m 
10.9m 
8.5m 
4 
10.8m 
8.8m 
9.4m 
7.6m 
5 
11.2m 
7.6m 
9.3m 
7m 
6 
12.3m 
9.7m 
11.3m 
9m 
7 
12m 
10m 
10.8m 
8.9m 
155
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

• 
The RF propagation between the beacons and the 
mobile node has to be as smooth as possible to ensure 
that it has as few as possible ‘nulls’. This can be 
achieved by judicious selection of the heights at both 
beacons and mobile node.  
• 
When using the fingerprinting approach, the 
selection of the reference points’ locations and topology 
needs preliminary evaluation according to well defined 
criteria such as the number of points, which define the 
computational load and the granularity of the 
localization accuracy as well, the required tracking 
accuracy, and finally, the simplicity of points 
generation, where the square grid is easier to be 
generated, while the quantized levels approach needs 
multiple calculations for each case of beacon - mobile 
node pair of heights. 
• 
The 
hardware 
variability 
strongly 
requires 
calibration procedure before any tracking task. Because 
of this, the antenna radiation asymmetry and the 
possibility of unpredictable and continuous rotation of 
the mobile node, the development of generic calibration 
algorithm is extremely challenging. Without proper 
calibration procedure the RSS-based tracking is 
impossible.  
• 
The filtering, such as the Kalman filtering, applied 
on the localized mobile node coordinates is absolutely 
essential for performing tracking, but it is not necessary 
when only localization is performed. 
• 
The real outdoor tracking test demonstrates that the 
RSS can be used for outdoor localization and tracking 
applications under well-defined topology constraints and 
only after the proper calibration. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The work reported here was performed as part of the 
uSWN FP6-2005 IST-034642 research Program and funded 
by the European Social Fund (ESF). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Kerasiotis, Ts. Stoyanova, A. Prayati, G. Papadopoulos, “A 
Topology-Oriented Solution Providing Accuracy for Outdoors RSS-
Based Tracking in WSNs”, Second International Conference on 
Sensor Technologies and Applications, SENSORCOMM 2008, 
August 
2008, 
Cap 
Esterel, 
France, 
pp. 
239–245 
doi: 
10.1109/SENSORCOMM.2008.122 
[2] 
M. Cardei, J. Wu, “Energy-efficient coverage problems in wireless 
ad-hoc sensor networks”, Computer Communications 29, pp. 413–
420, Elsevier B.V, doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2004.12.025 2006. 
[3] 
A. Savvides, C. Han, M. B. Srivastava. “Dynamic fine-grained 
localization in ad-hoc networks of sensors”, 7th annual international 
conference on MobiCom 2001, Rome, Italy, 2001, pp. 166–179, doi: 
10.1145/381677.381693 
[4] 
D. Niculescu, B. Nath, “DV Based Positioning in Ad hoc Networks”, 
Journal of Telecommunication Systems, Springer, Vol.22, Numb.1-4, 
January, 2003, pp. 267-280, doi: 10.1023/A:1023403323460. 
[5] 
M. L. Sichitiu, V. Ramadurai, P. Peddabachagari, "Simple algorithm 
for outdoor localization of wireless sensor networks with inaccurate 
range 
measurements”, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wireless 
Networks, 2003, pp. 300-305. 
[6] 
T. He, C. Huang, B.M. Blum, J.A. Stankovic, T. Abdelzaher, “Range-
free localization schemes for large scale sensor networks”, 9th annual 
international conference on MobiCom 2003, San Diego, CA, USA 
2003, pp. 81–95, doi: 10.1145/938985.938995. 
[7] 
F. Reichenbach, J. Blumenthal, D. Timmermann, ”Improved 
Precision of Coarse Grained Localization in Wireless Sensor 
Networks” 9th Conference on DSD 2006, , Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2006 
pp. 630-637, doi: 10.1109/DSD.2006.61. 
[8] 
Hu, L., Evans, D., “Localization for mobile sensor networks”, 10th 
Annual 
International 
Conference 
MOBICOM 
2004, 
ACM, 
Philadelphia, US, 2004, pp. 45 - 57, doi: 10.1145/1023720.1023726. 
 
Figure 22. Tracking of a mobile node with Kalman filtering for: 
 (a) square-grid reference point topology with 289 points and (b) quantized-levels reference point topology with 19 points 
156
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

[9] 
Y.-C. Tseng, S.-P. Kuo, H.-W. Lee, and C.-F. Huang. “Location 
tracking in a wireless sensor network by mobile agents and its data 
fusion strategies”, 2nd International Conference on Information 
Processing in Sensor Networks, IPSN 2003, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 
2003, pp. 625–641. 
[10] K. Mechitov, S. Sundresh, Y. Kwon, “Cooperative Tracking with 
Binary-Detection Sensor Networks”, 1st International Conference on 
Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, SenSys 2003, Los Angeles, 
California, USA, November 5-7, 2003, pp. 332-333. 
[11] H. Yang, B. Sikdar, “A Protocol for Tracking Mobile Targets using 
Sensor Networks”, Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on Sensor 
Network Protocols and Applications, WSNA 2003, Anchogare, AK 
2003.   
[12] Ts. Stoyanova, F. Kerasiotis, A. Prayati, G. Papadopoulos, 
“Evaluation of Impact Factors on RSS Accuracy for Localization and 
Tracking Applications in Sensor Networks”, Special issue of 
Telecommunications Systems Journal, Springer, Vol.42, pp. 235-248, 
Dec. 2009, DOI: 10.1007/s11235-009-9183-8) 
[13] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, 
2nd Edition. Prentice Hall, 2001 
[14] Ultra low power IEEE 802.15.4 compliant wireless sensor module, 
TmoteSky datasheet, Moteiv Co., 2006 
[15] A. Smith, H.Balakrishman, M. Goraczko, N. Priyanha, “Tracking 
moving devices with cricket location system”, In Proc. 2th ACM 
MobiSys, 
Boston, 
MA, 
2004, 
pp. 
190-202, 
doi: 
10.1145/990064.990088 
[16] C. Alippi, G. Vanini, “A RSSI-based and calibrated centralized 
localization technique for Wireless Sensor Networks”, In Proc. 4th 
annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communication Workshops 2006, PERCOMW’06, pp.301-305, doi: 
10.1109/PERCOMW.2006.13 
[17] Jian Ma, Quanbin Chen, Dian Zhang, Lionel M. Ni, "An empirical 
study of radio signal strength in sensor networks in using MICA2 
nodes," HKUST, Technical Report, 2006 
[18] Ts. Stoyanova, F. Kerasiotis, A. Prayati, G. Papadopoulos, “A 
Practical RF Propagation Model for Wireless Network Sensors”, In 
Proceedings of the 3d International Conference on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications, SENSORCOMM 2009, June 2009, 
Athens, Greece ,  doi: 10.1109/SENSORCOMM.2009.39 
[19] E. Parzen, “On estimation of a probability density function and 
mode.”, Annals in Mathematical Statistics, 33:1065-1076, 1962 
[20] D. F. Specht, “Probabilistic neural networks.” , Neural Networks, 
3(1), pp:109-118, 1990 
[21] “TelosB mote platform”, Crossbow Technology. Copyright 2009, 
http://www.xbow.com/Products/Product_pdf_files/Wireless_pdf/Telo
sB_Datasheet.pdf 
[22]  Ts.Stoyanova, F. Kerasiotis, A. Prayati, G. Papadopoulos, 
“Communication-aware deployment for Wireless Sensor Networks”,   
SENSORCOMM 2008, August 2008 - Cap Esterel, France. 
[23] Ts.Stoyanova, F. Kerasiotis, K. Efstathiou, G. Papadopoulos, 
“Modeling of the RSS Uncertainty for RSS-based Outdoor 
Localization and Tracking Applications in Wireless Sensor 
Networks” SENSORCOMM2010, July 2010, Vinecia, Italy, 
(accepted for publication). 
[24] Welch, Bishop, “An Introduction to the Kalman Filter”, UNC-Chapel 
Hill, TR 95-041, July 24, 2006, available from: 
http://www.cs.unc.edu/~welch/kalman/ 
[25] K. Murphy, “Kalman filter toolbox for Matlab” 1998 , available from: 
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Software/Kalman/kalman.html 
 
 
157
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

