55
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Flexible 5G Edge Server for Multi Industry Service Network 
 
Carlo Vitucci 
Technology Management 
Ericsson AB 
Stockholm, Sweden 
carlo.vitucci@ericsson.com 
Alf Larsson 
Senior Specialist 
Ericsson AB 
Stockholm, Sweden 
alf.larsson@ericsson.com
 
 
Abstract— The Telecom world is converging with IT rapidly in 
order to address users demands in a more agile and 
personalized way and is a once in a generation inflection point 
in the telecommunications industry. But how can a 5th 
generation wireless system architecture framework also 
conforms to the new demands from the major areas Internet of 
Things and Networked Society? The Software defined Network 
– Network Function Virtualization matches the 5th generation 
wireless system framework, it has the concepts and the key 
components for deploying a service at the edge of the Radio 
Access Network. But with a different approach: moving 
Software Defined Network-Network Function Virtualization 
into the Radio Access Network which is conceptually different 
than moving the Radio Access Network into the Cloud. This 
paper is an extension of Server at the Edge concept introduced 
recently and depicted with its key characterizations. Resources 
and meters handling are also considered fundamental for the 
new architecture using analytics feedback for a more efficient 
and autonomous deployment of new services. Business cases 
examples are added to highlight why the proposed components 
for the edge of the network are considered important. 
Keywords-component; 5G; IoT; SDN-NFV; Edge Network 
OS; SON; Analytics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The server at the edge concept has been presented as 
“SEED, a Server Platform for the Edge of the Network” [1]. 
Today, the Telecom realm is facing an epic moment, a 
technology step that will drive the evolution of the 
networked system in the future and, at the end of the day, the 
End User services and life style. The entire world of 
communication is driving the strong requirement for new 
services, where End User is at the center of the business case 
of a digital society (see Figure 1), and Telecom operators 
could make the difference. Mobility is dominating the area 
with significant smartphone penetration growth, it has 
changed the usage of connectivity [3][5]. With the emerging 
5th Generation wireless system (5G) new great benefits opens 
up for the Telecom operators.  
In the last years, Telecom operators have seen an 
exponential growth of data traffic and, at the same time, a 
significant income reduction from the “golden eggs goose” 
voice and Short Message Service (SMS). Today the majority 
of the operators have most of their Average Revenue Per 
User (ARPU) coming from data traffic where voice and SMS 
is often offered at a very cheap price just to attract new 
customers and increase revenue from data traffic. The trend 
is not supposed to change in the next years. Ericsson 
prediction shows that, by 2021, there will be 28 billion 
connected devices around the world [3].  
With that trend prediction, there are at least two aspects; 
The first is Mobile data offloading [6] and in this context for 
the operator a strive to find alternative for the backhaul and 
core network offloading. This not only affects the business 
model and the type of services provided. It would also 
require an interworking standardization between cellular and 
Wi-Fi to create a seamless user experience. The second 
 
Figure 1. 5G is about digital society (source [2]) 
 
Figure 2. Average revenue per user in telecom industry (source [4]) 

56
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
would be for the operators to increase network capability and 
thereby increase income. But the picture is not complete, 
most mobile users are not prepared to spend too much for 
using their smartphones. However, it is not a case that the 
revenue from new subscriber dropped down dramatically in 
the last years, as reported in Figure 2. Such a condition 
would result in a significant reduction of operator margin in 
a way that some pessimistic vision [7] is predicting a 
possible “end of profitability” condition for their business. 
But it is a fact that even in a more optimistic prediction the 
current business model is not sustainable. Operators need a 
new direction where their margins can start to increase again 
[8]. 
 
A common understanding is that Software Defined 
Network – Network Function Virtualization (SDN-NFV) is a 
key to reduce Operating expenses (Opex) and Capital 
expenditures (Capex) and thereby increase margin for 
operators. But it looks like that statement is not enough to 
make operators change strategy. Just to avoid any 
misunderstanding, SDN-NFV architecture will reduce Opex 
and Capex, but it is not actually that huge of an incentive for 
the business of the operators. In fact, Opex and Capex have 
been reduced during the latest years. Mostly thanks to the 
cost reduction of technology, and the truth is that today total 
cost and revenue are so close that one can hardly imagine a 
new golden era thanks only to Opex and Capex reduction. It 
seems enough for surviving in the Telecom market 
battlefield, but surely not enough to justify a new 
infrastructure investment.  
Eventually, let us consider the life cycle of a new 
Telecom technology: the delivery rate between a technology 
step (from 2G to 3G, from 3G to 4G and so on) has an 
aggressive pace, in most of the case “forcing” operators to 
make a new infrastructure investment. But reduced revenue 
and delivery interval is concurrently reducing the business 
case window. Thus operators are not actually too keen to join 
a new technology in such conditions and for sure they are 
looking at any new investment very carefully. So, what are 
the actual needs of the operators then? 
 
So far, their effort has been focused on a market where 
improvement of capacity and quality of the connectivity has 
been enough. But the richest market today is fully in the 
hands of the Over-The-Top (OTT) content media delivery 
companies (Google, Facebook, Netflix, etc.). A real shift of 
business for the operators is the key to enter such a rich 
market. Eventually, that will be a win-win condition, since 
OTT is perfectly aware that reducing the end-to-end (E2E) 
data contents latency will improve their business. They are 
also aware that accessing User Metadata (very well known 
by Telecom operators) will increase even more such a 
market thanks to new business cases. 
 
II. 
IOT AND MACHINE TYPE COMMUNICATION 
A clear huge opportunity for operators comes from the 
Internet 
Of 
Things 
(IoT). 
Telemetry, 
sensors 
and 
infrastructure monitoring have been visible for the last ten 
years, but cost reduction of semiconductors, system on chips, 
and new radio technology opens the door to smarter devices. 
Security, enhanced health, manufacturers fully connected, 
intelligent and with autonomous data handling are today very 
attractive business opportunities and promise great benefits 
for the consumers. The IoT is part of the Industry 4.0: an 
instrumented and data-driven world, a world where Data is 
the new oil. But a business is valid only if it is sensible. It is 
not realistic to expect operators investing and maintaining 
different infrastructures and limiting the operation agility. So 
the IoT infrastructure, as described in Figure 3, needs a 
system solution where IoT is considered as a vertical service 
more than a different infrastructure. This leads to the 
conclusion that the requirement for the next generation of 
mobile system is to concurrently support different areas of 
industry, from new End User services to IoT (Figure 4). 
Once devices and machines are connected, the traditional 
vision of data flow into centralized cloud repositories will 
not work any longer. The solution is to move intelligence 
close to those devices and machines. That will reduce latency 
in decision control loops for time-critical applications and 
 
Figure 3. IoT architecture and its software stack (source [9]) 
 
Figure 4. 5G is a common accelerator 

57
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the backhaul bandwidth drawback caused by that massive 
data flow. 
III. 
5G 
5G is the answer. It is not a bare new radio technology. 
5G has the ambition to be a new framework, covering the 
system architecture, the network management and the 
software deployment to act as the enabler of the new 
business opportunity 
mentioned. Massive 
broadband, 
machine-type communication and time-critical autonomous 
control are the three groups where to find 5G requirements, 
with the declared scope to offer an eco-system for business 
innovation. 5G solution wants to support vertical markets, 
such as IoT, automotive connectivity, Mobile broadband. 
 
The vertical deployment approach is based on a complex 
integration of: distributed computing, storage, networking 
and spectrum capabilities. Slicing those underlying resources 
is fundamental. A vertical service deployment needs a 
system where it is possible to have: multi-tenancy and multi-
service, respecting the Service Level Agreement (SLA), 
providing different Quality Of Service (QoS) level to achieve 
different Service characterization and different network 
policy. The diversity of that system needs an orchestrator 
responsible to allocate computing, storage and networking 
resources to the network functions. Then allocate those 
network functions to the vertical services.  
Security, Reliability and Power Consumption efficiency 
are very challenging in this scenario and need special focus. 
 
 
Automation of service deployment is also very important. 
In the traditional system, installation of a new service 
required months because it depended on a number of 
installation parameters. That traditional way of working is 
very expensive and often the root cause of performance 
drawback or bad reputation for infrastructure providers. The 
5G system needs to be more autonomous, self-organizing 
resources when and where needed. These characterizations 
are important enablers to a successful system, but they 
explain very well the complexity of the new architecture too. 
  
The 5G architecture is based on five pillars: 
 
- 
Radio Technology: Massive Multiple Input, Multiple 
Output (MIMO); 
- 
SDN/NFV Technology; 
- 
Radio Protocol split: The Mobile Edge Computing; 
- 
Management and Orchestration (MANO); 
- 
Self-organizing Network (SON) 
 
The concepts behind the 5G architecture are summarized 
in Figure 5. This paper is mainly focusing on the Mobile 
Edge Computing, identifying the critical technologies 
 
Figure 5. 5G Architecture (source [10]) 

58
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
needed. For the other bullets above only a recall is provided 
though with an emphasis taken for Edge Analytic handling. 
 
IV. 
SDN-NFV: A RECALL 
 
An SDN-NFV introduction should start from the reason 
behind the SDN-NFV architecture. In fact, following this 
approach, it will be clear why SDN-NFV is a pillar of 5G. 
SDN-NFV has been designed to cope with the reality that, in 
the next decades, enterprises will increasingly make their 
specific applications available on mobile devices. The next 
wave of mobile communication is to mobilize and automate 
industries and industry processes. This is widely referred to 
as Machine-Type Communication (MTC) and IoT. OTT 
players will move to deliver more and more applications that 
require higher quality, lower latency, and other service 
enhancing capabilities. The SDN-NFV target is to allow 
vertical multiservice deployment and, at the same time, 
reduce Opex and CapEx; thereby creating a more green-
power environment and allows an easy deployment of a new 
technology in a shorter, safer and comfortable new way. The 
“core” promise of SDN-NFV is to guarantee a new “business 
environment” where telecom operators are a stakeholder in 
service creation. SDN-NFV architecture is built over three 
layers [16], as logically shown in Figure 7: 
 
• 
Business Application Layer – where the enterprise 
business value model is defined 
• 
Business Enablement Layer – where the enabling 
and capabilities value are defined 
• 
Infrastructure Resources Layer – where the 
resources needed by the value are defined 
 
The SDN-NFV layered vision is the most useful to 
understand the service oriented approach supported by the 
architecture itself. The comparison between Figure 5 and 
Figure 7 is self-explaining: it is the same concept. The 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 
has set regulations and indications to design and define 
SDN-NFV architecture [12][13].  
 
The Architecture Framework is showed in Figure 8 [11], 
where any block has specific role, briefly summarized 
below: 
 
- 
Virtual Infrastructure Manager (VIM) 
• 
Manages life cycle of virtual resources in an 
Network Function Virtualitazion Infrastructure 
(NFVI) domain. That is, it creates, maintains 
and tears down virtual machines (VMs) from 
physical resources in an NFVI domain. 
• 
Keeps inventory of virtual machines (VMs) 
associated with physical resources. 
• 
Performance 
and 
fault 
management 
of 
hardware, software and virtual resources. 
• 
Keeps north bound Application Program 
Interfaces (APIs) and thus exposes physical 
and virtual resources to other management 
systems. 
 
- 
Virtual Network Function (VNF) Manager (VNFM) 
• 
VNFM manages life cycle of VNFs. It creates, 
maintains and terminates VNF instances. 
 
Figure 6: SDN-NFV in a nutshell 
 
Figure 7. SDN-NFV: the Layered Architecture 
 
Figure 8. NFV Architecture Framework 

59
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(Which are installed on the VMs which the 
VIM creates and manages) 
• 
It is responsible for the Fault, Configuration, 
Accounting, 
Performance 
and 
Security 
(FCAPS) of VNFs. 
• 
It scales up/scales down VNFs which results in 
scaling up and scaling down of CPU usage. 
 
- 
NFV Orchestrator (NFVO) 
• 
Resource Orchestration 
• 
NFVO coordinates, authorizes, releases and 
engages NFVI resources among different 
Point of Presence (PoPs) or within one PoP. 
This does so by engaging with the VIMs 
directly through their north bound APIs 
instead of engaging with the NFVI resources, 
directly 
• 
Service Orchestration 
• 
Service Orchestration creates end to end 
service between different VNFs. It achieves 
this by coordinating with the respective 
VNFMs so it does not need to talk to VNFs 
directly. Example would be creating a service 
between the base station VNFs of one vendor 
and core node VNFs of another vendor. 
• 
Service Orchestration can instantiate VNFMs, 
where applicable. 
• 
It does the topology management of the 
network services instances. 
 
- 
NFV Catalogs 
• 
A VNF Catalog is a repository of all usable 
VNF Descriptors (VNFDs). 
• 
Network Services (NS) Catalog is the list of 
the usable Network services. 
• 
NFV Instances list holds all details about 
Network Services instances and related VNF 
Instances. 
• 
NFVI Resources is a repository of NFVI 
resources utilized for establishing NFV 
services. 
 
- 
Element Management (EM) 
EM is not part of the MANO but, if it is available, it 
needs to coordinate with VNFM so it is important to 
know about it. Element Management System is 
responsible for the FCAPS of VNF. If you recall, 
VNFM does the same job. But EM can do it through 
proprietary interface with the VNF in contrast to 
VNFM. However, EM needs to make sure that it 
exchanges information with VNFM through open 
reference point (Ve-Vnfm-em). The EM may be 
aware of virtualization and collaborate with VNFM to 
perform those functions that require exchange of 
information regarding the NFVI resources associated 
with VNF. 
 
- 
Operations 
Support 
System 
(OSS)/Business 
Support System (BSS) 
NFV is supposed to work in coordination with 
OSS/BSS. 
 
It is useful to finish this recall for the SDN-NFV with a 
clarification: SDN and NFV are mentioned together because 
they 
need 
to 
be 
considered 
concurrently 
in 
the 
implementation of the architecture: the NFV system is the 
solution matching Figure 5 and Figure 7, while SDN is the 
tool used to deploy the NFV framework. 
 
V. 
RADIO PROTOCOL SPLIT AND MOBILE EDGE 
PLATFORM 
Despite the effort done by ETSI, some parts are left for 
others to design. One of those parts is the so-called NFVI 
(see Figure 8), where the Radio Network vendors could play 
their significant role, both contributing to the SDN-NFV best 
deployment and improving their own business. The first 
discriminating condition to succeed in this challenge is their 
ability to integrate the traditional IT world with the Telecom 
(as explicitly required by the new business case), that is, their 
ability to provide full SDN-NFV architecture up to the edge 
of the network; into the Radio Access Network (RAN). ETSI 
group defined the deployment of the SDN-NFV for the 
mobile network in their Use Cases study report [11]. 
According to that scenario, the current base station is 
actually split into two main objects: the Remote Radio 
Header (RRH), that is antenna and eventually the basic 
Layer 1, and the virtualized Baseband Unit (vBBU) as a 
service housed in a specific server implementing Layer 2 and 
Layer 3 of mobile protocols. Then, from an infrastructure 
point of view, the challenge is to understand what SDN-NFV 
deployment into the RAN really means, identifying how the 
server at the edge of the network should look like. The 
questions that initially need to be answered are: what are the 
characterizations and technologies that must be considered as 
key components of the server itself, which hardware 
characteristics are matching the requirements, which 
functions are clearly new components (services) of the 
platform housed into the server@edge (SEED) and which 
ones need more attention and effort to remove possible 
obstacles and limitations?  
 
It is a long journey where the infrastructure designers 
must remember the real needs behind the SDN-NFV. 
Moreover, the expectation of operators must be fulfilled and 
a more complete understanding of other opportunities, like 
footprint and energy consumption, play their important role. 
For these reasons, it is worth to focus on the SEED concept, 
identifying its characterization to cope with the radio 
function requirements.  
 
In fact, the starting point of this paper is that it could be 
very difficult to move the RAN into the cloud and it is more 
suitable to port SDN-NFV into the RAN. This will give all 
the benefits of SDN-NFV described in the introduction, and 
at the same time answer the specific requirements needed at 
the edge of the network.  
 

60
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The reference deployment model has been described 
[14][15] and ETSI made some progress in the same area [12] 
introducing the so called Mobile-Edge Computing (MEC) 
server. It offers application developers and content providers 
cloud-computing capabilities and an IT service environment 
at the edge of the mobile network. The reference system 
architecture in this paper is depicted in Figure 9. Another 
aspect is to consider SDN-NFV as an overall system 
solution, an end-to-end solution and, from that perspective, 
to avoid not fulfilling the fundamental requirements.  
There are also some concepts on the splitting of the 
current Base Station in RRH and vBBU and what it means 
for the current implementation of the Base Station Controller 
(BSC). As an example, one can refer to the Long Term 
Evolution (LTE) protocol deployment, to figure pros and 
cons out, while moving LTE function from RRH to the 
vBBU (see Figure 10).  
 
The deployment of Radio Technology between RRH and 
BBU could be done in several ways; mostly by deciding the 
point in the protocol chain where the split is done and so 
defining the interface typology between RRH and BBU. 
Depending on the decision taken one can face different types 
of 
issues 
or 
constraints. 
An 
ETSI-based 
vBBU 
implementation, for example, might guarantee the highest 
possible service flexibility. Thus, also achieving the highest 
level of operational agility (indeed very useful for Telecom 
Infrastructure providers as well, since deployment of a new 
technology could be handled in the same shape as of a new 
service deployment), but it is challenged by very aggressive 
latency time requirement.  
On the other hand, a “smooth” porting of the existing 
BSC solutions into the cloud could be attractive in term of 
legacy software or reduced latency time and would simply 
the first deployment. But it is a poor answer to the strong 
request of operation agility, because, in this case, the 
protocol splitting is done on the highest protocol layer only. 
In a similar way, splitting BSC between RRH and BBU 
could have important impacts by means of Fronthaul and 
Backhaul capacity demand [18].  
 
There is not a common trend between proposed solutions 
of operators. For example, KT (Korea Telecom) has recently 
set its target for 2020 to Radio Link Control (RLC) [19], 
emphasizing the need of reducing the Fronthaul bandwidth 
requirement. However, SK Telecom is pointing to L2, so 
somewhere between Medium Access Control (MAC) and 
RLC [20].  The uncertain trend is supposed to be fixed by 
3GPP standardization group and it is out of the scope of this 
paper to point to any splitting point. Pro and cons have been 
listed before. For the nature of the radio technology, the 
design of the server at the edge of the network makes the 
difference; by means of feasibility and performance.  
 
It is worth to mention that all network functions should 
be handled as a service, according to the layer architecture 
described in Figure 7. In SDN-NFV network, the 
deployment is based on Service Availability Concept: 
meaning, Radio Access must be a function deployed on the 
Business Enablement Layer and published to be used as 
component in a service chain at the Business Application 
Layer. The service chains capability [21] is considered a key 
accelerator of the SDN-NFV usage, since it is introducing a 
high level of operational agility, which is already mentioned 
as mandatory requirement. Note how the service chain is 
also a mindset in ETSI use case description of the BS [11] 
and it is at the very fundamental of SDN-NFV architecture 
description [22][23]. 
 
VI. 
SEED, A SDN-NFV SYSTEM ELEMENT 
In order to understand the needs for the SEED, it is 
important to recall the vertical services concept as introduced 
in Figure 4. This is only possible if the system can define and 
handle “slices” of network that can be univocally assigned to 
different services. Slicing requires the capability to virtualize 
the underlying resources. 
Virtualization is the core of the SDN-NFV architecture 
and there is no alternative to conform to such an architecture. 
All resources must be virtualized, with no exception. 
Functions are virtualized, and every single physical resource 
is virtualized as well. To downsize the virtualization is 
against the operational agility characterization, which has 
been already mentioned previously as the key incitement for 
the business model behind the SDN-NFV. Downsizing the 
 
Figure 9. Distributed computing in the next infrastructure (source 
[17]) 
 
Figure 10. Pro and cons of splitting Radio Technology 

61
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
virtualization means to downsize the operational agility. This 
affects the business capacity of the operators and eventually 
misses the expectation they have for the new business 
opportunity. Applications are services and handled as 
services into the new architecture. That means there is no 
software deployment as traditionally intended, but instances 
of services as VMs (or containers) deployed over the 
architecture to provide a network value. The MANO (see 
Figure 8) must concurrently be able to handle containers and 
VMs in a very elastic way. There will be services with strong 
real-time requirement that do not need any guest OS, and 
cannot accept the cost of non-OS based virtualization; 
among other services that will be deployed in the system as 
“standard” VMs. The SEED should be able to house both.  
It would be convenient to use Common Off The Shelf 
hardware (COTS), but it should not be a restriction. There 
are cases where implementation of complex traffic protocols 
or functions in software has not acceptable performance 
drawback and requires usage of Hardware Accelerators 
(HA). Moreover, the cost of the virtualization could be 
significantly reduced if the server is armed by a full set of 
Hardware 
Assisted 
Virtualization 
(HAV) 
features. 
Sometimes, HAV is the only chance to reduce the 
virtualization layer drawback with an acceptable result, and 
they can help avoiding unwanted dependencies between 
services. Which hardware for the SEED should be used? It is 
a decision that is based on a few requirements: 
  
• 
remove the latency obstacles to strengthen the 
operational agility, using HA and full set of HAV. 
• 
improve 
connectivity 
and 
direct 
services 
communication bypassing the virtualization layer 
thanks to the HAV.  
• 
structure a server to deploy both SDN-NFV objects, 
distributed computing capabilities, distributed storage 
and Radio interface. 
 
For the edge of the network, there is also a non-hardware 
need to consider: design to ensure Quality of Service (QoS) 
resource usage for Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
handling. The above set of different capabilities is defining 
the SEED as described in Figure 11. The number of the 
capabilities for the SEED will define its size, which is a pure 
dimensioning calculation. The solution is fully aligned to the 
most common cloud platform (ref. User’s Guide indication 
[24][25]).  
 
Traditional Data Center usage is considering slice 
allocation in computer domain, that is computation, storage 
and network capabilities. The SDN-NFV open source 
community created a solution with a data center way of 
working in mind and that drives the range and the 
“granularity” of resources while defining the slice. The 
characterization of applications running in a data center is on 
the opposite range of telecommunication applications: which 
are more sensitive to real-time constrains and, by definition, 
they need to have access to Radio Interfaces. Moreover, the 
distribution of computing into the system (see Figure 9) 
requires a more optimized usage of the resources, 
introducing the need of a different resource granularity 
definition. A better definition of resource slicing for the 
Radio Access is available in [26] and [37] and summarized 
in Figure 12.  
The optimized usage of the resources will require a 
different computational granularity. By introducing a more 
flexible usage of scheduling policies [27] it is possible to 
achieve better resources utilization and still have strong 
temporal isolation. In such case, the guaranteed QoS based 
on SLA protects the business case of the operators. The 
above consideration, about the need of a slice approach to 
point to new requirements: 
 
- 
The MANO should be able to manage resource 
allocation with a better elasticity, allowing the 
allocation of the resources per scheduling policies. 
- 
Once using HA to cope with real-time constrains, the 
engines shall be designed to provide slice access to 
the services, without the need of software layers that 
create useless performance drawback. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. The SEED structured per function capabilities 
Figure 12. The slicing resource scheme for the Radio Access (source 
[26]) 

62
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII. STRUCTURING THE SEED 
Looking at the state of the art, Intel architecture seems to 
have better performance and virtualization features than 
other architectures: the management of virtualized objects 
requests less capability and introduce less latency in the 
system. Moreover, SDN-NFV implementation is strongly 
supported by the Open Software Community, and as a matter 
of fact a lot of functions and features in SDN-NFV are 
designed on Intel architecture first and then eventually ported 
to other targets. Though, power consumption needs to be 
considered, especially while referring to the edge of the 
network. Here power consumption really is a big issue and it 
seems that other hardware architectures would be more 
efficient. Figure 13 is summarizing the main objects housed 
in a SEED board, where differences are described in the next 
paragraphs. 
 
 
A. Compute Platform for the Edge 
 
The compute platform for the edge shall support Linux 
Containers (LXC) and be based on 64-bits Linux Operating 
system (OS). Both hardware and software support the 
virtualization layer, which points to a very specific set of 
needed features:  
 
reduce the cache pollution (e.g., Huge Page or Rapid 
Virtualization Indexing – RVI, depending on 
hardware architecture), 
 
support multi-core system, 
 
guarantee low power consumption, 
 
full set of hardware and software feature in order to 
speed up VM context switch, 
 
Virtual Interrupt Handling, 
 
hardware assisted trace & debug capability for a 
virtualized environment, and 
 
virtual 
path 
(Single 
Root 
Input/Output 
Virtualization, SR-IOV).  
 
The OpenSoftware Cloud components and agents are 
obviously there (OpenStack, OpenDayLight, ONOS, M-
CORD and whatever is requested by MANO). Accelerated 
Data Plane in User Space (virtual path, direct interrupt 
delivery, etc.) is needed to design an efficient connectivity 
solution. Security is a critical aspect for a computing 
distributed 
system 
and 
this 
requires 
HA 
for 
encryption/decryption, cryptography and data compression. 
A Resource Manager Agent is needed and must be able to 
handle the resources reference points as described in the 
SDN-NFV architecture. Distributed SLA and Statistics 
(STAT) agents are also needed and they shall interwork not 
only with each other, but according to higher hierarchical 
SLA and STAT objects in the architecture. This point will be 
discussed further in next session.  
 
B. Third Party Product (3PP) Hosting Platform for the 
edge 
 
The hardware board is just the same as the one for 
compute and likewise we can say about OS and 
virtualization layer, even if 3PP applications will be 
deployed as standard VMs. Platform components are the 
same; or agents of the same functions in the compute board. 
For example, User Equipment (UE) metadata agent 
interworks with its server in order to provide the complete 
list of metadata info. 3PP bridge is the active component of 
its controller, providing connectivity channel between 3PP 
application and external internet/radio channels and, for that 
reason: 
responsible 
for 
security 
check, 
registration, 
authorization and encryption/decryption. The available 
connectivity channels are not the same; 3PP hosting - for 
security reason - shall not have a possibility to use the radio 
bus directly. This will allow resource control according to 
the SLA in the compute board, thereby avoiding any possible 
malicious or faulty behavior of the 3PP applications 
themselves. 
 
C. Radio-Interface Platform for the Edge 
 
The board could be armed with dedicated hardware 
accelerators, needed to speed up the radio access protocols 
handling. It is not a limitation, as long as they are designed to 
be controlled as virtualized resource by the resource 
manager. With such differentiation, the board and the 
platform components/functions are not different from the 
components/functions mentioned so far for the SEED 
platform. 
 
D. SEED Characterization 
 
Connectivity and the efficient implementation of it is the 
critical key of the SEED. It is fundamental to avoid any 
bottleneck and additional overhead that will cost a lot for 
latency time. At the same time, the connectivity handling 
shall never be an obstacle for the service chain deployment 
 
Figure 13. The SEED structured per function capabilities 

63
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
concept (the operational agility is a mandatory requirement 
for the server at the edge of the network). Once one decides 
to share resources between different actors, it is crucial that 
they can access them without creating disturbances to each 
other and also acting according to the resource sharing 
agreement. It is like job scheduling where one wants threads 
continuously working and not starve them out. In case that 
happens, the thread may steal a job from someone else, and 
thereby maybe using another set of resources. The virtual 
path concept is trying to do the same with the connectivity 
access. Different running VMs should be able to access 
connectivity, based on the maximum available bandwidth 
defined in its SLA (the virtualized slice of connectivity 
assigned to it) and avoiding performance drawback due to 
system overhead (minimum or zero cost of virtualization 
layer, VM walkthrough data handling).  
The nature of SEED sets a specific requirement for the 
platform; 
provide 
a 
wide 
range 
of 
computing 
characterization and also guarantee the agreed slice of 
computing resources, that should not be affected by other 
VMs running on a board. This is clear once one starts 
thinking on a platform where there are strong time constrains 
application types, like: radio services, relaxed time-
constrains application types, video or audio services, no 
time-constrains application types, and general services. But 
that is not enough. If someone pays for a specific bandwidth 
and computing, the platform shall assure those resources. 
Again, the macro effect should be that, no matter if the VM 
is working alone or not, it can always count on the resource 
slices assigned by SLA. For that reason, the platform shall 
schedule VM jobs according to the following rules: a) 
Provide strong isolation for VMs with strong time-
constrains; b) Provide maximum Central Processing Unit 
(CPU) utilization for VMs with relaxed time constrains using 
SCHED_DEADLINE policy. 
 
VIII. SELF-ORGANIZING NETWORK – AN OBVIOUS 
SIMPLIFICATION? 
The term “Self-Organizing” appears in many science 
fields, already in 1962 Ross Ashby a pioneer in cybernetics 
gave his first principles [39]. It might seem a little bit far-
fetched when speaking about Self-Organizing Network 
which already was introduced by the Next Generation 
Mobile Networks (NGMN) [40] and now a part of the 3GPP 
standard [28]. But it gives a historical perspective of a trivial 
question; how do we know that the developed organization is 
“good”? The simple answer is; we must decide a criterion to 
distinguish between “good” and “bad” and then we must 
ensure that the appropriate selection is done! 
As simple as it might sound the truth is that in a Self-
Organizing Network we are heavily relying on an Operations 
Administration and Management (OAM) that in every 
selection makes the right decision. For that we need a 
Configuration 
Management 
with 
verified 
operations, 
Diagnostics capability with strict classification and a scalable 
Analytic infrastructure. 
What is the rationale for Self-Organizing Network? From 
the 3GPP standard Technical Specification [41] it is stated as 
follows: 
 
a) The number and structure of network parameters have 
become large and complex; 
b) Quick evolution of wireless networks has led to 
parallel operation of 2G, 3G, Evolved Packet Core 
(EPC) infrastructures; 
c) The rapidly expanding number of Base Stations needs 
to be configured and managed with the least possible 
human interaction; 
 
Thus, the technical challenges. But the business target of 
SON is a transition from an operator controlled role to an 
autonomous operation environment to reduce the OPEX and 
shifts the management from an open loop to a close loop. 
The actions are taken by the SON functions and are 
dedicated of giving the best resource optimization, 
autonomous configuration and suitable setting of installation 
parameters. The ambitious target of the 5G framework, as 
shown in Figure 5, implies a higher network complexity and 
so a management overhead. If the target is to allow easy 
deployment of vertical service, it is mandatory to remove this 
management overhead from duties for operators. This means 
that SON in SDN-NFV is not only a simplification, but a 
crucial key technology to achieve the business purposes 
mentioned in the introduction of this paper. 
 
To resolve the different optimization and deployment 
scenarios the SON architecture comes in three types (see 
Figure 14). 
 
• 
Centralized – All SON functions are implemented 
close to the OAM; 
• 
Distributed – All SON functions are implemented at 
the edge; 
• 
Hybrid solution – The complex schemes are 
implemented close to OAM, and the simpler schemes 
are implemented at the edge; 
 
There is nothing that prevents that all three scenarios can 
co-exists and varies over time too. 
 
 
Figure 14. 3GPP, features delivery (source [44]) 

64
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SON solutions can be divided into three categories: Self-
Configuration, Self-Optimization and Self-Healing, each 
containing a wide range of decomposed use cases. When the 
3GPP standardization work started it was with the respect to 
eNodeB and as such focused with releases on the first LTE 
network deployments. Thereafter the releases have followed 
the LTE evolution and the maturity of commercial networks 
(see Figure 15). 
 
 
As the SON only have taken a half step forward so far 
(even though a vital step) basically an automatic 
configuration system, it needs to be extended to meet the 5G 
requirement. The relation to the “good” organization has to 
be concrete and should be based on the resources and its 
behavior which are controlled and formalized in the shape of 
SLA and guaranteed QoS. This will require a fully 
automated SON and functions that is more Self-oriented and 
able to make their own decisions. That means providing 
intelligence in the network which opens up for technologies 
like Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
 
From standard point-of-view one of the crucial work is to 
identify the set of interfaces to support OAM and one of the 
important is TR-069 [42] defined by Broadband Forum.  
TR-069 describes the CPE WAN Management Protocol 
(CWMP) 
(see 
Figure 
16) 
which 
is 
intended 
for 
communication between a CPE (Customer Premises 
Equipment) and Auto-Configuration Server (ACS). The CPE 
WAN Management Protocol is intended to support a variety 
of functionalities to manage a collection of CPE, including 
the following primary capabilities: 
 
• auto-configuration and dynamic service provisioning, 
• software/firmware image management, 
• software module management, 
• status and performance monitoring, and 
• diagnostics. 
 
IX. 
THE CORRELATION BETWEEN SON AND SLA 
 
Concepts introduced in the previous two chapters, SLA 
and SON, are mutually inclusive. SLA and STATS are 
strictly correlated to each other and hierarchically spread all 
over the system (this concept is also emphasized in Figure 
17).  
Indeed, STATs are far from being a passive snapshot 
recording, they are actively interworking with SLA and 
resource manager to deploy the best resource utilization of 
 
Figure 15. 3GPP, features delivery (source [44]) 
Figure 16. CPE WAN Management Protocol 
 
Figure 17. The hierarchical structure and co-relation of SLA and STAT 

65
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the network. The hierarchical implementation of resources 
and metrics handling is fully devoted to simplifying the 
SON. SON brings a set of self-configuration and self-
optimization use cases that allow a better control of the 
operational cost for the complex radio access technologies. 
Here, the role of the real-time data analysis makes the 
difference. It involves all resources of the system, removing 
the over-allocation, which today is dominating the 
dimensioning of RAN and causes a huge wasting of money 
in most of the operational time [29][30]. The hierarchical 
approach for meters and resources handling, as described in 
Figure 17, is crucial to avoid massive signaling. Moreover, 
the local resource-meters agents can by applying the right 
taxonomy create a resources relationship between different 
logical layers, from physical resources usage up to QoS, 
reducing the pressure of meters over the backhaul. This 
concept is further described in Figure 18 and the DPAC 
research program (Dependable Platforms for Autonomous 
System and Control) has designed a suitable framework for 
QoS control [31]. The model is suitable for debugging too, 
thanks to the centralized logs hosted as VNF, and it is 
integrated into the SDN-NFV solution (the so-called vProbe 
concept [32]).  
 
Concepts like Real-Time and Run-Time are widely 
abused in literature due to the different domains where such 
terminologies are used. Radio Access Network is very 
sensitive to time constrains, considering deadline and 
latencies in the range of few milliseconds or even less. It is 
worth to explain the roles behind the different hierarchical 
analytics. 
 
Real-time Analytics are responsible to collect, elaborate 
and act on the infrastructure resources usage, that, for the 
edge of the network, shall include the radio access too. The 
main target for real-time Analytics is the optimization of the 
resources allocation respecting the SLA. A function is 
described by its model, that is, characterization of inter-
arrival triggering time (for example, the incoming packets), 
statistics distribution of computing and temporal constrains, 
like deadline and latency limitation. Resource reservation for 
that function could be based on prediction algorithms that 
identifies the opportunity of resources sharing between 
different functions, by considering statistics of distribution 
characterization, constraints and previous allocations. Thus , 
Real-time Analytics needs to be done as close as possible to 
the resources location and its data. Another important role 
for Real-time Analytics is mapping very low-level resources 
usage into function parameters/characterization, to decrease 
the pressure of the data into the backhaul. Real-time 
Analytics can create resources usage report for higher 
hierarchical Analytics and STATs agents, but in the form of 
statistical reports. 
  
Run-Time Analytics collect, elaborate and act on the 
functions characterization. It is responsible to control the 
function slicing reservation and to scale in/out functions 
depending on the current usage and SLA. Run-Time 
Analytics could be based on prediction algorithms to be able 
to scale in/out function slicing and avoid resources conflicts. 
Depending on the outcomes of a prediction algorithm, Run-
Time Analytics can set different SLA to the lower 
hierarchical Analytics and STATs agents. It will translate 
function slices reservation, usage and prediction into Key 
Performance Indicators (KPI) to higher hierarchical STATs. 
A special case is the trace&log control. In this case, the Run-
Time Analytics will aggregate and correlate the data to set a 
contextual trace setting and thereby provide a “fault-
detection” log. Trace&log can be supported with dedicated 
vProbe at NFVI level, dynamically set by the run-time 
analytics and collect important data on the fly. Note how 
different logs can be considered and aggregated to provide a 
layered view of the system covering more or less of the 
topology. 
  
Statistics Analytics is probably the closest to data center 
analytics concept: there is not deadline of latency constrains 
and the analysis of the data can produce both Network 
statistics and new requests for the MANO. 
 
 
Figure 18. The different Analytic types in the hierarchical data handling 

66
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Regardless which level of Analytic considered, a field 
that is emerging and attracts more attention is AI. Actually, it 
would be more suitable to talk of Machine Intelligence (MI), 
that stands for Machine Learning – Artificial Intelligence, in 
order to emphasize the active and pro-active usage of system 
data. MI is today one of the most active research topics, but 
it is important to identify where MI can effectively open new 
market opportunities rather than be a fascinating technology. 
In the RAN domain, the amount of data that can be 
generated is huge. Therefore, MI has become a key 
technology in the area of prediction models, classification, 
and optimization problems. The need to analyze large data 
sets is today actually one of the main obstacles on the strive 
to achieve efficiency. Machine learning and deep learning is 
probably the best way to consider MI. As it has been stated 
before, it is the ability to learn behaviors and anticipate both 
the system and the End User behaviors (to optimize the use 
of resources such as the quality of the experience), but also it 
is the technology to understand how to present the data to the 
operator, how to use the right data to characterize the system 
itself. Not least, how to use the data to locate a possible 
mistake automatically. 
 
The dynamic resources handling as functional component 
of the network slicing is a critical enabler of the new 
services. For example, in Figure 12 it is shown how even 
spectrum is part of the slicing at the edge of the network and 
that is surely for optimal spectrum usage. But more focus 
should be put on its nature of E2E vertical deployment 
enabler, since it allows multiple services with multiple 
characterizations, from extreme bandwidths demand up to 
IoT (Figure 19). 
 
Massive MIMO (M-MIMO) has already been addressed 
in the paper as a pillar of the 5G and probably the most 
complex 
part 
of 
spectrum 
dynamic 
control; 
like 
beamforming, cooperative multipoint coverage and swept 
beams, which are only possible in RRH so it is out of the 
scope for this paper. However, Figure 20 shows how 
consideration of spectrum involves hierarchically higher 
controller, so that spectrum handling and analytics connected 
is spread on different levels (note how this example is fully 
compliant to the concept described in Figure 17). 
 
X. 
BUSINESS CASE OPPORTUNITY EXAMPLES 
The availability of distributed computing for the new 
system is the enabler for new business cases. Since 5G 
architecture is proposing itself as a new framework, it is the 
accelerator for new service products. This chapter wants to 
introduce two examples, already well-known.  
The first one is based on the local storage availability. 
This concept has been mentioned at the beginning of the 
paper and already described. The second case is considering 
the high value of the End User metadata. In Figure 13 
Agent/Server is considered a characteristic of the SEED. A 
service able to provide End User data is extremely attractive 
and valuable for enterprises and vertical services.  Handling 
of such a service, however, shall be done in the proper way. 
Security, licenses, registration and publication of the service 
is fully involving MANO and most likely need a certification 
agreement between OTTs and operators. MANO is also 
 
Figure 19. E2E slicing definition 
 
Figure 20. RAN Connected mobility 
 
Figure 21. Ue Metadata publishing interwork example 

67
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
responsible for authorization approval of the SEED 3PP 
controller, defining which level of End User metadata could 
be exposed for which 3PP application, as well as if the 3PP 
application is allowed to send data to the End User. Mainly, 
the SEED is the bridge between End User and OTTs 
providing a hierarchical service contents handling that will 
guarantee a better quality of experience to the consumers. 
For that reason, storage is a mandatory SEED capability, and 
one more time, the server dimensioning could be the 
differentiation of features while offering the solution to the 
operators (in telco vendors point of view) and while defining 
SLA to the OTTs (in the point of view of operators). Figure 
21 is emphasizing the complexity of End User data 
publishing in a secure way by defining the different steps 
needed, from registration to usage. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
The opportunity to move SDN-NFV into the Radio 
Access Network is a crucial objective for the communication 
system in the next years. Fulfilling the needs of the 
customers means: to answer on the demand for the next 
generation mobile, create new business models for the 
operators and open new service market share for the 
infrastructure vendors. However, mobile cannot be handled 
as data center or networking nodes. Location, latency time, 
End User metadata are unique and added value for the radio 
access, which means an ad-hoc solution is the enabler for a 
successful and high performing product. A complete C-RAN 
solution is not considered suitable due to the fronthaul 
capacity explosion, the more flexible approach of the Radio 
Access Network as a Service (RANaaS) looks more 
promising. 
The 
ad-hoc 
solution 
is 
based 
on 
the 
implementation of the ETSI concept called MEC. This paper 
emphasizes the role of it as server@edge of the network, 
calling it SEED. SEED is a suitable set of heterogeneous 
hardware solution, designed to dramatically reduce the cost 
of virtualization. The engine of the SEED is the so-called C-
mobile platform, a horizontal, per sever distributed, platform 
able to support the main functions characterizing the SEED: 
SDN-NFV controller, End User Metadata access service, 
Radio Access as Service solution, 3PP hosting and granted 
SLA. To be fully dynamic, SDN applications need to be 
responsive to their environment, therefore, triggers for 
network changes need to be state-driven. This automated 
management will be based on real-time network data 
analysis. Hierarchical Resource Manager and big data 
handling in the meaning of SON support is a key enabler 
together with the needed support. 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
standardization – network and service aspects – group, has 
set the 5G in that direction too, by emphasizing the 
diversification of service demands to be the key 
characterization of the 5G network for 2020 [33]. In fact, 
similarly as it has been done in the introduction of this paper, 
ITU identifies Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Ultra-
reliable and Low-Latency Communications (uRLLC) and 
Massive Machine Type Communications (mMTC) to be the 
service domains for 5G. Those services domains have a 
widely different set of performance and capabilities 
requirements (see Figure 22), that is only possible to achieve 
through the strengthening of the resource usage and SLA 
flexibility handling at the server of the edge. 
 
XII. FUTURE WORKS 
All the concepts in the paper needs investigation and 
future study. For example, the usage of sched_deadline in a 
virtualized environment needs c-groups extension for a 
complete control of thread in containers. Moreover, a Greedy 
Reclamation of Unused Bandwidth (GRUB)-like mechanism 
implementation would decrease the Constant Bandwidth 
Server (CBS) effect of sched_deadline, providing a more 
performing latency time [34][35]. Usage of resources meters 
and statistics is a very interesting topic. One of the natural 
next steps is the evaluation of the taxonomy framework 
introduced in [36] for the characteristic resources of the 
Radio Access Network: network slices, load balancing, 
resource abstraction and resource control as defined in [37]. 
Similarly, the impacts on SDN-NFV MANO look 
significant. In fact, the same concept of Point Of Presence 
(PoP) as defined today is missing the elastic assignment of 
resources. In a future scenario where MTC and IoT begin 
accelerating 5G deployment, the slicing of computing, for 
example assigning different scheduling policies and fraction 
of a core, looks like a fundamental opportunity even to 
decrease the power consumption through the optimization of 
the resource usage. More should be done also in the domain 
of hardware accelerators. In Chapter VI, it has been stated 
how HAs, at the state of the art, are mandatory to meet 
protocols requirements and functions feasibility, but they 
should be designed in order to support the function slicing 
concept, that is, the vertical services introduced in Chapter 
III as fundamental characterization for the 5G system. HAs 
should provide SR-IOV-like virtualized access to the 
function as the enabler of needed intra-service resource 
sharing and isolation.  
 
 
Figure 22. Key capabilities in different service domains (source: [33]) 

68
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
What has been considered only partially in this paper is 
the impact with respect to security requirements. Indeed, the 
strong temporal isolation introduced by the sched_deadline is 
in the security domain contents, but that is not enough. Even 
considering a fully slices based resources system, the 
intrusion avoidance is mandatory in order to protect sensitive 
data, like the End User data described in Chapter X. The 
real-time algorithms which are able to supervise, detect and 
lock unwanted threads are today under deployment [38]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. Vitucci and A. Larsson, "SEED, A server platform for the 
edge of the network," IARIA 2017, Volume ICN 2017: the 
sixteenth 
conference 
on 
Networks 
(includes 
SOFTNETWORKING 2017), Mestre (Venice), 2017, pp. 
118-123. 
[2] DG Connect team, "Towards 5G," European commission, 
Digital Single Market Policies, February 2014. Available 
from https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/policies/5g 
[retrivied: 06, 2017]. 
[3] Ericsson AB, "Ericsson mobility report on the pulse of the 
networked society," EAB-15:037849 Uen, 2015. Available 
from 
http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015/mobility-
report/ericsson-mobility-report-nov-2015.pdf [retrieved: 03, 
2017]. 
[4] Bahjat el-Darwiche, Pierre Peladeau, Christine Rupp, and 
Florian 
Groene, 
 
"2017 
telecommunications 
trends," 
Strategy& 
pwc, 
2017. 
Available 
from 
https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/trend/2017-
telecommunications-industry-trends [retrieved: 06, 2017]. 
[5] Ericsson AB, "Ericsson mobility report on the pulse of the 
networked society," EAB-15:026112 Uen, 2015. Available 
from 
http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015/mobility-
report/ericsson-mobility-report-june-2015.pdf [retrieved: 03, 
2017]. 
[6] A Aijaz, H Aghvami, and M Amani, "A survey on mobile 
data offloading: technical and business perspectives," IEEE 
Wireless Communications 20(2):104-112 · April 2013 
[7] T. Kridel, "The end of profitability," Tellabas Insight Q2, 
2011, pp. 14-15. 
[8] K. Shatzkamer, "Applying systems thinking to mobile 
networking," Brocade Communications Webinar, 2015. 
Available 
from 
http://docplayer.net/8990528-Applying-
systems-thinking-to-mobile-networking.html [retrieved: 03, 
2017].  
[9] Eclipse IoT working group, "The three software stacks 
required for IoT architectures," Sept. 2016. Available from 
https://iot.eclipse.org/resources/white-
papers/Eclipse%20IoT%20White%20Paper%20-
%20The%20Three%20Software%20Stacks%20Required%20
for%20IoT%20Architectures.pdf [retrivied: 06, 2017]. 
[10] 5G PPP architecture working group, "View on 5G 
architecture," EuCNC 2016. Available from https://5g-
ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/5G-PPP-5G-
Architecture-WP-July-2016.pdf [retrivied: 06, 2017]. 
[11] ETSI paper, "Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV); Use 
cases," ETSI GS NFV 001, v1.1.1, 2013. Available from 
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/001/01.01.0
1_60/gs_NFV001v010101p.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[12] Y. C. Hu, M. Patel, D. Sabella, N. Sprecher and V. Young, 
"Mobile edge computing - A key technology towards 5G," 
Sept. 
2015, 
availble 
from 
http://www.etsi.org/images/files/ETSIWhitePapers/etsi_wp11
_mec_a_key_technology_towards_5g.pdf 
[retrieved: 
03, 
2017]. 
[13] ETSI paper, "Network Function Virtualisation (NFV); 
Network operator perspectives on industry progress," SDN & 
OpenFlow World Congress, Dusseldorf, 2014. Available from 
https://portal.etsi.org/Portals/0/TBpages/NFV/Docs/NFV_Wh
ite_Paper3.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[14] G. Karagiannis et al, "Mobile cloud networking: virtualisation 
of cellular network," 21st International Conference on 
Telecommunications (ICT), 2014, pp. 410-415. 
[15] C.Vitucci, J.Lelli, A.Pirri, and M.Marinoni, "A Linux-based 
virtualized solution providing computing quality of service to 
SDN-NFV telecommunication applications," In Proceeding of 
the 16th real time Linux workshop (RTLWS 2014), 
Dusseldorf, Germany, 2014, pp. 12-13. 
[16] NGMN Alliance, "5G white paper," NGMN, 2015 J.S. 
Harrison, M.M. Do, "Mobile Network Architecture for 5G 
Era - New C-RAN Architecture and distributed 5G Core", 
Netmanias, 
2015. 
Available 
from 
https://www.ngmn.org/uploads/media/NGMN_5G_White_Pa
per_V1_0.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[17] Karl-Erik Arzen et al, "WASP: autonomous Cloud," Lunds 
Universitet, 
2017. 
Available 
from 
http://www.control.lth.se/Research/RealTimeComputing/auto
nomous-cloud.html [retrieved: 06, 2017]. 
[18] J.S. Harrison and M.M. Do, "Mobile network architecture for 
5G era - New C-RAN architecture and distributed 5G core," 
Netmanias, 
2015. 
Available 
from 
http://www.netmanias.com/en/post/blog/8153/5g-c-ran-
fronthaul-kt-korea-sdn-nfv-sk-telecom/mobile-network-
architecture-for-5g-era-new-c-ran-architecture-and-
distributed-5g-core [retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[19] Netmanias, "KT 5G network architecture," NMC Consulting 
Group, 
October 
2015. 
Available 
from 
http://www.netmanias.com/en/post/oneshot/11146/5g-kt-sdn-
nfv/kt-5g-network-architecture-update [retrivied: 06, 2017]. 
[20] SK telecom network technology R&D Center, "ATSCALE 
white 
paper," 
rev 
1.0, 
06/2016. 
Available 
from 
http://www.sktelecom.com/img/pds/press/SKT_5G%20White
%20Paper_V1.0_Eng.pdf [retrivied: 06, 2017]. 
[21] G. Brown, "Service chaining in carrier networks," Heavy 
Reading, 2015. Available from http://www.qosmos.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Service-Chaining-in-Carrier-
Networks_WP_Heavy-Reading_Qosmos_Feb2015.pdf 
[retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[22] T.A. 
Satria, 
M. 
Karimzadeh, 
and 
G. 
Karagiannis, 
"Performance 
evaluation 
of 
ICN/CCN 
based 
service 
migration approach in virtualized LTE systems," IEEE 3rd 
International Conference on Cloud Networking (CloudNet), 
2014, pp. 461-467. 
[23] M.J. McGrath, "Network functions as-a-service over 
virtualized infrastructures," Ref. Ares(2015)3376865, 2015. 
Available 
from 
http://cordis.europa.eu/docs/projects/cnect/0/619520/080/deli
verables/001- 
TNOVAD32InfrastructureResourceRepositoryv10Ares20153
376865.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[24] OpenStack, "OpenStack operations guide," OpenStack 
Foundation, 
2014. 
Avaiable 
from 
https://docs.openstack.org/ops-guide/ [retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[25] C. Dixon, "OpenDayLight: introduction, Lithium and 
beyond," 
available 
from 
http://colindixon.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/brighttalk-odl-webinar.pdf 
[retrivied: 03, 2017]. 
[26] N. Nikaein et al, "Network store: exploring slicing in future 
5G network," in Proceeding of the 10th International 
Workshop on Mobility in the Evolving Internet Architecture, 
2015-09, pp. 8-13. 

69
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[27] T. Cucinotta, M.Marinoni, A.Melani, A.Parri and C.Vitucci, 
"Temporal isolation among LTE/5G network functions by 
real-time scheduling," in Proceedings of the 7th IEEE 
International Conference on Cloud Computing and Services 
Science (CLOSER 2017), 2017. 
[28] 3GPP TS 32.500, "3rd generation partnership project; 
technical specification group services and system aspects; 
telecommunication management; Self-Organizing Networks 
(SON); concepts and requirements (Release 11)," v11.1.0, 
2011-12. 
[29] K.Trichias, 
R.Litjens, 
A. 
Tall, 
Z. 
Altman, 
and 
P. 
Ramachandra, "Self-optimisation of vertical sectorisation in a 
realistic LTE network," Europen Conference on Networks 
and Communications, 2015, pp. 149-153. 
[30] S. Fortes, A. Aguilar-Garcia, R. Barco, F. Barba, J.A. 
Fernandez-Luque, and A. Fernandez-Duran, "Management 
architecture for location-aware self-organizing LTE/LTE-A 
small cell networks," IEEE 53(1) Communications Magazine, 
2015, pp. 294-302. 
[31] M. Jägemar, A. Ermedahl, S. Eldh and M. Behnam, "A 
scheduling architecture for enforcing quality of service in 
multi-process system," (to appear in) Proceedings of 
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), 09, 
2017. 
[32] G. Brown, "Virtual probes for NFVI monitoring," Heavy 
Reading, 
2017. 
Available 
from 
https://builders.intel.com/docs/networkbuilders/virtual_probes
_for_nfvi_monitoring.pdf [retrivied: 06, 2017]. 
[33] ITU-R, Recommendation ITU-R M.2083-0 (09/2015), "IMT 
vision - framework and overall objectives of the future of 
IMT 
for 
2020 
and 
beyond," 
M 
series, 
Mobile, 
radiodetermination, amateur and related satellite services, 
2015. 
[34] L. Abeni, J. Lelli, C. Scordino, and L. Palopoli, "Greedy CPU 
reclaiming for SCHED DEADLINE," in Proceedings of the 
Real-Time Linux Workshop (RTLWS), Dusseldorf, Germany, 
2014. 
[35] G.Lipari and S. Baruah, "Greedy reclaimation of unused 
bandwidth in constant bandwidth servers," in IEEE 
Proceedings of the 12th Euromicro Conference on Real-Time 
Systems, Stockholm, Sweden, 2000, pp. 193-200. 
[36] S. Cai, B. Gallina, D. Nyström, and C. Seceleanu, "A 
taxonomy of data aggregation processes," IEEE DAGGERS 
project 
paper, 
2016. 
Available 
from 
http://www.es.mdh.se/pdf_publications/4628.pdf 
[retrivied: 
03, 2017]. 
[37] VG. Nguyen, TX. Do, and Y. Kim, "SDN and virtualization- 
based LTE mobile network architectures: A comprehensive 
survey," Wireless Personal Communications, 2016, Volume 
86, Number 3, pp. 1401-1438. 
[38] M. Fergurson, "Architecting a platform for big data 
analytics," 2nd Edition, Copyright © by Intelligent Business 
Strategies Limited, March 2016. Available from https://www-
01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-
bin/ssialias?htmlfid=IML14333USEN [retrivied: 07, 2017]. 
[39] W.R. Ashby, "Principles of the self-organizing system," in 
Principles 
of 
Self-Organization: 
Transactions 
of 
the 
University of Illinois Symposiu, H. Von Foerster and G.W. 
Zopf, Jr. (eds.), Pergamon Press, London, UK, 1962, pp. 255-
278. 
[40] Frank Lehser, "NGMN recommendation on SON and O&M 
requirements," NGMN Alliance, December 2008. Available 
from 
https://www.ngmn.org/uploads/media/NGMN_Recommendat
ion_on_SON_and_O_M_Requirements.pdf 
[retrivied: 
10, 
2017]. 
[41] Technical specification group services and system aspects, 
"SP-080064: New BB_Level WID on management of Self-
Organizing Networks (SON)," 3GPP, 2008.  
[42] William Lupton, John Blackford, Mike Digdon, and Tim 
Spets, "TR-069 CPE WAN management protocol v1.1", 
Broadand forum technical report, December 2007. Available 
from 
http://www.broadband-
forum.org/technical/download/TR-069_Amendment-5.pdf 
[retrivied: 10, 2017]. 
[43] Magdalena Nohrborg, "SON," 3GPP, 2017. Available from 
http://www.3gpp.org/technologies/keywords-acronyms/105-
son [retrivied: 10, 2017]. 
[44] 3GPP, 
"Release 
13," 
3GPP, 
2017. 
Available 
from 
http://www.3gpp.org/release-13 
[retrivied: 
10, 
2017].
 

