MAC and Network Layer Solutions for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks  
Anne-Lena Kampen 
Western Norway University of Applied Sciences (HVL) 
Bergen, Norway 
e-mail: Anne-Lena.Kampen@hvl.no 
 
Roald Otnes 
Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI) 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: Roald.Otnes@ffi.no 
 
 
Abstract—The 
underwater 
acoustic 
environment 
poses 
challenges for communication that can make solutions from 
terrestrial radio networks ineffective. However, the mature 
terrestrial solutions are based on decades of real-world 
research and experience, proving their sustainability and 
reliability. Although not suitable for direct replication, it may 
be wise to take advantage of these proven solutions. With this 
in mind, it is valuable to study successful terrestrial 
approaches and evaluate their ability to support the harsh 
underwater environment, and to assess how procedures and 
algorithms 
can 
be 
adapted 
for 
efficient 
underwater 
communication. In this paper, we revisit frequently used 
Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols and discuss the 
challenges they face in the underwater environment. In 
addition, underwater challenges related to multi-hop data 
collection are discussed. To improve reception reliability in the 
highly dynamic underwater environment, we focus on 
broadcast solutions that are constrained to avoid network 
flooding. Location-based techniques are promising in this 
regard. Related to the MAC layer, underwater communication 
solutions should focus on preventing collisions at receiver, and 
reducing the time between packet receptions. Furthermore, 
machine learning techniques can give more intelligent and 
accurate decisions, and may provide more autonomous 
network operations. These techniques should be further 
investigated.    
Keywords-UWSN; underwater wireless sensor networks; 
Medium Access Control MAC; underwater routing, survey. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Underwater wireless sensor networks (UWSNs) can 
provide extended connectivity for applications within 
underwater environmental monitoring, oil and gas industry, 
offshore wind, and defense purposes. The topic is given 
weight in the Norwegian Research Council funded research-
based innovation center “Smart Ocean”, motivating the 
present survey paper which discusses the state of the art in 
UWSN research and which approaches can and cannot be 
transferred from terrestrial radio networks. 
UWSNs consist of nodes deployed underwater that use 
wireless communication to generate a connected network. 
The ‘last mile’ in these underwater networks is to transport 
the collected data to the surface for further transmission 
toward a destination using terrestrial technologies. Focusing 
on the underwater network, the protocols used may borrow 
ideas from well-known terrestrial solutions. However, they 
must 
be 
thoroughly 
assessed 
against 
the 
unique 
characteristics of the underwater environment as discussed in 
[1], and further elaborated in this paper.   
The United Nation (UN) sustainability goal #14, life 
below water [2], calls for underwater surveillance solutions 
to monitor the marine environment and strengthen ecosystem 
knowledge. To this end, sensor networks can be essential 
building-blocks in systems used by the ocean industries and 
public surveys for monitoring the seabed and water-column 
conditions. The network can contribute to sustainable 
exploitation of underwater resources by monitoring 
environmental parameters, and ensure responsible growth 
with well-controlled environmental impact.  
The discussion is focused toward wireless networks. 
Using wired communication in underwater environments 
would increase the available bandwidth and provide more 
reliable communication. However, installation of a wired 
network consumes significant time and resources, and the 
network is less scalable due to fixed physical connections. In 
addition, fishing activities and underwater currents can move 
and twist nodes, cables, and mechanical junctions such that 
the communication infrastructure is deteriorated or is cut off.           
Sustainable network operation relies upon well-suited 
Medium Access Control (MAC) and network layer 
protocols. The goal of the MAC is to wisely share the 
network media between the nodes to provide efficient data 
collection. The network layer enables data from remote 
nodes to reach its destination. The protocols must adapt to 
the environmental challenges related to the underwater 
media, such as low propagation speed, low and dynamic 
channel 
capacity, 
interference, 
ambient 
noise, 
and 
asymmetric links, and so forth. In addition, the sensors are 
mainly battery operated, and battery replacement is 
unfeasible. 
Furthermore, 
the 
characteristics 
of 
the 
propagation environment may change substantially, both on 
short and long timescales. Thus, the protocols should provide 
solutions that cope with the dynamic environments and, 
simultaneously, reduce the energy consumption of the nodes.   
Current underwater wireless solutions are mainly based 
on underwater acoustic transmission [3]. The signal 
propagation for acoustic underwater communication is five 
orders of magnitude slower than the speed of light; in 
addition, it is affected by temperature, salinity and depth [4, 
5]. The low propagation speed presents a fundamental 
challenge in coordinating the access to the shared 
communication medium. The time window used by the 
resource reservation processes should be compressed to 
allow more time for payload.  
18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Network layer protocols establish routing paths to enable 
multihop transmission, which can be used to increase the 
area covered by the network and/or to reduce the output 
power, i.e., reduce transmission range, and save energy. The 
routing paths are formed based on specified criteria that aim 
to support the overall goal for the communication and/or to 
support overall network goals. For instance, the data can be 
transmitted over several paths simultaneously to support 
reliable communication, or the data can be sent alternately 
over different available paths to balance the energy 
consumption in the network to prevent early depletion of 
nodes. However, due to the dynamic characteristic of the 
channel, and potential movement of sensor nodes, it is 
difficult to construct proactive routing paths, while reactive 
paths introduce high transmission delay. On the contrary, 
broadcasting can limit the delay and reduce the need for 
proactive configuration. In addition, the reliability is 
improved because the data are transmitted over several paths. 
However, the broadcast should be constrained to reduce 
network traffic and limit the energy consumption of the 
nodes.  
Table 1 compares characteristics that are important with 
respect to MAC and network layer protocol performance. 
The peculiar characteristics of the underwater environment 
mean that protocols used in terrestrial communication 
require adjustments 
to provide efficient 
underwater 
communication. To this end, the contribution of this paper is 
to discuss characteristics that are challenging when 
converting basic terrestrial MAC layer protocols for use in 
the underwater environment. In addition, network layer 
protocols that enable constrained multicast are investigated. 
Basic multicast should be avoided to prevent excessive 
network traffic as well and excessive energy consumption. 
Researchers and developers might find our discussion 
valuable, as it presents general arguments that should be 
considered during protocol development and evaluation.    
There are several key performance indicators that can be 
used to assess solutions underwater communication. Energy 
consumption is an important indicator. Reducing the 
consumption increases the network lifetime, which is crucial 
since the nodes are generally battery charged, and battery 
replacement is expensive and not very feasible due to the 
harsh environmental condition. Other important indicators 
are throughput, reliability, latency and access-delay. In 
addition, the solution must be adaptable to the dynamic 
underwater environment.    
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II we present related work. MAC layer protocols and their 
issues related to the underwater environment are discussed in 
Section III. Network layer protocols, and their issues, are 
discussed in Section IV. Software Defined Network (SDN) 
and Machine Learning (ML) is shortly discussed in Section 
V. In Section VI network optimization is discussed in the 
light of modem and environmental characteristics. In Section 
VII we present conclusions.   
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The increasing interest in life and resources below water 
has mobilized a wide range of research on underwater sensor 
Table 1 Comparing terrestrial and underwater characteristics.  
 
Terrestrial 
Underwater acoustic 
Propagation 
speed 
Almost the speed of 
light, 3*108 m/s 
About 1.5*103 m/s in seawater 
Propagation 
delay between 
different 
nodes 
Almost negligible. 
Depends on distance betweeen 
nodes. 
Data rate 
High 
Low 
Channel 
quality 
High 
Low and dynamic 
 
networks. The communication protocols are important to 
enable efficient operation. Thus, a range of solutions are 
suggested in the literature, and various surveys present and 
discuss selected solutions focusing on various aspects. A 
thorough discussion of MAC protocols for underwater 
acoustic networks is found in [6]. It is emphasized that 
further studies should focus on methods that handle the long 
propagation delay in ways that improve the utilization of the 
available bandwidth, for instance by allowing concurrent 
transmission as long as packet collision at the receiver is 
prevented. The MAC survey presented in [7] points out that 
current MAC protocols designed for terrestrial solutions are 
not suitable for underwater communication, and introduces 
software-based approaches as a promising solution to 
address the challenges of underwater networks. Boukerche 
and Sun [8] discuss underwater channel modeling, MAC and 
routing protocols, and localization schemes. It is pointed out 
that the underwater environment is much more complex than 
the hypotheses that existing approaches are commonly based 
upon. The complex environmental characteristics are the 
reason that we, for network layer solutions, focus on 
constrained broadcast rather than single path solutions that 
are more vulnerable for changing channel characteristics. 
Khisa and Moh [9] focus on energy-efficient routing 
protocols. Energy consumption is also very much in focus 
when 
Khalid 
et 
al. discuss localization-based 
and 
localization-free routing protocols, along with routing issues, 
in [10]. They conclude by pointing out that all protocols have 
pros and cons, so that a protocol that is best for all cases 
cannot be found. The same is pointed out in [11], where 
routing protocols for acoustic sensor networks are assessed 
according to feasible application scenarios. An earlier survey 
that gives a nice overview of routing protocols and network 
issues is presented in [12]. Terrestrial routing protocols are 
also compared with Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks 
(UWSNs) in the survey. The survey presented in [13] 
focuses on cross-layer designed routing protocols. The 
authors define cross layer design as a design where 
algorithms from different layers can exchange information 
with each other, and point out that layered designs are better 
for creating adaptive solutions. A substantial part of the 
protocols suggested for UWSNs do, at least to some degree, 
follow the definition of cross-layer solutions defined in the 
paper. For instance, using this definition, all network layer 
protocols that use location or energy level as selection 
criteria will be categorized as cross-layer protocols.     
19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Our focus is to present the issues that affect the MAC and 
network layer protocols. We review traditional MAC layer 
algorithms and describe their weaknesses related to 
underwater communication. At the network layer, the focus 
is on methods that reduce broadcast. Due to the dynamic 
environment, the links are very unreliable. Broadcast 
communication is therefore advantageous compared to 
communication 
over 
predetermined 
dedicated 
links. 
However, simple broadcast (flooding) is a waste of energy. 
III. 
MAC PROTOCOLS 
MAC protocols have a large impact on the overall 
network performance, because they coordinate the nodes’ 
access to the medium. The access must be shared fairly 
between the nodes, the scarce bandwidth resources must be 
efficiently utilized, the access delay must be limited, and 
packet collisions should be minimized. To avoid collisions, 
transmission time as well as packet length must be taken into 
consideration. That is, the transmission time between the 
sender and the node that is farthest away, but still within the 
sender’s transmission range (interference range), must be 
considered. In addition, sustainable MAC protocol solutions 
require energy-efficient operations that lengthen the network 
lifetime and reduce the management cost. To this end, the 
impact for the various states of the communication processes 
must be investigated to develop the most optimal solution. In 
addition, dynamic environments and low channel capacity 
require adaptive and bandwidth-efficient protocols. 
The access methods generally used can be categorized as 
fixed-assignment protocols, demand-assigned protocols and 
random-access protocols [14]. In fixed-assignment protocols, 
the channel is divided between the nodes so they can access 
the medium without any risk of collisions. Typical protocols 
used are Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA), 
Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA), and Code 
Division Multiple Access (CDMA). These protocols provide 
predictable access delay, and efficient utilization of available 
bandwidth. In addition, no energy is wasted on collisions. 
However, the assigned resources require signaling to 
renegotiate resources when the network topology changes or 
if nodes require more resources due to increased traffic load. 
In addition, the dynamic underwater environment means that 
the quality of pre-allocated resources can fluctuate, causing 
issues related to packet loss and throughput.  
Demand-assigned protocols provide short term channel 
assignments. Polling schemes belong to this class of 
protocols. The nodes may emit request for channel 
allocation, and successful allocation is confirmed back to the 
nodes with description of the allocated resources. The 
resources may be defined in terms of number and positions 
of TDMA slots. Time slotted communication is illustrated in 
Figure 1. The administration of resources can be distributed 
to some key nodes in the network, for instance to cluster 
heads in clustered networks. However, network-wide 
resource reservation is complex as traffic from nodes in 
adjacent areas can interfere. Furthermore, efficient TDMA 
requires precise synchronization, which is challenging in 
underwater environments due to the long and variable 
transmission delay. In addition, using guard times that are 
adjusted to allow different time delays and time references 
will lead to inefficient utilization of the channel. However, 
short periods of static and predictable propagation delays 
may provide synchronization that is accurate enough [15].  
The nodes in random-access protocols are uncoordinated 
and operate in a fully distributed manner. ALOHA is one of 
the earliest and most important protocols in this category. In 
the simplest version of ALOHA, the nodes transmit the 
packets as soon as they are generated. Successfully receiving 
the packet, the receiver transmits an Acknowledgement 
packet (ACK) back to the sender. If the sender does not 
receive ACK, it assumes that a collision has occurred. It 
waits a random amount of time (backoff) before 
retransmitting the packet. ALOHA works well when the 
traffic load is low. Under heavier load the number of 
collisions increases, increasing the delay and energy 
consumption, and reducing the throughput efficiency. In 
slotted ALOHA, the time is divided into timeslots, and 
packet transmission can only start at the beginning of a 
timeslot. The slot time is long enough to accommodate the 
longest allowed packets. Thus, only simultaneously 
transmitted packets can collide. However, because of the 
long transmission delay, this is not true in underwater 
communication. In addition, to avoid collisions, the slot 
length must also take the transmission delay as well as 
packet length into consideration.  
Another popular random-access protocol is Carrier Sense 
Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/ CA), 
which is a random-access scheme with carrier sense and 
collision avoidance through random backoff.  Different 
backoff algorithms can be used, but they roughly follow the 
following 
procedure: 
To 
avoid 
disrupting 
ongoing 
transmissions the nodes listen (carrier sense) to the channel, 
and choose a random number of backoff slots within a 
contention window. After the channel has been idle for a 
time interval denoted Distributed Interface Space (DIFS), the 
backoff value is decremented for each idle timeslot observed 
on the channel. As soon as the counter expires, the node 
accesses the medium. See illustration in Figure 2, where 
node A transmits a packet after the channel has been idle for 
DIFS plus the time it takes for the backoff value to be 
counted down. Node B has to wait until the channel has been 
idle for DIFS before it starts counting down the backoff 
value. A collision triggers retransmission with a new random 
selection of backoff time, and for each collision the 
contention window doubles. This is called exponential 
backoff. Using slotted CSMA, the backoff equals a random 
integer number of timeslots. However, due to the time-delay 
 
Figure 1. Time slotted communication. TDMA  
20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

variations in underwater environments, unslotted version 
could be more feasible. An explicit ACK is sent by the 
receiver 
upon 
successful 
reception 
of 
the 
packet. 
Asymmetric links affect the communication efficiency 
especially when reliable communication is required. The 
reason is that when ACK messages are lost, the packets will 
be re-transmitted. Re-transmitted packets increase network 
traffic, which increases collision probability and also the 
energy consumption.  
Furthermore, carrier-sense protocols are susceptible to 
the hidden-node problem and unfair access. The slow 
propagation speed can lead to unfair access since there is 
bias in estimating clear channel: Nodes close to the signal 
source get a clear channel earlier, providing them with more 
access opportunities [16].  
The hidden-node problem is caused by the different 
location of the sender and the receiving node, see Figure 3. A 
transmitting node, N1, cannot detect activity at the receiver, 
N2, that is caused by a sending node, N3, whose transmission 
reaches the receiver, but not the node N1. To reduce the 
hidden-node problem, Request To Send/Clear To Send 
(RTS/CTS) can be used. After the sending node has obtained 
channel access it sends an RTS packet to the receiver. The 
packet includes a time field that indicates the duration of the 
overall transaction. Successfully receiving the RTS means 
that there are no hidden nodes that are currently creating 
interference at the receiver side. The sender replies with an 
CTS, which also includes the duration time field. Receiving 
the CTS, the transmitter starts transmitting the data packet. 
The hidden-node problem is reduced since both the sender, 
by means of the RTS, and the receiver, by means of the CTS, 
have informed their neighbors about the upcoming 
transmission.  However, a spatial unfairness may occur since 
nodes closer to the receiver may always win Request To 
Send (RTS) contentions because their requests are always 
received earliest [17].  
To account for the long transmission delays in the 
underwater environment, the nodes must delay data 
transmission according to the longest possible delay, and the 
relatively long time span increases the probability of 
transmission from a neighboring node. Thus, basic access 
control processes, such as carrier sense, reservation of the 
media, and ACK are more time-consuming, and more 
management is required if these processes are to be 
optimized for neighbors at different distances.  
Channel utilization is reduced because collision-free 
reception is not guaranteed although the transmissions from 
different nodes are collision-free. Likewise, concurrent 
transmission may not lead to collision [18]. To improve the 
media utilization, receiver-centric solutions can be used to 
handle the unequal delay that exists between the various 
transmitting nodes.   Receivers can arrange the transmission 
time for the transmitters so that collisions are avoided, while 
avoiding that the time between each received packet is 
unnecessarily long, such as suggested in [19]. The major 
challenge of the solution is prediction and management of 
delays, which require frequent information exchange 
between 
nodes, 
especially 
under 
dynamic 
channel 
conditions.  
No solution can take all challenges into account. Thus, no 
solutions fit all scenarios as confirmed in the at-sea-
experiment presented in [20], where the performance of three 
well-known MAC layer protocols, namely CSMA, T-Lohi 
[21, 22], and Distance Aware Collision Avoidance Protocol 
(DACAP), is evaluated in an extensive sea-test during at-sea 
campaigns. CSMA is the simplest of these protocols, where, 
to prevent collisions, the nodes listen to detect if the media is 
idle before transmission. If not idle, the nodes back off 
according to an exponential back-off mechanism after which 
they again listen for a silent channel. ACK can be used for 
reliable communication. Applying T-Lohi, the node 
transmits a reservation tone, after which it listens to the 
channel for the duration of a Contention Round (CR). If no 
other tones are heard during CR, the data packet is 
transmitted. Otherwise, it enters back-off state for a random 
number of CR before repeating the procedure. The most 
advanced of the three protocols is DACAP, in which 
RTS/CTS is used to reserve the channel. To warn about 
possible interference, the destination node sends a short 
warning packet to its sender if it overhears control packets 
from other nodes after sending its CTS and before receiving 
the associated data packet. If the sender overhears a control 
packet, or receives a warning from its destination while 
waiting for CTS, it aborts data communication.  
 
Figure 3. Hidden node  
 
Figure 2. Carrier Sense Multiple Access CSMA  
21
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Using two different modems, the results reported in [20] 
for the three different MAC protocols show similar trends, 
although the overall protocol performance is significantly 
affected by the delays and overheads associated with the 
acoustic modem used. Furthermore, the results presented 
show that different traffic loads, channel conditions, and 
evaluation metrics call for different solutions. Basically, 
solutions should be able to adapt, in a distributed way, to 
dynamically changing conditions. Using DACAP, the 
network performance is deteriorated when the traffic load is 
increased.  ACK packets improve packet delivery ratio as 
long as the link is symmetric, however this is not always the 
case. CSMA reduces the transmission attempts since the 
channel is reserved by the data packet itself, however, the 
whole packet has to be retransmitted when collisions occur. 
The end-to-end delay of CSMA and DACAP use exponential 
backoff, making the delay increase rapidly with increased 
number of retransmissions. Not using exponential backoff, 
T-Lohi has lower end-to-end delay, the price paid is higher 
packet loss.  
In contrast to single-channel protocols discussed so far, 
multiple-channel protocols rely on several channels for 
communication to increase network throughput, reduce 
channel access delay, and potentially save energy. 
Neighboring nodes can communicate simultaneously, 
provided that they communicate using unequal data 
channels. Furthermore, control signals sent on a different 
channel will not affect the data that are sent.  
In [23], the control channel is slotted so each node in a 
neighborhood is assigned a unique slot. Thus, also control 
packets are prevented from collisions. The solution 
suggested in [24] presents quorum-based data channel 
allocation to prevent collisions. However, generation and 
management of multichannel protocols is complex, and 
require advanced modems. In addition, if the nodes are 
equipped with only one transceiver, it means that they can 
only work one channel at a time, either on the control 
channel or on the data channel. When this is the case, 
handshaking protocols such as RTS/CTS must be tuned to 
prevent the triple-hidden-node problem [25]. The triple-
hidden problem occurs if two of the nodes in a neighborhood 
are communicating on a data channel. Simultaneously, two 
other nodes use the control channel for handshaking and 
agree to use channel A for data communication. The first two 
nodes will then be unaware of the data channel that the last 
two nodes selected. Thus, if the first two nodes want to 
initiate a new communication, they may select data channel 
A, creating a collision.     
Centralized one-hop network solutions simplify media 
access management and general network complexity at the 
cost of network coverage and network dynamics. Collisions 
may be avoided using a polling approach where the nodes 
are prohibited from transmission unless polled by the central 
node. The polling sequence is not required to be sequential; 
it can contain repetitions to support nodes with various 
amount of sensor data [26]. To approach the throughput 
gained using TDMA, [27] suggests a centralized approach. 
The gateway measures the delay to each individual node to 
organize the nodes’ transmission time and sequence. The 
gateway manages the network operation so the data from all 
the nodes are received in strict order, resembling a 
subdivision frame. Although interesting approaches, they 
require the nodes to stay awake to listen for polling requests. 
A general weakness of the polling approach is that it relies 
on symmetric links between the central controller and the 
other nodes. This is not always the case in underwater 
communication.   
To summarize, there is no single solution that works best 
in all scenarios, and there is probably a need for solutions 
that can be adapted to dynamic changes. Furthermore, most 
of the underwater MAC protocols suggested follow 
terrestrial approach, trying to avoid transmission collision, 
although this will not guarantee against collision at reception 
[6]. To efficiently utilize the scarce bandwidth available 
underwater, the focus should be on the receiver side. 
Solutions must reduce the time between packet receptions 
while simultaneously preventing collisions at the receiver.  
IV. 
NETWORK LAYER PROTOCOLS  
Multi-hop communication can be used to increase the 
area covered by the network, or it can be used to reduce the 
distance between nodes. The advantage of reducing the 
distance is that the nodes’ output power can be reduced to 
save energy. Also, the reduced distance can be used to 
increase the bit rate by increasing the transmission frequency 
and bandwidth. Furthermore, short distance between nodes 
increases the granularity of the surveyed area, which may be 
valuable for picking up local variations and trends related to 
the parameters surveyed. On the other hand, longer distances 
between nodes in multi-hop networks can reduce equipment 
and management costs.  
Multihop communication entails challenges such as 
increased network traffic and imbalance in the energy 
consumption in the network. Traffic increases because data 
packets must be forwarded, and management information 
must be exchanged to generate and maintain the routing 
paths. Energy imbalance occurs since the nodes in the 
vicinity of the sink must forward packets for all remotely 
located 
nodes. 
Furthermore, 
the 
harsh 
underwater 
environment makes the generation of routing paths more 
challenging. For instance, it is likely that the quality of a 
substantial amount of the links is time varying, thus 
proactively generated paths may not be reliable. Reactively 
created paths, on the other hand, introduce long delay. In 
addition, the links may be unidirectional or asymmetric, 
which makes it difficult to utilize paths that may be well-
working and stable for communication in the correct 
direction. Broadcasting alleviates the challenges related to 
generating routing paths since all candidate paths are tried, 
and no specific routing paths needs to be generated. 
However, broadcasting creates excessive traffic as all nodes 
forward received data packets as illustrated by the blue 
arrows pointing in both directions in Figure 4. Whichever 
node generated the data packet, it is flooded throughout the 
whole network, consuming bandwidth and energy. To 
prevent this excessive usage of resources, the broadcast 
should be constrained.  
22
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Opportunistic routing [28] can be an efficient method to 
constrain broadcasting. The basic idea is that all receivers 
contend to forward packets, i.e., the senders broadcast the 
packets, which are forwarded by the most optimal receiver. 
Location-based protocols can be used for opportunistic 
routing in underwater environments. Using a greedy scheme, 
packets are always forwarded by the node located closest to 
the sink. This is illustrated in Figure 5, where the green node 
transmits a packet. The circle around the green node 
illustrates green node’s transmission range. The red node is 
the destination, i.e., the sink. The orange node is the node 
inside the green node’s transmission range that is closest to 
the sink. Thus, the orange node forwards the packet. Only 
local information is used to decide whether the received data 
should be forwarded, no routing data needs to be exchanged. 
For instance, each data packet contains information about the 
destination’s location. Nodes that receive the packet start a 
timer that is proportional to their own distance to the 
destination. If the node overhears the packet being forwarded 
by a neighboring node before its own timer reaches zero, it 
refrains from forwarding the packet. Otherwise, it forwards 
the packet. The long delay in underwater communication 
requires that the timer that sets the holding-time (the time 
between a packet is received until it is potentially forwarded) 
wisely. Two aspects must be considered. Firstly, the timer 
must be long enough to ensure that a packet forwarded by a 
more preferred node is received by the less preferred node 
before the timer of the less preferred node expires. Due to the 
underwater environment, it takes time for the forwarded 
packet to reach the less preferred nodes. Secondly, it is likely 
that the node in the more preferred location receives the 
packet later because it is probably located closer to the sink, 
and further from the transmitter. To sum up: wait until the 
most-preferred node receives the packet, then wait for the 
packet relayed by this most-preferred node to reach the less-
preferred nodes. Taking both of these aspects into 
consideration increases the delay in the network. In addition, 
when the number of potential successor nodes is high, a wide 
range of distinct holding-time values is required to prevent 
multiple node timers from expiring simultaneously. To 
provide a broad range of distinct holding-time values, the 
average delay in the network increases.  
Location-based opportunistic protocols require that nodes 
know their location. GPS is unfeasible as an underwater 
location service. One method of solving the underwater 
location problem is to let some dedicated nodes, with known 
locations, send out beacons at regular intervals. Based on 
received signals, other nodes can use methods like 
triangulation to determine their own location. However, 
some nodes may be located such that they cannot receive the 
beacons emitted to estimate locations. To prevent data from 
these nodes from being lost, a method such as suggested in 
[29] can be used: The nodes that do not receive location 
information use a reactive protocol to send data to the best-
located neighbor node.  
Routing pipe can be used to reduce the number of 
potential forwarding nodes, and reduce the probability of 
excessive network traffic for opportunistic protocols. In 
addition, it alleviates the increased delay needed to 
accommodate the broad range of distinct holding-time values 
discussed above. Assuming a vector from the sender to the 
target node, the routing pipe is a cylinder with adjustable 
radius centered around that vector. Nodes inside the cylinder 
are candidate forwarding nodes. The transmitted packet 
carries the position of the sender node, the target node, and 
the forwarding nodes to enable the receivers to determine 
whether they are located inside the routing pipe, and whether 
they are located closer to the destination than the 
transmitting node. This is illustrated in Figure 6. The green 
node transmits a packet toward the sink (the red node). All 
nodes within the green circle encircling the green node are 
covered by transmission. The packet is forwarded by the 
orange node since it is the node inside the pipe (blue shaded 
cylinder) that is closest to the sink. Adjusting the width of 
the cylinder, or the transmission range, adjusts the number of 
candidate forwarders. In [30], to reduce the chances of 
forwarding data packets, nodes with less energy than the 
transmitting node intentionally calculate a reduced pipe 
diameter. Thus, they reduce the chance of being inside the 
cylinder formed by the sender-receiver vector and diameter. 
This is done to improve the energy balance in the network.    
A challenge related to location-based routing is the 
possible existence of void regions in the network. To prevent 
data loss, some measures are needed to find detours around 
potential voids. A simple algorithm for finding detours 
around voids is to switch to broadcasting when approaching 
voids regions. Other measures to avoid void generally 
require that information is exchanged between the nodes. In 
the depth-based approach suggested in [31], the node 
examines its neighbors to check whether they can provide 
 
Figure 5. Opportunistic routing.  
 
Figure 4. Broadcasting.  
23
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

positive progress toward the destination. If not, the node 
requests information from two-hop nodes to adjust its depth 
such that positive forwarding can be resumed. To reduce the 
void problem, and improve the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), 
a holding-time that takes several factors into consideration is 
suggested in [32]. Firstly, a reliability index is calculated 
based on the energy of the current node and the energy of the 
forwarding region. In order to limit formation of energy 
holes and thereby increase the reliability, the forwarding 
region with the highest energy is selected. Secondly, an 
advancement factor is used: The depth of the node is 
calculated so that a small decrease in the depth gives an 
exponential increase in priority. This reduces the probability 
of duplicate packet transmissions because the priority 
difference is significant, even for a low change in depth. 
Third, a shortest path index is used. It combines the number 
of hops toward the destination and the average depth of the 
nodes in the next hop.  
Other well-known algorithms used in terrestrial Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSNs) to reduce broadcasting, such as 
probabilistic and counter-based schemes may be well-worth 
testing in underwater environments. Counter-based schemes 
are based on the fact that broadcasting a message that has 
already been broadcasted by several neighboring nodes will 
not substantially increase the area covered. Thus, the nodes 
are prevented from rebroadcasting messages if the expected 
additional coverage is limited.  Basically, the nodes count the 
number of times a message is received while waiting for 
medium access. If the counter becomes higher than a 
threshold, the transmission is canceled, otherwise the 
message is transmitted [33]. The method is applied in the 
Dflood algorithm suggested in [34, 35]. An alternative 
“gossiping” approach to reduce the broadcasting is 
introduced in [36]. 
In probabilistic schemes, the nodes will rebroadcast 
messages with a probability P. If P = 1 the data packets are 
broadcasted. There is a certain probability that no neighbors 
choose to forward a packet. To ensure the progress of a 
packet towards the destination, the sender can re-emit the 
packet if no forwarded packets are heard. However, to ensure 
the packet’s progress, the sender may need to re-emit the 
packet several times, which increases network traffic. In 
addition, the packet may have been forwarded by nodes 
connected over a unidirectional link, which means that the 
re-emitted packets are a waste of both energy and bandwidth. 
An alternative to broadcasting may be repeated 
transmission of every packet. This solution is used in [37], 
where nodes repeatedly transmit the same packet to increase 
the probability of successful packet reception. The wanted 
success probability decides the number of repetitions. No 
acknowledgement or channel reservation is used. The 
disadvantage of this method is that both bandwidth and 
energy are wasted for all packet transmissions that appear 
after the packet is successfully received. An advantage, 
however, is the constraining of the interference area that each 
packet generates when transmitted. Broadcasting means that 
dispersed neighboring nodes, all with different coverage 
areas, forward the same packet. Thus, a larger area is 
affected by the transmission, i.e., the interference area 
increases. This reduces the probability that packets, 
generated by nodes located in a different part of the network, 
are successfully received.  
To summarize, due to dynamically changing channel 
conditions and long propagation delays in the underwater 
environment, broadcasting may be a better solution than 
reusing terrestrial routing protocols that generate specific 
routing paths. Broadcast-based forwarding is likely to 
improve the probability of packets reaching their intended 
destination. However, the broadcasting procedure should be 
constrained to reduce both energy consumption and network 
traffic. 
V. 
OTHER SOLUTIONS USED IN TERRESTRIAL 
COMMUNICATION 
Software Defined Network (SDN) is a technology aimed 
at enabling efficient and dynamic network configuration to 
improve network performance [38, 39]. This is done by 
centralizing the network management, implement it in 
software, and base it on complete network information 
combined with knowledge of the requirements put forward 
by the running applications. The SDN architecture is 
generally divided into three layers, application, control, and 
data layer. The programs at the application layer informs the 
control layer of desired network behavior and requirements. 
The control plane manages and dictates how the data plane 
should handle data traffic. In addition, it can monitor the 
traffic flow and resource utilization to dynamically manage 
the network configuration to improve the performance 
according to the request sent by the application layer. The 
data layer concerns the actual data forwarding that takes 
place at the distributed network devices, i.e., routers and 
switches.  
Using SDN in USWN raises challenges. Control 
messages between the network nodes and the central 
controller are often transmitted on a secure channel, which 
requires reliable communication guaranteed by IP-based 
end-to-end connections. The dynamic channel quality in the 
underwater environment makes it difficult to support such 
guarantees. 
Other 
challenges 
relate 
to 
availability, 
performance, and security. The central controller must be 
available, which is not always the case in underwater 
communication. To maintain network performance, varying 
 
Figure 6. Time slotted communication. TDMA  
24
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

channel conditions, varying traffic load, and requests must be 
handled within time limits that are short enough to follow the 
dynamically changing characteristics of the underwater 
environment. The controller must be secured to ensure that 
only authorized applications are able to modify the network 
configuration, although, some security functions can also be 
improved since centralized SDN may efficiently protect 
against malicious attacks by monitoring and detecting 
irregular behavior [40].  
Another software-related solution is to use Machine 
Learning (ML), whose algorithms can generally be divided 
into 
three 
categories: 
supervised, 
unsupervised 
and 
reinforcement learning (RL) [41, 42]. In supervised learning 
a training set of defined input parameters gives a set of 
known output parameters. These parameters are used to 
generate a system model employing the learned relationship 
between input, output and system parameters. The objective 
is to predict the correct output vector for a given input 
vector. Unsupervised learning means that no targets outputs 
are provided. The objective is to discover a useful 
representation of the input data. Examples of criterions for 
learning can be maximization of output variance [43], or to 
identify suitable clusters based on similarities of the input 
samples  [42]. RL deals with the ability to learn the mapping 
from situation to actions so as to maximize the long-term 
reward. The goal is to learn through experience, i.e., decide 
which action yields the highest reward by trying them [44]. 
This means that RL algorithms dynamically optimize 
processes, and is therefore a frequently suggested algorithm 
for underwater communication [45]. A common approach 
for RL is Q-learning [45], which is described as a Markov 
Decision Process (MDP) that handles problems as random 
transitions and rewards. Under the environment of the 
current state, a software agent performs an action that with a 
given probability makes the agent transition to a new state 
[46]. The state transitions return some positive or negative 
reward, and the goal for the agent is to find a policy that will 
maximize rewards over time. Q-value pertain to the total 
rewards the agent can expect if it acts optimally.  
An important issue with Q-learning is that it does not 
scale when there are too many actions or states [45, 47]. A 
solution to save space and time is to use deep Q-network 
(DQN), where deep neural network (DNN) is used to 
estimate Q-values. The DQN is trained to predict Q-values 
using supervised learning. The state is the input and an 
estimated Q-value for each possible action is the output. 
Thus, Q-learning is combined with DNN to save space and 
time. 
Using ML means that several parameters can be taken 
into account, and the solutions can be more adaptable to 
changing environments. In [48] both latency, energy, 
globally optimal paths, and mobility are taken into 
consideration using a ML approach where reinforcement 
learning is combined with neural network. The suggested 
protocol is called Deep Q-network-based energy and latency-
aware routing protocol (DQELR). In [49] RL is used to take 
energy consumption, channel condition, and number of 
retransmissions left before discarding the packet into 
consideration to select the set of next-hop nodes among its 
neighbors. The set can consist of everything from one to all 
neighboring nodes depending on whether the aim is to 
reduce energy consumption or maximizing transmission 
reliability. Overhearing is used to verify that transmitted 
packets are further relayed by at least one next-hop node.  To 
account for link asymmetry, the nodes take into account both 
that the packet they transmit to their next-hop nodes can be 
lost, and that they may fail to overhear the packets when they 
are retransmitted. The suggested protocol is called Channel-
aware Reinforcement learning-based Multi-path Adaptive 
routing (CARMA). Compared against a hop-count routing 
protocol as well as flooding, the simulations in [49] shows 
that, as expected, transmission along several paths increase 
protocol robustness. However, the PDR is substantially 
reduced when flooding is used in large network with high 
traffic. Thus, it is concluded that dynamically changing the 
number of relays is advantageous. Experimental at sea 
measurements underline poor and varying link quality, and 
also 
demonstrate 
that 
links 
are 
often 
asymmetric. 
Transmission through several next-hop neighbours as done 
using CARMA, improves the PDR under these conditions.   
The high propagation delay of underwater environment 
means that the implicit assumption in RL: that the feedback/ 
reward is immediately presented to the agent, is not valid. To 
address this limitation, X. Ye et al. [50] suggest a deep 
reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithm that takes an action 
regardless of whether the reward of previous step has been 
received yet or not. The algorithm is called delayed-reward 
deep Q-network (DR-DQN). No time is wasted to wait for a 
new reward. Through a series of observation-action-reward 
the agent learns to fully exploit the timeslots that may 
otherwise be wasted due to transmission delay. Using the 
DR-DQN method, a deep-learning multiple access protocol 
is presented (DR-DRMA). DNN is used to predict the 
action-values in Q-learning. To reduce the energy 
consumption of the nodes, the DNN is trained only if the 
average reward exceeds a threshold.     
One of the great advantages of using ML is that it creates 
a very autonomous network, where protocol choices and 
solutions adapt to the current state of the environment. 
However, troubleshooting can be challenge when using ML. 
Physical inspection of the nodes and environment is 
generally unfeasible. Machine learning may generate 
complex relations between the input parameters and output 
parameters. Thus, it is not always easy to decide which 
output to expect for a given set of input parameters. This 
uncertainty 
complicates 
troubleshooting 
since 
it 
is 
challenging to decide whether the unexpected network 
behavior is caused by poorly designed ML algorithms or 
physical/environmental characteristics.  
 
VI. 
OPEN RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
In this section, we pinpoint some topics for further 
studies based on contemplating the characteristics of 
underwater 
modems 
and 
the 
environment. 
The 
characteristics are presented in Table 2. Some of the entries 
in the table are represented as a range of values. These are 
25
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

values reported in [51], where several commercial as well as 
research modems are investigated. 
Starting with power consumption, it is observed that 
transmission power is generally higher than power consumed 
for receiving. Looking at the data for each individual modem 
in [51] reveals that the ratio of transmission power 
consumption to receiving power consumption is between 1.4 
and 188, and for the majority of the modems the ratio is 
between 10-100. In addition, the power consumed in sleep 
mode is generally lower than for receiving, the ratio of 
receiving to sleep mode is from about 1.7 over 1000. To 
reduce energy and lengthen the network lifetime solutions 
that focus on reducing the transmission time and enables 
nodes to enter sleep mode should be studied. Sleep protocols 
are extensively studied for terrestrial WSNs [52-54], and 
there are probably ideas that can be adapted for underwater 
communication. Reducing transmission time can be realized 
for instance by using overhearing to learn traffic patterns to 
prevent collisions, and/or use advanced ML techniques to 
predict channel conditions to decide when to transmit, and to 
decide the most efficient transmission strategy, for instance 
whether to use unicast, multicast, broadcast.  
Regarding the low propagation speed, it is recommended 
to study receiver-centric approaches to avoid collisions. 
Furthermore, due to the low data rate, approaches that avoid 
spending bandwidth on unnecessary data should be studied. 
Statistical methods and aggregation, or more intelligent 
approaches based on ML, could be used in this regard.   
Finally, increasing the frequency increases the data rate 
and reduces the transmission range. Higher data rates can 
increase the amount of information exchanged, or can be 
used to reduce the duration of the packets to reduce the 
collision probability.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
MAC and network layer solutions for underwater 
communication require that characteristics such as long 
propagation delay, dynamic channel characteristic, and 
limited bandwidth are considered. Long delays are especially 
challenging for MAC protocols. The time available for 
access control is reduced, and the limited channel resources 
should not be depleted by large amounts of management 
traffic. For efficient utilization of the limited channel 
capacity, the focus should be on solutions that both reduce 
the time between received packets, and, at the same time, 
prevent packet collisions at the receiver. 
 
Table 2 Modem and environments characteristics [51, 55].  
Parameter 
Value 
Propagation speed 
1.5*103 m/s 
Datarate 
In the order of kbps,  
increases with inreased frequency. 
Transmissoin range 
50m- 10km, reduced with increased frequency 
Transmission power 
1-40W  Commercial, 0.1-120 W Research 
Receiving power 
0.6-1.8W Commercial, 0.02-1.2 W Research 
Standby  
0.0005-0.6W Commercial, 20-60mW Research 
Sleep 
In the order of mW.  
Dynamic   channel   properties   make   it challenging to 
generate fixed routes. To reduce the probability of packets 
being lost during forwarding, we recommend to use 
constrained 
broadcasting 
techniques. 
Location-based 
techniques seem to be especially promising.  
Machine 
learning 
techniques 
should 
be 
further 
investigated to improve networks’ ability to dynamically 
adapt to the changing characteristics of the underwater 
environment.  
In future work, promising solutions will be selected for 
further investigations and experimental testing in an 
underwater test facility at the west-coast of Norway.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work is funded by the SFI Smart Ocean NFR Project 
309612/F40. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A.-L. Kampen, "Protocols for Underwater Wireless Sensor 
Networks-Challenges and Solutions,"  in The Fifteenth 
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications, 
SENSORCOMM. 
International 
Academy, 
Research and Industry Association (IARIA), pp. 34-40, 2021. 
[2] United Nations, Sustainable Development. "Goal 14." United 
Nations. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal14 (retrieved: May 
2022). 
[3] C. M. Gussen, P. S. Diniz, M. Campos, W. A. Martins, F. M. 
Costa, and J. N. Gois, "A survey of underwater wireless 
communication technologies," J. Commun. Inf. Sys, vol. 31, 
no. 1, pp. 242-255, 2016. 
[4] S. Gauni, C. Manimegalai, K. M. Krishnan, V. Shreeram, V. 
Arvind, and T. N. Srinivas, "Design and Analysis of Co-
operative Acoustic and Optical Hybrid Communication for 
Underwater 
Communication," 
Wireless 
Personal 
Communications, vol. 117, no. 2, pp. 561-575, 2021. 
[5] E. Zanaj, E. Gambi, B. Zanaj, D. Disha, and N. Kola, 
"Underwater wireless sensor networks: Estimation of acoustic 
channel in shallow water," Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 18, 
p. 6393, 2020. 
[6] S. Jiang, "State-of-the-art medium access control (MAC) 
protocols for underwater acoustic networks: A survey based 
on a MAC reference model," IEEE communications surveys 
& tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 96-131, 2017. 
[7] A. Al Guqhaiman, O. Akanbi, A. Aljaedi, and C. E. Chow, "A 
survey on MAC protocol approaches for underwater wireless 
sensor networks," IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 
3916-3932, 2020. 
[8] A. Boukerche and P. Sun, "Design of Algorithms and 
Protocols 
for 
Underwater 
Acoustic 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks," ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 6, 
pp. 1-34, 2020. 
[9] S. Khisa and S. Moh, "Survey on Recent Advancements in 
Energy-Efficient Routing Protocols for Underwater Wireless 
Sensor Networks," IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 55045-55062, 
2021. 
[10] M. Khalid et al., "A survey of routing issues and associated 
protocols in underwater wireless sensor networks," Journal of 
Sensors, vol. 2017, 2017. 
[11] Q. Lu and J. Shengming, "A review of routing protocols of 
underwater acoustic sensor networks from application 
perspective," in 2016 IEEE International Conference on 
Communication Systems (ICCS), IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2016.  
26
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[12] M. Ayaz, I. Baig, A. Abdullah, and I. Faye, "A survey on 
routing techniques in underwater wireless sensor networks," 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 34, no. 
6, pp. 1908-1927, 2011. 
[13] N. Li, J.-F. Martínez, J. M. Meneses Chaus, and M. Eckert, 
"A survey on underwater acoustic sensor network routing 
protocols," Sensors, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 414, 2016. 
[14] H. Karl and A. Willig, Protocols and architectures for wireless 
sensor networks. John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
[15] A. A. Syed and J. S. Heidemann, "Time Synchronization for 
High Latency Acoustic Networks," in Infocom, vol. 6, pp. 1-
12, 2006.  
[16] W.-H. Liao and C.-C. Huang, "SF-MAC: A spatially fair 
MAC protocol for underwater acoustic sensor networks," 
IEEE sensors journal, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1686-1694, 2011. 
[17] M. A. Hossain, A. Karmaker, and M. S. Alam, "Resolving 
spatial unfairness problem with reduced-handshaking in 
underwater acoustic sensor network," in 2017 International 
Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing 
and Networking (WiSPNET), IEEE, pp. 2178-2182, 2017.  
[18] K. Kebkal, A. Mashoshin, and N. Morozs, "Solutions for 
underwater 
communication 
and 
positioning 
network 
development," Gyroscopy and navigation, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 
161-179, 2019. 
[19] N. Chirdchoo, W.-S. Soh, and K. C. Chua, "RIPT: A receiver-
initiated reservation-based protocol for underwater acoustic 
networks," 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1744-1753, 2008. 
[20] R. Petroccia, C. Petrioli, and J. Potter, "Performance 
evaluation of underwater medium access control protocols: 
At-sea experiments," IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 547-556, 2017. 
[21] A. A. Syed, W. Ye, and J. Heidemann, "T-Lohi: A new class 
of MAC protocols for underwater acoustic sensor networks," 
in IEEE INFOCOM 2008-The 27th Conference on Computer 
Communications, IEEE, pp. 231-235, 2008.  
[22] A. A. Syed, W. Ye, and J. Heidemann, "Comparison and 
evaluation of the T-Lohi MAC for underwater acoustic sensor 
networks," 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1731-1743, 2008. 
[23] C. Zidi, F. Bouabdallah, R. Boutaba, and A. Mehaoua, "MC-
UWMAC: A multi-channel MAC protocol for underwater 
sensor networks," in 2017 International Conference on 
Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications (WINCOM), 
IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2017.  
[24] F. Bouabdallah, R. Boutaba, and A. Mehaoua, "Collision 
avoidance energy efficient multi-channel MAC protocol for 
underwater acoustic sensor networks," IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 2298-2314, 2018. 
[25] Z. Zhou, Z. Peng, J.-H. Cui, and Z. Jiang, "Handling triple 
hidden terminal problems for multichannel MAC in long-
delay underwater sensor networks," IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 139-154, 2011. 
[26] W. Liu et al., "APOLL: Adaptive polling for reconfigurable 
underwater data collection systems," in 2018 OCEANS-
MTS/IEEE Kobe Techno-Oceans (OTO), IEEE, pp. 1-9, 
2018.  
[27] N. Morozs, P. Mitchell, and Y. V. Zakharov, "TDA-MAC: 
TDMA without clock synchronization in underwater acoustic 
networks," IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1091-1108, 2017. 
[28] V. G. Menon and P. J. Prathap, "Comparative analysis of 
opportunistic routing protocols for underwater acoustic sensor 
networks," in 2016 international conference on emerging 
technological trends (ICETT), IEEE, pp. 1-5, 2016.  
[29] S. Lee and D. Kim, "Underwater hybrid routing protocol for 
UWSNs," in 2013 Fifth International Conference on 
Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), IEEE, pp. 472-
475, 2013. 
[30] S. M. Mazinani, H. Yousefi, and M. Mirzaie, "A vector-based 
routing protocol in underwater wireless sensor networks," 
Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 1569-
1583, 2018. 
[31] R. W. Coutinho, A. Boukerche, L. F. Vieira, and A. A. 
Loureiro, 
"Geographic 
and 
opportunistic 
routing 
for 
underwater 
sensor 
networks," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Computers, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 548-561, 2015. 
[32] M. Ismail et al., "Reliable path selection and opportunistic 
routing protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks," 
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 100346-100364, 2020. 
[33] Y.-C. Tseng, S.-Y. Ni, Y.-S. Chen, and J.-P. Sheu, "The 
broadcast storm problem in a mobile ad hoc network," 
Wireless networks, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 153-167, 2002. 
[34] R. Otnes and S. Haavik, "Duplicate reduction with adaptive 
backoff for a flooding-based underwater network protocol," in 
2013 MTS/IEEE OCEANS-Bergen, IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2013. 
[35] R. Otnes, P. A. van Walree, H. Buen, and H. Song, 
"Underwater acoustic network simulation with lookup tables 
from physical-layer replay," IEEE Journal of Oceanic 
Engineering, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 822-840, 2015. 
[36] M. Goetz and I. Nissen, "GUWMANET—Multicast routing 
in underwater acoustic networks," in 2012 military 
communications and information systems conference (MCC), 
IEEE, pp. 1-8, 2012.  
[37] C. Li, Y. Xu, C. Xu, Z. An, B. Diao, and X. Li, "DTMAC: A 
delay tolerant MAC protocol for underwater wireless sensor 
networks," IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 4137-
4146, 2015. 
[38] H. Luo, K. Wu, R. Ruby, Y. Liang, Z. Guo, and L. M. Ni, 
"Software-defined 
architectures 
and 
technologies 
for 
underwater wireless sensor networks: A survey," IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 
2855-2888, 2018. 
[39] R. Ruby, S. Zhong, B. M. ElHalawany, H. Luo, and K. Wu, 
"SDN-enabled energy-aware routing in underwater multi-
modal communication networks," IEEE/ACM Transactions 
on Networking, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 965-978, 2021. 
[40] S. Jiang, "On securing underwater acoustic networks: A 
survey," IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, 
no. 1, pp. 729-752, 2018. 
[41] M. S. Mahdavinejad, M. Rezvan, M. Barekatain, P. Adibi, P. 
Barnaghi, and A. P. Sheth, "Machine learning for Internet of 
Things data analysis: A survey," Digital Communications and 
Networks, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 161-175, 2018. 
[42] M. A. Alsheikh, S. Lin, D. Niyato, and H.-P. Tan, "Machine 
learning in wireless sensor networks: Algorithms, strategies, 
and applications," IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1996-2018, 2014. 
[43] P. F. Baldi and K. Hornik, "Learning in linear neural 
networks: A survey," IEEE Transactions on neural networks, 
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 837-858, 1995. 
[44] W. G. Hatcher and W. Yu, "A survey of deep learning: 
Platforms, applications and emerging research trends," IEEE 
Access, vol. 6, pp. 24411-24432, 2018. 
[45] R. T. Rodoshi, Y. Song, and W. Choi, "Reinforcement 
Learning-Based Routing Protocol for Underwater Wireless 
Sensor Networks: A Comparative Survey," IEEE Access, vol. 
9, pp. 154578-154599, 2021. 
[46] S. K. Sharma and X. Wang, "Toward massive machine type 
communications in ultra-dense cellular IoT networks: Current 
issues and machine learning-assisted solutions," IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 426-
471, 2019. 
27
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[47] H. Li, H. Gao, T. Lv, and Y. Lu, "Deep Q-learning based 
dynamic resource allocation for self-powered ultra-dense 
networks," in 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), IEEE, pp. 1-
6, 2018.  
[48] Y. Su, R. Fan, X. Fu, and Z. Jin, "DQELR: An adaptive deep 
Q-network-based energy-and latency-aware routing protocol 
design for underwater acoustic sensor networks," IEEE 
Access, vol. 7, pp. 9091-9104, 2019. 
[49] V. Di Valerio, F. L. Presti, C. Petrioli, L. Picari, D. Spaccini, 
and S. Basagni, "CARMA: Channel-aware reinforcement 
learning-based multi-path adaptive routing for underwater 
wireless sensor networks," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 2634-2647, 2019. 
[50] X. Ye, Y. Yu, and L. FU, "Deep reinforcement learning based 
MAC protocol for underwater acoustic networks," IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2020. 
[51] M. Y. I. Zia, J. Poncela, and P. Otero, "State-of-the-art 
underwater acoustic communication modems: Classifications, 
analyses 
and 
design 
challenges," 
Wireless 
Personal 
Communications, vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 1325-1360, 2021. 
[52] M. A. Jamshed, K. Ali, Q. H. Abbasi, M. A. Imran, and M. 
Ur-Rehman, "Challenges, applications and future of wireless 
sensors in Internet of Things: A review," IEEE Sensors 
Journal, 2022. 
[53] J. Singh, R. Kaur, and D. Singh, "A survey and taxonomy on 
energy management schemes in wireless sensor networks," 
Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 111, p. 101782, 2020. 
[54] A. Kumar, M. Zhao, K.-J. Wong, Y. L. Guan, and P. H. J. 
Chong, "A comprehensive study of iot and wsn mac 
protocols: Research issues, challenges and opportunities," 
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 76228-76262, 2018. 
[55] H. Khan, S. A. Hassan, and H. Jung, "On underwater wireless 
sensor networks routing protocols: A review," IEEE Sensors 
Journal, vol. 20, no. 18, pp. 10371-10386, 2020. 
 
 
 
28
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

