257
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
A Modular Platform for Wireless Body Area Network Research and Real-life 
Experiments  
The ASE-BAN Testbed 
Rune Hylsberg Jacobsen, Finn Overgaard Hansen, Jens Kargaard Madsen, Henrik Karstoft, 
Peter Høgh Mikkelsen, Tore Arne Skogberg, Esben Sune Rasmussen, Claus Andersen, Michael Alrøe, and 
Thomas Skjødeberg Toftegaard 
Aarhus University School of Engineering, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Denmark 
 e-mail: {rhj, foh, jkm, hka, phm, tas, esr, clan, ma, tst}@iha.dk 
 
 
 
Abstract – The paper presents ASE-BAN, a wireless 
Body Area Network (BAN) developed at Aarhus 
University School of Engineering (ASE). ASE-BAN is a 
modular platform enabling research in the healthcare 
area and allowing real-life experiments with real users. 
The paper presents requirements, architecture and 
implementation of a hardware platform consisting of 
different modules, the current progress of research with 
development of sensor nodes for this ASE-BAN and the 
corresponding software. The concept of a body gateway 
is presented alongside with the preliminary results 
obtained with our current wireless BAN prototype.  
 
Keywords-low power; wireless sensor network; WBAN; 
Body area network; BAN; healthcare; Body gateway; 
testbed; IEEE 802.15.4; 6LoWPAN. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
There is an increasing need for personal home healthcare 
due to a growing population of elderly people [1]-[3]. To 
support the health problems of the elderly population 
wireless sensor technologies have enabled new types of 
applications for monitoring and controlling people’s 
physiological parameters.  
The first generation of e-healthcare solutions were more 
or less replacement of a wire with a wireless communication 
channel, i.e., another set of protocols on top of a new 
physical communication media. In the second generation, the 
devices communicated wirelessly with a local system host, 
which relayed alarms and possible also data to remote sites. 
In the third generation the healthcare sensors and actuators 
are wirelessly connected to a mobile body area network. 
Miniaturization and cost reduction of modern electronics 
facilitate the assembly of tiny and affordable wearable 
devices for real-time monitoring systems of personal medical 
data. There is an increase in the demand for such devices, 
partly due to the demand for highly person-centric and 
prevention-based health-related services and partly because 
of the relative increase in number of elders in the developed 
countries. 
A wireless network system can be set up, where network 
devices communicate accurate personal medical data to a 
host for storage or post-processing. The data may also be 
sent to medical practitioners such as caregivers and 
physicians for examination and diagnostic purposes. This 
enables greater mobility; reduces hospitalization, and results 
in better welfare at reduced costs for the society. The system 
provides ease in information-flow from the user to the 
central server or the doctors and caretakers, in a convenient 
and secure way.  
A system for 
wireless real-time 
monitoring of 
physiological data from a body can be organized in a 
wireless BAN [4], as illustrated in Figure 1. The BAN 
consists of a number of different sensor and actuator nodes 
interconnected by using wireless communication with a body 
gateway. Sensors can be devices for picking up physiological 
signals from the body, e.g., electro-cardiogram (ECG) sensor 
used to monitor cardiovascular activity, an oximeter sensor 
used to monitor pulse and blood oxygen levels etc. Another 
example is an actuator node that can be used to stimulate 
muscle activity.  
The body gateway communicates wirelessly with a local 
or a remote host application at a home base station or a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A wireless body area network system. 

258
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
remote central server as shown in Figure 1. Some types of 
sensor nodes may acquire large quantities of medical 
information in real-time. Subsequently, data must be sent to 
the host for storage or post-processing from time to time. 
Since wireless transmission is relatively energy costly, 
the gateway should only transmit context relevant data when 
needed, to minimize energy consumption. This is one of 
many requirements for a well-designed BAN.  
As described above the concept of a BAN has over the 
last decade been researched intensely. This research involves 
investigating 
different 
themes 
raging 
from 
wireless 
propagation models locally around the body to how to design 
a feasible physical wearable low-power small scale network. 
The work described herein is an extension and an elaboration 
of our recent publications [1][5]. The target has from the 
beginning been to design a modular, wireless BAN testbed 
based on state-of-the-art wireless communication technology 
that can connect different wearable biomedical sensor nodes 
as integrated system components. To achieve this it was 
decided to make proprietary hardware that, over time can be 
re-designed and enhanced according to different design 
parameters like power consumption, physical size, price etc.  
Figure 2 shows a picture of the hardware modules that 
can be mounted on top of each fitting in a small “box”. The 
use of an open source software platform with a high degree 
of flexibility was subsequently chosen.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II state-of-
the-art for wireless BANs is described. Section III provides 
details about for requirements for the design of a BAN. 
Section IV describes the architecture and design of ASE-
BAN. Section V goes into details about the current 
implementation status of ASE-BAN including the specific 
sensors integrated into the system. Especially, the fluid 
balance sensor and the ECG sensor node are described. 
Section VI presents the demonstrator and the preliminary 
results made so far. The paper concludes with a discussion of 
future research directions in Section VII. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Four hardware  modules  of the ASE-BAN testbed. 
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART FOR WIRELESS BANS 
The wireless BAN has been a topic for research and 
development during the last ten years and several surveys on 
wireless BAN and their application in mobile health and 
telemedicine have been published in the literature  [6]-[16]. 
The growing interest in building large-scale BANs across a 
public healthcare system such as a hospital have fueled a 
large number of research and development projects such as 
OpenCare 
[2], 
MobiHealth 
[6], 
MIMOSA 
[17], 
CodeBlue [18], SMART [19], AID-N [20], CareNet [21], 
ASNET [22], MITHril [23], WiMoCa [24] to mention a 
few. Whilst there are many similarities among the different 
approaches taken by research groups, the research domain 
suffers from a large fragmentation. 
1) BAN sensor nodes 
Essentially, wireless BANs are used to transmit 
physiological data such as vital signs by using radio wave 
communication. Most body sensors are utilized in an event-
driven fashion, but BANs also need to support data streams 
for real-time monitoring [25]. Analysis of sensor data 
streams in BANs involves identifying and extracting the set 
of attributes or characteristics from each multi-dimensional 
time series that correspond to different performance goals of 
health monitoring applications.  
To better monitor a human’s vital signals, behavior, and 
the surrounding environment, a wide range of commercially 
available sensors can be deployed, such as accelerometer and 
gyroscope, as well as traditional medical sensors including 
electroencephalography (EEG), electromyography (EMG), 
electrocardiogram (ECG), blood pressure, pulse oximetry 
(SpO2), respiratory inductive plethysmography (RIP), carbon 
dioxide (CO2), and so on. Accelerometer sensors, along with 
visual and biosignal sensors, are utilized to characterize 
movement and to detect falls of the user [26]. Finally, 
ambient sensors measure environmental phenomena, such as 
humidity, light, sound pressure level, and temperature. 
Recent technological developments have enabled sensor 
miniaturization, 
power-efficient design and improved 
biocompatibility. Issues related to systems integration, low-
power sensor interface, and optimization of wireless 
communication channels are active research fields. With 
advances in MicroElectroMechanical systems (MEMS), 
sensor devices are getting even tinier in size. These are  
changing the traditional way of measuring human 
physiological parameters.  
2) Radio communication 
A wireless BAN is a radio frequency-based wireless 
networking technology that interconnects tiny nodes with 
sensor or actuator capabilities in, on, or around a human 
body. As such the topic has fueled research in the area of a 
body-centric 
wireless 
communication 
channel [27]. 
Antennas and propagation for telemedicine systems can be 
considered in two parts, those for systems outside the body 
and those that communicate with internal implanted sensors 
and devices. The increased interest in wireless channels on 
the body has led to a review of the types of propagation 
mode that may occur on the body. Use of the Medical 
Implant Communication System (MICS) at 402 MHz to 
 

259
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
405 MHz, allows bands of 300 kHz to be achieved. 
However, due to the high availability of components for 
wireless body sensor networks both the industrial, scientific, 
and medical ISM bands between 400 MHz and 2.45 GHz, 
and the ultra-wideband (UWB) frequency allocation between 
3.1 GHz and 10.6 GHz are frequently seen in actual 
implementations [27][28]. More recently there is an interest 
in investigating the performance of BANs operating at 
millimeter wavelengths and in particular at 60 GHz [29][30]. 
Looking at BANs, a more generally attractive alternative by 
using the radio channels for communication between sensors 
is to have bio-channels serving as a unique secured means of 
communication, where the human body is used to transmit 
either exogenous or endogenous information [31]. 
3) Networks and standards 
Emerging and existing standards for wireless BANs and 
Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs) include 
Bluetooth Low-Energy, UWB, and ZigBee. However, 
proprietary and open technologies like Z-Wave [32], 
ANT [33], RuBee (IEEE 1902.1) [34] and RFID [35] have 
been utilized as well. Z-Wave is a proprietary mesh 
networking technologies for home automation. It works in 
the 900 MHz band. ANT is another proprietary sensor 
networking technology, featuring a simpler protocol stack 
and lower power consumption [36]. It implements a light-
weighted protocol stack, ultra-low power consumption, and a 
data rate of 1 Mb/s. ANT has been embedded in some Nike 
shoes to collect workout data and it is able to talk to iPod 
products. RuBee and RFID are both used for logistics 
applications. 
There have been many academic research projects 
utilizing IEEE 802.15.4 for transmitting health-related data 
[37][38]. These are based on IEEE 802.15.4 chips such as 
the CC2420 and the CC2430 from Texas Instruments. 
Implementations do seldomly use the higher-layer ZigBee 
protocol stack because either networking capability is not a 
must, or researchers are interested in devising more 
appropriate protocols. 
Body area networking, i.e., networking among devices 
in, on, and around the body poses unique challenges for 
resource allocation, sensor fusion, hierarchical cooperation, 
quality of service (QoS), as well as security and privacy. 
Hierarchical aggregation, topology control, star and star-
mesh hybrid topologies, coordination, multi-hopping multi-
hop data forwarding [39]. In terms of research and 
development mesh networking and energy-efficient routing 
in BANs are still open issues. On the one hand, minimalistic 
networking schemes increase system run-time and reduce 
obtrusiveness. However, this could jeopardize QoS or 
privacy, which is unacceptable for life-critical or sensitive 
medical applications. Other topics related to the practical 
applications of body sensor networks such as multi-sensor 
data fusion, decision support, and technological scaling are 
also important.  
Technologies for inter-BAN communication are mature, 
and include: WLAN, Bluetooth, Zigbee, cellular (GPRS), 
and 3G/UMTS etc. The more communication technologies 
that a personal server supports the easier it is for a BAN to 
be integrated with other applications. 
On-going work within the IEEE 802.15.6 Task Group 6 
aims at supporting applications with various data rates, 
where quality of service  guarantees are crucial in case of 
life-threatening conditions [40]. An emerging BAN standard, 
IEEE 802.15.6 will likely employ UWB. 
4) MAC layer  
At the MAC layer, there is a tradeoff between reliability, 
latency and energy consumption that needs to be resolved. 
Normally, an asynchronous MAC mechanism, such as 
carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance 
(CSMA/CA), is used with IEEE 802.15.4 to deal with 
collisions. To increase the lifespan of these sensors, energy-
efficient MAC protocols will play an important role. Corroy 
and Baldus present in [41] a comparison between different 
low-power MAC layers. S-MAC [42], T-MAC [43], and 
TRAMA [17] use their transmission schedule and listening 
periods for synchronization and to maximize throughput, 
while reducing energy by turning off radios during much 
larger sleeping periods. On the other hand, low-power 
listening (LPL) approaches such as WiseMAC [44] and B-
MAC [45] use channel polling to check if a node needs to 
wake up for data transmitting or receiving. Hereby the 
necessity of idle listening is reduced. Several other power-
efficient MAC protocols have been developed and 
investigated. MAC protocols have been surveyed in [46]. It 
has been shown that many MAC protocols offer better 
performance in terms of the end-to-end packet delay and 
energy saving compared to the IEEE 802.15.4 MAC. 
5) 6LoWPAN 
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has led the 
specification of 6LoWPAN or Internet Protocol (IP) 
version 6 over low-power wireless personal area networks 
[47]. The approach has been to define modifications to IPv6 
that allow it to be used over the IEEE 802.15.4 MAC/PHY 
layers. By using IP for the higher networking layers, the 
sensor network is interoperable with other IP networks 
including the Internet. This has the potential of making 
gateway devices simpler. The use of IEEE 802.15.4 allows 
the requirements of wireless BAN for low power and long 
lifetimes to be met. In addition, IPv6 has an addressing space 
adequate for all conceivable sensor networks. It also has the 
advantage that it is an established technology with an 
extensive set of support tools for development, design, 
control and reconfiguration. 6LoWPAN allows existing 
standards to be leveraged, rather than fostering a need to 
build standards from the beginning. 
6) Software frameworks, middleware and OS 
Many BAN projects use the open source operating 
system TinyOS [48] designed for small wireless devices. 
Another emerging operating system for wireless sensor 
networks in general is Contiki [49], designed for the Internet 
of Things.  
Waluyo et al. presents in [50] a lightweight middleware 
for personal wireless body area networks designed to reside 
in personal mobile devices. A middleware taxonomy 
together with examples of current middleware projects 
grouped according to the taxonomy.  
To support communication between the central located 
server computers and the body gateway, frameworks can be 

260
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
built to support the IEEE 11073 standard implementing a 
composite IEEE 11073 agent consisting of the body area 
network sensors communication with an IEEE 11073 
manager on the central server [51]. On the sensor side, one 
project [52] has recently implemented the IEEE 1451 smart 
transducer standard in a BAN context [53]. 
III. 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRELESS BAN  
Requirements in this section are mainly requirements 
which will have an influence on the system architecture for 
the BAN. It is thereby not an attempt to define a complete set 
of application-oriented functional requirements, which 
normally are defined by the use case technique. More 
technical requirements are currently being defined by the 
IEEE 802.15 WPAN Task Group 6 (TG6), which define the 
requirements for a WPAN [54]. An overview of these 
requirements, current challenges and wireless technologies 
for BANs are presented by Patel and Wang [3]. 
First, the user related requirements are described, 
followed by a set of more general system requirements. Most 
of these requirements have an impact on the hardware 
architecture and partly also on the software architecture. A 
subset of these requirements is also listed by Shnayder et 
al. [55]. 
A. User Related Requirements 
1) Diverse User Group 
Users of the BAN can for example be elderly persons 
living at home or in a nursing home. It can be physically 
disabled persons at all ages,; it can be persons suffering from 
dementia; it can be persons with chronicle diseases at all 
ages; and it can be athletes. Some of these users have several 
of these characteristics e.g., an elderly physically disabled 
person with a chronic disease.  
In this way, a very diverse user group, spanning from 
young to very old, and in some cases people suffering from 
dementia, can be addressed. These different types of users 
have very different needs and different skill levels for 
handling new technology. The user group with dementia and 
disabled people raise the largest challenge for healthcare 
developers. This leads to the first challenge: 
Challenge 1: Dealing with very diverse types of users, with 
different application needs and different skill levels. 
Requirements: Adjustable technology, user friendly, easy 
installation and configuration of software and hardware, 
easy to add new functionality, sensors, and actuators.  
Development of a BAN system for this diverse user 
group will benefit from using a user driven innovation and 
development process. 
2) User Communication 
The 
BAN 
should 
support 
different 
ways 
of 
communicating with the user. It could be by messages, LED 
lamps and sounds; it could be by speech syntheses or speech 
recognition, by activating normal buttons or soft buttons on a 
touch screen. Another possibility is communication with 
hearing-aids or headphones. Some of these devices can be 
used to give reminders to the user e.g., a reminder to take 
medicine or to exercise or to measure blood pressure.  
Challenge 2: User interface design for a diverse user group. 
Requirements: User friendly and easy to use interfaces.  
This could be obtained by conducting usability studies 
with different user groups and different types of interfaces 
supported by incorporating industrial designers in the design 
team and process.  
3) Calling for Help 
The BAN should support a “call for help” device so a 
user can call for help at any time. This functionality could be 
supplemented with a voice-channel so the caretakers can 
communicate with the user.  
Challenge 3: To offer safety and security to users.  
Requirements: Physical design of a reliable call-device and 
a reliable system for transferring this event, as this could be 
an emergency call. 
4) GPS Outdoor Positioning 
The BAN should allow the connection of a GPS-device 
for locating people in case of an accident. It could for 
example be demented people who left the nursing home 
without supervision or a user getting a heart attack outside 
the home. As a GPS-receiver is a power demanding device, 
the receiver should be controlled by the BAN and the 
connected system so it only works on demand and therefore 
only use power in a short time frame. 
Challenge 4: To locate a user in case of an accident.  
Requirement: Outdoor navigation using GPS. 
Ideally, indoor positioning is also relevant. However, this 
is currently much more challenging and not part of our 
current research scope. 
5) Fall Detection 
The BAN should support a fall detection device node 
with the purpose of sending an automatic call for help. It 
could be in situations where the user is unconscious after a 
fall or it could be a person with dementia, who could not 
operate a call button or a call device. 
Challenge 5: Reliable detection of a fall. 
Requirement: Physical design of a tiny and reliable fall 
detection node integrated on the person e.g., in the cloth or 
in a belt or as a decorative, personalized object. 
6) Mobility 
The user should be allowed to move freely around. For 
example a heart ECG monitoring should take place indoors 
in a private home or at work as well as outdoors and in 
public places.  
Challenge 6: To be anytime and anywhere connected. 
Requirement: Seamless connectivity over heterogeneous 
networks with automatic roaming supporting indoor as well 
as outdoor communication over Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) and Wireless Wide Area Network 
(WWAN). 
7) Physical Constraints for BAN Components 
All the BAN components are connected with wireless 
technology and should be integrated in the person’s daily 
life. This raises specific requirements for the physical design, 
i.e., it should have a small form factor, be light-weighted, 
and have a smart design. Some of the devices requires skin 
contact and could be integrated in a plaster; some could be 

261
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
integrated in the cloth as an intelligent textile and some 
should be visible e.g., a device with user interaction for 
example integrated in the body gateway. 
Challenge 7: Obtaining user acceptance of healthcare 
technology devices and wearing. 
Requirements: Low form factor, low weight and easy 
installation, wearing and a nice-looking design. 
8) Power Consumption 
With the diverse user group in mind it is difficult for 
these users to handle battery exchange and charging of a 
number of sensor nodes. For general convenience the devices 
should be developed as low-powered devices with either 
long battery life or by utilizing some kind of energy 
harvesting technique. This leads to the architectural design 
with essentially only a single power demanding unit – the 
body gateway. 
Challenge 8: Low-powered devices with energy-efficient 
communication.  
Requirements: There is a demand for low powered devices 
(nodes) and communication protocols.  
The body gateway requires more power and could be 
charged e.g., by induction or by a normal power charger with 
the inconvenience for the user and problems with being 
offline. 
9) Economics for a BAN 
The technology can help reducing the workload with 
caregiving, but with a cost of the new healthcare technology. 
With the high volume of users there are strict requirements to 
the solutions to be as cheap as possible both in buying, 
installation and operation. 
Challenge 9: Obtaining low total system cost and operation 
cost. 
Requirements: Low system costs and low cost of system 
operation, especially for the mobile communication part, 
which currently can be quite expensive. 
B. General System Requirements 
1) Security and Safety Issues 
It is important that the BAN and the rest of the 
infrastructure are both safe and secure. Person-related 
information is normally regulated by national law and should 
be transferred in a safe and secure manner. Another problem 
could be external hackers which could threaten for example a 
close-looped application connected to a medicine injection 
pump. Person-related information is to be handled with 
confidentiality and a BAN sets strict requirements to the 
handling of this information. 
Challenges 10: Obtaining a safe and secure system. 
Requirements: Use of standard encryption techniques and 
authentication protocols. 
2) Healthcare Application Flexibility 
The BAN should support the possibility to place the 
application or business logic code on different components in 
the architecture. It could be on a sensor node, on the 
gateways, or on one of the connected servers. Implementing 
an application on a sensor node, doing pre-processing of the 
signal, can reduce the communication bandwidth and thereby 
save power, but at the cost of a more expensive sensor node. 
Challenge 11: Obtaining a flexible software and hardware 
architecture with different processing capabilities. 
Requirements: An adjustable software framework or 
structure for application code and flexible component-
oriented hardware architecture. 
An automatic configuration of the application and sensor 
node software is a clear goal. 
3) Monitoring Data Types 
Data types can be real-time, life-critical application data: 
ECG data as well as sporadic event data for example alarms 
and emergency calls for help. 
Challenge 12: Very diverse requirements for signal 
monitoring. 
Requirements: Support for continuous real-time monitoring 
as well as for events. See [57] and [2] for a list of technical 
requirements for different applications with bit rates from 
less than 1 kb/s for drug dosage and up to 10 Mb/s for video 
imaging.  
4) User Identification 
The BAN should support an identification mean so the 
user can be unambiguously identified by supporting systems 
and the identification can be send with the collected data to 
remote servers. 
Challenge 13: To obtain an unambiguous and secure 
identification. 
Requirement: A secure identification of the user is required 
for the BAN system. 
5) Node and Person Matching 
The BAN should support a mean for unambiguous 
identification of sensor and actuator nodes on a given person 
and connect these devices with the user’s identification code. 
In this way the sensor data can be linked to a given person. A 
problem occurs when a sensor node connects to nodes on 
other persons BAN in near vicinity of the person.  
Challenge 14: Matching nodes with the person wearing the 
wireless node. 
Requirement: For a secure and easy identification method.  
This could for example be obtained by using Body-
coupled communication (BCC) where the BCC is used to 
discover an identify sensor nodes on the same body as 
presented in [57]. 
6) Open Standards and Open Source 
The BAN should be based on open international 
standards for supporting as many BAN devices from 
different vendors as possible and with different types of 
functionality. The Continua Health Alliance [58], a non-
profit coalition of more than 200 member companies, has 
defined interoperability goals for wireless systems and the 
IEEE group is working on a standard for wireless personal 
area networks [57]. The Continua Alliance material and 
software are mainly openly available for members of the 
alliance. 
Challenge 15: Development of open standards for the BAN. 
Requirements: Base BAN on open standards and optionally 
also open source software solutions for BAN components. 

262
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
7)  Network Topology and Communication 
The BAN should work with any kind of network 
topology 
from 
a 
star 
network 
with 
bidirectional 
communication between gateway, sensors, and actuators, to 
a meshed network that allows communication between all 
nodes. It is critical to have a network infrastructure and 
related communication protocols that minimize the power 
consumption of this part of the BAN as well. 
Challenge 16: Design a network with ultra-low power, 
secure and reliable communication. 
Requirements: Support for star and mesh topology. 
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  
The system architecture is a conceptual model that allows 
components to be added, removed, and modified. It allows 
data to be collected based on information requests. It 
provides a framework to abstract the underlying hardware 
resources from the applications and may be implemented as 
a middleware [59]. The system architecture of ASE-BAN is 
defined in order to describe the structure, behavior, and the 
different views of the ASE-BAN system. The architecture 
can be deployed in both indoor and outdoor environments. It 
can extend existing healthcare infrastructures such as e.g., 
OpenCare [2] and can be generally integrated into it 
infrastructures by use of web services [60].  
A. System Context for ASE-BAN 
The overall design guideline for the ASE-BAN is to have 
a body gateway node acting as the link from the body 
network to external systems, a central server or a home base 
station as shown in Figure 3.  
This body gateway should be the only power demanding 
component with a longer communication range supporting 
both wireless Local Area Network (LAN) and Wireless 
Wide Area Network (WWAN) communication and with a 
seamless handover between the two network types. 
The other BAN nodes should be ultra-low power sensor 
or actuator nodes with a limited communication range, i.e., 
less than one meter, where the communication power level 
can be adjusted to the minimum required for getting a 
reliable on-body communication.  
Figure 3 shows a domain model for a complete 
healthcare system including the ASE-BAN system which is 
mounted on the indicated user.  
When the user is at home the communication will be over 
WLAN from the body gateway and it can typically send both 
alarms and monitored data from the BAN to the home base 
station component e.g., a touch screen based computer. If the 
user leaves his or her home the BAN will automatically stop 
sending real-time monitoring data and store them locally on 
the BAN gateway component and only communicate alarms 
and keep-alive signals over the WWAN (e.g., GSM or 
UMTS).  
This solution is previously proposed by Saadaoui and 
Wolf [61]. It saves communication cost, i.e., both power and 
money. The principle of having a central server and a home 
base station is implemented in the OpenCare project 
described in [2], where the BAN is described as a Mobile 
Tier component for communicating a single physical value 
from a user and not as being a part of a body area network. 
The idea of having a powerful gateway for the body area 
network is also described in the work by Jovanov et al. [62] 
and Otto et al. [63] where they describe a three tier system 
consisting of tier 1: wireless BAN nodes, tier 2: personal 
server and tier 3: central systems. On their wireless BAN 
each node communicates in a star network topology with the 
personal server, i.e., the gateway. 
For ASE-BAN both a star and a mesh network topology 
have been used as possible network solutions. The mesh 
configuration enables ultra-low power communication and 
communication in difficult setup’s e.g., from a person’s back 
to his/her front KKK. Another important difference, in 
relation to the work described in [61], is the introduction of 
the home base station component, which gives another level 
of service to the users living in a private home; for elderly 
people normally one or two persons. The home base station 
collects monitoring data from the BANs on the people living 
in the house and it also supports shared and non-personal 
related healthcare devices in the home, which assist the 
residents with staying healthy. This could be medicine 
dispenser automation, a blood pressure meter or a smart 
weight scale, which can have one or more users. Using a 
home base station enables the development of healthcare 
applications which take decisions based on inputs from 
several different sources, i.e., BAN sensors or from the 
shared devices. 
Another advantage with the WWAN enabled ASE-BAN 
is the extra security obtained by having a backup channel for 
alarms in case of malfunctions in the normal data flow from 
BAN to home base station and to the central server. 
B. ASE-BAN System architecture 
The ASE-BAN system architecture, shown in Figure 4, 
enables continuous transmission of medical data for  
 
 
Figure 3.  System domain model including ASE-BAN. 
Central
Server
Home
Base
Station
Body Area
Network
(ASE-BAN)
Health
Care
Device
alarms
alarms
alarms
Monitoring
data
Monitoring
data
*
1..2
1..2
0..1
1..*
*
1
Remote
User
Local
Care
Taker
User
 

263
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
the reporting of vital signs as well as transmission of alarms. 
The architecture scales well in terms of the number of users 
and the number of sensors and actuators on each user. It 
supports the normal behavior of an elderly person. The ASE-
BAN system is composed of a number of sensor nodes and a 
body gateway. Each BAN is private for one user. 
The body gateway is a powerful, wireless node providing 
connectivity between the BAN and external systems. It 
contributes in the collection and processing of physiologic 
data from the BAN. An ASE-BAN installation can be 
extended gradually with sensors nodes to fit the intended 
purpose.  
The body gateway is equipped with at least two radio 
components – one for the communication within the BAN 
and one for interconnecting with external systems. The BAN 
forms a Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN) for its 
internal communication. When the BAN user is at home the 
communication will be over WLAN to the Home Base 
Station whereas the ASE-BAN will rely on public 
telecommunication networks and use WWAN when the user 
moves outside his/her premises.  
In addition to storage and a CPU, the body gateway may 
be composed of one or more input-output (IO) units to 
support human intervention such as keypad, microphone, 
loudspeaker and a display. Moreover the body gateway may 
support the interaction with systems in proximity by using 
Near-Field Communication (NFC) units and can be equipped 
with sensors that complement the sensor nodes of the BAN 
such as a GPS receiver, camera etc. The storage module can 
be used to store physiological data signs in outdoor 
environments to reduce the high communication costs of 
WWAN networks. 
The sensor node combines one or more sensors with a 
low power processing unit (CPU) and the WPAN 
communication unit, i.e., the Radio. Its main function is the 
sampling and pre-processing of physiological data and to 
participate in the communication within the BAN. A special 
sensor node configuration, called the relay node, acts as a  
 
 
Figure 4.  Block definition diagram describing the ASE-BAN architecture. 
 
 
relay or a router for the wireless mesh network 
communication. It may be used to enhance the robustness of 
the communication by means of multi-hop communication.  
One possible usage is to ensure that a sensor node located on 
a person’s back can communicate with a body gateway 
placed on a person’s front. 
For more computational demanding sensor nodes an 
additional CPU such as a Digital Signal Processor (DSP) can 
be added to the sensor node. This allows for a distributed 
data processing in the ASE-BAN. 
The candidate wireless technologies are based on the 
standards IEEE 802.11b, IEEE 802.15.1 and IEEE 802.15.4. 
In the testbed the latter IEEE 802.15.4 standard is used for 
communication within the BAN. 
Table I lists the sensor nodes supported in ASE-BAN. 
Sensor nodes have been classified according to reaction 
types: Continuous or Event. Sensor nodes of the Continuous 
type is used for the continuous monitoring of physiological 
data whereas the Event type is used for the issuing of alarms 
when a pre-determined threshold is met e.g., low fluid 
balance or in case of a fall.  
C. Software platform 
1)  Software processing capabilities 
The architecture supports running software on different 
places. The CPU at the sensor node can be of different types 
from a simple microcontroller to an advanced digital signal 
processor that allows advanced preprocessing of the sensor 
signals and the execution of application algorithms. An 
example of an advanced preprocessing is the Heart Rate 
Variability (HRV) detection or ECG signal supervision for 
heart artifacts. This gives the possibility only to send alarms 
in case of malfunction and in this way limits the power 
demanding wireless communication. The next application 
level is on the body gateway, which normally has a powerful 
processing capability. The software running on this platform 
can correlate signals from several sensor nodes and in this 
way take decisions based on multiple sensor inputs. 
The next level of processing is performed either on the 
home base station or on the remote central server 
communicating with the ASE-BAN via the body gateway 
component, when the user is away from home. 
TABLE I.  
ASE-BAN SUPPORTED SENSOR NODES. 
Sensor node 
Description 
Key function 
Reaction 
type 
Data rate 
Temperature 
Ambient temperature 
monitoring 
Continuous 
or Event 
Low 
Fluid balance 
Monitoring 
of 
the 
fluid balancing 
Continuous 
or Event 
Low 
Electrocardiogram 
(ECG) 
Monitoring 
of 
heart rate and heart 
rate variations 
Continuous 
or Event 
High 
/Variable 
Fall detection 
Detection 
and 
reporting of a fall 
Event 
Low 
Relay node 
Multi-hop 
communication 
None 
Variable 
 
«System of Interest»
BAN
«block»
Sensor node
«block»
Body gateway
0..*
1..*
«block»
Actuator
1..1
Patient
«block»
Sensor
«block»
CPU
«block»
Radio
«block»
IO unit
«block»
Sensor
«block»
CPU
«block»
Radio
«block»
Storage
WPAN
WLAN
WWAN
0..*
0..*
1..1
1..*
1..*
1..*
0..*
2..*
0..*
WPAN
 

264
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
2)  Sensor node software: TinyOS 
Many of the existing implementations of BANs have 
been based on tailor-made software that fits the purpose of 
the application. Most of these software implementations are 
proprietary, lacking flexibility and openness, and customers 
are often faced with vendor lock-in and high total cost of 
ownership. With the emergence of small operating systems 
such as TinyOS and Contiki a gap between the application 
and the underlying hardware, available in the sensor world, 
have been closed. Hence application developers or no longer 
forced to account for all the lower level details when 
developing applications.  
TinyOS is an open source operating system designed for 
low-power wireless devices, such as those used in sensor 
networks and personal area networks [65][66]. The operating 
system and its associated tools are supported by a worldwide 
community that counts people from academia as well as the 
industry.  
ASE-BAN sensor devices were based on TinyOS. This 
gives the following immediate benefits: 
• 
Hardware abstraction layer 
• 
Hardware platform support (MSP430 and CC2420) 
• 
Core operating system functions e.g., memory 
management, interrupts handling, timer etc. 
• 
An event-driven concurrency model for program 
execution 
• 
Driver support e.g., for the radio hardware unit 
• 
Networking protocols 
• 
Software development tools 
• 
No license cost (BSD-licensed) 
D. Wireless node hardware platform 
The 
hardware 
architecture 
reflects 
the 
different 
stakeholders of the platform: sensor, communication, power 
and embedded processing specialists. The basic elements of 
the architecture are shown in Figure 5. 
Energy, as energy sourcing and power conditioning; 
Communication that implements secondary communication 
technologies; Physical IO containing sensors, actuators and 
pre- and post-data processing and finally Processing 
Element, for managing the system and optional data 
processing. The processing element component can also 
include the primary radio frequency (RF) transceiver that is 
 
 
Figure 5.  ASE-BAN node hardware block diagram. 
often integrated with the main CPU. Each wireless sensor 
node is a mix of these building blocks. 
1) Processing Element.  
Many of today’s wireless sensor node platforms are 
based on TinyOS and AVR/MSP430 processors. Several 
ARM Cortex-M0/M3 devices are emerging [67], allowing 
the nodes to benefit from the 32-bit architecture, thus 
enabling more processing power in the nodes, which again 
enables new methods in data aggregation and compression 
[68].  
A comparison of some processors with build-in RF is 
shown in Table II. Energy consumption is given for the 
wake-up, the active, the sleep and the transmission and 
reception phase (Tx/Rx) of the node operation. Energy 
consumption estimations are based on current consumption 
and wake up time values from the respective data sheets. 
The ARM and the AVR processors use 32-/8-bit RISC 
architectures respectively, whereas the MSP430 uses a 16-bit 
Von Neumann architecture. The AVR and MSP430 
processors are assumed on average to take three clock cycles 
per normalized instruction compared to an ARM Cortex-M3. 
Table II shows how the different CPUs have different 
strength and weaknesses. For computation intensive 
applications, the ARM Cortex-M3 CPU is preferred, whereas 
communication intensive applications would benefit more 
from the efficient RF front-end of the AVR processor. 
Applications that wake up regularly, but transmit less data, 
will benefit from the MSP430’s short wake-up time. Hence, 
the choice of processor depends on the application used.  
2) Communication 
The primary wireless connection used for the wireless 
BAN is application dependent as well. Wireless sensor node 
research extends well beyond near-distance, inter-body 
wireless communication. Future applications may well 
extend 
to 
agricultural, 
environmental, 
and 
energy 
surveillance applications. Table III shows several wireless 
standards which the platform should be prepared to 
accommodate for.  
3) Energy 
Being open to different applications also effects how 
energy should be sourced and conditioned. Rechargeable 
batteries require a charging circuit, and even during shut 
 
TABLE II.  
ENERGY CONSUMPTION COMPARISON. 
Processor 
Energy Consumption (1.8 volt) 
Wake-up     
[nJ] 
Active 
[nJ/instr.] 
Sleep      
[nJ/s] 
Tx/Rx  
[nJ/bit] 
ATmega128RF1 
(AVR) [69] 
147 
0.620 
1800 
(PDX) 
100 
CC430F6126 
(MSP430) [70] 
14 
0.860 
3600 
(LPM3) 
150 
EM357 
(ARM, Cortex-
M3) [71] 
1188 
0.460 
1440 
(DS1) 
200 
 
 

265
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE III.  
COMPARISON OF WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES. 
 
Z-Wave  
IEEE 
Dash-7  
ANT  
Bluetoot
h Low E  
Standard 
Propriet
ary 
IEEE 
802.15.4 
ISO 
18000-7 
Propriet
ary 
IEEE 
802.15.1 
Target 
Home 
auto-
mation 
Health-
care 
Military, 
Industry  
Health-
care 
Health-
care 
Frequency 
900 
MHz 
2.4 GHz 
433 
MHz 
2.4 GHz 
2.4 GHz 
Topology 
Mesh 
Mesh, 
Star 
Mesh 
Mesh, 
Star, 
P2P 
Star, 
P2P 
Range 
30M 
30M 
1000M 
30M 
1M 
Data Rate 
40 kb/s 
250 kb/s 
200 kb/s 
20 kb/s 
200 kb/s 
 
down its internal transistors (FETs) will drain a small 
quiescent current. A coin-cell battery provides a higher 
capacity and a lower self-discharge than rechargeable 
battery. For applications that require medium power and 
have short operational life, a rechargeable battery is 
preferred. This is illustrated in the following example: A 
sensor node based on the EM357 samples an analogue value, 
preprocesses the sample, receives and transmits an IEEE 
802.15.4 packet and goes back to deep sleep at a fixed 
interval. Figure 6 illustrates the achievable battery life with 
different wake-up periods. 
For applications running up till a month, the rechargeable 
battery will be the right choice. For applications that have 
low activity, but a long lifespan, the coin cell battery (e.g., 
CR2032) is the preferred choice. The ASE-BAN platform is 
prepared for both.  
Secondary communication forms include Universal 
Serial Bus (USB) for debugging and the base station 
applications as well as different wireless interfaces such as 
Bluetooth for body gateway applications. 
4) Physical I/O 
The Physical I/O should be able to interface to most 
sensors and actuators. This interface should be kept open as 
sensor technology is a key design requirement. A list of the 
required interfaces for current sensors is given in Table IV. 
As the table indicates, GPIO, SPI, I2C and analogue 
interfaces will be sufficient. Interfaces such as USB host or 
LVDS 
does 
not 
match 
the 
requirements 
of 
a 
 
 
Figure 6.  Example of battery life vs. wake-up interval. 
TABLE IV.  
SENSOR CHARACTERISTICS AND INTERFACES. 
Application  
Digital 
I/F  
Analog 
I/F  
Inter-
rupt  
Supply  
Exa
mple  
Acceleration 
SPI 
x3 
Yes 
1.8-
3.3V 
ADX
L345 
Temperature 
I2C 
x1 
Yes/No 
2.7-
5.5V 
AD7
414 
Microphone 
No 
x1 
Yes 
 
 
Codec 
I2C/SPI 
No 
No 
5V 
AD1
877 
Impedance 
I2C 
No 
No 
2.7-
5.5V 
AD5
933 
Gyro 
SPI 
x1 
No 
5V 
ADX
R520 
Digital 
Potentiometer 
I2C 
No 
No 
2.7-
5.5V 
AD5
175 
Strain Gauge 
No 
x2 
No 
2.7-
5.5V 
 
DSP 
SPI/I2C/
TDM 
No 
Yes 
1.2+3.3
V 
BF5
33 
I/O Extender 
I2C/SPI 
No 
Yes 
3.3V 
 
H-Bridge 
4xGPIO 
No 
No 
3.3V 
 
 
low-power wireless node. A DSP is included for 
computation intense pre- and post-data processing. 
The mechanical properties of the nodes are important as 
well. In order to make the nodes usable in real applications, 
they should be compact and have a self-supporting 
ruggedized structure. These properties are not found in many 
research nodes created so far. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ASE-BAN 
This section describes the implementation of the ASE-
BAN platform covering hardware, software, protocols, body 
gateway and the different sensors.  
A. Hardware platform 
The ASE-BAN hardware platform shown in Figure 7 is 
built from hardware modules attached to a common base 
Printed Circuit Board (PCB) as illustrated in Figure 8 and 
pictured in Figure 9.  
The modules are soldered together with the base PCB by 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  ASE-BAN’s modular node design 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
L
i
f
e
[
D
a
y
s
]
Wake-up Interval [s]
CR2032, 230mAh
Li-Ion, 270mAh
 
«hardware»
CPU/RF Module
«hardware»
Base PCB
«hardware»
Sensor/Actuator 
Module
«hardware»
Energy Harvest
Module
«hardware»
Communication 
Module
Reg Pwr
Analog
U(S)ART
IRQ
I2C
SPI
Analog
IRQ
I2C
U(S)ART
Analog
IRQ
 

266
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 8.  ASE-BANs physical layering with the fluid balance sensor 
stacked to the base PCB. 
using edge-plating technique on the modules. This technique 
is well-known from Bluetooth modules. Using this approach 
is quite beneficial, since the design becomes very modular 
and the structure becomes quite robust and compact as no 
connectors are involved. The edge plating technique allows 
easy assembly and the construction of new modules. This is 
in contrast to use of fine pitch connectors or BGA 
techniques. 
The modules support the architecture described earlier. 
The base PCB acts as a passive backplane, processing is 
placed in the CPU/RF module, sensors on the sensor module 
and so on. This allows us to select among a variety of 
communication forms, sensors and energy sources, while 
maintaining the basic functions of the system.  
The base PCB includes sensors such as, temperature, 3D 
acceleration and proximity. These sensors are placed on the 
PCB backside and may be replaced by a sensor module with 
other sensors attached. It also has a build-in Li-Ion charger, 
power conditioning, debugging LEDs, buttons and a micro 
USB 
connector 
for 
charging 
and 
possible 
wired 
communication.  
Similar design techniques exist for the energy sourcing 
and conditioning circuits. They may e.g., also be replaced by 
an energy harvesting module or a CR2032 battery. The 
solder terminals are placed along the PCB edge allowing the 
sensor modules only to use a fraction of the full base PCB 
length. Connections such as power and serial IO are 
duplicated to support this.  
An example of a sensor node is the fluid balance node 
shown in Figure 10. Through impedance measurements in 
skin tissue the node estimates the current fluid balance. The 
battery chosen is a 270 mAh Li-Polymer battery. The fluid 
balance sensor consumes a lot of energy, and the sensor is 
not intended to be fitted for long periods of time without 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  ASE-BAN node (processing and energy side). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Fluid balance sensor node internal block diagram. 
service. The application allows us to recharge the node when 
the user is in bed at night. The charging circuit takes power 
from the micro-USB connector and a matching power 
adapter should be a commodity in today’s smartphone 
households. 
Power conditioning is done by means of LDO regulators, 
as the quiescent current of switched-mode regulators 
becomes dominant over the improved power conversion 
efficiency. 
As the processing element, the MSP430 processor [72] 
from Texas Instruments was chosen in conjunction with the 
CC2420 radio transceiver [73] also from Texas Instruments. 
This is a rather common set-up seen in sensor nodes such as 
the TelosB [74]. This setup allows easier integration with 
TinyOS, as this is the target operating system. As mentioned 
in the architecture section, the MSP430 provides overall 
good performance for medium processing applications, so it 
fits this application quite well. The CC2420 is a well-
established IEEE 802.15.4 radio transceiver used in related 
research [75][76]. Actuators are LEDs for this application, 
but buzzers and vibrators are being considered for stand-
alone fluid balance applications. 
The fluid balance sensor itself, shown in Figure 11, is 
based on an impedance measurement integrated circuit from 
Analog Devices. The primary interface to the processor is 
I2C 
used 
for 
sending 
commands 
and 
receiving 
measurements. The sensor module has a local LDO regulator 
that can be shut down by the processor to minimize power 
consumption during node sleeping periods. The fluid balance 
sensor is described in more detail in a later section. 
The fluid balance sensor node has a small connector for 
attaching external electrodes. It is 8x20x55 mm in size and 
weights 9 grams, excluding battery. This allows the node to 
be placed in a wristband for realistic application evaluation. 
The current setup enables the creation of sensor nodes for 
a wide range of applications: Temperature sensors that wake 
up every minute but has years of service time, thus requiring 
a coin cell battery and a very basic CPU/RF module. HRV 
sensors are very processing intensive using an additional 
DSP for HRV estimation, have only 2-3 days operating time 
and require rechargeable Li-Ion batteries.  
 
 

267
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  ASE-BAN node (fluid balance sensor side). 
The hardware construction has proven to be convenient 
and robust obtained by the close attachment of the PCBs. 
The hardware design accomplishes the goals for the ASE-
BAN platform, namely to provide a flexible platform for 
interdisciplinary research and development of sensors for a 
wide range of healthcare applications. 
B. Software and protocols 
 
The network interface abstraction that comes with 
TinyOS provides a generic way to use the network regardless 
of the underlying hardware instance.  
The core TinyOS communication abstraction is based on 
Active Messages. Active Messages provides an unreliable, 
single-hop datagram protocol, and provides a unified 
communication interface to both the radio and the built-in 
serial port.  
More recently TinyOS has been extended with a IPv6 
protocol stack, called the Berkeley Low power IP (BLIP) 
stack [66]. The BLIP protocol stack is adapted to the IEEE 
802.15.4 radios and has been optimized to run on sensor 
nodes with limited resource characteristics [77]. This 
implementation of IPv6 over IEEE 802.15.4 communication, 
commonly known as the 6LoWPAN protocol stack, has been 
standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). 
This provides an Application Program Interface (API) for 
communication that is then implemented for the particular 
interface(s) of the sensor device. Furthermore, one can 
seamlessly connect sensor devices to the Internet or to 
networks based on Internet technology such as e.g., the 
OpenCare project [2]. 
1) Protocols 
In ASE-BAN experiments with the usage of Active 
Messages as well as BLIP have been made. Figure 12 shows 
an example of the protocol stacks for an end-to-end system 
based on 6LoWPAN. Looking at communication end-to-end 
one finds IPv6 as the common denominator that connects the 
home base station (or a remote central server accessible over 
the Internet).  
The use of IPv6 at the network layer allows us to connect 
sensor devices to the Internet and to support multi-hop 
communication based on standardized, light-weighted 
routing protocols [78]. 
To bridge the gap between the healthcare sensor 
application and the communication interface, it was decided  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  ASE-BAN protocol stack. 
to rely on the UDP socket interface provided by the BLIP 
protocol stack or to rely on embedded web services [79]. In 
the latter case a middleware layer, which is able to map 
applications’ requirements to the sensor network resources, 
was used.  
These server controlled resources are accessed by clients 
in a synchronous request/response fashion using methods 
such as GET, PUT, POST, and DELETE of HTTP/CoAP, as 
shown in Figure 13.  
IETF is proposing the Constrained Application Protocol 
(CoAP) to support RESTful web services in constrained 
environments such as wireless sensor networks. In ASE-
BAN we have chosen to follow this path and have 
implemented a TinyOS implementation of CoAP similar to 
[80] . 
Hence, healthcare services can be provided end-to-end 
with open, flexible and scalable software which eventually 
leads to an attractive total cost of ownership for the 
healthcare provider, i.e., often the society in general. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Example of web service architecture for interoperable 
healthcare services for ASE-BAN. 
 
Routing
ICMPv6
CoAP
Routing
ICMPv6
CoAP
Routing
ICMPv6
HTTP
ICMPv6
HTTP
CoAP
HTTP 
HTTP 
CoAP 
 

268
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
C. Body gateway and node software components 
1) Smartphone as a body gateway 
The body gateway was developed using a smartphone (a 
Google Nexus One), but was also imagined as an embedded 
solution. The gateway is responsible for relaying information 
from the internal wireless BAN to an external IP network. A 
smartphone based on the Android operating system was 
chosen as the target platform [81][82], since it allowed for 
easy prototyping using high-level code.  
The first prototype of the body gateway used a Bluetooth 
Serial Port Profile (SPP) to communicate with the bridge 
node of the wireless BAN. This is not an optional solution as 
the bridge node requires daily recharging caused by the 
power demand of the Bluetooth protocol. 
The second prototype still needed the bridge node, but 
used a directly wired serial port. This was possible due to the 
openness of the Android platform, which allowed compiling 
and replacing the driver module for the USB connector on 
the phone. This reduced the power consumption and 
minimized the footprint. A third option was considered, 
where the master node is connected to the same battery as 
the phone and directly inserted into the phone via the 
microSD card interface. 
2) System Software Components and communication 
The actual ASE-BAN consists of 4 different types of 
nodes with software: a central server, a body gateway (the 
smartphone), a bridge node and the sensor nodes.   
The central server and the body gateway software 
components shown in Figure 14 use essentially the same 
code to handle incoming events and differ only in the way 
they receive these events.  
The central server receives incoming events via the 
HTTP protocol from the body gateway, while the body 
gateway receives these using a serial port connected to the 
bridge node. 
The bridge node software component shown in Figure 15 
is designed to bridge data from the wireless BAN to the 
serial port. The wireless BAN software uses the Active 
Message protocol, where data is delivered as datagrams, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  Central server and body gateway software components. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  Bridge node software components 
while the serial port uses a simple frame stuffing algorithm 
to isolate each datagram. 
Figure 16 shows the sensor node software components 
for a sensor node equipped with a fluid balance sensor and 
an on-board accelerometer. The SoftI2cC component 
implements the I2C communication for two general purpose 
I/O pins. The accelerometer component is the software driver 
for the physical accelerometer which communicates through 
the 
I2C 
interface. 
The 
FallDetectionC 
component 
implements a fall detection algorithm. The SensorAppC 
component binds the software components together and 
delegates the received events e.g., a fall event and a fluid 
balance alarm event to the ActiveMessageC component, 
which implement the Active Message protocol. 
D.  Sensors 
1) Fluid Balance sensor  
The fluid balance sensor enables wireless BAN to issue 
alarms when the body fluid level of the user becomes 
critically low. The fluid balance sensor is designed for 
measurement of the electrical-biological impedance (EBI) of 
adult humans. The focus is on the detection of the 
dehydration, typical for elderly or demented people, who 
may benefit from some kind of feedback when water intake 
is needed. However, the sensor may also be implemented 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  Sensor node software components. 
 
ActiveMessageC
 
Bridge 
Node
UartC
Body Gateway
Android 2.3.3
ASE-BAN Application
Modified Linux Kernel
SerialPort
WiFi/2G/3G
Central Server
Network
Database
Medical Application
 

269
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
within areas such as total body composition, lungs 
composition and respiration rate if the software is adjusted 
accordingly [83].  
Biological tissues are composed of groups of cells with 
each cell consisting of a cell membrane separating the 
internal fluid from the external fluid. The conductivity of the 
fluid may be represented through a resistance between any 
two points and the impedance of the tissue becomes modeled 
as the resistance of the external fluid in parallel with the 
resistance of the internal fluid and separated by the 
capacitance of the cell membrane, thus leading to equivalent 
models by Fricke (1924) and Cole (1928). They are 
commonly called “2R-1C” networks since they consist of 
two resistance values and one capacitance shown in Figure 
17 [83]. Typical resistance levels are from 10 Ω to 200 Ω 
and the average capacitance value is within the 100 nF range 
depending on the measurement principle being used, such as 
from arm to arm or from arm to leg. The impedance is within 
the ASE-BAN circuit monitored from 5 kHz to 100 kHz. 
The present design uses the AD5933 impedance 
measurement device from Analog Devices, which comprises 
a programmable sine wave oscillator and discrete single-
frequency Fourier transform circuitry converting the 
measured 
quantity 
into 
real 
and 
imaginary 
values 
representing the complex impedance. External circuitry is 
used to convert the AD5933 oscillator output voltage into 
current, which is routed through the skin to the tissue to be 
analyzed using two electrodes. Two additional electrodes are 
used to monitor the voltage created across the tissue and this 
voltage is correlated with the excitation signal thus 
determining the relative magnitude and phase of the 
impedance. Calibration uses a fixed resistor for scaling of the 
numerical value output from the AD5933 back into 
resistance thus reducing errors related to component 
tolerances. 
Fluid balance measurements must be determined with 
approximately 1 Ω of accuracy for determination of the 
change in impedance due to dehydration. The contact 
resistance from electrode to skin may exceed 1 kΩ at the 
frequency range of interest. Four electrodes are needed to 
unload the measurement electrodes from the excitation 
current. The present design uses an AC current level of 
40 µA, which is far below the detectable range [84]. A plot 
of the impedance in the complex plane approximates a half 
circle in the fourth quadrant, usually called a Cole plot, is 
shown in Figure 18. Impedance measurement is conducted 
by fitting the measured values with the periphery of a half 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  The electrical-biological impedance measurement principle is 
shown with the current path at low and high frequency (LF and HF 
respectively). To the right the Fricke model (top) and Cole model (bottom). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18.  Cole plot of a network with two series-connected resistors of 
75 Ω each and one capacitor of 220 nF in parallel to one of the resistors 
with the approximating circle. The frequency range was from 5 kHz 
(rightmost data point) up to 25 kHz using 250 Hz of step size. 
circle, and then extrapolating the half circle to zero and 
infinite frequency for determination of the resistance of the 
external and internal fluids as well as the bulk capacitance of 
the cell membrane. At infinite frequency the impedance 
reduces to the series resistance of the Cole model and at zero 
frequency the impedance becomes the sum of the resistance 
components. The capacitance value is determined from the 
frequency at the extreme imaginary value. The degree of 
dehydration is detected as a change within the resistance 
pattern, and examination is currently being conducted to 
determine 
this 
correlation, 
the 
effect 
of 
electrode 
contamination and the required monitoring precision. 
A result is shown within the picture using a 2R-1C model 
network. The analysis is to be carried out autonomously by 
the fluid balance sensor and the result is either uplinked 
using the radio transmitter or alternatively output directly to 
the user as an audible or visible indication of the need to 
drink water. 
2) ECG sensor  
Monitoring of heart activity uses an analogue interface 
with an instrumentation amplifier. The signal from the heart 
is less than 5 mV of peak amplitude so the interface 
amplifies the signal to fit the input range of the A/D 
converter. The input is differential to reduce mains hum and 
a third electrode is used for suppression of common-mode 
disturbance. The required bandwidth is 40 Hz for heart rate 
determination but sampling at 500 times per second resolves 
frequencies up to 150 Hz for diagnostic use. Digital filtering 
may implement a filter for additional hum suppression, such 
as notch filtering at the frequency of the disturbance without 
serious impact upon bandwidth or low pass filtering with 
high order slope and cut off around 40 Hz.  
The interface is general-purpose and may be used for any 
low-voltage analogue interfacing with bandwidth set by the 
sampling rate at the A/D converter.  
A more advanced interface is offered through the DSP 
based ECG sensor, which is interfaced to the ASE-BAN 
PCB base module and is intended to unload the 
 

270
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
microcomputer and radio link through the use of a dedicated 
signal processor device. 
From the electrical signal, the HRV can be derived [85]. 
The complete electric signal: the electrocardiogram (ECG) 
and the HRV is measured by the sensor. The ECG and the 
HRV are widely used for medical surveillance and 
diagnostic purposes. 
The ECG sensor module measures two lead ECG signals 
on the chest of the user. The sensor is intended to be worn 
for several days without intervention; hence appropriate 
electrodes are used, to provide for high signal quality and 
user comfort. The prototype uses insulated bioelectrodes 
which provides good signal quality and reduced risk for skin 
irritation [86]. The module amplifies the weak ECG signal 
(peak to peak amplitude of approximately 2 mV), before the 
signal is AD-converted. The sampling rate is 500 Hz in 16 
bits to provide for sufficient signal quality for diagnostic 
purposes [87]. Figure 19 shows a recorded ECG on the home 
base station. 
The processor module shown in Figure 20 for the ECG 
sensor is a small foot-print DSP platform equipped with a 
Blackfin BF533 signal processor from Analog Devices [88]. 
The Blackfin BF533 is a high-performance fix-point 
processor with two 16-bits Multiply-And-Accumulate units, 
capable of parallel processing. The processor is capable of 
handle clock-speeds up to 600 MHz. The on-chip Real-
Time-Clock is connected to a 32 kHz crystal. 
The DSP processor module is used for sensor local 
analysis of the ECG signal. This is done to save node energy, 
since processing data is more energy efficient that 
transmission of data. Commercial radios typically dissipate 
Te ~150 nJ/bit [89]-[91], versus the processor referenced in 
Table II dissipate on the order of Ce ~1 nJ/sample [92]. This 
indicates a break-even between transmission and processing 
of data at ~2500 instructions per sample (16 times 
150 inst./sample) [93]. 
Equations for the energy budget can be setup as follows: 
 
N Te
n Te
K Ce
⋅
=
⋅
+
⋅
,  
 
(1) 
 
K is the number of instructions needed to reduce N samples 
to n samples. Ce is the energy-use per instruction and Te is 
the energy-use per transmit of one sample. Rearranging 
 
 
 
Figure 19.  ASE-BAN measurement of an ECG signal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 20.  The ASE-BAN ECG sensor module with DSP. The size is 13 
mm x 18 mm x 30 mm. The weight is 6 g. 
Equation (1), one arrives at Equation (2): 
 





⋅




=  −
Ce
Te
N
n
N
K
1
,   
 
(2) 
 
Our application aims at reducing bandwidth by a factor 
n/N ~1000 times (HRV transmission at 0.5 Hz, and ECG 
sampling rate at 500 Hz). According to the analysis above 
Te/Ce is set to 2500 inst./sample and hence K/N attain a 
value of ~2500 inst./samples. 
ASE-BAN software runs standard adaptive noise 
removing techniques to remove hum in the ECG. The R-
peak in the ECG signal is calculated using the Pan Thomkins 
algorithm [56] and the ECG signals is finally analysed,  
calculating standard Heart Rate Variability pNN50 [85]. This 
algorithmic data reduction can be run on the processor 
module. An efficient implementation is estimated to be using 
500 inst./sample or less. This is significantly below the 2500 
inst./sample break-even limit calculated above.  
3) HRV sensor 
A dedicated module for high-speed processing of the data 
is offered using the BF533 digital signal processing device of 
the BlackFin-series from Analog Devices. The module was 
developed for evaluation of algorithms and interfaces to the 
ASE-BAN module.  
4) Accelerometer sensor 
Acceleration detection is a versatile instrument with 
applications for user-orientation (standing or lying), fall 
detection, and alarm generation for users that do not move at 
all following a fall, in addition to motion and tap detection. 
The project interfaces to LIS331 or MMA8452Q, which are 
tree-axis seismic accelerometers interfacing through I2C. A 
mass is part of a capacitive half bridge for each of the axis 
within the device, so the sensor is capable of detecting static 
gravitation such as monitoring the physical orientation along 
earth’s gravity as well as detection of shock and vibration. 
The sensors may generate an interrupt request to the micro 
controller if the acceleration crosses through programmed 
limits.  
5) Fall detector 
For use in the demonstrators a fall detector application 
was designed. The fall detection algorithm is based on the 
 
 
 

271
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
movement pattern during a fall. When a person falls either 
from a standing or sitting position or when walking the 
sensor will experience the same basic pattern. First, the 
sensor will sense close to 1 g of downwards force due to 
gravity. Then, during the first phase of the fall, a free or near 
free fall condition will be experienced. The free fall 
condition will be followed by the impact phase in which the 
person will hit the ground. The sensor will see this as a series 
of large spikes in the sensed acceleration. This detection state 
machine is shown in Figure 21. 
The algorithm could be improved to track the fall after 
the impact to determine if the person is unconscious or is 
trying to get back up. The fall detector is currently able to 
detect the laboratory reproductions of a fall but optimizations 
such as lowering the 50 Hz sample rate to reduce energy 
consumption or adjusting acceleration and timing thresholds 
to increase detection reliability has not been performed. 
6) Proximity detector 
Applications include the substitution of mechanical 
switches and proximity detection, such as the presence of a 
user of the ASE-BAN circuitry. The interface uses the 
AT42QT1010 chip, which detects the change within 
capacitance due to the presence or absence of the human 
body or one of the fingers within the proximity of a 
conductive plate. The interface is one bit so the output is 
detected or not detected, and the device includes options for 
reducing sensitivity to electrical noise or transients from 
quick brushes with an object, such as during cleaning. 
7) Temperature sensor 
The project includes several temperature monitoring 
points due to the build-in sensors at the micro controller and 
the fluid balance sensor, but they are not externally 
accessible and the measurement precision is limited.  
VI. 
DEMONSTARTOR AND RESULTS 
This section describes the ASE-BAN demonstrator and 
the results. Since this is work in progress only preliminary 
results will be presented together with a prototype design of 
a casing for an ASE-BAN sensor node. 
A. Demonstrator 
A fully integrated ASE-BAN demonstrator, to be used by 
a test person, is under preparation. The objective of this 
demonstrator is to show the integration of the developed  
 
 
Figure 21.  The four states of the fall detection algorithm. 
ASE-BAN components as well as the feasibility of 
integration into a complete healthcare system. 
From a sensor point of view the demonstrator consists of 
fluid balance sensor nodes, an ECG sensor node, an ambient 
temperature sensor node and a fall detection sensor node. All 
sensor nodes except the fall detection sensor are installed on 
the front of the test person. The fall detection sensor device 
is installed on the back at the person's waist. To provide 
connectivity to sensors on the back an ASE-BAN relay node 
is installed. Figure 22 shows the positioning of sensor nodes 
and how they are connected in the network. 
To demonstrate the feasibility of the integration with a 
healthcare system it is shown how sensor nodes can be 
monitored remotely via the Internet as well as from the 
OpenCare project infrastructure installed in the user’s home. 
The two fluid balance sensor nodes – one attached to the 
upper arm and the other attached to the person’s thigh are 
used in order to test the consistency of sensor readings. 
In the demonstrator an Android smartphone is used to act 
as ASE-BAN body gateway. The smartphone connects to the 
sensor nodes by using one of the sensor nodes e.g., the 
ambient temperature sensor node as a bridge node. A serial 
connection between the smartphone and the bridge node is 
configured. Both a wired and a wireless option are viable. In 
the former case the bridge node is piggy-backed onto the 
smartphone whereas in the latter case a serial Bluetooth 
connection is used between the bridge node and the body 
gateway.  
The demonstrator is able to push data to the home base 
station and/or an external web server residing in the 
healthcare domain, i.e., a central server. In the latter case a 
global IPv6 network infrastructure with the 6LoWPAN 
networking capabilities of the BAN is established. For this 
part of the demonstrator a Linux PC is used as a 6LoWPAN 
due to the lack of support for IPv6 in Android. Effort is 
ongoing to include IPv6 support and to port the 6LoWPAN 
edge router software to Android. The results with 6LoWPAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22.   BAN with four sensor devices connected to a global network 
infrastructure. 
:
2
4
6
1
3
5
Front
Back
6
ID
Sensor type:
1.
Ambient temperature sensor
2 & 3. Fluid balance meters
4.
ECG sensor
5. 
Fall detection sensor
6.
BAN relay node – no sensing
BAN 
gateway
Internet /
telecommunication 
infrastructure
Open care
Healthcare 
Service 
provider
GPRS
Bluetooth
 

272
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
are described as Result 2. Another experiment with the 
demonstrator used the smartphone with the Active Messages 
protocol as described in Results 3. In both cases data can be 
displayed on the smartphone as well as on a remote central 
server. 
B. Results 
1) Result 1– Radio communication channel 
The human body has a significant impact on the radio 
communication in a wireless BAN. To gain a better 
understanding of this effect a dedicated test environment has 
been created for this. This consists of a boiler suit fitted with 
an array of IEEE 802.15.4 compatible radio modules. These 
radio modules are connected to a PC through a cable to form 
a wired network for test purpose. This setup is illustrated in 
Figure 23 which also shows the actual boiler suit. 
The radio modules continuously broadcast packets 
containing their network id. These packets are received by 
some or all of the other radio modules depending on the 
radio conditions. As all modules transmit at the same power 
level each receiving module is able to calculate the loss in 
signal strength by subtracting the Received Signal Strength 
Indicator (RSSI) value recorded when the packet was 
received from the known transmission power level. The cost 
of all links is transferred to the PC through the wired 
network and stored in a log file. Simultaneously a camera 
connected to the PC records the actions of the wearer of the 
boiler suit.  
These images are stored in the log file together with the 
link quality data from the same instance in time that the 
image was taken.  
By creating log files of standard everyday scenarios 
(sitting down on a chair and getting back up, walking etc.) 
the expected signal conditions in an actual wireless BAN 
were identified. It was evident from the tests that the 
communication in a wireless BAN often relies on reflections 
from the surroundings for the radio waves to reach their 
destination as there is often no line of sight path. Areas that  
 
 
Figure 23.  The test environment (left) and the actual boiler suit (right). 
should receive special attentions were also identified. The 
effect of a swinging arm during a walk was for instance very 
significant between certain nodes but barely visible on other 
links. Calculations indicate that packet loss can be reduced 
significantly and energy consumption lowered due to 
improved link quality if automatic power control is 
employed. The information obtained with these tests where 
used to design the network for the demonstrator. 
For a detailed explanation of the full test environment 
and a deeper analysis of the results please refer to [94]. 
2) Result 2 – 6LoWPAN network 
This part of the demonstration focus on body area 
networking aspects and global IPv6 Internet connectivity. 
Our experimental setup consists of up to 6 sensor nodes and 
a base station. In order to demonstrate interoperability a mix 
of ASE-BAN nodes and the TelosB nodes, that offer similar 
hardware architecture, have been used [74]. For the base 
station a Linux PC with a TelosB node for the IEEE 802.15.4 
connectivity has been used. The Linux PC is configured as a 
6LoWPAN edge router.   
The ASE-BAN nodes implements the 6LoWPAN 
protocol standards based on the open source TinyOS stack 
called BLIP. Global IPv6 connectivity will be provided by 
using an IPv6 deployment and tunnel broker service provider 
such as SixXS [95]. Over this global IPv6 infrastructure 
sensor data is delivered by using web services.  
The ASE-BAN testbed successfully demonstrates many 
networking aspects that are of importance and relevance for 
body area networking. The following list provides a few 
highlights of this demonstrator: 
• 
Sensor device network interoperability (TelosB and 
ASE-BAN hardware) 
• 
Multi-hop communication in the BAN (mesh-
networking) 
• 
6LoWPAN networking  
• 
Dynamic routing by using Hydro routing protocol 
• 
Global IPv6 connectivity using a tunnel broker 
• 
Web services for BAN 
 
3) Result 3 – ASE-BAN applications 
The demonstrator contains software applications that 
were developed to handle issues from different parts of the 
ASE-BAN. In this section a fall detection application based 
on accelerometer readings will be described. 
A central issue was how to connect the smartphone to the 
actual wireless BAN, originally the solutions was to use a 
Bluetooth connection, since this seemed to be the easiest and 
most compatible solution. To gain battery life and a smaller 
footprint solutions that allowed using the USB connector of 
Android as a serial port, as shown in Figure 24, were 
implemented.  
For the gateway a Google Nexus One (HTC) Android 
smartphone with CyanogenMod 7.0.2.1 was used [96]. 
CyanogenMod is a customized, aftermarket firmware based 
on Android 2.3.3. The platform allowed using the USB 
connector as a serial port. 
 
 
 

273
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 24.  Body gateway with bridge node. 
ASE-BAN needed to be modular, and support sensor 
types which are not defined yet. Therefore a highly flexible 
way to handle data transport and data presentation was 
designed. For data transport Java Script Object Notation 
(JSON) was chosen [97]. JSON is a lightweight alternative 
to XML, and is native to the JavaScript language.  
First data is collected on the fall detector node shown in 
Figure 25, #1 and is transferred to the body gateway. The 
actual data is formatted as JSON. 
Data example from the fall detector node: 
 
{"d":0.156,"f":"fd"}.  
 
This is a simple JSON byte array with two fields: “d” is 
data as a JSON Object, and “f” is a unique data format 
identifier. In this case the format identifier “fd” is used, 
which tells us that the data is a fall detection format and that 
the data is in G (gravity). 
Next data is received at the body gateway, where data 
will be relayed to the Central Server, Figure 25, #2: 
 
{"d":0.156,"f":"fb","t":69585742574, 
 "u":"Foo Bar","s":"Accelerometer"}.  
 
Here additional fields are added, “t” is a timestamp in 
Unix time. “u” is the unique name for the BAN user, “s” is 
the unique sensor the data originated from. 
The last step is when data enters the database and is 
stored for later usage, Figure 25,# 3. 
For data presentation it was decided to use a combination  
 
 
Figure 25.  Communication flow. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 26.  Body gateway accelerometer curve. 
of JavaScript and HTML5. This allowed us to reuse UI code 
for both the Android smartphone and the central server.  
An example is shown in Figure 26 with accelerometer 
data displayed on the Android smartphone while Figure 27 
shows the same data presented in a browser that accesses the 
central server. 
C. Prototype casing for the ASE-BAN module 
To bring the ASE-BAN module out of the laboratory and 
into the hands of the user group a casing has been designed 
by an industrial designer. The design is based on the fall 
detection application but is open enough to be adapted to any 
application supported by the ASE-BAN platform. Figure 28 
shows the casing being used by a potential user.  
The black circle in the middle is a button for user while 
the green circle is a multi-color LED used to inform the user 
of system events. The back side features a secondary button 
used to test remaining battery capacity. When this button is 
pressed the LED will light up in green, orange or red 
depending on battery status. The bottom of the casing 
exposes two metal pads which mates with two matching pads 
when inserted into the charger as illustrated in Figure 29. 
The driving force behind the design has been to create 
something that the user would naturally embrace and think of 
as a decorative object. Both the center piece of the casing 
and the two “wings” come in different colors to allow users 
to make their individual unit unique. Furthermore, the design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 27.  Central server accelerometer curve. 
 
 
 
 
 

274
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28.  The ASE-BAN casing being worn by a user. 
of the backside of the casing makes it possible to wear it 
either as a broche or as a necklace. 
VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With additional personalized healthcare assistance a 
more comprehensive and affordable healthcare solution is 
provided to the BAN user. It is absolute vital that the 
solution is highly reliable and easy to configure and operate. 
Furthermore, it must be energy-efficient to ensure a long 
battery life-time.  
The next generation of wireless technologies is being 
driven by the rapid convergence of three key technologies: 
MicroElectroMechanical systems (MEMS), digital circuitry, 
and the explosive growth of wireless communications. 
Common to all three are reductions in size, weight, power 
consumption, and cost associated with the large number of 
units produced, as well as reductions in complexity and 
functionality.  
In sensor networks, energy consumption is of highest 
priority and the RF communication design blocks consume 
the most energy. Wireless sensor network designers strive to 
reduce the power consumption of the blocks in general. The 
improvement for wireless sensor network is likely to be used 
to reduce size and power consumptions instead of increasing 
capacity and speed. The use of energy harvesting is an 
important aspect of sensor devices. With a smart 
combination of energy efficient protocols and energy 
harvesting methods, the optimal solution for achieving 
autonomous and long-lasting BANs can be reached. 
Efficient protocol support is also needed for the IP based 
wireless sensor networks and the ongoing work of the IETF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 29.  The ASE-BAN casing and its charger. 
6LoWPAN working group is heading in this direction. This 
includes protocol optimization for small devices such as 
neighbor discovery, compression mechanisms for TCP, 
light-weighted key management protocols as well as energy 
efficient routing protocols.  
In essence, the implemented, modular wireless BAN 
testbed is flexible and can be customized to the individual 
needs of users. Our hardware platform is energy-efficient 
and has a low footprint. Whilst the basic capabilities of the 
testbed have been demonstrated there is still effort to be done 
in particular with respect to the software and protocol parts. 
As an example a plan exists to adapt the ASE-BAN testbed 
to the Medical / health device communication standards, i.e., 
the IEEE 11073 standards [51]. The IEEE 11073 standards 
specify the communication between medical/healthcare 
devices and external computer systems in a client-server 
architecture. Features such as automatic and detailed 
electronic data capture of client-related and vital signs 
information as well as device operational data can be 
communicated, from the BAN node application to servers 
residing at e.g., a hospital, over an IP network. Standards like 
IEEE 11073 are critically important to ensure multi-vendor 
interoperability thus enabling the personal healthcare to 
converge from today’s defragmented market where isolated 
solutions exist. 
The long term plan is to design a low-cost plug-and-play 
biomedical wearable computing network that can be 
integrated as part of a future ambient assisted living network, 
to be used e.g., for local personal real-time monitoring of an 
elderly person at home.   
To succeed there is a need to combine a number of 
competences like integrated electronics, communication 
technology, embedded real-time systems, software and 
digital signal processing. For the integrated electronics part, 
work with issues like power optimization is ongoing. With 
respect to communication technology the key issue is to 
design a wireless wearable and human centric network based 
on the communication channel in a near human body 
environment. For the software part plans are made for 
developing application frameworks for the different system 
components. Finally, with respect to signal processing, some 
of the data processing will be performed locally on the 
testbed. For certain applications the system must run in real-
time and have a very high reliability as e.g., with continuous 
heart-rate-variability monitoring. 
In future generation of ASE-BAN much more emphasis 
will be put into the security and privacy aspects. A security 
framework adapted to wireless body area network has to be 
sufficiently light-weighted to meet the constraints of the 
sensor devices. On the other hand it also needs to be capable 
of providing the in-depth security and privacy required for 
the 
wireless 
sensor 
applications. 
Flexible 
security 
mechanisms must be developed and new generation of 
system on chips must offer basic security features as an 
embedded part of the chip.  
Besides a more complete integration and intentions to 
apply the platform with trial users plans for a third 
generation platform are under preparation.  
 
 

275
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank designer Lena Monrad 
Gade from the company Designers by Choice for her novel 
and insightful design of a sensor node case. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. K. Madsen, H. Karstoft, F.O. Hansen, and T.S. Toftegaard, 
“ASE-BAN – a Wireless Body Area Network Testbed,” 
Proceedings EMERGING 2010, Florence, Italy, 2010, pp. 1-
4. 
[2] S. Wagner and C. Nielsen, "OpenCare project: An open, 
flexible and easily extendible infrastructure for pervasive 
healthcare assisted living solutions," 3rd International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare, April 2009, pp. 1-10. 
[3] P. Patel and J. Wang, “Applications, Challenges, and 
Prospective 
in 
Emerging 
Body 
Area 
Networking 
Technologies,” IEEE Wireless Communications, Februar 
2010, pp. 80-88. 
[4] K. Van Dam, S. Pitchers, and M. Barnard, “Body area 
networks: Towards a wearable future," in Proceedings of 
WWRF kick off meeting, Munich, Germany, 6-7 March 2001. 
[5] F.O. Hansen and T.S. Toftegaard “Requirements and System 
Architecture for a Healthcare Wireless Body Area Network”, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Health 
Informatics, 
HEALTHINF, January 2011, pp. 193-199. 
[6] G. Z. Yang, “Body Sensor Networks,” Springer-Verlag, 2006. 
London, U.K. 
[7] B. Latré, B. Braem, I. Moerman, C. Blondia, and P. 
Demeester, "A survey on wireless body area networks," 
Wirel.Netw., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1-18. 
[8] M. Chen, S. Gonzalez, A. Vasilakos, H. Cao, and V.C. Leung, 
"Body Area Networks: A Survey," Mob.Netw.Appl., vol. 16, 
no. 2, pp. 171-193. 
[9] C. Liolios, C. Doukas, G. Fourlas, and I. Maglogiannis, "An 
overview of body sensor networks in enabling pervasive 
healthcare and assistive environments," Proceedings of the 
3rd International Conference on Pervasive Technologies 
Related to Assistive Environments, ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, pp. 43:1-43:10. 
[10] K. JeongGil, L. Chenyang, M.B. Srivastava, J.A. Stankovic, 
A. Terzis, and M. Welsh, "Wireless Sensor Networks for 
Healthcare,", Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 98, no. 11, pp. 
1947-1960. 
[11] F. Tufail and M.H. Islam, "Wearable Wireless Body Area 
Networks," 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Management and Engineering, ICIME '09, April 2009, pp. 
656-660. 
[12] M.A. Hanson, H.C. Powell, A.T. Barth, K. Ringgenberg, B.H. 
Calhoun, J.H. Aylor, and J. Lach, "Body Area Sensor 
Networks: Challenges and Opportunities," Computer, vol. 42, 
no. 1, pp. 58-65. 
[13] S. Ullah, H. Higgins, B. Braem, B. Latré, C. Blondia, I. 
Moerman, S. Saleem, Z. Rahman, and K. Kwak, "A 
Comprehensive Survey of Wireless Body Area Networks," 
Journal of medical systems, pp. 1-30. 
[14] J. Xing and Y. Zhu, "A survey on body area network," 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Wireless 
communications, networking and mobile computing, IEEE 
Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 404-407. 
[15] C. Gomez and J. Paradells, “Wireless home automation 
networks: A survey of architectures and technologies”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 48, issue 6, 2010, pp. 92-
101. 
[16] Y. Hao and R. Foster, "Wireless body sensor networks for 
health-monitoring applications," Physiological Measurement, 
vol. 29, no. 11, pp. R27-R56.  
[17] J.M. Quero, C.L. Tarrida, J.J Santana, V. Ermolov, I. 
Jantunen, H. Laine, and J. Eichholz, "Health Care 
Applications Based on Mobile Phone Centric Smart Sensor 
Network," 29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS, August 
2007, pp. 6298-6301. 
[18] V. Shnayder, B. Chen, K. Lorincz, T.R.F. Fulford-Jones, and 
M. Welsh “Sensor nets for medical care,” Harvard University 
Technical Report TR-08-05, April 2005. 
[19] D. Curtis, E. Shih, J. Waterman, J. Guttag, J. Bailey, T. Stair, 
R.A. Greenes, and L. Ohno-Machado, “Physiological signal 
monitoring in the waiting area of an emergency room,” 
Proceedings of the ICST 3rd international conference on 
Body area networks, BodyNets 2008, pp. 5:1-5:8. 
[20] T. Gao, T. Massey, M. Sarrafzadeh, L. Selavo, and M.  
Welsh, “Participatory user centered design techniques for a 
large scale ad-hoc health information system,”  Proceedings 
of the 1st ACM SIGMOBILE international workshop on 
Systems and networking support for healthcare and assisted 
living environments, 2007, pp. 43-48. 
[21] S. Jiang, Y. Cao, S. Lyengar, P. Kuryloski, R. Jafari, Y. Xue, 
R. Bajcsy, and S. Wicker, “CareNet: an integratied wireless 
sensor networking environemnt for remote healthcare,” 
Proceedings of the ICST 3rd international conference on 
Body area networks, BodyNets 2008, pp. 9:1-9:3. 
[22] A.S. Mahmoud, T.R. Sheltami, and M.H. Abu-Amara,  
“Wireless sensor network implementation for mobile patient,” 
IEEE  GCC Conference, GCC, 2006, pp. 1-5. 
[23] R. DeVaul, M. Sung, J. Gips, and A. Pentland, “MIThril 
2003: applications and architecture,” Proceedings. Seventh 
IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers, 
October 2003, pp. 4-11.  
[24] E. Farella, A. Pieracci, and A. Acquaviva, “Design and 
implementation of WiMoCA node for a body area wireless 
sensor 
network,” 
Systems 
Communications, 
2005. 
Proceedings, 2005, pp. 342-347. 
[25] M.K. Garg, D. Kim, D.S. Turaga, and B. Prabhakaran, 
"Multimodal analysis of body sensor network data streams for 
real-time healthcare," ACM Proceedings of the international 
conference on Multimedia information retrieval, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 469-478. 
[26] M.R. Narayanan, M.E. Scalzi, S.J. Redmond, S.R. Lord, B.G. 
Celler, and N.H. Lovell, "A wearable triaxial accelerometry 
system for longitudinal assessment of falls risk," Engineering 
in Medicine and Biology Society, 2008. EMBS 2008. 30th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE, aug., pp. 2840-
2843.  
[27] P.S. Hall, Y. Hao, and S.L. Cotton, "Advances in antennas 
and propagation for body centric wireless communications," 
Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), 2010 Proceedings of the 
Fourth European Conference on, april, pp. 1-7. 
[28] T. Zasowski, F. Althaus, M. Stager, A. Wittneben, and G. 
Troster, "UWB for noninvasive wireless body area networks: 
channel measurements and results,", IEEE Conference on 
Ultra Wideband Systems and Technologies, 2003, pp. 285-
289. 
[29] R. Fisher, "60 GHz WPAN Standardization within IEEE 
802.15.3c", International Symposium on Signals, Systems and 
Electronics, ISSSE '07, August 2007, pp. 103-105.  
[30] S. Alipour, F. Parvaresh, H. Ghajari, and F.K. Donald,  
"Propagation characteristics for a 60 GHz Wireless body area 
network (WBAN)," Military Communications Conference, 
MILCOM, November 2010, pp. 719-723.  

276
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[31] C.C.Y. Poon, Y. Zhang, and S. Bao, "A novel biometrics 
method to secure wireless body area sensor networks for 
telemedicine 
and 
m-health," 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 73-81.  
[32] M. Pulli, “System for Monitoring People's Home Activities”, 
Dissertation/Thesis, Unpublished, Helsinki university of 
technology, 
Espoo, 
Finland, 
2010, 
url 
http://www.diem.fi/news/diem-thesis-a-system-for-
monitoring-peoples-home-activities, accessed January 2012. 
[33] A. Johansson, S. Wei, and X. Youzhi, “An ANT Based 
Wireless Body Sensor Biofeedback Network for Medical E-
Health Care”. 7th International Conference on Wireless 
Communications, 
Networking 
and 
Mobile 
Computing 
(WiCOM), 2011  pp.1-5 
[34] X. Yu, X. Xia, and X. Chen, “Design and Application of 
RuBee-Based Telemedicine Data Acquisition System”, 
IEEE/ACIS 10th International Conference on Computer and 
Information Science (ICIS), pp. 365-370, 2011.  
[35] L. Ho, M. Moh, Z. Walker, T. Hamada,and C-F. Su, “A 
prototype on RFID and sensor networks for elder healthcare: 
progress report”, Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM 
workshop on Experimental approaches to wireless network 
design and analysis, 2005, pp. 70-75. 
[36] ANT web site. URL: http://www.thisisant.com/. Accessed 
January 2012. 
[37] N.F. Timmons, and W.G. Scanlon, "Analysis of the 
performance of IEEE 802.15.4 for medical sensor body area 
networking," First Annual IEEE Communications Society 
Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and 
Networks, SECON 2004. November 2004, pp. 16-24. 
[38] D. Yazar and A. Dunkels, "Efficient application integration in 
IP-based sensor networks," Proceedings of the First ACM 
Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-
Efficiency in Buildings, 2009, pp. 43-48. 
[39] A. Natarajan, B. de Silva, K. Yap, and M. Motani, "To hop or 
not to hop: network architecture for body sensor networks," 
Proceedings of the 6th Annual IEEE communications society 
conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications 
and Networks. IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 682-
690. 
[40] IEEE 
802.15.4 
Task 
Group 
6 
(TG6). 
URL: 
http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG6.html. Accessed January 
2012. 
[41] S. Corroy and H. Baldus, "Low power medium access control 
for 
body-coupled 
communication 
networks,", 
6th 
International Symposium on Wireless Communication 
Systems, ISWCS, September 2009, pp. 398-402.  
[42] Y. Wei, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “An energy-efficient 
mac protocol for wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings of 
IEEE Twenty-First Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications Societies, INFOCOM, vol. 3, 
June 2002, pp. 1567–1576. 
[43] T. van Dam and K. Langendoen, “An adaptive energy-
efficient mac protocol for wireless sensor networks,” in 
Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Embedded 
networked sensor systems, SenSys03, November 2003, 
pp. 171-180. 
[44] A. El-Hoiydi and J. Decotignie, “Low power downlink mac 
protocols for infrastructure wireless sensor networks,” Mobile 
Networks and Applications, vol. 10, no. 5, October 2005, pp. 
675-690. 
[45] J. Polastre, J. Hill, and D. Culler, “Versatile low power media 
access for wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the 
2nd international conference on Embedded networked sensor 
systems, SenSys04, November 2004, p. 95-107. 
[46] S.A. Gopalan, D. Kim, J. Nah, and J. Park, "A survey on 
power-efficient MAC protocols for wireless body area 
networks," 3rd IEEE International Conference on Broadband 
Network and Multimedia Technology, IC-BNMT, October 
2010, pp. 1230-1234.  
[47] IETF 
6loWPAN 
working 
group. 
URL: 
http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/6lowpan/. 
Accessed 
January 
2012. 
[48] TinyOS web site,URL: http://www.tinyos.net. Accessed 
January 2012. 
[49] Contiki web site, URL: http://www.sics.se/contiki/. Accessed 
January 2012 
[50] A. Waluyo, I. Pek, X. Chen, W. Yeoh, “Design and 
evaluation of lightweight middelware for personal wireless 
body area network,”. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 
vol. 13, issue 9,  2009, pp. 509-525. 
[51] ISO/IEEE 11073 Personal Health Data (PHD) Standards, 
IEEE std. 11073-20601 – Application profile – optimized 
exchange protocol. 
[52] E. Kim, S. Lim, J. Ahn, J. Nah, and N. Kim, “Integration of 
IEEE 1451 and HL7 exchaning information for Patients 
sensor data,” Journal Medical Systems, vol. 34, issue 6, 2010, 
pp. 1033-1041. 
[53] IEEE std 1451.0-2007, “IEEE standard for smart transducer 
interface for sensors and acturators – common functions, 
communication protocols, and transducer electronic data sheet 
(TEDS) formats”. 
[54] B. Zhen, M. Pastel, S. Lee. E- Won. And A. Astrin, IEEE 
P802.15 Wireless Personal Area Network, “TG6 Technical 
Requirements Document”, IEEE P802.15 15-08-0644-09-
0006. 
URL: 
https://mentor.ieee.org/802.15/dcn/08/15-08-
0644-02-0006-tg6-technical-requirements-document.doc. 
Accessed January 2012. 
[55] V. Shnayder, B. Chen, K. Lorincz, T. Fulford-Jones, and M. 
Welsh, “Sensor Networks for Medical Care,” Proceedings of 
the 3rd international conference on Embedded networked 
sensor system, 2005, pp. 314-327.  
[56] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection 
algorithm”. IEEE Transaction on Biomedical Engineering, 
vol. BME-32, no. 3, 1985, pp. 230-236. 
[57] T. Falck, H. Baldus, J. Espina, and K. Klabunde, “Plug´n play 
simplicity for wireless medical body sensors,” Mobile 
Network Applications, vol. 12,  no.2-3, 2007, pp. 143-153. 
[58] ContinuaAlliance, http://www.continuaalliance.org. Accessed 
January 2012. 
[59] P. Brandão and J. Bacon, "Body sensor networks: can we use 
them?" M-PAC'09 Proceedings of the International Workshop 
on Middleware for Pervasive Mobile and Embedded 
Computing, 2009, pp. 3:1-3:6. 
[60] H. Mayumi and O. Masakazu, "Applying XML Web Services 
into Health Care Management," hicss, vol. 6, pp.155a, 
HISSC’05 Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 38th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2005, 
p. 155.1. 
[61] S. Saadaoui and L. Wolf, "Architecture Concept of a Wireless 
Body Area Sensor Network for Health Monitoring of Elderly 
People," 
4th 
IEEE 
Consumer 
Communications 
and 
Networking Conference, CCNC 2007, January 2007, pp. 722-
726. 
[62] E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and P.C. de Groen, “A 
wireless body area network of intelligent motion sensors for 
computer 
assisted 
rehabilitation,” 
Journal 
of 
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, Vol. 2, no. 6, 2005, 
pp. 6-16. 
[63] C. Otto, A. Milenkovic, C. Sanders, and E. Jovanov, “System 
Architecture of a wireless body area sensor network for 
ubiquitous health monitoring,” Journal of Mobile Multimedia. 
Vol. 1. No. 4, 2006, pp. 307-326. 

277
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[64] K. Kortermand, R.H. Jacobsen, and T.S. Toftegaard, "Routing 
analysis of wireless body area networks using path 
availability measurements," 4th International Conference on 
Biomedical Engineering and Informatics (BMEI), vol.3, 
October 2011,  pp. 1380-1385. 
[65] P. Levis, S. Madden, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, K. 
Whitehouse, A. Woo, D. Gay, J. Hill, M. Welsh, E. Brewer, 
and D. Culler. “TinyOS: An operating system for wireless 
sensor networks,” In Ambient Intelligence, Springer-Verlag, 
2004, pp. 115-148. 
[66] TinyOS 
web 
site, 
BLIP 
tutorial, 
 
URL: 
http://docs.tinyos.net/index.php/BLIP_Tutorial. 
Accessed 
January 2012. 
[67] Energy Micro, News Archieve: “Details of the energy 
friendly 
EFR4D 
radio 
product 
family”. 
URL: 
http://www.energymicro.com/news-archive/energy-micro-
announces-details-of-energy-friendly-radio-product-family, 
Accessed January 2012. 
[68] L. Krishnamachari, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker, "The impact of 
data aggregation in wireless sensor networks," ICDCSW '02 
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on 
Distributed Computing Systems, 2002, pp. 575-578.  
[69] Atmel 
ATmega128RF1 
Datasheet 
 
 
URL: 
http://www.atmel.com/dyn/resources/prod_documents/doc826
6.pdf, 2010. Accessed January 2012. 
[70] Texas Instruments CC430F6126 Datasheet. Doc. No. 
SLAS554E –MAY 2009–REVISED NOVEMBER 2010.  
Texas 
Instruments. 
URL: 
http://focus.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc430f6126.pdf. 
Accessed 
January 2012. 
[71] Ember 
EM351/EM357 
High-preformance, 
Integrated 
ZigBee/802.15.4 System-on-Chip. Datasheet: Ember, 2011. 
URL: 
http://www.ember.com/pdf/120-035X-
000_EM35x_Datasheet.pdf . Accessed January 2012. 
[72] Texas Instruments MSP430F1611 Datasheet,  Texas 
Instruments, 2011, URL: 
http://focus.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/msp430f1611.pdf. Accessed 
January 2012. 
[73] Chipcon CC2420 Datasheet. Texas Instruments, 2007. URL: 
http://focus.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc2420.pdf. Accessed 
January 2012 . 
[74] TelosB Datasheet, Memsic, 2010, URL: 
http://www.memsic.com/support/documentation/wireless-
sensor-networks/category/7-
datasheets.html?download=152%3Atelosb. Accessed January 
2012. 
[75] C. Gomez, A. Boix, and J. Paradells, “Impact of LQI-based 
routing metrics on the performance of a one-to-one routing 
protocol for IEEE 802.15.4 multihop networks,” EURASIP 
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, 2010, 
February 2010, pp. 6:1–6:20. 
[76] B. Chen, K.-K. Muniswamy-Reddy, and M. Welsh. “Ad-hoc 
multicast routing on resource-limited sensor nodes,” in 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multi-hop 
Ad, 2006, pp. 87–94.  
[77] J.W. Hui and D.E. Culler, “IPv6 in Low-Power Wireless 
Networks”, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 98, no. 11, 
pp. 1865-1878. 
[78] K. Jeonggil, A. Terzis, S. Dawson-Haggerty, D.E. Culler, 
J.W. Hui, and P. Levis, "Connecting low-power and lossy 
networks to the internet," IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 96-101.  
[79] Z. Shelby, “Embedded web services,” IEEE Wireless 
Communications, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 52-57. 
[80] K. Kuladinithi, O. Bergmann, T. Pötsch, M. Becker, and C. 
Görg. “Implementation of CoAP and its Application in 
Transport Logistics,” Presented at IP+SN 2011, April 11th 
2011, 
Chicago. 
URL: 
http://hinrg.cs.jhu.edu/joomla/images/stories/coap-ipsn.pdf. 
Accessed January 2011 
[81] P. Hii and W. Chung, "A Comprehensive Ubiquitous 
Healthcare Solution on an Android™ Mobile Device," 
Sensors, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 6799-6815. 
[82] Android 
OS: 
URL: 
http://code.google.com/intl/da-
DK/android/, Accessed January 2012. 
[83] A.A. Pena, “A feasibility Study of the Suitability of an 
AD5933-based Spectrometer for EBI Applications,” Final 
degree thesis, 9/2009, University of Borås. 
[84] DS/EN 60601-2-27. “Medical electrical equipment – Part 2-
27”, 2nd revision, 2006. 
[85] Guidelines. “Heart rate variability, Standards of measurement, 
physiological interpretation, and clinical use,” European Heart 
Journal vol. 17, 1996, pp. 354-381. 
[86] C. Park, P.H. Chou, Y. Bai, R. Matthews, and A. Hibbs, "An 
ultra-wearable, wireless, low power ECG monitoring system", 
Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, November 
2006, pp. 241-244. 
[87] T. Bragge, M.P. Tarvainen, P.O. Ranta-Aho, and P.A. 
Karjalainen, “High-resolution QRS fiducial point corrections 
in sparsely sampled ECG recordings,”  Physiological 
Measurement. 2005, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 743-753. 
[88] Analog Devices, “High Performance General Purpose 
Blackfin 
Processor,” 
2008, 
URL: 
http://www.analog.com/en/embedded-processing-
dsp/blackfin/adsp-bf533/processors/product.html. 
Accessed 
January 2012.  
[89] L. Nord and J. Haartsen, “The Bluetooth Radio Specification 
and the Bluetooth Baseband Specification”, Bluetooth, 1999-
2000. 
[90] H. Darabi, S. Khorram, H.M Chien, M.A. Pan, S. Wu, S. 
Moloudi, J.C., Leete, J.J. Rael, M. Syed, B. Ibrahim, M. 
Rofougaran, and A. Rofougaran, “A 2.4 GHz CMOS 
Transceiver for Bluetooth,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State 
Circuits, vol. 36, issue 12, 2001, pp. 2016-2024. 
[91] F.O. Eynde, J.J. Schmit, V. Charlier, R. Alexandre, C. 
Sturman, K. Coffin, B. Mollekens, J. Craninckx, S. Terrijn, A. 
Monterastelli, S. Beerens, P.Goetschalckx, M. Ingels, D. Joos, 
S. Guncer, and A. Pontioglu, “A fully integrated single chip 
SOC for Bluetooth,” 2001 IEEE Solid-State Circuits 
Conference, ISSCC, Digest of Technical Papers, 2001, 
pp. 196-197. 
[92] R. Amirtharajah, S. Meninger, J.O. Mur-Miranda, A. 
Chandrakasan, and J. Lang., “A micropwer programmable 
DSP powered using a MEMS based vibratio-to-electric 
energy 
converter,” 
2000 
IEEE 
Solid-State 
Circuits 
Conference, ISSCC, Digest of  Technical Papers, 2000, 
pp. 362-363. 
[93] K. Holger and A. Willig, “Protocols and Architectures for 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” Wiley 2005, pp. 40-45. 
[94] C. Andersen and E. Rasmussen,”Development of an energy 
optimized Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN),”. Master 
thesis at Aarhus University, December 2010. 
[95] SixXS 
IPv6 
Deployment 
& 
Tunnel 
Broker, 
URL: 
http://www.sixxs.net. Accessed January 2012.  
[96] CyanogenMod: 
А 
customized 
aftermarket 
firmware 
distribution, URL: http://www.cyanogenmod.com. Accessed 
January 2012. 
[97] JSON: 
JavaScript 
Object 
Notation, 
URL: 
http://www.json.org. Accessed January 2012. 
 
 

