206
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Overview and Future of Switching Solutions
for Industrial Ethernet
Gy¨orgy K´alm´an, Dalimir Orfanus, and Rahil Hussain
ABB Corporate Research Norway
{gyorgy.kalman, dalimir.orfanus, rahil.hussain}@no.abb.com
Abstract—Industrial Ethernet is the preferred network tech-
nology in industrial green ﬁeld deployments. Although the
performance of these networks is superior compared to legacy
ﬁeldbuses, the complexity of possible installations is an issue in
the ﬁeld. Both selection and placement of active devices and
efﬁciently running network services are causing problems in
planning and also during the life of the network. This paper
is giving an overview on implementation possibilities of switched
network in industrial applications with respect to performance,
features, logical architecture, and ﬂexibility. It also shows the
importance of time synchronization and presents current stan-
dardization work with focus on impact on industrial applications.
An outlook for expected future possibilities is shown, including
the use of Software Deﬁned Networking (SDN).
Keywords—industrial Ethernet, switch, embedded, discrete, soft
switch, forwarding, performance, QoS, SDN, 1588, 802.1AS
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extended version of our paper at ICN 2014,
An Overview of Switching Solutions for Wired Industrial
Ethernet [1]. Compared to the original, it contains an extended
state-of-the-art analysis, a section on time synchronization,
which is one of the most important features for industrial
applications, extended experiments and an outlook with an
introduction on how Software Deﬁned Networking (SDN)
could be used in an industrial setting.
Ethernet is already the dominating technology at the control
and higher levels of an automation network and is expected,
along with wireless Ethernet, to be the primary choice in ﬁeld
installations.
Because of resource constraints and Quality of Service
(QoS) requirements, most of the automation networks are
implemented as Local Area Networks (LANs) (Figure 1). The
motivation is twofold: ﬁrst, this approach leads to a simpler
network conﬁguration as there are no routing tables and there
are plenty of resources to utilize without the need to coordinate
with external nodes or other actors. Second, as the operation
is closer to the physical layer, the QoS parameters can be held
within more strict boundaries.
The paper is structured as follows: the second section
provides background overview on industrial Ethernet, then
current top design priorities are presented in the third: topology
and fourth: time synchronization. In the ﬁfth section, the pos-
sible switch architectures are presented including performance
requirements of different applications.
Then the possible architectural solutions are explained, with
discrete, embedded and soft switches as main categories.
Performance comparison is given based on our testbed mea-
surements focusing on latency and jitter. A conclusion on
possible ﬁelds of use for the discrete, embedded and soft
solutions is given. As a possible evolution, an outlook on SDN
for future industrial Ethernet planning and extensions towards
using Layer 3 networks and wireless solutions is shown.
Controller
Controller
Plant network/intranet
Client/server network
Control network
Fieldbus
Workplaces
Servers
ERP, Remote control
Proxy
Fig. 1. An example of automation network architecture
II. INDUSTRIAL ETHERNET BACKGROUND
Industrial Ethernet enables the use of standard Ethernet de-
vices and the IP protocol suite in automation networks [2]. By
implementing industrial network based on Ethernet, vendors
can create infrastructures that provide improved bandwidth,
resiliency, and network security compared to ﬁeldbus solutions
(Figure 1). As an additional value, the use of already estab-
lished standards lowers the risk associated with technology
development.
A number of issues emerge from the fact that the Eth-
ernet networks are replacing the ﬁeldbuses. A heritage of
the ﬁeldbus past including design processes is the dominant
cause of bus-like topologies (Figure 2) resulting in suboptimal
operation of Ethernet [3]–[5].
The most challenging topology types are long chains of
switches, which are often closed to form rings. While Rapid
Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP) was designed with loop-
avoidance in mind, it is currently widely used redundancy
protocol in the industry. In a ring structure, RSTP will disable
one link and render the active network topology into a special
tree, a line of switches.

207
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Redundant ring
Bus
Ring
Star
Redundant star
Fig. 2. Industrial Ethernet topologies
Although a line is a valid Ethernet topology and the
technology will work, the industrial network will suffer from
scalability issues due to much smaller end-node count than
it could be expected from ofﬁce experience [6], [7]. One of
the reasons is that the most industrial Ethernet protocols are
using standard Ethernet as bearer, with some exceptions such
as PROFINET IRT or EtherCAT, so the network operation is in
practice not different from the ofﬁce counterparts. However,
it runs on much less optimal infrastructure with more QoS
sensitive applications. The other problem is raising in the
requirements of precise timing. The need for synchronous op-
eration is apparent, e.g., in case of synchrophasor operations,
where the precise sampling of the waveform requires today a
GPS time source. To enhance resiliency and to lower costs,
time synchronization protocols are expected to provide a stable
solution allowing the operation of such services even if the
network is large and without the need to place an external
precise time source at each critical network point.
The very long and sparse spanning tree is having a low
branching factor (the average number of child links at each
switch) and can lead to excess latency and jitter [8]–[11]. As
compared to ofﬁce counterparts, more manually conﬁgured
nature of the industrial networks is creating another drawback:
in a typical network the root bridge is conﬁgured manually and
this node is typically not the one in the middle of the longest
chain to break it into two halves. Thus, in calculating expected
QoS parameters, the worst case having one single long line of
nodes is used.
Still, in the most of the industrial operations, processes and
automation tasks have tolerances several magnitudes higher
than the total jitter of a reasonably built industrial Ethernet
network could have. One of the exceptions is motion control
where deadlines can be close to the jitter and/or delay of
a large network, thus giving certain planning constraints.
This particular ﬁeld of automation shares requirements with
applications in very different ﬁelds, e.g., ﬁnance and telecom-
munication.
In the current applications, however, automation tasks are
focused on LAN operations, thus mostly the time-critical
planning stops at the LAN-WAN interface. In telecom uses
WAN environments are also included, which results in, e.g.,
different focus in standardization.
This convergence can clearly be seen from, e.g., the stan-
dardization efforts, where in addition to traditional networking
and industrial companies, telcos and silicon vendors are taking
a considerable effort.
III. TOPOLOGY
In ofﬁce environments, high port count switches are used
to implement a high branching factor network, thus the issues
associated with cascaded switches are less important [12],
[13]. Also, in a typical setup, an ofﬁce LAN is much earlier
divided into subnetworks using ﬁrewalls and/or routers than
reaching a deep spanning tree.
As an indirect result of the low branching factor and the
pressure for lower costs and relatively high price of managed
industrial Ethernet switches, the industrial installations are
experiencing pressure from both sides: on the one, the required
performance level is relatively high, especially for processing
delays and jitter. On the other hand, the price of such devices
on the market is relatively high in a project, because of the low
port count and low general utilization of the resources. The
recent trend is to include or integrate low port count switches
directly into devices, i.e., devices can be interconnected into
a cascade or a low branching factor tree without the need of
other external devices [14]. Such topology has also practical
impact on physical installation of cables: generally it is more
far more expensive to lead a bundle of cables across the whole
factory rather than a single cable that connects with the most
or even all devices.
Moving towards switch as an integrated feature might lead
to scalability problems because of increased latency and jitter
on long sparse trees. This scalability issue is more apparent
when integrated modules use low port count (2-3 ports, only
providing enough ports for daisy-chaining). However, higher
port count modules can be as ﬂexible as the current situation
with discrete devices in ﬁeldbuses. The only limitation for
the scalability of networks [15]–[17] can be when the daisy-
chaining solution with few ports is combined with time-critical
automation tasks.
Integrated switches are expected to lower the cost of
building the network with lowering the amount of standalone
devices and with better integration to the automation devices.
The expected feature set is similar or equivalent to discrete
units. In following sections we provide an overview of the
typical embedded switch architectures and how they could be
ﬁtted into the industrial landscape.
IV. TIME SYNCHRONIZATION
One of the most important features in the current industrial
deployments is the possibility and capability of precise time
synchronization throughout the network.
The convergence between the industrial, telecom and ﬁ-
nance requirements for a synchronous operation lead to that
two standardization groups in IEEE are working on extend-
ing the current synchronization solutions towards additional
networks and to widen their application areas.

208
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Synchronizing time was always an important question over
network applications, time references, timestamps are widely
used in communication both for management, message ex-
change, logging and security applications. However, the gran-
ularity and the level of synchronization very much depends
on the application. For less demanding tasks, e.g., process
automation, a protocol with a fraction of a second precision
would be sufﬁcient. On the other end, (ﬁne) motion control ap-
plications or power electronics would require sub microsecond
level synchronization [18] to operate in a coordinated man-
ner (Figure 3). Also in the incident management is important
to be able to put the chain of events into the correct order.
Today the standard requirement for switched Ethernet is
to support IEEE 1588v2 as the time synchronization proto-
col [19].
Another motivation for high precision time synchronization
is also to ﬁlter out the non-deterministic processing delay in
the active network components (switches, routers etc.). For
this reason, IEEE 1588v2 supports Layer 2 time stamping
of frames and different layers of procedures to enhance the
precision.
The ﬁrst place is in the network itself. Relay nodes in the
network (switches, routers etc.) are introducing variable frame
delay because they queue frames. This delay depends on the
amount of trafﬁc in the transit at a particular relay point. In
IEEE 1588 the delay at a transit point can be calculated form
timestamps put on ingress and egress frames.
The second level is the node level, which can be either
an end node or a relay node. Timestamps are created in a
way that the end node can calculate the correct time within a
precision limit. In intermediate nodes, both at an ingress and
egress ports the frame timestamps are updated to correct the
transit time with the residence time in the node in order to
keep the precision. The reason why IEEE 1588 and also other
high precision synchronization protocols cannot rely solely on
ﬁltering solutions in upper layers is, that the measurement
of time (here arrival and departure times) should be done as
close to the physical medium as possible. Closeness to the
physical world lowers uncertainties and allows for a more
accurate measurement. Explicitly, IEEE 1588, if enabled, uses
a hardware time stamper connected directly to the Ethernet
card between the PHY and the MAC, to allow accurate
measurement in the required precision range.
While this is a very efﬁcient and good placement for a high
precision stamping unit [20], the direct connection to wired
Ethernet was also found to be a limitation, so in the future
versions, it is expected that a hardware abstraction layer will
be introduced to open for more networking technologies.
A. IEEE 1588v3
The work on the new version of the current standard
Precision Time Protocol (PTP) is ongoing. The standard is
expected to undergo a major overhaul compared to the v2
released in 2008 [22].
The new standard is expected to follow the example of the
architecture of IEEE 802.1AS, which was originally developed
Fig. 3. Timing requirements for industrial Ethernet [21]
for Audio/Video applications but currently evolving into a
much more generic protocol under the IEEE Time Sensitive
Networks group. To forecast the evolution of industrial Eth-
ernet, it is important to get an view on how IEEE 1588v3 is
expected to evolve compared to v2 [23].
• Common Management Information Base (MIB): The cur-
rent 1588v2 landscape is somewhat disrupted as several
parallel proﬁles exist, which are not fully compatible with
each other. An example is the IEEE C37.238, the power
proﬁle, which uses a different MIB compared to other
proﬁles, thus management of the complete time domain
is more challenging.
• A layered protocol structure: The current PTP version
uses functions which are stretching across network layers
and thus limiting generic implementations of the protocol,
where, e.g., the clock state machine can be reused even
if the physical layer is exchanged.
• High availability synchronization: the protocol is planned
to offer a solution for having multiple clocks in the time
domain, where they can take over the master’s role within
speciﬁed limits.
• Security: IEEE 1588v3 is expected to provide a security
mechanism to protect the time quality by using crypto-
graphic functions for authenticity and integrity checking.
• Wider scope: The new PTP version is expected to support
a wider range of networking technologies, including Wiﬁ
networks and wireless sensor networks. Support for time
synchronization over IP is expected.
The most important change is to apply a proper protocol
architecture where the media-dependent parts are connecting
to the upper layers of the protocol through a standard interface.
This enables 1588v3 to run on different networks.
Another difference w.r.t. 802.1AS is that 1588 does not
require time-aware infrastructure. It can apply sophisticated
ﬁltering to reach good precision, although it would be less
precise than with direct layer 2 stamping.
B. IEEE 802.1AS
The development of 802.1AS started as an audio/video
technology. The intended use was to support synchronized
network streams to be delivered over a LAN and requires time-
aware infrastructure. The protocol was deﬁned partially as a

209
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
strict proﬁle (subset) of 1588v2, but also has extended the
1588 protocol so the compatibility is limited.
IEEE 802.1AS was planned already with a proper protocol
layering and from the beginning it was expected to support
several network technologies. It has raised the interest of
industrial actors and later the audio/video focus was extended
to cover any kind of service which needs high precision time
synchronization.
The 802.1AS focuses on synchronized services on bridged
networks and the standardization is ongoing with high effort.
The most important current ﬁelds are:
• A
frame
preemption
technique
in
the
bridges
(P802.1Qbu)
• An Ethernet trafﬁc scheduling technique (P802.1Qbv)
• New trafﬁc shapers
• Next
version
of
the
Stream
Reservation
Protocol
(SRP)(P802.1Qcc)
With IEEE 802.1 TSN, the network itself will use the
time that is transported. Both the Ethernet trafﬁc scheduling
functionality and time triggered trafﬁc shapers will utilize time
for correct execution.
The addition of a reservation protocol, having preemption
and scheduling makes this standardization effort very impor-
tant for industrial actors. This could mean that IntServ-like
QoS functions could be deployed on an L2 network, which
until now had to accept to have only simple ﬁltering, priorities
and very simple trafﬁc management rules.
C. IETF TICTOC
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is working on a
time synchronization solution with focus on WANs as well.
Their focus is on running time synchronization over large net-
works, e.g., running 1588 over Multiprotocol Label Switching
(MPLS).
D. Convergence
It is expected that the two protocols, as they both are being
developed by nearly the same actors under the umbrella of
the same organization, will be able to at least coexist on the
same network. Even more, a cooperation between the protocols
would be beneﬁcial, as there 802.1AS could take over in LANs
and 1588v3 could cover all the other networks.
V. ARCHITECTURE POSSIBILITIES
With a few exceptions, only managed switches are being
deployed in industrial Ethernet networks. This is a result of the
different requirements, e.g., prioritization and Virtual LANs
(VLANs) are rising in the industrial environment compared to
the ofﬁce networks.
A. Discrete switches
Unmanaged switches offer a low-price connectivity solu-
tion, where leafs are placed into the same network and the
ingress trafﬁc can be treated with the same rules independently
of the port. The biggest advantage of the unmanaged devices
is their simplicity. The simple silicon offers more deterministic
operation (there are no multiple user-conﬁgured rules and
preferences to check), higher reliability (typically in safety
deployments an unmanaged switch represents much lower
failure risk), lower heat dissipation and lower price.
Unfortunately, in most cases and despite their advantages,
unmanaged switches are not considered as typical require-
ments in industrial installations. Typical requirements are
redundancy functions, trafﬁc prioritization and extended status
reports, which are not available in unmanaged devices.
Managed switches offer redundancy and loop-avoidance
functions (e.g., RSTP) with logical segmentation using
VLANs, remote management with Simple Network Manage-
ment Protocol (SNMP) and troubleshooting features such as
port mirroring.
There are also devices in the ofﬁce networks, located
between these two levels, called smart switches. They offer the
most of the managed switch functions, but lack for example
SNMP management. Introducing a similar class of devices
into automation networks where only the necessary protocols
are selected might be of interest, since having a more grained
approach on switch features can lead to a more cost-effective
network architecture. Also, in safety and security ﬁelds, it
is beneﬁcial to have as simple devices as possible, also in
the software running on them. A switch, where a part of
the protocols are being left out (e.g., VoIP-related if no VoIP
system is in operation) simpliﬁes the checking and certiﬁcation
tasks.
Fig. 4. Typical switch size comparison
There are few arguments against the use of discrete switches
and most of them originate from the speciﬁc industrial land-
scape: the low branching factor, which results in a high
number of low port-count switches, as shown on Figure 4. The
high number of standalone switches and the rugged hardware
leads to an expensive network infrastructure with most of the
resources being unused.
The low port count is even more apparent in the daisy-
chained ﬁeld networks, where Ethernet is also expected to
replace the legacy communication solutions but typically it
has to utilize the same topology.
In such environments, using the typical 8-10 port managed
switches is rather expensive, as even such a low port count will
not be utilized in addition to the higher management effort.
To overcome price pressure, excessive engineering complexity
and dependency on third party devices, vendors move towards
embedded solutions.

210
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. EMBEDDED SWITCHES
Integrating a switch module into devices like controllers is
on the agenda of automation vendors. These modules could
take tasks of discrete switches in the lower levels of automa-
tion networks. The construction of these units is potentially
cheaper than using a separate switch (e.g., a low-end switch
fabric) and can provide a few gigabit/second of non-blocking
bandwidth.
There are several important issues around the integration
of devices. The ﬁrst is the question of interface towards the
host device. The typical architecture offers an internal interface
towards the host, which is implemented as a standard, but
internal, Ethernet link. This setup is analogue with the discrete
switch case, only the interface connecting the host and the
switch has been exchanged with the internal connection.
Switch modules, by default, only forward the trafﬁc and all
features, which are needed to implement a managed switch,
have to be run on the host or the switch module has to be
extended with trafﬁc processing capabilities.
Integrated modules are expected to deliver similar perfor-
mance results as their low port count discrete counterparts and
also to offer the similar range of services. The cost of such a
solution could be still lower as compared to the separate unit,
as several components can be shared with the host, e.g., power
supply, casing and user interface, while a potential risk is the
software support and compatibility for mixed or brown ﬁeld
deployments.
If the management functions are implemented by using the
CPU on the host, multicore platforms can be exploited by
moving the forwarding-connected functions to one core and
running the other functions on another core, even on a different
operating system if needed by utilizing virtualization.
The possible drawback with these modules is that the host
is still only connected with one internal port. This means that
if the aggregated bandwidth use exceeds the host’s bandwidth,
the host has no possibility to monitor the whole network trafﬁc.
The lack of full monitoring possibility is problematic if the
switch module itself cannot report hazardous trafﬁc situations
with, e.g., raising a signal when a port experiences trafﬁc con-
gestion. Also the implementation of trafﬁc prioritization can
be problematic if not at least parts of the task is implemented
in the silicon.
It is clear, that for the industrial applications, unmanaged
switches offer less than the required functionality, but on
the other hand, fully featured managed switches, especially
the low latency ones originally developed for core operation
or ﬁnance applications are too expensive and most of their
features will not be utilized.
A. Minimum acceptable service level
A non-conventional approach is to minimize the imple-
mented features of the devices. Typical requirements state that
the switches used should be managed, but the actual feature
set is not deﬁned. Currently, managed switches typically im-
plement the whole feature set expected from a managed switch
(complying to IEEE 802.1D), but in most cases, only a handful
of features are actually used and also out of these, some are
enabled by using the default conﬁguration (e.g., weighting of
frames in QoS queues).
A reduction in both cost and management effort could
be realized by implementing a set of minimum acceptable
service-level switches. An ofﬁce network approach is the smart
switch device class, for example the NetGear JFS524e, where
the feature set is restricted to offer easier management and cost
reduction in hardware. The smart switches represent more a
restricted managed switch, but in the industrial environment,
an approach from the opposite direction, extending the features
of an unmanaged switch might be more interesting.
The motivation to use such devices is partly supported by
the reduced development and device cost, but more impor-
tantly, the special circumstances of industrial deployments
are also supporting this solution. One of the more complex
services of the discrete switches is connected to trafﬁc manip-
ulation and security functions.
The gain associated with, e.g., Internet Group Management
Protocol (IGMP) is that it can reduce the link load by grouping
the receivers of multicast streams and also to protect other
devices from using resources on trafﬁc, which they have no use
for. Protocols Multiple MAC Registration Protocols (MMRP)
and Multiple VLAN Registration Protocol (MVRP), are also
expected to reduce trafﬁc load in areas where, e.g., a VLAN
has no clients conﬁgured.
The other group of protocols are the network operation
functions, e.g., RSTP, and IEEE 802.1X using Remote Authen-
tication Dial In User Service (RADIUS). These protocols are
run to keep the network loop-free and ensure network integrity
and to allow secure authentication of new nodes.
Although all of these protocols are useful in an average
network topology, in the industry-typical long and sparse
trees, their gain is reduced. For increased trafﬁc effectiveness:
because of operational safety, networks anyway have to be
designed so, that they can carry the whole network trafﬁc,
so the gain offered by grouping protocols might be limited.
The main problem associated with grouping protocols in the
typical line topology is that the resources need to be reserved
over the whole path if nodes are expected to join or leave on
the ports. The trafﬁc reduction efﬁciency for line topologies
depend on the actual trafﬁc type.
For
example,
Multiple
VLAN
Registration
Protocol
(MVRP) might cut out some VLANs to be carried on a speciﬁc
path, but if new nodes are allowed to join to a segment, the
bandwidth for carrying additional or all of the existing VLANs
shall be possible, thus the bandwidth spared by MVRP shall
be reserved. In case of multicast protocols, like MMRP can
be beneﬁcial, but in this case also, at least the bandwidth need
for all multicast groups shall be reserved even if not all of the
groups are transmitted.
The execution of RSTP might also be of limited use, if the
switches are organized in a chain and in every case, if the main
uplink is broken, the other designated port towards the other
switches will be chosen. Also, the topology of these networks
is very static.

211
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A possible solution is to use a compromise: deploy as
simple as possible switches where chained topologies are
used and include fully-featured discrete units where a tree
connection structure is used (e.g., interconnecting rings or
network backbone). Thus, the discrete units can run all the
grouping protocols and reduce the load introduced to the
ring, but inside the ring no further optimization is done. The
simple devices shall be transparent on all protocols they do
not support.
VII. SOFT SWITCHES
Embedded communication solutions are now allowing the
implementation of a soft switch processing trafﬁc of several
gigabit/s of trafﬁc on low consumption System on a Chips
(SoCs). These are typically combined from an embedded CPU,
a set of independent network controllers and a chipset, which
integrates these into one system.
The positive point with these setups is that the host is the
switch: it is possible to monitor the whole trafﬁc ﬂow directly
on the interfaces. Also, the platform can provide a good basis
for feature extensions toward implementing a router, ﬁrewall
or network monitoring appliances. The industry can proﬁt here
with the evolution of SoCs in the recent years, reaching very
high performance and integration with low power consumption
and versatile usage areas, e.g., different ARM cores with inte-
grated analogue-digital converters, various network adapters,
on dye memory, cryptographic functions and storage.
A high performance, multicore SoC can also serve as a
platform for automation tasks and with the use of a multicore
CPU, the communication and automation tasks could be run
separated. With virtualization being also offered in this price
and performance segment, it is also possible to even run tasks
on separate, isolated operating systems, using dedicated cores.
The main drawback of soft switches is the absence of the
dedicated switching fabric. The throughput of the platform is
prone to the actual implementation of the system and network
adapter interconnection, used drivers and operating systems
as well. Also, the limitations of the bus system and the
network interfaces are summed, which can lead to insufﬁcient
performance in low latency environments. The price tag of
such a solution can be justiﬁed if the device is utilized also in
other tasks not only bridging.
VIII. FEATURE COMPARISON
The reviewed architectures show that if the switching
solution is chosen, the future possibilities regarding trafﬁc
management, performance and feature set are being reduced.
Discrete switches offer high performance and a long list
of management features and supported protocols. Embedded
switch modules are implementing switching, but protocol and
management features have to be implemented by the host or
by a separate CPU and they only offer statistic multiplexing
towards the host if utilized bandwidth exceeds what the host
interface can carry. Soft switches are in practice implementing
the embedded switch scenario but without the hardware switch
module, thus while offering full access to all trafﬁc crossing
the interfaces, they also suffer from the largest delays.
From the forwarding performance side, for large port counts,
discrete switches offer the best solution, since a high-speed,
non-blocking backplane is a hard requirement in this area. For
smaller and medium sized switches (4-16 ports), an integrated
module can also be viable. For low port count even the
cheaper backplane solutions can provide enough bandwidth. It
is also less probable, that such a switch will be experiencing
a situation where all of the ports are fully utilized.
Our measurements on the forwarding latency and through-
put of switches showed marginal differences between discrete
and embedded solutions while the tests executed on the soft
switch platform resulted in weaker performance ﬁgures.
IX. PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
A. Measurement and test equipment
Our test was implemented with the use of an array of
discrete managed switches. The trafﬁc generator was a Softing
Industrial Ethernet Tester (OEM Psiber LanExpert 80), which
can generate trafﬁc between its two gigabit Ethernet interfaces
and was acting as trafﬁc source and sink.
Our tests were split into two areas: one was to measure the
latency between two ports of the same switch to provide a
way to compare the raw performance. The second area was to
show switched Ethernet behavior in a typical industrial setup,
where switches are chained and the ingress and egress links
are only 100Mbps while inter-switch links are 1Gbps. The
initial results based on the LanExpert measurements showed
no signiﬁcant difference in latency or throughput between the
embedded and discrete units.
To measure the latency between 100Mbps endpoints, we
need preciseness ideally at the level of a bit-duration or better,
which is 10ns for the Fast Ethernet. Since the LanExpert’s
measurement capabilities were not satisfactory for generation
of the statistics and exact measurement of forwarding behavior
in a cascade, we decided to use the EtherCAT network
consisting of the master (a Freescale P2020 development board
utilizing a dual-core PowerPC e500 CPU) and two slaves
(Figure 5. EtherCAT provides service called Distributed Clock
(DC), which can precisely synchronize clock in slaves with
time resolution of 10ns and has dedicated hardware in slaves
to measure network latency.
Test segment
Loopback
100M
100M
P2020
Time reference
Fig. 5. Testbed setup
To assess the performance of the selected equipment and to
be able to provide guidelines for network planning, we set up
the following measurements.

212
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Default forwarding latency
Measurement of the time it takes for the frame to traverse
the switch. It is composed from store and forward latency
(LSF ), the switch fabric latency (LSW ), the wire line latency
(LW L) and the queuing latency (LQ) [24].
LSF depends on the frame length. The results are expected
to show a linear growth of the latency with the longer frames
[25].
Ingress sw.
Egress sw.
100M
100M
Switch 2
Switch 3
1G
1G
1G
1
2
3
4
Fig. 6. Test segment setup
Our architecture related measurement scenarios deals with
latency between endpoints (both with 100Mbps) of serial con-
nected switches and without any additional interfering trafﬁc
(see Figure 6). The purpose is to see the raw latency scaling of
a network built by a chain of switches. We have four scenarios,
each of them consisting with 1 up to 4 switches. Switches
are between themselves connected with 1Gbps link. Initial
measurements showed, in accordance with the LanExpert
measurements, no signiﬁcant difference between the discrete
and embedded units, so the testbed was created by using 4
RuggedCom RS940G switches.
C. Standalone forwarding
Latencies and throughput between two interfaces of the
same switch was measured with the LanExpert device and
the results showed no signiﬁcant difference between the capa-
bilities of the embedded or the discrete units.
Measurements were performed on switches, which repre-
sent a signiﬁcant part of the market: RuggedCom RS940G,
Hirschmann RSR30, Moxa EDS-G509, a board based on
Marvell 88E6352 switch chip and a soft switch using a stock
Ubuntu linux and an Intel Xeon CPU with four chipset-
integrated gigabit Ethernet interfaces. As a control, a test
was also executed on a Cisco SG 200 switch (approximately
the same performance class as the tested industrial variants),
where differences in the results were also insigniﬁcant com-
pared to the industrials. The measured latencies of the Marvell
module are marginally lower, than the discrete counterparts,
which are expected to be the result of the simpler architec-
ture, as the module in the tested form implements only an
unmanaged switch.
The only considerable difference could be observed with
the soft switch platform. It was not expected to hold the same
latency ﬁgures but the maximal frame frequency of approx-
imately 180kfps is low compared to the rest of the devices
(Table I). Although the latency is also higher (Table II), the
ﬁgures stay mostly within acceptable range for the majority of
networking tasks. The low throughput observed with shorter
frames in contrast, limits the speciﬁc setup’s usability since it
will not be able to utilize the bandwidth in case of a setup
like our test segment, where two interfaces need to carry the
TABLE I
THROUGHPUT IN K FRAMES PER SECOND FOR RESPECTIVE FRAME SIZES
USING 1 GBPS LINKS
Frame size
RS940G
RSR30
EDS-G509
88E6352
soft
64
1481
1485
1485
1485
179
128
840
842
842
842
178
256
452
452
452
452
178
512
234
234
234
234
166
1024
119
119
119
119
119
1280
96
96
96
96
96
1518
81
81
81
81
81
TABLE II
LATENCY IN MICROSECONDS FOR RESPECTIVE FRAME SIZES USING 1
GBPS LINKS
Frame size
RS940G
RSR30
EDS-G509
88E6352
soft
64
5
5
5
3
16
128
5
5
5
4
16
256
6
6
6
5
18
512
8
9
8
7
33
1024
12
13
12
11
114
1280
14
15
14
13
93
1518
16
17
16
15
99
Fig. 7. Scenarios 1-4
aggregated trafﬁc. It is expected that with different operating
system and driver optimizations, better performance can be
achieved.
D. Scaling of latency in a chain
Our measurements using the testbed extended with a vari-
able cascade of switches (Figure 6 show that the discrete
switches scaled as expected. When no additional trafﬁc was
injected to the measured interfaces, the latency growth was
linear with minor variations. Measurements using an industry-
typical scenario with 100 Mbps edge links and 1 Gbps
internal links were executed. Four scenarios were measured,
compromising of chains of 1-4 switches (Figure 7).
Also, the histogram on Figure 8 shows the expected be-
havior: the longer the chain is built, the wider is the range
of latencies measured. The determinism of the switching
solutions can be seen on the measurements and that in low
trafﬁc installations a linear growth of latency can be expected.
The histogram of the measurements showed the expected
result, with having the most step-like distribution at using
one switch and a still narrow but wider distribution of frame
latencies for longer switch chains.

213
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8000
9000
10000
11000
12000
13000
14000
15000
Frequency
Nanosecond
1sw
2sw
3sw
4sw
Fig. 8. Histogram Scenarios 1-4
E. Behavior under load
As an extension, the testbed was also used to execute
measurements under load, to check how the devices react on
a selection of trafﬁc situations.
Behavior on crossing trafﬁc was tested, where the switch
fabric was tested if it is in fact non-blocking. In the range of
devices tested, there was no signiﬁcant difference compared
to the no trafﬁc scenarios (Figure 9, which shows that the
hardware is using a non-blocking architecture.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10400
10450
10500
10550
10600
10650
10700
10750
Frequency
Nanosecond
No trafic
Full load, max size
Full load, min size
Fig. 9. Switch fabric stress test histogram
Also when jitter with regard to frame length was checked,
the results were in line with the expectations with showing
stable low deviations in the no trafﬁc case (where the measure-
ment frame was the only payload transmitted on the network)
and the case where minimum length frames were sent over
the network.
The trafﬁc made from full length frames, as expected were
suffering more (Figure 10), as both their transmission time and
the possible waiting time is longer.
Fig. 10. Jitter with different frame sizes
The histogram (Figure 11) also shows the expected be-
havior, where in the no other trafﬁc situation the roundtrip
times have little variation, where at the maximum length frame
measurements show a relatively high jitter, which is introduced
by the long transmission time.
Fig. 11. Histogram of jitter for different frame sizes
One of the main sources of industrial skepticism against
Ethernet is the non-deterministic operation of the net-
work. While our experiments show that the expected non-
deterministic transmission times do happen and that in case
of long frames, the jitter is high compared to the minimal or
the typical transmission times, it is important to point out, that
this low jitter values only have relevance in a few applications
only. The measurements showed a maximum deviance of
approximately 5000 nanoseconds per hop. In more realistic
trafﬁc mixes, where the industry-typical short to medium sized
frames would take the bulk of the trafﬁc, also with the typically
low bandwidth utilization, the experienced jitter would be
much lower. Still, even if the worst case with maximum length
frames is taken, compared to real applications, like process
automation and most of manufacturing, the tolerance of the
measurement or control loop is several magnitudes higher than
the jitter introduced by the communication subsystem.
The insigniﬁcance of jitter is especially valid if there is a
Layer 3 device in the path (e.g., ﬁrewall or a gateway), where
it is expected, that device alone will introduce a higher delay
than the whole section of L2 network before and after. In case
operator reaction is needed, the tolerance is even higher, as
humans react in fraction of a second or close to a second, so
the delay introduced by the operator would be much higher
than the jitter.
X. OUTLOOK
In the foreseeable future, industrial network installations
will follow the chained structures, mainly because of the in-
dustry’s traditional skepticism for changes and partly because
of the costs associated with additional cabling.
The evolution of industrial Ethernet will proceed towards
higher device integration, where ﬁrst, the switches will be
included in the automation controllers and other devices, and
which will proceed with integrating most of the active network
devices.
It is expected, that only the site level high performance
devices, which have a large resource need on their own will
still be independent devices, but these will most probably

214
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be shared between the industrial and telecom ﬁelds. This
sharing is opening a very promising ﬁeld, Software Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) for the industrial market as the support
functions will be available in the high-end active devices
supplied by networking companies and the industrial area
offers a relatively simple, static and homogeneous world.
The strongly limited industrial environment represents a
good starting point for deploying networks using SDN. The
range of devices is much smaller as compared to ofﬁce
environments and, especially in green ﬁeld deployments; the
network is controlled by one vendor.
Trafﬁc on an industrial network also tends to be determin-
istic, having periodic communication as part of the control
loops, periodic updates of the logs and infrequent best effort
trafﬁc related to end node maintenance.
SDN ﬁts very well the wishes of industrial vendors:
• hiding network complexity, which lowers the pressure on
engineers,
• allows simpler service deployment,
• possibility for central resource management,
• seamless integration of wireless technologies.
A. Network complexity
The network topology and node types provide a good basis
for experimenting with SDN in an industrial setting. The used
topologies are not complex, the type of nodes is limited and
the typical operation is static.
So an abstraction from the physical nodes could be imple-
mented with limited effort as there is no need for a generic
solution. In a typical installation, even before using integrated
switches, a handful of types would be deployed together
with a large number of end nodes, which from the network’s
viewpoint, operate nearly the same. As the typical trafﬁc is
machine-to-machine, the dynamism of the trafﬁc is limited
compared to non-industrial scenarios.
The use of SDN would although come from a different mo-
tivation as compared to, e.g., telecom installations. While there
the use of SDN would enable better dynamism and abstraction
of control from forwarding to allow more ﬂexible network
utilization, the industrial scenario is more about having a
centralized control over the network, including forwarding
decisions (no local conﬁguration of the integrated devices is
necessary) and for implementing a type of call admission
control. With admission control, the SDN controller could
check if a newly deployed control loop or other trafﬁc source
could be securely ﬁt into the current resource utilization or
there is a need for more changes in the infrastructure.
Also the granularity of control would be extended, as with
SDN it is possible to inﬂuence forwarding decisions on a
per ﬂow basis. This means, that the engineer will be able
to globally prioritize trafﬁc ﬂows, have a total overview on
forwarding decisions and have a central entity to ensure
that the conﬁguration of devices is actually the one what is
expected.
B. Service deployment
In and SDN case, the central management entity can change
the conﬁguration and forwarding behavior of the underlying
devices. This could lead to cost savings in both infrastructure,
as currently over provisioning is typical in the ﬁeld, or in
lowering the resources needed for engineering since the trafﬁc
estimates would be made by the SDN system and not the
engineers.
An additional gain would be that an SDN system could
deploy a new service without disturbing the current operation,
which would reduce costs related to planned downtimes. The
abstraction of hardware and central intelligence leads also
towards simpler integrated devices.
C. Central resource management
Currently, SNMP-based Network Management Systems
(NMSs) are widely used for monitoring the health and status
of large network deployments. Using SDN could also here be
beneﬁcial, as the monitoring functionality would be extended
with the ability of actively changing conﬁgurations and re-
source allocations if needed.
D. Wireless integration
Another key ﬁeld currently is the integration of wireless
networks into industrial deployments. Although there is skep-
ticism for the usage of wireless solutions both because of
determinism and security, already now, a growing part of the
deployments use wireless solutions. Here SDN could help with
integration of wireless technologies by checking if the needs
of a new service, e.g., can be satisﬁed with a path having one
or more wireless hops or a new rule has to be deployed into
the network to steer the trafﬁc of that service on a different
path.
E. Vendor-neutrality
As also Ethernet deployments are getting old enough to be
part of plant upgrades or new deployments with multiple sup-
pliers, SDNs capability of giving a vendor-neutral abstraction
of the network would be a great advantage.
XI. CONCLUSION
Our review shows that with regard to forwarding perfor-
mance and latency, embedded switching solutions present a
competitive solution compared to discrete units. Although, the
offered set of features might differ and for managed functions,
either the host CPU or an additional CPU for the switching
board needs to be used, the performance expectation can be
the same.
Soft switching on the other hand might be problematic when
using a non-real time operating system and non-optimized
drivers. If the software selection would move towards these,
on the other hand, the ﬂexibility of the platform would be
limited. Our measurements showed that soft switches might
be too slow to be used in a chained topology, but might be
applicable in cases, where additional processing is required,
for example as a controller with several network interfaces.

215
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Our conclusion is that if there are no clear requirements for
trafﬁc monitoring capabilities exceeding the bandwidth of the
host-switch module link, embedded switches are a viable and
effective solution for low branching factor industrial networks.
Soft switches are a viable solution for implementing routers
or other network functions, where the additional latency com-
pared to the other switching solutions is not critical as the
processing of the data on higher layers will contribute to more
latency and jitter as the switching.
In a broader perspective, the identiﬁed problems for indus-
trial Ethernet switching lie more on the feature set than in the
hardware performance.
REFERENCES
[1] G. K´alm´an, D. Orfanus, and R. Hussain, “An overview of switching
solutions for wired industrial ethernet,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth
International Conference on Networks, IARIA, Nice, France, 2014, pp.
131–135.
[2] J. Kay, R. Entzminger, and D. Mazur, “Industrial ethernet- overview
and best practices,” in Pulp and Paper Industry Technical Conference,
Conference Record of 2014 Annual, June 2014, pp. 18–27.
[3] F. Cen, T. Xing, and K.-T. Wu, “Real-time performance evaluation of
line topology switched ethernet,” International Journal on Automation
and Computing, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 376–380, October 2008.
[4] J. Jasperneite and P. Neumann, “Switched ethernet for factory com-
munication,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 2001.
Proceedings. 2001 8th IEEE International Conference on, October 2001,
pp. 205–212, vol.1.
[5] J.-P. Georges, N. Krommenacker, T. Divoux, and E. Rondeau, “A design
process of switched ethernet architectures according to real-time appli-
cation constraints,” Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 335 – 344, 2006.
[6] N. Kakanakov, M. Shopov, G. Spasov, and H. Hristev, “Performance
evaluation of switched ethernet as communication media in controller
networks,” in Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on
Computer Systems and Technologies, ACM, 2007, pp. 30:1–30:6.
[7] J.-P. Georges, T. Divoux, and E. Rondeau, “Comparison of switched
ethernet architectures models,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation, 2003. Proceedings. ETFA ’03. IEEE Conference, vol. 1,
September 2003, pp. 375–382 vol.1.
[8] G. Marsal, B. Denis, J.-M. Faure, and G. Frey, “Evaluation of response
time in ethernet-based automation systems,” in Factory Communication
Systems, 2006 IEEE International Workshop on, 2006, pp. 95–98.
[9] H.-T. Lim, L. Volker, and D. Herrscher, “Challenges in a future
ip/ethernet-based in-car network for real-time applications,” in Design
Automation Conference (DAC), 2011 48th ACM/EDAC/IEEE, June 2011,
pp. 7–12.
[10] T. Skeie, S. Johannessen, and O. Holmeide, “Timeliness of real-time
ip communication in switched industrial ethernet networks,” Industrial
Informatics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 25–39, February
2006.
[11] J. Jasperneite, M. Schumacher, and K. Weber, “Limits of increasing the
performance of industrial ethernet protocols,” in Emerging Technologies
and Factory Automation, 2007. ETFA. IEEE Conference on, September
2007, pp. 17–24.
[12] A. Manita, F. Simonot, and Y.-Q. Song, “Multi-dimensional markov
model for performance evaluation of an ethernet switch,” INRIA, Tech.
Rep. 4813, 2003.
[13] K. Beretis and I. Symeonidis, “Experimental evaluation of end-to-
end delay in switched Ethernet application in the automotive domain,”
in SAFECOMP 2013 - Workshop CARS (2nd Workshop on Critical
Automotive applications : Robustness & Safety) of the 32nd International
Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability and Security, M. ROY, Ed.,
Toulouse, France, 2013, p. NA.
[14] J.-D. Decotignie, “Ethernet-based real-time and industrial communica-
tions,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 1102–1117, June
2005.
[15] A. Jacobs, J. Wernicke, S. Oral, B. Gordon, and A. George, “Ex-
perimental characterization of qos in commercial ethernet switches
for statistically bounded latency in aircraft networks,” in Local Com-
puter Networks, 2004. 29th Annual IEEE International Conference on,
November 2004, pp. 190–197.
[16] H. Systems, “Real time services (qos) in ethernet based industrial
automation networks,” Hirschmann, Tech. Rep., 2000.
[17] M. Knezic, B. Dokic, and Z. Ivanovic, “Performance evaluation of
the switched ethercat networks with vlan tagging,” Serbian Journal of
Electrical Engineering, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 33–42, 2012.
[18] M. Kezunovic, A. Sprintson, J. Ren, and Y. Guan, “Signal process-
ing, communication, and networking requirements for synchrophasor
systems,” in Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
(SPAWC), 2012 IEEE 13th International Workshop on, June 2012, pp.
464–468.
[19] ”IEEE Standard Proﬁle for Use of IEEE 1588 Precision Time Protocol
in Power System Applications, IEEE Std. C37.238-2011, 2011.
[20] A. Mahmood, R. Exel, and T. Sauter, “Delay and jitter characterization
for software-based clock synchronization over wlan using ptp,” Indus-
trial Informatics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1198–1206,
May 2014.
[21] Siemens, “Proﬁnet answers for industry,” Siemens, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[22] 1588-2008 IEEE Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization Proto-
col for Networked Measurement and Control Systems, IEEE Std., 2008.
[23] F.-J. Goetz, “IEEE 802.1AS bt (gPTP) & IEEE 1588 v3 (PTP v3),”
2013, presentation of Siemens at IEEE 802.1 TSN WG Meeting.
[24] S. RuggedCom, “Latency on a switched ethernet network,” RuggedCom,
Tech. Rep., 2008.
[25] J.-P. Georges, T. Divoux, and E. Rondeau, “Network calculus: Appli-
cation to switched real-time networking,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International ICST Conference on Performance Evaluation Methodolo-
gies and Tools, ser. VALUETOOLS ’11.
ICST, Brussels, Belgium,
Belgium: ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2011, pp. 399–407.

