Evaluation of Vehicle Position Estimation Method
Combining Roadside Vehicle Detector and
In-vehicle Sensors
1st Shunya Yamada
Institutes of Innovation for Future Society
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Aichi, Japan
s yamada@ertl.jp
2nd Yousuke Watanabe
Institutes of Innovation for Future Society
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Aichi, Japan
watanabe@coi.nagoya-u.ac.jp
3rd Hiroaki Takada
Institutes of Innovation for Future Society
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Aichi, Japan
hiro@ertl.jp
Abstract—Properly managing merging at junction is important
in improving highway trafﬁc safety and trafﬁc ﬂow. Accurate
vehicle positions and velocities are necessary in realizing proper
management, but existing sensors have both advantages and
disadvantages. Roadside vehicle detectors are very accurate, but
only available at ﬁxed points. By contrast, in-vehicle Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) sensors can be used anywhere
except in tunnels, but are less accurate. However, these sensors
can compensate for each other’s week points. In this paper, we
propose a vehicle position estimation method that combines road-
side vehicle detector and in-vehicle sensors. This method is used
to gather data from the roadside vehicle detector and in-vehicle
sensors via different wireless networks. It then applies Kalman
ﬁlters to calculate the accurate position and velocity. When
exchanging information over wireless networks, communication
delays occur and the data arrival sequence is not guaranteed.
Our method can retroactively calculate the vehicle position in
the presence of delays below a maximum acceptable threshold.
This study evaluates in several simulations using the data created
from the GNSS position error and communication delay models.
We also perform the evaluation using a dataset created based on
the actual vehicle information and communication delays in the
simulations. The simulation results show that our method can
more accurately estimate the vehicle positions compared to that
using data from either sensor alone. Moreover, our method is
more suitable for managing trafﬁc and controlling merging at
junctions.
Index Terms— Sensor fusion; Position estimation; Communica-
tion delays; Intelligent transportation system.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an enhanced version of [1]. Vehicles merging
into the main lane at highway junctions are increasingly
causing the trafﬁc congestion in that lane [2]. Moreover, 20–
30% of highway truck accidents occur at or near junctions
[3]. Thus, appropriately managing trafﬁc and controlling the
merging at junctions are important in improving both highway
safety and trafﬁc ﬂow.
Fig. 1. Roadside vehicle detector.
Fig. 2. General-purpose GNSS sensor.
Several previous studies have investigated proper trafﬁc
management and merging control at junctions. Cui et al. [4]
proposed a system for detecting collisions by estimating the
vehicle arrival time at junctions. Their system obtained the
vehicle positions and velocities from a monocular camera
82
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 3. Existing approach1: using GNSS sensors.
Fig. 4. Existing approach2: using roadside vehicle detector.
Fig. 5. Proposed approach: combining both sensors.
Fig. 6. Merging support system overview.
installed at the junction and used these to estimate the arrival
times. Milanes et al. [5] installed a local control system
near the junction, which receives the position and velocity
information from approaching vehicles and sends them low-
risk merging strategies. Chou et al. [6] proposed a merging
method based on vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication.
The vehicles approaching the junction use this to exchange
their positions and velocities. The vehicles in the main lane
then create gaps for entering vehicles before they have even
reached the merging point. Hirai et al. [7] proposed a system
that uses roadside vehicle detector installed before merging
points. Roadside vehicle detector are often used to detect the
presence of vehicles and the vehicle velocities on the lane
to estimate trafﬁc (Figure 1). Hirai’s approach was estimated
vehicles’ arrival times at the merging points. When a vehicle
on the on–ramp arrives at almost the same time as a vehicle
in the main lane, the system alerts the latter, enabling it
to prepare for merging, even if its driver has not seen the
vehicle on the on–ramp. Giving drivers longer time to prepare
makes the process safe. Japan’s government has started ﬁeld
tests of autonomous driving in the Tokyo waterfront area
[8]. Accordingly, information on roadside vehicle detector are
available in these ﬁled tests. Proper trafﬁc management and
merging control at junctions are considered by companies that
participated in the ﬁeld tests.
All the above-mentioned merging methods depend on the
vehicle position and velocity information to properly manage
trafﬁc and control merging at junctions. The location esti-
mation method using a camera must be applied such that
occlusion does not occur, and the place where it can be used is
limited. Although accurate vehicle velocities can be obtained
from speed sensors, vehicle positions can be incorrect. These
are often acquired from position estimation methods using
light detection and ranging (LiDAR) or in-vehicle global
navigation satellite system (GNSS) sensors. The position esti-
mation method using LiDAR can more accurately estimate the
position when compared to GNSS sensors; hence, autonomous
vehicles often use it for position estimation. However, the cost
of LiDAR usage is much higher than that of using general-
purpose GNSS sensors and LiDAR cannot be immediately
installed in conventional vehicles. GNSS sensors are obtained
position by receiving the signals emitted from satellites and
can function anywhere, except in tunnels. The signals received
from the satellites contain noise. High-precision GNSS sensors
can correct noise [10] and obtain accurate positions, albeit
being expensive. The GNSS sensors mounted on vehicles
are almost general-purpose products (Figure 2). They are
inexpensive, and the positions measured using these sensors
can differ from the true position by more than 10 m depending
on the location. Properly managing trafﬁc and controlling the
merging at junctions cannot be performed with large vehicle
position errors [6]. The system using roadside vehicle detector
accurately estimates the vehicle arrival times when the sensor
is close to the merging point. However, the error increases with
the distance between the sensor and the merging point. The
establishment cost is also high, and multiple installations are
not reasonable because roadside vehicle detector are usually
attached to poles installed at roadsides and gates across the
road (Figure 1).
Exchanging information via such wireless networks leads to
communication delays. Dedicated short-range communications
(DSRC) or long-term evolution (LTE) is used for V2V and
vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications. According to
83
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 7. Illustration of the position estimation model and variable deﬁnitions.
Dey et al. [11], these delays are approximately 100 ms for the
DSRC (for the communication between a vehicle traveling at
80 km/h and a roadside unit). These delays also mean the data
arrival times are not guaranteed. We believe that we can obtain
more accurate vehicle positions by combining data from the
GNSS and roadside vehicle detectors and compensating for
the communication delays.
In this paper, we propose a vehicle position estimation
method that combines data from roadside vehicle detector
and in-vehicle sensors. This can retroactively calculate prior
vehicle positions in the presence of delays below the maximum
acceptable threshold. This study makes the following three
main contributions.
The ﬁrst contribution of this study is a vehicle position
estimation method that combines data from roadside vehicle
detector and in-vehicle sensors. In our system, a roadside
vehicle detector is installed before the merging point and a
roadside unit is installed near the junction. In-vehicle sensor
information is used to estimate its position and velocity. A
roadside vehicle detector is also used to estimate the vehicle
position based on the sensor position and vehicle velocity.
The two estimates are combined using a statistical approach
proposed by Dufﬁn [12]. Previous studies used only one of the
position information obtained from the GNSS and roadside
vehicle detector (Figures 3 and 4). Our method estimates
positions using both position information (Figure 5).
The second contribution of this study is a communication
delays compensation method. The vehicle positions at earlier
times are retroactively calculated when older data arrive up to
the predetermined maximum communication delay. When the
roadside unit does not receive information from a vehicle, it
estimates the vehicle’s position based on the most recent infor-
mation received from it. Modiﬁed Kalman ﬁlters that consider
communication delays are proposed [14]. The contribution is
applying the modiﬁed Kalman ﬁlters to the scene of merging
support.
The third contribution of this study is the evaluation of our
system. We evaluated our proposed system by using only the
data created from the GNSS position error and communication
delay models in several simulations [1]. In this paper, our
system was also evaluated by using a dataset created based on
actual vehicle information and communication delays in sim-
ulations. The actual vehicle information were obtained when
driving through a main lane of the airport west interchange
in Tokyo, Japan. The dataset including communication delays
was created by actually transmitting from a certain terminal
to other terminal via LTE communication.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the assumptions made herein. Section III introduces
our proposed system. Section IV evaluates the method using
several simulations. Section V presents the results. Section VI
discusses our proposed system, and Section VII concludes the
paper.
II. ASSUMPTION
In this study, roadside vehicle detector were installed before
the merging point. A roadside unit was located near the
junction (Figure 6). All vehicles are assumed to have GNSS
devices, speed sensors, and V2I communication devices. Vehi-
cles approaching the junction send their current position and
velocity, as well as the time the data were acquired, to the
roadside unit. This information is repeatedly sent at regular
intervals in vehicle position estimation section and starts to
send before the vehicle passes through the roadside vehicle
detector. The system clocks in the vehicles, roadside vehicle
detector, and roadside units are assumed to be synchronized.
Some delay exists in the communications between the vehicles
and the roadside units. Meanwhile, the communication delays
between the roadside vehicle detector and the roadside unit are
assumed to be negligible because the communication between
them is via wire and dedicated connection.
Figure 7 shows the environmental model, where the vehicle
drives from the starting point toward the merging point. A
roadside vehicle detector is installed at x = xrvd
0
m. The
vehicle sends information about its position (namely the aver-
age xgps
t
m and the standard deviation σgps
t
m) and velocity
(average vt km/h and standard deviation σvt km/h) to the
roadside unit. The roadside vehicle detector sends the position
of the vehicle’s center (average xrvd
0
m and standard deviation
σrvd
0
m) and the detection time t0 s to the roadside unit when
the vehicle passes through it.
The roadside unit estimates the vehicle’s position using both
the information received from the vehicle (the average ˆxodo
t|t m
and standard deviation ˆσodo
t|t
m) and that from the roadside
vehicular detector (average ˆxrvd
t|t−1 ms and standard deviation
ˆσrvd
t|t−1 m). It then combines these two estimates to obtain the
ﬁnal vehicle position (average ˆxfsn
t
m and standard deviation
ˆσfsn
t
m).
The assumptions in this study are according to the actual
ﬁeld test of Japan [8]. Support for autonomous driving by
providing information for automatically adjusting the speed
and timing of entering the main line at highway junctions has
84
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

been considered in the ﬁeld tests [13]. The experiment has
been conducted at an airport west interchange in Tokyo, Japan.
Figure 8 shows the top view of the airport west interchange
and the sensor location. Figures 9 and 10 illustrate the devices
for merging control. Figure 11 depicts the merging point of the
airport west interchange. The roadside vehicle detector detects
the speed of the vehicles driving on the main lane and sends
them to the roadside unit located near the merging point via
wire and dedicated connection. The roadside unit estimates
the speed and timing to safely join the main lane. These
information are provided to the vehicles driving on the ramp
via wireless at the place where the communication device is
installed. Furthermore, previous studies have already discussed
time synchronization [9]. Therefore, these assumptions are
realistic.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM
In this section, we describe our proposed position estimation
approach, followed by our method of compensating for the
communication delays.
A. Position Estimation
Figure 12 presents a ﬂow diagram showing the steps
performed to estimate the vehicle position when it passes
through the gate at time t0 s. Here, the vehicle position
is estimated by applying Kalman ﬁlters to the position and
velocity information received from it until it passes through
the roadside vehicle detector. Kalman ﬁlters are often used
to estimate the exact state based on inaccurate and noisy
information; hence, we used them here to estimate the vehicle
position from the noisy position and velocity information.
The Kalman ﬁlters usage is divided into the prediction
and correction steps. During the prediction step, the vehicle
position is estimated based on the estimate from the previous
time step and the current vehicle velocity information. The
correction step adjusts this estimated position using the cur-
rent vehicle position information. The speciﬁc equations are
presented below.
Prediction step:
ˆxodo
t|t−1 = ˆxodo
t−1|t−1 + 5
18vtdt,
(1)
(
ˆσodo
t|t−1
)2
=
(
ˆσodo
t−1|t−1
)2
+
( 5
18σvtdt
)2
.
(2)
Correction step:
ˆxodo
t|t = ˆxodo
t|t−1 + kt
(
xgps
t
− ˆxodo
t|t−1
)
,
(3)
(
ˆσodo
t|t
)2
= (1 − kt)
(
ˆσodo
t|t−1
)2
,
(4)
kt =
(
ˆσodo
t|t−1
)2
{(
ˆσodo
t|t−1
)2
+ (σgps
t
)2
}.
(5)
where ˆxodo
t|t−1 m and ˆσodo
t|t−1 m are the average and standard
deviation of the vehicle position, respectively, generated by
Fig. 8.
Status of devices for merging support system at the airport west
interchange in Tokyo.
Fig. 9. Roadside vehicle detector.
Fig. 10. Communication device.
Fig. 11. Merging point.
the prediction step for timestep t s; ˆxodo
t|t
m and ˆσodo
t|t
m are
the average and standard deviation of the vehicle position,
respectively, generated by the correction step for timestep t s;
vt km/h and σvt km/h are the average and standard deviation of
the vehicle velocity, respectively, generated by the correction
step for timestep t s; kt is the Kalman gain at timestep t s;
and
5
18 is a term used for converting the vehicle velocity from
85
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 12. Flow diagram showing the steps performed to estimate the vehicle
position.
km/h to m/s.
The roadside unit receives the position of the vehicle’s center
from the roadside vehicle detector at time t0 s, then combines
this with the velocity information received from the vehicle
and the Kalman ﬁlters’ prediction step to estimate the vehicle
position. The speciﬁc equations are presented below.
Position estimation:
ˆxrvd
t
= ˆxrvd
t−1 + 5
18vtdt,
(6)
(
ˆσrvd
t
)2 =
(
ˆσrvd
t−1
)2 +
( 5
18σvtdt
)2
.
(7)
where, ˆxrvd
t
m and ˆσrvd
t
m are the average and standard
deviation of the vehicle position predicted by the Kalman
ﬁlters at timestep t s, respectively; vt km/h and σvt km/h are
the average and standard deviation of the vehicle velocity at
timestep t s; and
5
18 is a term used for converting a vehicle
velocity from km/h to m/s.
The vehicle position (average ˆxrvd
t0
m and standard deviation
ˆσrvd
t0
m) at timestep t0 s is deﬁned as the position received
Fig. 13. Overview of our communication delays compensation method.
from the roadside vehicle detector; hence, it is given as
follows:
ˆxrvd
t0
= xrvd
0
,
(8)
ˆσrvd
t0
= σrvd
0
.
(9)
where xrvd
0
m and σrvd
0
m are the average and standard
deviation, respectively, of the vehicle position received from
the roadside vehicle detector.
Finally, the two vehicle position estimates are combined
using the statistical approach proposed by Dufﬁn [12], which
is based on Bayes’ rule and Kalman ﬁlters. This approach
simply combines the two Gaussian distribution.
Estimate combination:
ˆxfsn
t
= ˆxodo
t|t +
(
ˆσodo
t|t
)2
(
ˆσodo
t|t
)2
+
(
ˆσrvd
t
)2
(
ˆxrvd
t
−ˆxodo
t|t
)
,
(10)
(
ˆσfsn
t
)2
=





1 −
(
ˆσodo
t|t
)2
(
ˆσodo
t|t
)2
+
(
ˆσrvd
t
)2





(
ˆσodo
t|t
)2
.
(11)
where, ˆxfsn
t
m and ˆσfsn
t
m are the average and standard
deviation of the vehicle position obtained by combining the
two estimates.
B. Communication delay compensation
Communication delays inevitably occur when exchanging
information over wireless networks; thus, they must be con-
sidered when estimating the vehicle positions. Here, we used
86
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Kagami et al.’s approach, which involves modiﬁed Kalman
ﬁlters that account for the communication delays [14]. This
method retroactively calculates prior positions and velocities
when older data are received up to a predetermined maximum
communication delay. However, the modiﬁed Kalman ﬁlters
model proposed by Kagami et al. is a multidimensional state–
space model. Hence, in this study, the communication delay
compensation is only used a concept, and the Kalman ﬁlters
model is changed to a one-dimensional (1D) constant velocity
(CV) model.
Figure 13 illustrates our method of communication delay
compensation. Here, L s is the maximum communication
delay. t − L s denotes the L timesteps after the vehicle
passed through the roadside vehicle detector. The roadside
units did not receive any position and velocity information
from the vehicle at timesteps t − 1 and t s. The data is
received at timestep t − 2 s, and the roadside unit uses this to
retroactively calculate the vehicle positions and velocities at
timesteps t − 1 and t s, working back from the present time
to the predetermined maximum communication delay.
The vehicle position is estimated using Eqs. (1)–(11) at each
time. The vehicle position is estimated based on the estimate
from the previous time step and each time vehicle position
and velocity information. Finally, the two vehicle position
estimates are combined.
IV. EVALUATION EXPERIMENTS
Our vehicle position estimation method is evaluated in
several simulations in this section. First, our vehicle position
estimation method is evaluated using the data created from
the GNSS position error models and the communication delay
model and conducted with and without communication delays.
Next, our system is evaluated using a dataset created based
on the actual vehicle information and communication delays
in the simulations. We used Matlab R2019a herein. Table I
shows the personal computer (PC) speciﬁcations used for the
simulation.
A. Evaluation using models
1) Environment without communication delays: In this ex-
periment, the position estimation accuracy was evaluated in an
environment where the communication delays were assumed
to be negligible. Our proposed method labeled as “Fusion”
was compared with one that simply applies Kalman ﬁlters to
the in-vehicle sensor data (i.e., “GNSS only”).
In this simulation, a vehicle drove from the starting point
at x = −100 m toward the merging point at a speed of 80
km/h. The roadside vehicle detector was installed at x = 0
m. The standard deviations of the vehicle’s center position
and velocity were set to s σrvd
0
= 0.5 m and σvt = 5 km/h,
respectively. The vehicle sent its position and velocity to the
roadside unit every 100 ms. The roadside unit also estimated
the vehicle position every 100 ms. The vehicle acquired its
position from a GNSS device. We considered two models
of the GNSS position error, namely a Gaussian white noise
model and a Gauss-Markov random process model, used in
TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PC USED FOR THE SIMULATIONS.
CPU
Intel Core i9-9900X at 3.50GHz
Memory
64 GB
Storage
Samsung MZVLB1T0HALR-00000
TABLE II
PARAMETERS OF THE GAUSSIAN WHITE NOISE MODEL.
GNSS error
σw
Low
3
Medium
6
High
9
TABLE III
PARAMETERS OF THE GAUSS–MARKOV RANDOM PROCESS
MODEL.
σg
σr
β
Case 1
0.2020
0.0027
1/600
Case 2
0.1030
0.3160
1/600
a previous study [6]. These models will be described below.
The simulation was repeated six times for each GNSS position
error model.
Gaussian white noise model:
This is given by the following equations:
xgps
t
= xt + wt.
(12)
where, xt is the actual vehicle position, and wt is the Gaussian
white noise, i.e., wt ∼ N(0, σw). Here σw is set as in
Table II. σw in Table II is set from a trial experiment using
a general-purpose GNSS sensor. UBX-M8030-KT was used
for a general-purpose GNSS sensor. The speciﬁcations of it
denotes in Table IV. When position data were acquired using
the sensor at multiple points in Nagoya University, the most
low value was σw ≈ 3, the most high value was σw ≈ 9. Thus
the σw is set as 3 in the low GNSS error and the σw is set as
9 in the high GNSS error. As an intermediate value between
the high and low GNSS error, σw is set as 6 in the medium
GNSS error.
Gauss–Markov random process model:
This is given by the following equations [15]:
mt = e−βdtmt−1 + gt,
(13)
nt = mt + rt,
(14)
xgps
t
= xt + 0.9nt.
(15)
Here, represents time–correlated noise with time constant β
and Gaussian white noise gt, i.e., gt ∼ N(0, σg). In addition,
nt is the total noise composed of mt and uncorrelated noise
rt, i.e., rt ∼ N(0, σr). As in the previous study [6], σg, σr,
and β were set as in Table III. The GNSS error in Case 2 was
worse than that of Case 1.
2) Environment with communication delays: In this exper-
iment, our communication delay compensation method was
evaluated by comparing the performance our method, called
“Fusion with DC” with those of the other two methods.
The ﬁrst method (i.e., “GNSS only without DC”) estimated
the vehicle position by applying Kalman ﬁlters to the in-
vehicle sensor data without compensating for the communi-
cation delays. This method only used the most recent position
87
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE GNSS SENSORS USED IN THE
EXPERIMENT.
AQLOC-VCX (Mitsubishi Electric)
Receiver type
GPS, QZSS, Galileo
Horizontal position accuracy
12.0 cm
Internal antenna
Dielectric antenna (59x59x33 mm)
UBX-M8030-KT (u-blox)
Receiver type
GPS, QZSS, GLONASS
Horizontal position accuracy
2.0 m
Internal antenna
Dielectric antenna (25x25x4 mm)
and velocity information received, thereby ignoring older
delayed data. The second method (i.e., “GNSS only with DC”)
was similar, but with communication delay compensation.
In this method, the communication delays were represented
by a Gaussian white noise (i.e., N( ¯d, σ2
¯d) ¯d was set to 96.130
ms following that in a previous study [11], and σ ¯d was set to 2
ms). We considered three possible maximum communication
delays, namely 0.10, 0.12, and 0.14 s, and repeated each
simulation six times.
B. Evaluation using actual data
In this experiment, the proposed system was also evaluated
using a dataset created based on actual vehicle information
and communication delays. The actual vehicle information
were obtained when driving through a main lane of the
airport west interchange in Tokyo, Japan. The dataset, in-
cluding the communication delays, was created by actual
transmission from a certain terminal to the other terminal
via LTE communication. Accordingly, the performance of
our proposed method (“Fusion”) was compared with those
of the other three methods. The ﬁrst method (“RVDS only”)
estimated the vehicle position by applying a linear uniform
motion to the time and speed, at which the vehicle passed the
roadside vehicle detector. The second method (“GNSS only
with CD”) estimated the vehicle position by applying Kalman
ﬁlters to the in-vehicle sensor data with communication delay
compensation. The third method (“GNSS only without CD”)
estimated the vehicle position by applying Kalman ﬁlters
to the in-vehicle sensor data without communication delay
compensation. In this simulation, the standard deviation of the
vehicle’s center position, vehicle position, and velocity were
set to s σrvd
0
= 0.5 m, σgps
0
= 2 m, and σvt = 5 km/h,
respectively. The vehicle sent its position and velocity to the
roadside unit every 100 ms, and the roadside unit estimated
the vehicle position every 100 ms.
1) Acquisition of vehicle information: The vehicle position
and velocity were acquired using two sensors. Table IV lists
the sensor speciﬁcations. AQLOC-VCX is a high-precision
GNSS sensor that can acquire quasi-zenith satellites informa-
tion. This sensor includes an IMU and can obtain the vehicle
position and velocity by inputting the vehicle speed pulse and
the back pulse. Therefore, the position information obtained
from it were used as the correct vehicle position data,while
the velocity information were used for the position estimation.
UBX-M8030-KT is a general-purpose GNSS sensor. The
position information obtained from it were used herein for
Fig. 14. Experimental vehicle and sensor installation.
Fig. 15. Vehicle position acquired by GNSS sensors.
the position estimation. These sensors were mounted on the
vehicle celling (Figure 14).
Figure 15 shows the vehicle position acquired by the GNSS
sensors. The vehicle position was expressed in the UTM
coordinate system. The lane center line was extracted from a
high-precision map created using the mobile mapping system.
The correct vehicle position was along the lane center line.
Meanwhile, the position used for the estimation was far from
the lane center line because of noise.
Our proposed position estimation method used a 1D CV
model and considered lateral movement, but not vertical move-
ment. The position information of the GNSS outputs were 2D.
In this simulation, the position information were projected
to the lane center line, and we only considered the lateral
movement. Figure 16 shows how the position error changed
88
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 16. Position error versus true position.
Fig. 17. Vehicle velocity versus true position.
Fig. 18. Communication delay times versus true position.
with the vehicle position. The roadside vehicle detector was
installed at x = 0 m. The merging point was at x = 148
m. The vehicle estimation section started from x = −20 m
to x = 150 m. The horizontal axis represents the position,
whereas the vertical axis represents the position error, namely
the difference between the correct vehicle position and the
vehicle position used for estimation. When the position error
was positive (negative), the vehicle’s estimated position was
ahead (behind) its true position. The vehicle position used for
the estimation had a large position error near the roadside
vehicle detector and a small position error near the merging
point.
Figure 17 exhibits how the vehicle velocity changed. The
horizontal axis represents the true vehicle position, whereas the
vertical axis represents the vehicle velocity at that position.
The vehicle accelerated from the roadside vehicle detector
toward the merging point.
2) Addition of communication delays: The information
obtained from the GNSS sensors did not include communi-
cation delays. To contain the actual communication delays,
the vehicle information were transmitted between the terminals
that were time synchronized using the ntp server via LTE com-
munication. The communication delays were then recorded.
The communication carrier used in the experiments was b-
mobile, mobile virtual network operator of Docomo. Docomo
is the main communication carrier in Japan.
Figure 18 represents the state of the communication delays.
The horizontal axis represents the actual vehicle position,
whereas the vertical axis represents the communication delay
times. The average value of the communication delays were
approximately 0.05 s. The maximum value is 0.111 s, whereas
the minimum value was 0.042 s. Therefore, the maximum
communication delay time was set to 0.12 s in this experiment.
V. RESULTS
A. Evaluation using models
1) Environment without communication delays: Table V
presents the simulation results. Figures 19-23 show how
the position error changed with the vehicle position. The
horizontal axis represents the true vehicle position, while
the vertical axis represents the position error, namely the
difference between the true and estimated vehicle positions.
When the position error was positive (negative), the vehicle’s
estimated position was ahead (behind) its true position.
Table V shows that the average and standard deviation of the
position error were both lower for “Fusion” than for “GNSS
only.” When the vehicle passed through the roadside vehicle
detector, the position error of the “Fusion” method sharply
dropped, becoming much lower than that of the “GNSS only”
(Figures 19-23). This result demonstrates that the proposed
position estimation method can be signiﬁcantly more accurate
than “GNSS only.”
2) Environment with communication delays:
Table VI
shows the simulation results. Figures 24-26 depict how the
position error changed with the vehicle position. The hori-
zontal axis represents the true vehicle positions, whereas the
vertical axis represents the position error deﬁned as before.
Table VI shows that both the average and standard deviation
of the position error were lower for our “Fusion with DC”
method compared to the other approaches. The errors were
lower for the “GNSS only with DC” than for the “GNSS only
without DC” and signiﬁcantly lower for “Fusion with DC”
than for the other methods when the maximum communication
89
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF POSITION ESTIMATION METHODS.
Gaussian white noise model
(Low GNSS position error)
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only
0.298 m
0.182 m
Fusion
0.238 m
0.030 m
Gaussian white noise model
(Medium GNSS position error)
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only
0.360 m
0.290 m
Fusion
0.260 m
0.052 m
Gaussian white noise model
(High GNSS position error)
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only
0.467 m
0.461 m
Fusion
0.274 m
0.085 m
Gauss–Markov random process
model (Case 1)
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only
1.681 m
0.907 m
Fusion
1.280 m
0.591 m
Gauss–Markov random process
model (Case 2)
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only
0.691 m
0.467 m
Fusion
0.477 m
0.315 m
Fig. 19. Position error versus true position (Gaussian white noise model with
a low GNSS position error).
Fig. 20. Position error versus true position (Gaussian white noise model with
a medium GNSS position error).
delay time was 0.14 s. We believe this was because the amount
of data that had to be discarded due to not being received
within the maximum communication delay time decreased as
the maximum communication delay time increased.
Figures 24-26 depict that the position error was always
negative for the “GNSS only without DC” method because
the latest information received from the vehicle was out-of-
data due to communication delays. The fact that the errors
Fig. 21. Position error versus true position (Gaussian white noise model with
a high GNSS position error).
Fig. 22. Position error versus true position (Gauss-Markov random process
model, Case 1).
Fig. 23. Position error versus true position (Gauss-Markov random process
model, Case 2).
were smaller for both “GNSS only with DC” and “Fusion with
DC” conﬁrmed that our communication delay compensation
method performed well. In addition, the fact that the position
errors were lower for our “Fusion with DC” method than for
“GNSS only with DC” conﬁrmed that our proposed method
can more accurately estimate the vehicle position than “GNSS
only” in an environment with communication delays.
B. Evaluation using actual data
Table VII lists the simulation results. Figure 27 shows how
the position error changed with the vehicle position. Table VII
90
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VI
EVALUATION OF OUR COMMUNICATION DELAYS
COMPENSATION METHODS.
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only without DC
-2.420 m
0.612 m
Maximum communication
delay of 0.10 s
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only with DC
-0.471 m
0.527 m
Fusion with DC
-0.248 m
0.065 m
Maximum communication
delay of 0.12 s
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only with DC
-0.410 m
0.411 m
Fusion with DC
-0.246 m
0.059 m
Maximum communication
delay of 0.14 s
Average
Standard
deviation
GNSS only with DC
-0.380 m
0.362 m
Fusion with DC
-0.234 m
0.063 m
Fig. 24.
Evaluation of our communication delay compensation method
(maximum communication delay of 0.10s).
TABLE VII
COMPARISON OF POSITION ESTIMATION METHODS.
Position error at
Average
Standard
the merging point
deviation
Fusion
-1.037 m
0.576 m
1.707 m
RVDS only
-14.420 m
-8.035 m
6.722 m
GNSS only with DC
-0.862 m
2.181 m
2.840 m
GNSS only without DC
-2.513 m
0.468 m
2.889 m
summarizes the position error at the merging point, and the
average values and standard deviation of the position errors
after passing the roadside vehicle detector until reaching the
merging points. The horizontal axis represents the true vehicle
position, whereas the vertical axis represents the position
error, namely the difference between the true and estimated
vehicle positions. The vehicle’s estimated position was ahead
(behind) its true position when the position error was positive
(negative).
Table VII shows that “GNSS only with DC” method had
the smallest position error at the merging point. The position
estimation method with the smallest average value was “GNSS
only without DC,” and the method with the smallest standard
value was “Fusion.” The value of “RVDS only” was large in
all items.
Figure 27 also depicts that the position errors of “Fusion”
and “RVDS only” were very small when the vehicle passed
through the roadside vehicle detector and the position can
accurately be obtained. The positon error of “RVDS only”
gradually left behind its true position because the vehicle
Fig. 25.
Evaluation of our communication delay compensation method
(maximum communication delay of 0.12s).
Fig. 26.
Evaluation of our communication delay compensation method
(maximum communication delay of 0.14s).
Fig. 27. Position error versus true position.
accelerated after passing through the roadside vehicle detector
(Figure 17). Finally, the fact that the estimated position were
always behind for the “GNSS only with DC” method than
for the “GNSS only without DC” method conﬁrmed that our
communication delay compensation method performed well.
VI. DISCUSSION
This section discusses the advantage of the proposed method
based on the evaluation results.
A. Advantages of the proposed method
The position estimation using only the roadside vehicle
detector information can accurately estimate the vehicle posi-
tion near the roadside vehicle detector. However, an accurate
91
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

position estimation cannot be performed when the vehicle
velocity changes after passing the roadside vehicle detector.
Vehicle velocity changes often occur to deal with vehicles
merging into the main lane; thus, vehicle speed information are
necessary for an accurate position estimation. In this respect,
the proposed method and the position estimation method using
only the in-vehicle sensors have an advantage.
Merging support systems create merging support information
based on the position information of the vehicles approaching
the merging point. Therefore, the position information near
the merging point are more important for the merging support
system than at the merging point. Furthermore, the merging
support system may provide strange merging support informa-
tion if the standard deviation is large, even if the average of
the position error is small after passing the roadside vehicle
detector until reaching the merging points. Thus, the average
and standard deviation of the position error must be small
after passing the roadside vehicle detector until reaching the
merging points. The evaluation experiment conﬁrmed that the
proposed method can accurately estimate the vehicle position
near the roadside vehicle detector because of the information
from the roadside vehicle detector. Consequently, we con-
ﬁrmed that the average and standard deviation of the position
error after passing the roadside vehicle detector until reaching
the merging points become relatively small. Therefore, the
proposed method has an advantage over the position estimation
method using only in-vehicle sensor information in terms of
support system reliability.
The method without the communication delay compensation
estimates the position based on the past information of the
GNSS due to the communication delays. The evaluation exper-
iment showed that the estimated position was always behind
the position estimated using the method with the communi-
cation delay compensation. Thus, communication delay com-
pensation is useful in the environment with communication
delays.
B. Maximum communication delay time
In the evaluation using the actual data, we set the maximum
communication delay time based on the record of the commu-
nication delay times. Communication delays are inﬂuenced by
various factors, such as the number of vehicles and building.
The time required for the position estimation increases as the
maximum communication delay time increases. The maximum
communication delay time must be set considering the time
constrain of the merging support system and the communica-
tion delay time in various situations.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this study, our system was evaluated in several simu-
lations using the various models and actual data. We demon-
strated that the proposed method can estimate vehicle positions
more accurately than that using only the in-vehicle sensors
and roadside vehicle detector. We also conﬁrmed that our
communication delay compensation method can perform well.
Our method can estimate the vehicle positions accurately in
environments with communication delays; hence, it is more
suitable for managing trafﬁc and controlling merging at junc-
tions.
We will explore several topics in the future work. The
proposed method can be applied while the delay occurs
according to a speciﬁc distribution. The communication delay
distribution tendency drastically changes with the number of
increasing vehicles. Thus, a method that can handle it, even
if the communication delay distribution tendency is changed,
must be considered. We would like to evaluate whether or not
the proposed method works correctly by incorporating it into
the merging support system proposed in the previous research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JST, OPERA, JPMJOP1612
and JST, COI, JPMJCE1317.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Yamada, Y. Watanabe and H. Takada, “A Vehicle Position Esti-
mation Method Combining Roadside Vehicle Detector and In-Vehicle
Sensors,” in Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference
on Networks(ICN2020), Feb 23–27, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, pp.7–14,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-770-2.
[2] T. Abbas, L. Bernado, A. Thiel, C. F. Mecklenbr¨auker, and F. Tufvesson,
“Measurements based channel characterization for vehicle-to-vehicle
communications at merging lanes on highway,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International Symposium Wireless Vehicular Communications(WiVeC),
June
2–3,
2013,
Dresden,
Germany,
Jun.
2013,
pp.1–5,
ISBN:
978-1-4673-6339-6, URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document
/6698241 [retrieved: 12, 2019].
[3] B. N. Janson, W. Awad, J. Robles, J. Kononov and B. Pinkerton,
“Truck accidents at freeway ramps: data analysis and high-risk site
identiﬁcation,” Journal of Transportation and Statistics, vol. 1,Jan. 1998,
pp. 75–92, ISSN: 1094-8848.
[4] H. Cui et al., “Early ramp warning using vehicle behavior analysis,” Soft
Computing, vol. 22, March, 2018, pp. 1421–1432, ISSN: 1432-7643.
[5] V. Milanes, J. Godoy, J. Villagra and J. Perez, “Automated On-Ramp
Merging System for Congested Trafﬁc Situations,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 12, Jun. 2011, pp. 500–508,
ISSN: 1524-9050.
[6] F. C. Chou, S. E. Shladover, and G. Bansal, “Coordinated merge
control based on V2V communication,” in Proceedings of the Ve-
hicular Networking Conference (VNC) December 8–10, 2016, Ohio,
USA, Dec. 2016, pp.1–8, ISBN: 978-1-5090-5197-7, ISSN: 2157-
9865 , URL:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7835933 [retrieved: 12,
2019].
[7] S. Hirai et al., “AHS Safety Service Utilizing an ITS On-Board Unit
for Driving Support in Merging Sections,” World Congress on ITS, pp.
1–8, October, 2007.
[8] “Start
of
Field
Operational
Tests
of
Autonomous
Driving
in
Tokyo Waterfront Area,” URL: http://www.soumu.go.jp/menu news/s-
news/01kiban14 02000404.html [retrieved: 12, 2019].
[9] F. Sivrikaya and B. Yener, “Time synchronization in sensor networks: a
survey,” IEEE, vol. 18, pp. 45–50, August, 2004.
[10] Y. Morales and T. Tsubouchi, “DGPS, RTK-GPS and StarFire
DGPS performance under tree shading environments,” in Proceed-
ings of IEEE international conference on integration technology(ICIT),
March 20–24, 2007, Shenzhen, China, pp. 519–524, ISBN:1-4244-
1091-6, URL:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4290370 [re-
trieved: 12, 2019].
[11] K. C. Deya, A. Rayamajh, M. Chowdhury, P. Bhavsar and J. Martin,
“Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communi-
cation in a heterogeneous wireless network - Performance evaluation,”
Transportation Research Part C, vol. 68, pp. 168–184, April, 2016.
[12] W. Anderson and R. Dufﬁn, “Series and parallel addition of matrices,”
Journal of Mathematical Analysis Applications, vol. 26, pp. 576–594,
1969.
92
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[13] “Start of joint research on information provision to support au-
tonomous driving,” URL: http://www.nilim.go.jp/lab/bcg/kisya/journal/
kisya20180119.pdf [retrieved: 12, 2019].
[14] S. Kagami and M. Ishikawa, “A sensor selection method considering
communication delays,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation(ICRA) April 26–May 1, 2004,
LA, USA, pp.206–211, ISBN: 0-7803-8232-3, ISSN: 1050-4729, URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/13071529 [retrieved: 12, 2019].
[15] J.
Rankin,
“An
error
model
for
sensor
simulation
GPS
and
differential GPS,” in Proceedings of of IEEE Position Location
and
Navigation
Symposium(PLANS’94)
April
11–15,
1994,
Las
Vegas,
USA,
pp.260–266,
ISBN:
0-7803-1435-2,
URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/303322 [retrieved: 12, 2019].
93
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

