189
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Integrating Future Communication Technologies  
for the Downstream Component of 
Public Warning Systems 
 
Michelle Wetterwald, Christian Bonnet,  
EURECOM, Sophia Antipolis, France 
michelle.wetterwald@eurecom.fr 
christian.bonnet@eurecom.fr 
Daniel Camara 
INRIA, Sophia Antipolis, France 
daniel.camara@inria.fr 
Jérome Fenwick 
Groupe SYNOX, BALMA, France 
jfenwick@groupe-synox.com 
 
Sebastien Grazzini 
Eutelsat, Paris, France 
sgrazzini@eutelsat.fr  
 
Xavier Ladjointe, Jean-Louis Fondere 
Thales Alenia Space, Cannes, France 
xavier.ladjointe@thalesaleniaspace.com 
jean-louis.fondere@thalesaleniaspace.com  
 
 
Abstract— Natural disasters have often made the headlines in 
the past years. As a consequence, many actions have been 
started by the public authorities to reduce the damages and the 
number of casualties. In that objective, the French project 
RATCOM aimed at developing an alert system in case of 
coastal tsunami due to underwater landslides. Its downstream 
component combines reliable and efficient communication 
systems to relay the alert. In parallel to the integration of the 
existing technologies in the project demonstrator, a survey 
analysis has been performed to identify the communications 
technologies and networks, which are in preparation but not 
yet operational, and which will increase the efficiency and 
quantity of individuals reachable by the future population 
alert networks. Each of these technologies is not sufficient by 
itself, but their combination improves drastically the efficiency 
of the alerting global system. This paper presents the 
RATCOM architecture, focusing mainly on its downstream 
component. For each candidate technology, it analyses how it 
can satisfy the requirements and improve the efficiency of the 
public alerting system. The final demonstration of the project 
is also described, as it assesses the feasibility of the system and 
how the overall impact on the alert dissemination is improved 
by the design of this new architecture. 
Keywords - tsunamis; alerting; public warning system; 
broadcasting networks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Natural disasters and the thousands of casualties they 
usually cause raise a major concern at public authorities’ 
level. A milestone event in this field was the Indian Ocean 
tsunami that happened in December 2004. This event raised 
the question of how to improve the protection of the 
population and prevent so many deaths. In fact, the main 
answer relies in the fast distribution of the information: 
information about the best behaviour to adopt in case of a 
disaster, and more importantly, information about the 
imminent arrival of a disaster. 
The South East part of the French Mediterranean coast 
has been identified by the experts as the potential location for 
small-sized tsunamis. These could be caused by major 
landslides in the underwater area, few kilometres away from 
the coast. One of these tsunamis occurred in 1979 in front of 
Nice and made several million euros’ worth of damage. As a 
prevention tool, the RATCOM project [1], started in 2009 
and ended in June 2011, aimed at developing and confirming 
the feasibility of an evolved alerting system towards the 
public safety professionals on one hand and the citizens on 
the other hand. The project has been organized around two 
major components: the upstream component and the 
downstream component. The upstream component is 
responsible to monitor the events occurring at the sea and 
report the risk level to a Control Centre. The Control Centre 
then makes the decision to generate an alert and forwards it 
to the downstream component, which is responsible to 
disseminate the warning within the shortest time frame 
possible. Mainly the downstream component is addressed by 
this paper.  
The best-known method to broadcast alert messages is by 
triggering the operation of alert sirens. However, more 
modern technologies exist nowadays that can help reaching a 
larger quantity of people. The RATCOM downstream 
component aims at identifying and setup a network 
combining these technologies into a single framework. Some 
of these technologies are currently operational and have been 
included in the final project demonstration. To complete this 
setup, an additional survey paper activity has been conducted 
to identify other technologies that are not ready to be 

190
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
included in the demonstrator, but may become relevant to 
this warning system in the future. Their suitability to be 
included in the project downstream component has been 
analysed. The final objective of this study, which is reported 
in this paper, is to draw up an inventory of the technologies 
and networks that are not yet operational, but are relevant to 
be used in the context of a future public warning system. 
Understanding what these technologies can bring and how 
they can be included in the system architecture that combines 
them as much as possible is an important step for the 
definition of future systems. This study has provided the core 
of [2], which is extended here to provide more details on the 
RATCOM objective and architecture, the prospective 
technologies, 
and 
a 
presentation 
of 
the 
feasibility 
demonstration that was performed at the end of the project. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the RATCOM architecture and its expected impact 
on the alert dissemination. The third section considers 
systems of communication close to their deployment phase, 
with a probable delay of less than three years, and having the 
ability to be connected to a warning system in the medium 
term. Derived from digital broadcast systems, the DVB-SH 
(Digital Video Broadcasting for Satellite Handheld) uses the 
coverage capabilities of satellite networks. Satellites offer 
also the possibility to provide redundant connections and 
improve the strength of the whole system. WiMAX 
(Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) is a new 
technology, which can provide service to larger areas than 
Wi-Fi (or IEEE 802.11), whose concept is somewhat similar. 
The new capabilities and possibilities of connecting current 
and upcoming mobile cellular networks are discussed. In the 
third part are presented prospective technologies that are 
currently being defined and standardized, but which will be 
effectively operational in a period longer than five years. 
They are essentially the Public Warning System integrated in 
mobile phone networks, broadcast technology in these global 
networks and Vehicular Networks. Finally, we draw our 
conclusion to this study in the last section. 
II. 
THE ALERT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Following the tsunami that occurred in December 2004 
in the Indian Ocean, the French government ordered a risk 
analysis covering the French coast which highlighted that the 
south-eastern part ran a small risk, possibly triggered by 
large underwater landslides. Willing to develop activity and 
competence in this area, the government decided to launch a 
project aiming at the feasibility study for an end-to-end 
system addressing that challenge, i.e., short range local 
tsunamis, somehow different from the earthquake and 
tsunami monitoring systems deployed in the Pacific Ocean 
for example, which address long range threats.  
Providing an end-to-end architecture, from seismic or 
pressure sensors to public warning, the RATCOM project 
has been organized according to two main components. The 
upstream component monitors the threat, while the 
downstream component disseminates the alert. Both are 
linked through a terrestrial or Alert Elaboration Centre, also 
called Control Centre. These components are pictured in 
Figure 1. The upward component has the objective to deploy 
sensors in the sea or on the coastal ground, and to provide an 
enhanced automated aggregation and analysis of their 
outputs, in order to help making the alert decision, while 
eliminating the risk of false alarm.  
This processing is performed in the Control Centre and, 
when relevant, launches the alert towards two different 
groups: firstly the local and administrative authorities 
through a highly secured specialized network, secondly the 
concerned population (mentioned as citizens in the figure), 
through a public warning network organized around a 
centralized and intranet-like network called SecuNet. Even 
though it would have been interesting to describe the whole 
chain in details, this paper targets the study that was 
performed to enhance the public warning system with 
modern communication technologies, in order to extend the 
impact of the alert on the largest number of people possible 
and comply with a requirement of an alert dispatched in a 
few seconds timeframe. 
 
 
Figure 1.  RATCOM project components 
When studying existing alerting systems, including in 
France, a varied set of mechanisms can be found, addressing 
diverse types of population. Moreover, they are usually not 
correlated, lacking thus the benefits of an integrated system. 
Finally, they often rely on old technologies like sirens or 
direct voice communications, obviously not benefiting from 
the more recent technologies brought by satellites, mobile 
cellular 
networks 
or, 
in 
the 
future, 
vehicular 
communications. The impact of the integrated system highly 
depends on the combination of technologies used for the 
alerting system. It varies also according to the density and 
location of the population in the target area. The same beach 
in August or in November would not host the same number 
of people. It’s even more difficult to evaluate if we include 
the first ten meters of coast where people would or would not 
be swimming. Some parts of the coast offer beaches; others 
are sided by roads, where people are driving their cars, or 
railways with frequent trains. The objective and novelty of 
the RATCOM downstream component is thus to federate a 
large amount of communication and warning system in order 
to become more adaptive to the conditions under which the 
alert has to be broadcasted. Next section will analyse how 

191
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the state of the art technologies are suited to be federated 
under the SecuNet umbrella, while Section IV will evaluate 
the relevance of future upcoming technologies. 
III. 
USING STATE OF THE ART TECHNOLOGIES 
In this section, some technologies that are still in their 
early phase of deployment or will be in the next two or three 
years are described. The section focuses only on the 
technologies that seem to be relevant for the broadcast of 
warning messages to the public. These technologies (satellite 
systems, WiMAX and cellular systems) have the ability to 
quickly reach a greater proportion of the population, 
including people on the move. They constitute a part of the 
population who could not be informed by more traditional 
methods such as the television. For each of the technologies 
is presented a fast description then an analysis of why it is 
relevant for the public warning and for the interconnection 
with our alert distribution system is performed. 
A. Satellite systems 
Satellite systems can be used in two different manners:  
first manner consists in broadcasting directly information to 
handheld devices. This is the DVB-SH technology. The 
second manner consists in strengthening the whole system 
by operating connections redundantly with terrestrial links, 
which may be at risk. 
The DVB-SH [3] is a standard derived from the DVB-H 
(Digital Video Broadcast-Handheld) standard to distribute 
broadcast video, audio and data to mobile devices such as 
mobile phones. Mobile TV (television) is definitely set to 
become the next major media market of tomorrow. The 
publication in November 2004 of the DVB-H standard, seen 
by analysts as a possible solution for providing mobile 
television, was the starting point of a series of work on this 
new mode of television programs consumption. While DVB-
H is designed primarily for use in the UHF terrestrial 
broadcasting only, the DVB-SH tries to exploit the S band, 
as shown in Figure 2, where there are opportunities for 
Mobile Satellite Services (MSS). Thus, this standard, created 
specifically for distributing content in mobility situation, 
makes a major innovation in the satellite telecommunications 
world: it enables the addition of a network of terrestrial 
repeaters, called CGC (Complementary Ground Component) 
to complement the satellite coverage. This is displayed with 
the terrestrial repeater in the middle of the figure. 
One of the major problems in terms of warning systems 
is to quickly reach a large number of people, whether they 
are in a mobility situation or not and, if possible, at a reduced 
cost. The DVB-SH broadcast network meets these criteria 
through the variety of devices able to receive the signal 
(mobile phones, vehicular terminals, etc.) as well as through 
the possibility of sharing the same flow between a large 
number of people via the satellite. Accordingly, it becomes 
quite interesting to interface our alerting network and 
demonstrate the potential offered by hybrid broadcast 
architecture. Three warning systems are considered in the 
framework of this study: first, the broadcast of video / audio 
warning on TV / Radio mobile satellite devices, second, the 
broadcast of a detailed report about the alert to the TV / 
Radio mobile satellite devices for interested people and 
finally the triggering via the satellite of fully autonomous 
and easily installable alerting peripherals (e.g., on beaches).  
 
 
Figure 2.  DVB-SH broadcast network architecture 
 
The first two cases are closely related; they actually 
consist in stopping the Radio / TV programs to replace them 
with the tsunami warning. The procedure is very similar to 
what exists for the abduction alerts on TV but would be 
applied to mobile TV. The major innovation lies in the fact 
that, simultaneously with the program stop, an alert is sent as 
data traffic and the user can view this bulletin with the same 
device. This bulletin can be updated to indicate, for example, 
the end of the alert. The third case is the satellite triggering 
of alerting fully autonomous and of easy maintenance 
devices. Indeed, with DVB-SH, it is possible to receive the 
signal with a small omnidirectional antenna and one can 
imagine devices (sirens, billboards, etc.) independent of 
terrestrial communications networks that can be triggered 
remotely via a satellite signal. This new type of installation 
would benefit from reduced costs because no wired 
connection would have to be planned and its assembly and 
disassembly in urban areas would be simplified. The 
positioning of the devices would be defined only by taking 
into account the risk factor and not the availability of a 
terrestrial network. This freedom enables an improvement of 
the efficiency of the devices. Moreover, such a warning 
system would benefit from a complete independence from 
terrestrial communications networks, which can be damaged 
by natural disasters. 
As the second manner to use the satellite technology, the 
Ku band connection systems or VSAT (Very Small Aperture 
Terminal) serve redundant network nodes or quickly connect 
fixed subscribers or isolated alert networks. This is 
illustrated in Figure 3. These systems make use of satellite 
dishes with a diameter less than 3 meters and terminals (or 
modem) that allow bidirectional communications. They 
provide the following intrinsic advantages: a minimum 
ground infrastructure, an immediate area covering several 
alert networks from one or several countries at the same time 
and a simple and rapid deployment. With a satellite link, it is 
possible to connect either a comprehensive warning system, 

192
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in which case we preferably connect via the satellite the 
control node responsible for the warning broadcast on this 
network, or a specific node of the warning network, such as a 
siren, a VMS (Variable-Message Sign) or any other 
equipment that would require redundancy or that just needs 
to be connected to the network. Such a node can be a 
warning system sharing the same satellite link or a single 
important subscriber connected to the satellite endpoint. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Ku Band Satellite Connection Systems 
 
The choice of the satellite as the transmission system 
component on the downstream component is justified by the 
desire, first, to avoid congestion or interruption of the 
terrestrial networks, which can become harmful in case of a 
tsunami, and, secondly, to be able to quickly connect a 
warning system or a single isolated but important subscriber. 
In this case, the satellite will thus be used for the redundancy 
of critical network nodes (connected to a warning system or 
a subscriber of critical importance in the decision process), to 
connect the system to an existing warning network, or just to 
quickly connect a siren or isolated warning sign.  
B. WiMAX networks 
The WiMAX technology is standardized by the IEEE 
(Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) under 
IEEE 802.16 and addresses several objectives: fixed mobile 
convergence, higher flow rates, compliance with quality of 
service constraints, etc. Compared with the architecture of 
conventional cellular systems such as EDGE (Enhanced Data 
for [Global System for Mobile communications] GSM 
Evolution) 
or 
UMTS 
(Universal 
Mobile 
Telecommunications System), the architecture of a WiMAX 
network is based on components that are intended to remain 
close to the Internet standards, as pictured in Figure 4.  
The 
standard 
provisions 
various 
types 
of 
communications. For point to point transmission, it aims to 
link transmission points separated by a few dozen kilometres 
for the multiplexing of IP traffic with the support of 
differentiation and service guarantee. This type of 
application is similar to radio-relay transmission while it 
provides the spectral efficiency and intelligent management 
of IP traffic. It comes in support of network deployments that 
would not be economically viable if done in wire line 
technologies. The 
systems 
for point to 
multipoint 
transmissions without mobility provide the Internet traffic 
from a connection point of the wired network to a group of 
buildings or homes through the radio interface. User devices 
within the buildings are basically PCs (Personal Computers) 
that receive a service equivalent to an ADSL (Asymmetric 
Digital Subscriber Line) access. This standard thus targets to 
address the so-called "white areas" in which a typical 
deployment of ADSL based on a wired infrastructure would 
be too expensive to setup. In the point to multipoint 
transmission with mobility version, the WiMAX radio signal 
terminates directly on the terminal of the final user. This 
system can accommodate the wireless ADSL users, but also 
PC terminals (usually laptops) for a mobile Internet access.  
 
 
Figure 4.  WiMAX Mobile Environment 
 
The WiMAX offers a continuous connection for the 
transfer of IP packets. Accordingly, it can support any type 
of warning system based on data transmission. An interesting 
feature is its ability to support a Broadcast / Multicast mode 
called MCBCS (Multicast and Broadcast Services). In the 
same perspective as the 3GPP MBMS (Multimedia 
Broadcast/Multicast Service) technology, the WiMAX plans 
to provide broadcast services in geographical areas managed 
by the system. In a Multi-BS (MBS) system, several BSs 
located in the same geographical area, called MBS_ZONE, 
can transmit the same broadcast / multicast messages 
simultaneously on a single radio channel. It should be noted 
that a BS may belong to several MBS_ZONEs. A mobile 
terminal that registers for an MBS service can receive 
information from all the BSs of the MBS_ZONE without 
having to register with a specific BS of the area. In addition, 
it can receive the MBS signals from several BSs (Base 
Stations) simultaneously for an improved reception quality. 
This broadcast service enables the usage of the WiMAX 
technology as a potential support for public alerting 
messages. 
C. 3G and LTE cellular networks 
The CBS (Cell Broadcast Service) technology allows 
sending through the GSM network one or more small 
messages to all the mobile phones located within a specific 
area covered by one or several broadcasting Base 
Transceiver Stations (BTS), as pictured in Figure 5. The 
information can be broadcast over several channels, possibly 
one per language used for the broadcast message. The user 
must first select the channels to which he wants to subscribe. 

193
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This technology allows disseminating a mass message 
without network performance problems. However, setting 
the terminal requires an adequate communication plan to the 
population associated with a technical support team able to 
assume the setup on heterogeneous consumer devices, in the 
best case when they are compatible, since the CBS feature 
has been removed from many terminals in favour of more 
vending features. In any case, this technology has been 
selected by the standards to carry the messages of the Public 
Warning System (PWS), as will be explained in Section IIIB. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Using 3G and LTE (4G) Cellular Networks 
 
The LTE (Long Term Evolution) is a project led by the 
3GPP standards body for the publication of the technical 
standards of the future fourth generation mobile telephony. It 
enables data transfer at very high speed, with a longer range, 
a higher number of calls per cell and lower latency. For the 
operators, the LTE involves changing the core network and 
the radio transmitting stations. New compliant mobile 
terminals must also be developed. Considering the 
limitations of the current solutions in terms of deployment 
and performance, the LTE generation allows, with 
continuous connections, to be able to alert all the terminals 
almost simultaneously in a specific area, using dedicated 
short messages. The question of the penetration rate of 
terminals with 4G subscriptions is an important element in 
the relevance of the solution for an alerting system. The 
number of users accessing the 3G services has been 
increasing sharply since the latest developments of devices 
such as the iPhone, Android, BlackBerry or Windows 
phones and the commercialization of unlimited flat rate 
packages. The population currently reached with 3G mobile 
subscriptions will probably evolve to the upcoming 4G 
systems rapidly due to the effect of device renewal. 
IV. 
USING ENHANCED UPCOMING TECHNOLOGIES 
This analysis has been completed with a prospective 
study of networks currently in the phase of definition and 
standardization, and which are of interest for the future 
population warning systems. In a first step are introduced the 
future vehicular networks, which deployment is planned for 
the second half of the decade. The advantage of such 
networks is that, in addition to being able to reach the 
drivers, they operate in a cooperative mode. As a result, 
these networks are resilient to the possible destruction of the 
communications infrastructure. In a second step are 
presented the future developments of broadcast technology 
for mobile cellular networks (CBS and MBMS) and their 
integration in terms of standards into warning systems. The 
presented techniques were initially developed for a tsunami 
warning network in Japan and subsequently generalized to a 
more comprehensive Public Warning System (PWS). The 
CBS technology is used here again. This standard is part of 
the GSM, UMTS-3G and future LTE operational standards. 
Its advantage is that it allows the global broadcast of short 
messages (SMS-type) and thus overcomes the limitations 
due to network overload when targeting a large population. It 
also contains features that allow to "wake up" idle mobile 
phones and select the geographical coverage for the 
broadcast, making it particularly suitable for a connection to 
a global alerting system. However, it is somehow questioned 
since its deployment differs according to operators and 
countries. 
A. Vehicular Communications 
This new mode of communication from vehicle to 
vehicle is based on the new standards for Intelligent 
Transport Systems (ITS). Here we introduce the ETSI TS 
102 636-3 standard [4], which specifies the GeoNetworking 
operation in the ITS environment. The most interesting 
feature of this standard is the definition of a set of methods to 
distribute, and route messages in specific geographical areas. 
For example, in the advent of an emergency situation, the 
message is sent to the vehicles concerned by this emergency 
in the destination area. It would, in this way, reach only the 
concerned vehicles, not disturbing drivers outside the target 
region. The communication among entities may be between 
Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V), Infrastructure to Vehicle (I2V), 
Vehicle 
to 
Infrastructure 
(V2I), 
Infrastructure 
to 
Infrastructure (I2I) and all the concatenation of these basic 
scenarios. Vehicular communication is becoming a huge 
research area and one of the most crucial aspects into this 
new research field is the data forwarding problem. Data 
forwarding is related to how to transmit a packet from one 
node to another, trying to reach the destination. Usually, in 
the context of vehicular networks, nodes forward data 
through geocast, where the position of the nodes defines the 
way the data will be transferred. There are basically three 
types of data forwarding schemes: geographical unicast, 
geographical broadcast and topologically scoped broadcast. 
Figure 6 (a) shows an example of geographical unicast, 
where multi-hop data transfer is used to connect the origin 
and the destination. Only one copy of the message is present 
at each time in the network. In geographical broadcast, 
Figure 6 (b), the message is distributed by unicast until a 
delimited region, where the nodes rebroadcast the message 
using flooding. In topologically scoped broadcast, Figure 6 
(c), the nodes rebroadcast the messages for a predefined 
number of hops from the origin. Propositions and techniques, 
linked to data forwarding, range from the use of torrent-
based communications to propagate messages, to the 
seamless connection to the network and the use of Delay 
Tolerant Networks (DTNs). 
As a work on seamless connectivity, we can highlight 
BATMAN [5], a distance vector based routing protocol that 
performs channel selection between vehicular and roadside 

194
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
mesh. On BATMAN, each node has its own forwarding 
strategy to find the best next hop and reach the destination. 
The proposed solution shows to be more efficient than some 
of the most popular routing protocols for mesh and ad hoc 
networks.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Types of V2V communication, (a) geographical unicast  (b)  
Geobroadcast (c) Topologically-scoped broadcast 
 
Some additional research has been conducted on the 
propagation of public safety warning messages using 
GeoBroadcast and Delay Tolerant Networks techniques [6]. 
The main purpose of such work is to increase the coverage of 
the existing network to reach more people in a faster way. 
People in vehicles usually do not watch TV and may not be 
listening to the radio. In the future, cars will be equipped 
with devices helping to increase road safety that will be 
constantly active to provide the drivers with the information 
about the road conditions. The work described in [6] 
proposes that the vehicles act as virtual Roadside Units 
(vRSUs) and help on the spreading of the warning messages 
in case of an emergency. The intention is to decrease the 
“last mile” information access problem. The evaluations 
show that the mechanism is robust and efficient even over 
different disaster scenarios. Thus the use of vRSUs is an 
effective way to distribute warning messages to vehicles in a 
region. One of the greatest advantages of this kind of 
epidemic approach is its efficiency. Remembering that the 
target scenario for this work is the propagation of public 
safety warning messages, i.e., extremely important data. 
vRSU, even considering disaster scenarios can redistribute a 
warning message to all nodes into an area of 15x9 kilometres 
in about six to seven minutes. 
B. Future Cellular Technologies 
Some new technologies and actions have recently been 
introduced in the 3GPP standardization for cellular systems 
which are relevant to public warning systems. The first part 
describes the two candidate technologies that can comply 
with the broadcasting requirements in case of a major event. 
Both technologies offer a global broadcast capability, which 
means that a message is sent only once and received at once 
by all the target terminals.  
The CBS, which has already been pointed out above 
(Section IIC) as a potential existing technology, has been 
part of the standards since the early GSM, even if not always 
deployed by operators, so it is technically compliant with all 
the existing enabled mobiles in the market. It permits to 
broadcast unacknowledged messages to all the receivers 
within some particular defined geographical areas known as 
cell broadcast areas. A CBS page is comprised of 93 
characters and up to fifteen pages may be concatenated to 
form a message. Messages are broadcast cyclically at a 
frequency and for a duration agreed with the information 
provider. Mobiles can selectively display only the messages 
chosen by the Mobile user. In addition, a message that has 
been formerly successfully received is not displayed a 
second time. The second technology, the MBMS is an 
enhancement of the 3G systems which provides a point-to-
multipoint capability for Broadcast and Multicast Services 
[7], allowing resources to be shared in the network. Figure 7 
shows the network reference model with the infrastructure 
design of the MBMS, as defined in the 3GPP standards for 
cellular network. Since it is more recent than CBS, it has 
more constraints, but it also brings the capability to 
disseminate multimedia information (video, audio, pictures) 
in addition to the text messages. As the LTE is enhancing the 
capacity and efficiency of the cellular networks, the MBMS 
is evolving and adapted to benefit from these improvements. 
 
 
Figure 7.  MBMS model in the LTE system 
 
Public 
notification 
warnings 
have recently 
been 
implemented by the 3GPP standardization groups. Japan 
launched the first step with the ETWS (Earthquake and 
Tsunami Warning System), delivering Warning Notifications 
specific to Earthquake and Tsunami simultaneously to many 
mobile users located in Warning Notification Areas, 
typically a distribution of cells, who should evacuate from an 
approaching Earthquake or Tsunami. The architecture and 
notification hierarchy of the ETWS is shown in Figure 8. An 
ETWS warning may be required in a very urgent timeframe 
(down to 4 seconds for the primary notification or initial 

195
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
alert) and is characterized by the capability to provide a very 
short notification period. A secondary notification can be 
delivered afterwards, carrying a larger amount of information 
such as text, audio or graphics to instruct what to do and 
where to get help, or a valid route from present position to an 
evacuation site. In a further release, this system has been 
generalized into the PWS (Public Warning System) [8], 
which targets worldwide objective, including the CMAS 
(Commercial Mobile Alert System) in the USA or the 
support 
of 
European 
requirements. 
The 
minimum 
functionalities to be supported by warning providers are 
activation of the notification delivery, its update and its 
cancellation. This notification must be delivered without any 
user interaction, even if it targets a terminal in sleeping 
mode. On the contrary, a manual action is mandatory to 
suppress the message, increasing the potential impact of the 
method. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Global view of the Earthquake and Tsunami Warning System 
 
Some early technical studies considered both some 
variants of the CBS and MBMS broadcasting technologies 
for the PWS. Since the CBS is more mature from a 
standardization point of view, it is the solution that has been 
adopted. However, because the MBMS will be part of the 
future EPS (Evolved Packet Systems), which will replace the 
current mobile networks, and can convey larger amount of 
data, it is still an interesting candidate to support future 
alerting systems. One of its drawbacks, though, is that it 
lacks the geo-localization feature of the CBS system. An 
enhanced system has been proposed in [9] to extend the 
MBMS by developing cross-layer cooperation where the 
networking protocol and the cellular system collaborate to 
improve the efficiency of the geographical radio coverage. It 
enables a more precise and efficient delivery of the broadcast 
information, taking advantage of the comprehensive 
knowledge of the infrastructure and network topology by the 
mobile operator. Only the base stations located in the target 
zone participate in the distribution of the message, as shown 
in Figure 9.  
Users located outside of their coverage do not have to 
filter out the un-necessary information, increasing the 
efficiency of the system. 
 
 
Figure 9.  RATCOM Application Scenario with MBMS 
 
C. Software Defined Networks 
In many contexts, Public Safety Networks (PSN) rely on 
multi-hop transmissions to deliver the information. This 
makes the discussion about wireless capacity and efficient 
use of the spectrum as a central topic for these networks. 
Some works, such as Tenoc [10], try to reduce the volume of 
data transmitted into a wireless network using software 
defined networks or network coding. Network coding [11] is 
a technique that permits a sensible reduction into the number 
of data transmissions. We believe that this kind of technique 
will have a huge impact on the data forwarding in the future. 
Network coding is a packet dissemination strategy that aims 
to improve the throughput and increase the robustness of 
wireless networks. Network coding implements a store, code 
and forward paradigm, where each node stores the incoming 
packets in a temporary buffer and at each transmission time, 
the node sends a combination of the stored data. To 
successfully decode N packets a node has to collect N 
independent combinations of packets. Reducing the number 
of packet transmission to deliver data to multiple destinations 
is an effective strategy to increase the network throughput.  
V. 
FEASABILITY EXPERIMENTATION 
Administrative officials were invited to a system 
feasibility demonstration at the end of the project [12]. The 
experimentation featured the downstream component built 
according to the planned administrative hierarchy, as 
described below. It concluded the validation phase of the 
project, which targeted the feasibility and successful 
operation of the integrated system only, leaving performance 
analysis for future work. In the setup shown, the Control 
Centre is directly interconnected with a professional alerting 
system (for firemen or rescue teams, for example), the 
SECUNET network, which also hosts a relay allowing to 
access the various technologies listed in the previous sections 
of this paper, using either commercial or experimental 
equipment. The layout of the demonstrator is pictured in 
Figure 10.  
The initial alert is encoded as an XML (Extensible 
Markup Language) message, whose template is stored in the 
Alerting Gateway. This server contains a network manager 
which is made of plug-ins that allows transferring the 

196
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
message to the various technologies through mail, file 
transfer or web service, whichever is the adequate format for 
the technology. When the alert is triggered by the Control 
Centre, it is first re-formatted by each plug-in and then 
forwarded to all the relevant networks. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Demonstration of the public Alerting System 
 
During the demonstration, a simulated alert was launched 
and led within a few seconds to the simultaneous ringing of 
(i) phones registered at the call centre, (ii) satellite phones or 
(iii) geographically-scoped mobile phones receiving SMS 
(Short Message Service). In addition to these existing 
technologies, the demonstrator was connected to an 
experimental test setup, showing the operation of multicast 
over LTE network and virtual Road Side Units, which were 
described in Section III. The layout of this setup is pictured 
in Figure 11 and described in more details in [13]. Figure 12 
shows that it consisted mainly in laptop computers, running 
the LTE OpenAirInterface [14] software platform under 
Linux. When the alert was triggered at the Control Centre, an 
email was sent to the Alerting Application at the Cellular 
Network Gateway, appearing on the bottom right of Figure 
10 or as “backhaul” in Figure 11. It resulted in the 
appearance of a pop-up window in each of the end user 
terminals. This demonstration concluded that existing state 
of the art and future technologies are capable to be combined 
in an integrated alerting system, enhancing its effect and 
efficiency. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Experimental testbed setup for the demonstration 
 
 

197
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 12.  Picture of the experimental setup during the demonstration 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper were presented several technologies to be 
deployed in the medium to long term. Some are completely 
new (WiMAX, DVB-SH or vehicular networks), others are 
the future evolution of existing communication networks (Ku 
band satellite networks, cellular mobile telephony).  
Each of these technologies offers specific characteristics 
and particular interest for the broadcast of alert messages. 
The DVB-SH satellite broadcast network reaches a large 
number of users by stopping the radio and TV programs 
received on fixed or mobile devices, and replace them by the 
alert bulletin. It does not require the availability of a 
terrestrial network and therefore does not run the risk of 
being damaged by a natural disaster. The Ku band satellite 
network connections can also serve as redundancy to the 
existing network nodes in the case of failure due to a major 
problem, enabling the safe operation of critical network 
nodes or connecting a subnet that was isolated. The WiMAX 
technology, which is in its early deployment, is based on 
features close to the Internet. It offers the ability to support a 
Broadcast / Multicast mode and thus to provide broadcast 
services in geographical areas that cannot be easily 
connected with a legacy wired network. The CBS is based on 
existing cellular networks and deployable at medium term. In 
countries like Japan, CBS is used for mass message 
broadcast, even if its setting is somehow problematic. It will 
be advantageously replaced by the LTE that will achieve 
permanent connections towards all the terminals with a 4G 
subscription. Vehicular Networks will allow the broadcast of 
information from car to car in a specific geographical area. 
The advantage of this technology lies in the fact that it 
requires no infrastructure and can reach people while they 
are travelling. The future evolution of cellular networks is 
still being defined. With CBS and MBMS technologies, it is 
possible to broadcast a single message to many users, so at a 
lower cost from the point of view of radio resources, while 
capitalizing on a network and a massive penetration rate. The 
PWS systems take advantage of these features to provide a 
comprehensive model of early warning network. A proposal 
to extend the geographical feature of MBMS and increase its 
efficiency has also been introduced. Finally, the successful 
demonstration held at the end of the project and showing the 
downstream public alerting system has been described. 
All these technologies can reach in a very limited time a 
significant number of users and are particularly relevant to a 
potential connection to the downstream component of a 
future public warning system, enhancing its overall 
efficiency. The availability of these technologies in the near 
or longer future depends mainly on their commercial 
success, according to business models and the return on 
investment expected from their deployment. Nevertheless, it 
is the administrative authorities who ultimately may decide 
on the development and promote the implementation of the 
functionalities needed to connect them to a global safety 
system. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] Offcial RATCOM project web site : http://ratcom.org, last accessed 
on 
30/06/2011 
(closed 
as 
of 
15/12/2012, 
refer 
to 
http://www.afpcn.org/100601VigilanceAlerte/AFPCN-100601-
1425AriasBuffardCedralis.pdf ) 
[2] Michelle Wetterwald, Christian Bonnet, Daniel Camara, Sebastien 
Grazzini, Jérome Fenwick, Xavier Ladjointe, and Jean-Louis 
Fondere, "Future Architectures for Public Warning Systems", ICNS 
2011, pp. 104-109, 7th International Conference on Networking and 
Services, May 22-27, 2011, Venice/Mestre, Italy 
[3] ETSI TS 102 585 V1.1.2 : "System Specifications for Satellite 
services to Handheld devices (SH) below 3 GHz" 
[4] ETSI TS 102 636-3: "Intelligent Transportation System (ITS); 
Vehicular Communications; GeoNetworking; Part 3: Network 
architecture". 
[5] Stefano Annese, Claudio Casetti, Carla-Fabiana Chiasserini,  Nazario 
Di Maio, Andrea Ghittino, and Massimo Reineri, “Seamless 
Connectivity and Routing in Vehicular Networks with Infrastructure”, 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 29, No. 3, 
pp. 501-514, March 2011 
[6] D. Camara, C. Bonnet and F. Filali, “Propagation of Public Safety 
Warning Messages”, IEEE WCNC 2010, pp. 1-6, Sydney, Australia 
[7] 3GPP TS 23.246, “MBMS; ARCHITECTURE AND FUNCTIONAL 
DESCRIPTION”, V8.3.0 (03-2009)  
[8] 3GPP TR 22.268; “Public Warning System (PWS) Requirements”; 
V9.2.1 (06-2009) 
[9] M. Wetterwald, “A case for using MBMS in geographical 
networking”, ITST 2009, pp 309-313, October 2009, Lille, France. 
[10] Stéphane Rousseau, Farid Benbadis, and Damien Lavaux, "Tendoc: A 
Network Coding Video Transmission for Public Safety," mass, 
pp.953-954, 2011 IEEE Eighth International Conference on Mobile 
Ad-Hoc and Sensor Systems, 2011 
[11] Rudolf Ahlswede, Ning Cai, Shuo Yen Robert Li, and Raymond W. 
Yeung, "Network information flow". IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory, vol. 46, pp1204-1216, 2000 
[12] http://www.lepetitnicois.fr/article/alerte-tsunami-en-
m%C3%A9diterran%C3%A9e-%C3%A7a-marche-45857.html  
[13] Daniel Câmara, Christian Bonnet, Michelle Wetterwald, and Navid 
Nikaein, "Multicast and virtual road side units for multi technology 
alert messages dissemination", WMAPS 2011, 1st International 
Workshop on Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks for Public Safety Systems, 
October 21, 2011, Valencia, Spain 
[14] http://www.openairinterface.org/  
 
 

