Misuse Capabilities of the V2V Communication
to Harm the Privacy of Vehicles and Drivers
Markus Ullmann,∗ † Thomas Strubbe,∗ and Christian Wieschebrink∗
∗ Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security
D-53133 Bonn, Germany
Email: {markus.ullmann, thomas.strubbe, christian.wieschebrink}@bsi.bund.de
† University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhine-Sieg
Institute for Security Research
D-53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Email: markus.ullmann@h-brs.de
Abstract—A deployment of the Vehicle-2-Vehicle communication
technology according to ETSI is in preparation in Europe. Cur-
rently, a policy for a necessary Public Key Infrastructure to enrol
cryptographic keys and certiﬁcates for vehicles and infrastructure
component is in discussion to enable an interoperable Vehicle-2-
Vehicle communication. Vehicle-2-Vehicle communication means
that vehicles periodically send Cooperative Awareness Messages.
These messages contain the current geographic position, driving
direction, speed, acceleration, and the current time of a vehicle.
To protect privacy (location privacy, “speed privacy”) of vehicles
and drivers ETSI provides a speciﬁc pseudonym concept. We
show that the Vehicle-2-Vehicle communication can be misused
by an attacker to plot a trace of sequent Cooperative Awareness
Messages and to link this trace to a speciﬁc vehicle. Such a
trace is non-disputable due to the cryptographic signing of the
messages. So, the periodically sending of Cooperative Awareness
Messages causes privacy problems even if the pseudonym concept
is applied.
Keywords–Vehicular Ad hoc Networks; Vehicle-2-Vehicle Com-
munication; Intelligent Transport System; Cooperative Awareness
Message; Pseudonym Concept; Privacy
I.
INTRODUCTION
A ﬁrst brief analysis of the mentioned privacy prob-
lems caused by Cooperative Awareness Messages is given
in [1] and [2]. The vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-
infrastructure communication (V2I) (consolidated V2X) have
been intensively discussed in recent years. The deployment of
this technology requires accepted standards. The neccessary
speciﬁcation and standardization in Europe is done by the Eu-
ropean Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) based
on considerations of the Car2Car Communication Consortium
[3]. This includes the security standardization as well [4].
The ETSI speciﬁcations deﬁne an architecture for Intelli-
gent Transport Systems (ITS). This architecture speciﬁes dif-
ferent ITS stations (e.g., ITS roadside stations, and ITS vehicle
stations) and wireless communication between the ITS stations.
The wireless communication technology for cooperative V2X
communication is based on the IEEE 802.11p standard. A
frequency spectrum in the 5.9 GHz range has been allocated on
a harmonized basis in Europe in line with similar allocations
in US.
The ETSI communication model deﬁnes broadcast com-
munication between ITS stations. Different message types are
speciﬁed for information exchange. These are the Cooperative
Awareness Message (CAM) and the Decentralized Environ-
mental Notiﬁcation Message (DENM). These messages are
disseminated via broadcast. According the ETSI speciﬁcations
CAMs and DENMs shall be digitally signed by the sender (ITS
vehicle station or ITS roadside station) to guarantee message
integrity and authenticity. In order to issue and authenticate
the corresponding cryptographic keys, a suitable public key
infrastructure (PKI) has to be established.
At the moment, the deployment of V2X technology is in
preparation in large scale intelligent mobility infrastructure
projects, for example SCOOP@F [5] in France, the C-ITS cor-
ridor Rotterdam-Frankfurt-Vienna [6], and the Nordic Way [7],
a joint project of Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. In
the meantime, the European Commission published a strategy
“Towards Cooperative, Connected and Automated Mobility”
which announce the deployment of the V2V communication
in Europe beginning 2019 [8].
Each ITS vehicle station leaves a signed trace of its
geographic location. Each entity within the communication
range of the ITS communication technology can receive that
data. In the ﬁnal report of the C-ITS platform (January 2016)
of the EC DG MOVE the data elements of CAMs and DENMs
of ITS vehicle stations are rated as personal data [9].
In this paper, we show that it is possible to link se-
quent CAMs of a vehicle to a CAM-trace even in case of
a pseudonym switch. A side effect of cryptographic signed
CAMs is that the transmission of the CAM data is not
disputable. The applied cryptographic ECC domain parame-
ters (NIST P-256 [10], BrainpoolP-256r1 [11]) are such that
ECDSA signatures are not manipulable within the next years.
We show in Section V-B, that an attacker can misuse the
existing V2V communication to plot a CAM-trace of a vehicle.
If only one CAM of the whole trace can be linked to a speciﬁc
vehicle then the whole trace can be linked to this vehicle. So,
CAMs provide side effects which can totally jeopardize the
privacy of motorist. The privacy shortcomings of the CAMs
are raised by the combination of following issues:
•
the amount of included data within CAMs,
•
the cryptographic signing of CAMs with distinct
pseudonymous keys (non-disputable property),
•
the CAM frequency of up to 10 Hz,
35
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

•
the linkability of CAMs to traces of speciﬁc vehicles,
and
•
the linkage of non-disputable CAM-traces to a speciﬁc
vehicle.
Modern vehicles are equipped with wireless interfaces,
like Bluetooth, to connect devices (smart phones, tablets,
etc.) to the multimedia component (head-unit) of the vehicle.
Furthermore, head-units are increasingly able to establish Wi-
Fi hotspots to support internet access for vehicle passengers.
These wireless interfaces have nothing to do with the V2V
communication. But from an attacker perspective these in-
terfaces enable to link captured CAM-traces to a speciﬁc
vehicle. Therefore, these wireless vehicular interfaces have
to be regarded in a holistic security analysis of the V2V
technology as well.
The following sections of this paper are organized as fol-
lows: Section II is a description of related work. Next, Section
III provides a brief overview of the secure V2V communication
speciﬁed in the ETSI standards. Especially, the suggested
pseudonym concept for securing CAM and DENM messages
is presented in detail. One important privacy requirement of
the V2V communication is that CAMs can not be linked over
a longer time period. But in Section IV is shown how CAMs
of a vehicle can be technically linked to a CAM-trace of a
vehicle. How vehicles can be monitored in a non-disputable
manner based on an observation device is presented in Section
V. Next, an analysis of the captured information is given in
Section VI. Finally, in Section VII we summarize our results,
mention open research issues and propose requirements for a
future V2V communication technology. Subsequent, identiﬁers
for ITS vehicle stations are presented in Section B.
II.
RELATED WORK
A detailed overview of attacks in vehicular ad-hoc net-
works (VANETs) is given by Ghassan Samara et al. [12]. A
security and privacy architecture for pseudonymous message
signing is described by Papadimitratos et al. [13]. Julien
Freudiger et al. suggested mix zones for location privacy in
vehicular networks [14]. A survey on pseudonym schemes in
vehicular networks is given by Petit et al. [15].
Wiedersheim et al. [16] analyzed the location privacy in
a speciﬁc communication scenario. Vehicles periodically send
beacon messages. The beacons only carry the geographic posi-
tion and an identiﬁer. To support location privacy, the vehicles
use pseudonymous identiﬁer, which are changed regularly.
Assuming a passive attacker who is able to eavesdrop the
communication in a speciﬁc region. Then the attacker is able
to track the vehicles with an accuracy of almost 100% if he
uses the approach in [16]. To perform this attack in a larger
area an infrastructure of receivers is necessary to collect the
CAM data. This can be done, e.g., by
•
ITS roadside stations or
•
an ITS vehicle ﬂeet (e.g., truck ﬂeet)
Besides the identiﬁcation of ITS vehicle stations based
on licence plates or cryptographic certiﬁcates the identiﬁca-
tion based on noise features (individual noise spectrum) are
discussed. That is a very active research area and different
studies are presented [17] [18]. They differ in concerning
single or multi sensor usage and concrete feature extraction.
Surprisingly, neither common security nor privacy analysis of
the V2V communication consider this issue. Also, Bluetooth
MAC IDs of vehicular multi-media devices are already used
to develop route speciﬁc origin-destination tables and to per-
form trafﬁc counting on speciﬁc roads. Carpenter et al. [19]
performed an analysis in Jacksonville, Florida. Therefore, a set
of Bluetooth receivers was located at the roadside on speciﬁc
streets to capture the Bluetooth MAC ID of crossing vehicles.
The identiﬁcation and tracking of vehicles based on Secondary
Vehicle Identiﬁer (e.g., Bluetooth interfaces, Wi-Fi hotspots,
...) is presented in [20].
Further identiﬁcation techniques allow wireless devices
to be identiﬁed by unique characteristics of their analog
(radio) circuitry; this type of identiﬁcation is also referred to
as physical-layer device identiﬁcation. Physical-layer device
identiﬁcation is possible due to hardware imperfections in the
analog circuitry of transmitter introduced at the manufacturing
process. An good overview concerning the physical ﬁnger-
printing of different wireless communication technologies is
given in [21]. Especially IEEE 802.11a compliant transmitters
are investigated in [22]. Baldini et al. analyzed physical-layer
device identiﬁcation of IEEE 802.11p compliant transmitter
based on statistical features [23].
III.
SECURE V2X COMMUNICATION
In Europe and US, V2X broadcast communication is pro-
vided based on IEEE 802.11p. IEEE 802.11p is a dedicated
short-range communication (DSRC) technology with a com-
munication range of up to 800 m in open space. 75 MHz of
the DSRC spectrum at 5.9 GHz are exclusively used for the
V2X communication. The overall bandwidth is divided into
seven frequency channels. IEEE 802.11p is technologically
very similar to IEEE 802.11a or IEEE 802.11g. The IEEE
802.11 family provides frequency channels of 5 MHz, 10
MHz, and 20 MHz. IEEE 802.11a uses the full clocked mode
with 20 MHz bandwidth while IEEE 802.11p uses the half
clocked mode with 10 MHz bandwidth. 5 MHz, and 10 MHz
bandwidth can be achieved by using a reduced clock rate. Due
to the half clock mode of IEEE 802.11p, in contrast to IEEE
802.11a, the guard time is doppled from 0,8 µs to 1,6 µs [24],
[25], and [26].
A. V2V Communication according to the European Telecom-
munication Standards (ETSI)
The ETSI speciﬁcation [27] deﬁnes a basic set of applica-
tions for ITS, like active road safety (e.g., emergency vehicle
warning), co-operative trafﬁc efﬁciency (e.g., regular speed),
co-operative local services (e.g., automatic access control), and
global internet services (e.g., ﬂeet management).
The ETSI ITS architecture [27] distinguishes 4 different
ITS station types: ITS roadside stations (typically termed road
side unit), ITS vehicle stations, ITS central stations (e.g., trafﬁc
operator or service provider), and ITS personal stations (e.g.,
a handheld device of a cyclist or pedestrian such as a smart
phone).
The ITS stations exchange information based on two dif-
ferent speciﬁed message types: CAMs, and DENMs.
To fulﬁll the security- and privacy requirements, ITS sta-
tions will be equipped with two classes of key pairs/certiﬁcates
based on elliptic curve cryptography (ECC):
36
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1)
Long term key pairs (certiﬁcates termed enrollment
credentials by ETSI) and
2)
Pseudonymous key pairs (certiﬁcates termed autho-
rization tickets by ETSI)
Due to privacy reasons authorization tickets may not be linked
in any way to enrollment credentials or any other vehicle
identiﬁer.
The following privacy requirements have to be fulﬁlled by
the V2V communication to guarantee the privacy (e.g., location
privacy) of motorists:
1)
Pseudonymity of the sender identity and
2)
Unlinkability of CAMs to CAM-traces of vehicles
over longer time periods
Based on the long term key pair an ITS vehicle station is
able to authenticate itself, e.g., against a certiﬁcation author-
ity (Pseudonym Certiﬁcation Authority termed Authorization
Authority according to ETSI). Cryptographic keys and cor-
responding pseudonymous certiﬁcates (termed authorization
tickets by ETSI) are used to secure the CAMs and DENMs
mentioned below. It is assumed that pseudonymous certiﬁcates
are not directly linkable to the identity of an ITS vehicle
station.
1) Cooperative Awareness Message: Cooperative Aware-
ness Messages are comparable to beacon messages. They are
broadcasted periodically with a packet generation rate of 1
up to 10 Hz. Based on received CAM messages, ITS vehicle
stations can calculate a local dynamic trafﬁc map of their
environment. A CAM reveals a lot of dynamic information
about the associated ITS vehicle station: geographic position,
speed, driving direction, etc., at a speciﬁc time. In addition,
static information, e.g., the length and width (stated with a
precision of 10 centimeters) of the ITS vehicle station and the
conﬁdence levels of heading, speed, acceleration, curvature and
yaw rate are given.
To assure message integrity and authenticity CAMs con-
tain an electronic signature and the appropriate certiﬁcate
(as signature algorithm ECDSA, which operates on elliptic
curves, is used). Then the receiver is able to cryptographically
verify the message and check the temporal validity (temporary
freshness). It is not planned to forward CAMs hop-by-hop.
Figure 1 illustrates the structure of a CAM, which is speciﬁed
in detail in [28].
Regarding ECDSA based on NIST P-256 a CAM without
special container has a size of about 2 kbit. These 2 kbit are
splitted into 200 bits for coding the basic -, high frequency -
and low frequency container, 750 bits for the header and the
ECDSA signature and nearly 1 kbit for a certiﬁcate according
to the ETSI format [4]. So, only about 10 % of the whole CAM
message size is used for the data elements. The remainder 1,8
kbit are necessary for coding the CAM header, the ECDSA
signature and the certiﬁcate of the appropriate public key.
2) Decentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Message: In
contrast, the second message type, Decentralized Environ-
mental Notiﬁcation Message, is event-driven and indicate a
speciﬁc safety situation, e.g., road works warnings (from an
ITS roadside station) or a damaged vehicle warnings (from an
ITS vehicle station). The DENM message format is speciﬁed in
detail in [29]. DENMs can be transmitted hop-by-hop. Figure
2 illustrates the structure of a Decentralized Environmental
Notiﬁcation Message.
Complete Message
Header
Signer_Info
Generation_Time
its_aid ITS-AID for CAM
Basis Container
ITS-Station Type
Last Geographic Position
Speed
Driving Direction
Longitudinal Acceleration
Curvature
Vehicle Length
Vehicle Width
Steering Angle
Lane Number
…
Vehicle Role
Lights
Trajectory
Emergency
Police
Fire Service
Road Works
Dangerous Goods
Safety Car
…
Signature
ECDSA Signature of this Message
Certificate
According Certificate for Signature Verification
CAM 
Information
High Frequency 
Container
Low Frequency 
Container
Special 
Container
Figure 1. Examplary message format of a CAM. The CAM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the basis container, a signature and the
appropriate certiﬁcate
Figure 2. Examplary message format of a DENM. The DENM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the management container, a signature
and the appropriate certiﬁcate.
37
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

time
t = t0
t = t1 
1
2
Figure 3. Pseudonymous key switch for signing CAMs respective DENMs
(pseudonym concept). Till time point t0 pseudonym “1” is used for signing
the CAM. At time point t1 a key switch to pseudonym “2” is performed.
3) Pseudonymous Signatures: CAMs and DENMs should
not reveal the identity of ITS vehicle stations (sender
anonymity). Furthermore, it should not be possible to link
messages of an ITS vehicle station (message unlinkability)
over longer time periods. Both requirements shall be sufﬁcient
to assure location privacy of the ITS vehicle stations. Due
to these privacy requirements, CAMs and DENMs are signed
using pseudonymous ECC keys, which are not publicly linked
to a vehicle. The pseudonymous ECC keys are randomly
chosen. Keys used for signing and their appropriate certiﬁ-
cates are periodically changed during operation. Therefore, an
ITS vehicle station needs a set of pseudonymous keys and
certiﬁcates valid for some period of time. Figure 3 depicts the
usage of the pseudonyms. At time point t0 pseudonym “1” is
still used for signing the CAM. Then the used pseudonym is
switched to pseudonym “2”. So, in contrast to time point t0
at time point t1 pseudonym “2” is used for signing during the
next time frame.
Moreover, the applied elliptic curve domain parameters
(NIST P-256 or BrainpoolP-256r1) are such that ECDSA
signatures are not manipulable within the next years. There-
fore, the effect of cryptographic signing of data is that the
transmission of this data is non-disputable.
IV.
LINKABILITY OF V2V MESSAGES
Each CAM includes a pseudonymous certiﬁcate. The ac-
cording secret key is used to sign the CAMs for a short
time frame, e.g., 15 minutes. As long as the same key for
signing is used the according certiﬁcate is static. So, this static
information at the end of each CAM can be easily used to
link sequent CAMs of an ITS vehicle station. The pseudonym
concept (change keys during operation) is applied to prohibit
the linkability of CAMs after a pseudonym switch. But a
linkability of CAMs is even possible based on the (static) CAM
data elements shown next.
A. Linkability of CAMs based on Data
First, static CAM data elements (e.g., vehicle length and
vehicle width, and the conﬁdence level of heading, speed,
Assumptions: Speed: 50 km / h,     CAM transmission frequency: 10 Hz
time / seconds
t = t0
t = t0 + 0.1
~ 1.4 m
~ 1.4 m
Figure 4. Movement of an ITS vehicle station within 100 ms based on a
speed of 50 km/h
acceleration, curvature and yaw rate) are helpful to link CAMs.
Furthermore, the trajectory (included in the low frequency
container of the CAM) can be used, too.
Besides that, some information only change very slightly
within a time frame of 100 ms: The speed and the geographic
position and can be used as well.
The requested transmission rate for CAMs are up to 10
messages each second. Figure 4 illustrates that an ITS vehicle
station moves on nearly 1.4 m in this case if the speed is
50 km/h. 50 km/h is the permitted speed in towns in Europe.
Assuming that an ITS vehicle station has a minimum length
of 3 m: So the geographic position of the length of an ITS
vehicle station overlaps at least 50 %. If the ITS vehicle station
is longer than 3 m it overlaps much more than 50 %. So, no
other ITS vehicle station can physically be at the same geo-
graphic position. In addition, linkability of subsequent CAMs
of a speciﬁc ITS vehicle station is constituted based on the
geographic position included in CAMs. Next, the linkability
of CAMs is exploited to plot complete CAM traces of drives
of a speciﬁc vehicle.
V.
OBSERVING A SPECIFIC VEHICLE INCLUDING THE
DRIVER
Wiedersheim et al. [16] analyzed the location privacy
of vehicles in a speciﬁc area based on a set of distributed
receivers.
In contrast to Wiedersheim et al., we show that it is
very easy to monitor speciﬁc vehicles (driver) in a way that
the plotted data (time, location, speed, ...) is non-disputable.
The speciﬁc non-disputable property comes along with the
cryptographic signing (ECDSA signature) of the CAM data
elements, described in Section III-A3.
But, a speciﬁc observation device is necessary to perform
our attack, see Figure 5.
A. Observation Device
The basic idea is to stick an electronic observation device
at the ITS vehicle station under surveillance. In the ETSI
38
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5. The V2V communication can be missued to monitor a speciﬁc
vehicle. Therefore, an observation device (e.g., smart phone) has to be
invisible sticked at the vehicle under surveillance.
speciﬁcation it is provided that ITS personal stations (e.g., a
handheld device of a cyclist such as a smart phone) take part
in the communication. So, if V2V communication components
will be broadly deployed we expect that smart phones will
support communication according IEEE 802.11p in the 5,9
GHz frequency band in future, too. This is why we exemplarily
choose a smart phone as observation device. In addition, fur-
ther components (e.g., GPS receiver) and sensor elements (e.g.,
accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer) are integrated in
a smart phone which can also be used for monitoring purposes.
But our observation device is not limited to smart phones. Any
V2V communication component can be used as observation
device.
B. Performing the Attack
1) Capture a CAM-Trace of a Vehicle: After sticking the
observation device at a speciﬁc vehicle the observation device
knows the GPS position of the vehicle based on its internal
GPS measurement. So, it can easily exﬁltrate CAMs which
are sent from external devices at the start time of a vehicular
drive. Subsequently, CAMs have to be parsed concerning the
included data elements: time, geographic position, certiﬁcate as
well as the static information: length, width, and the conﬁdence
level of heading, speed, acceleration, curvature and yaw rate.
These information are sufﬁcient to link and store successive
CAMs, as mentioned in Section IV. CAMs which are sent from
an outer geographic position can be exﬁltrated and discarded.
If a whole drive is monitored with our observation device, then
a continous CAM-trace (from starting point to the destination)
of the ITS vehicle station exists. If the observation device is
sticked at the ITS vehicle device over a longer period, a couple
of drives can be monitored. Only the really battery power
and the available memory (one CAM has a size of about 2
Kbit) of the observation device will be the limiting factors.
The different CAMs of a drive can be linked based on the
submission time and the static pseudonym certiﬁcate. Due to
the linkage of data even a pseudonym switch does not interrupt
the linkage of sequentiall CAMs as shown before. So, with this
kind of observation device it is possible to capture CAM-traces
of complete drives of a vehicle. Also it is possible, that CAMs,
received by the observation device, are directly communicated
to a control and command center, e.g., via the LTE interface.
Paul-
Löbe-Haus
Konrad-Adenauer-
Straße
Otto-von-Bismarck-Allee
Reinhardtstraße
Luisenstraße
Invalidenstraße
Chauseestraße
Tieckstraße
S
D
Figure 6. Examplary geographic position of a captured CAM-trace of a
personal driven vehicle in Berlin. The colored dotted lines indicate
pseudonymously signed CAMs of one speciﬁc vehicle. Here, three different
pseudonyms (“black” line, “red” line, and “blue” line) are used during the
drive
Figure 6 shows a vehicular drive beginning at the start
position “S” and ﬁnishes the drive at the destination “D”. Next,
we are interested to link captured CAM traces to a speciﬁc
vehicle or driver based on additionally captured information
of the vehicle.
Quite the same CAM trace can be captured if an attacker
actively follows the vehicle under observation and stores the
received CAMs as CAM trace.
2) Capture Secondary Vehicular Identiﬁer: Secondary Ve-
hicle Identiﬁer (Appendix B-B) were analyzed in detail in
[30]. Moreover, measurements with available tools for smart
phones and PCs were performed. This measurements show,
that Bluetooth MAC IDs of active vehicle Bluetooth interfaces
of vehicular head-units are easily detectable. E.g., the Blue-
tooth MAC ID of the head-unit of a standstill Skoda Octavia
III could be detected based on a Samsung Galaxy S6 (with
Android 6.0.1) and the Bluetooth-Scanner App (version 1.1.3)
up to 24 m. Also, measurements for moving vehicles were
performed. In addition, internal Bluetooth connections of smart
phones with the head-unit of the vehicle could be sniffed based
on the Ubertooth tool [31], too.
Besides Bluetooth MAC IDs, Wi-Fi MAC ID were ana-
lyzed. E.g., the MAC ID of a Wi-Fi hotspot of the head-unit of
39
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. CAPTURED AND LOGGED CAM-TRACE, SENSOR DATA
TRACE AND VEHICULAR BLUETOOTH ID OF A VEHICLE UNDER
SURVEILLANCE WITH AN OBSERVATION DEVICE
CAM Trace
Sensor Data Trace: Location,
Vehicular Bluetooth
Acceleration, Attitude, Speed, Time
MAC ID
CAM1
data record1
48 bit
.. .
...
.. .
CAMn
data recordn
48 bit
a BMW 7 at a standstill could be detected based on a Samsung
Galaxy S6 (with Android 6.0.1) and the Wiﬁ-Analyzer App
(version 3.10.1-L) up to 20 m.
These measurements show that the Secondary Vehicle Iden-
tiﬁer, Bluetooth MAC IDs and Wi-Fi MAC IDs of vehicles,
are very easy to detect outside of vehicles.
3) Capture Sensor Data Trace of the Observation Device
based on the Internal Sensor Elements: Besides communi-
cation interfaces smart phones are equipped with additional
components (e.g., GPS receiver) and sensor elements (e.g.,
accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer) as already men-
tioned before. We use these sensors to separately capture
geographic location, acceleration, attitude and the according
time with the same frequency as CAMs are received. Based
on this captured data, the speed can additionally be calculated.
If we are doing this, we have two separate data traces, which
represent a drive: one CAM-trace and a second trace composed
of the captured sensor data termed sensor-data-trace, see Table
I. Due to the synchronized capturing of both traces (CAM-
trace and sensor-data-trace) speciﬁc data elements (geographic
location, acceleration, attitude, and speed) of both traces can
be easily correlated.
VI.
ANALYSIS OF THE CAPTURED DATA: CAM-TRACE,
SENSOR-DATA-TRACE, AND SECONDARY VEHICLE
IDENTIFIER
A. Role of Distinct Pseudonymous ECC Keys
Here, we assume that the pseudonymous ECC keys for
V2X are generated at random based on the chosen ECC
domain and are securely stored within a secure element in
the vehicle and no duplicates of this keys are available. So,
a calculation of an ECDSA signature with that key is only
possible with the according secure element. Also, the ECDSA
signatures will be generated within the secure element to
assure a secure application of the ECC key. Moreover, the
applied elliptic curve domain parameters (NIST P-256 or
BrainpoolP-256r1) are such that ECDSA signatures are not
manipulable within the next years. If a CAM (CAM-trace) can
be cryptographically veriﬁed based on the included certiﬁcate
(public ECC key) then the CAM (CAM-trace) was signed by
the corresponding ECC signing key. In that case, a side effect
of cryptographic signing of data is that the transmission of this
data is non-disputable.
B. Linking a Captured CAM-Trace to a Vehicle
An attacker knows to which vehicle he sticked the observa-
tion device. But further linking mechanism are available based
on the captured information, see Section V-B.
1) Linking a Captured CAM-Trace to a Vehicle Based
on Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer: As shown in Section B-B
Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer, e.g., Bluetooth MAC ID of the
vehicular head-unit, are very easy to detect. The result is shown
in Table I. But in contrast to a signature, a monitored and ﬁled
Bluetooth- or Wi-Fi MAC IDs can be altered later on. So, this
information is only a reference and no proof of identiﬁcation.
2) Linking a Captured CAM-Trace to a Vehicle Based on
a Physical Fingerprint of the IEEE 802.11p Transmitter: To
perform the physical ﬁngerprinting of IEEE 802.11a compliant
transmitter, a software deﬁned radio based Wi-Fi sniffer on
an Ettus USRP N210 platform was used in [22]. So, the
mentioned observation device in Section V-A is not sufﬁcient
to extract physical identiﬁcation features. In [23] an Ettus
USRP N210 is used as well to perform physical ﬁngerprinting
of IEEE 802.11p compliant transmitter. Physical ﬁngerprinting
of transceiver is comparable to an identiﬁcation of humans
based on biometric human features.
3) Linking a Captured CAM-Trace to a Vehicle During an
Ofﬁcial Trafﬁc Control: Today, in case of a speeding during
an ofﬁcial trafﬁc control, the vehicular speed is measured and
photographs are shot of the vehicular driver and the licence
plate of the vehicle. In future in addition, CAMs of the crossing
vehicles could be recorded and correlated with the optical
captured information.
C. Linking a Captured CAM-Trace to a Driver
Among others, people go by vehicle periodically recurring
drives. E.g., the daily drive from home to the ofﬁce, factory
or university. These relapsing drives are driver speciﬁc and
therefore a personal identiﬁcation feature. So, according CAM-
traces can directly be linked to an individual driver.
D. Distinction between a CAM-Trace and a GPS Tracker
Observation
Even today an attacker can stick a GPS tracker at a
vehicle and monitor and store the geographic position and the
according time of a vehicle as a data-trace. But a monitored
GPS-trace can be generated by any movement and it is very
easy to modify it in some way. So, in contrast to a CAM-
trace a GPS data-trace has only minor relevance as proof of a
covered drive (to a third party).
E. Distinction between a CAM-Trace and a Personal Obser-
vation Performed by a Detective
What is the difference of our observation device to a
personal detective who monitors a speciﬁc vehicle or person by
following the vehicle? The V2V technology provides that ITS
vehicle stations will publicly send CAMs to the environment.
We have shown, that a standard smart phone with G5 interface
will be an adequate observation device. This component is
available for everyone. So in future, in contrast to today, more
or less “everyone” is able to perform such an observation
attack with a smart phone. This means: monitoring and storing
CAM-traces, sensor-data-traces, and secondary vehicle identi-
ﬁer (Bluetooth MAC ID, Wi-Fi MAC ID) of any speciﬁc ITS
vehicle station as presented in Table I.
VII.
CONCLUSION
From our point of view misuse capabilities of the V2V
communication arise with the periodically broadcasted CAMs.
So, here only CAMs are analyzed.
40
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Summary
Privacy problems of the V2V communication - especially
CAMs - arise due to the combination of following issues:
•
CAMs include static data elements (e.g., length and
width of the vehicle, and the conﬁdence level of
heading, speed, acceleration, curvature, and yaw rate).
Because of this static data, included time stamps and
high transmission frequency of up to 10 Hz, subse-
quent CAMs of a vehicle (Section IV) are linkable to
a CAM-trace and
•
Cryptographic
signing
of
CAMs
(with
distinct
pseudonymous
cryptographic
keys)
cause
non-
disputable property of CAMs.
Next, non-disputable CAM-traces can be linked to a spe-
ciﬁc vehicle (Section VI-B). This is possible based on: Sec-
ondary Vehicle Identiﬁer of modern vehicles, e.g.,:
•
64 bit Bluetooth MAC ID of vehicular headunits
•
64 bit MAC ID of vehicle Wi-Fi hotspot (of vehicular
headunits)
•
Physical ﬁngerprinting of IEEE 802.11p compliant
transmitter
•
Periodically recurring drives
•
...
and during ofﬁcial trafﬁc controls.
To avoid any privacy problems for drivers with the existing
V2V solution, drivers should be selectively able to deactivate
V2V transmission of ITS vehicle stations. Moreover, we rec-
ommend a standard conﬁguration of V2V transceiver for ITS
vehicle stations: radio reception of all CAMs and DENMs but
only transmission of DENMs to avoid privacy problems.
B. New V2V Approach for Day-2
Research and development of the V2V communication has
started 15 years ago. In the meantime, the IT architecture of
vehicles has signiﬁcantly changed. A lot of components for
assisted driving are available: lane keeping support, trafﬁc jam
assist, automatic parking assistants, remote parking assistants
and so on. This is a pre-stage of automatic driving, which is
one of the main challenges in automotive engineering at the
moment. Already, the mentioned systems to support driving
require speciﬁc sensor systems to detect objects (e.g., road
lanes, other vehicles and/or static trafﬁc signs) as well as
pedestrians and bicycles by capturing the environment. Many
modern vehicles are already able to deduce a speciﬁc envi-
ronmental trafﬁc situation based on the captured information
without any V2V communication. The integration of further
sensor elements in vehicles is an ongoing activity due to
automated driving in the near future. We argue that due to
this deployment the relevance of the V2V communication will
change over time.
To avoid the misuse of CAMs to harm privacy a selective
communication approach for CAMs should be chosen instead
of todays continuous communication of CAMs. E.g., CAM
transmission on location with statistical higher accident rates,
on crossings, during passing maneuver, etc. In addition, the
amount of included data in CAMs should be restricted. Fur-
thermore, a new cryptographic concept should be chosen which
avoid the non-disputable property of CAMs today.
From a technical perspective, the current V2V concept,
signing CAMs on the sender side and veriﬁng CAMs on
the receiver side, is very time consuming. In addition, a
complex key management system is necessary to enrole the
needed pseudonymous certiﬁcates. Moreover, the integration of
ECDSA-signature and certiﬁcate expands the CAM message
size tenfold - see Section III-A1 - and can cause CAM colli-
sions on the wireless communication cannel. This effect will
dramatically increase, when a switch to another ECC domain
parameter set (e.g., NIST P-386 [10] or BrainpoolP386r1 [11])
is needed for security reasons in future.
C. V2X Communication
In this paper, only the V2V communication, especially
CAMs, are analyzed. In contrast, the adaptation of the ETSI
communication to ITS roadside station - constituted in [32] -
is sound and can be broadly applied that way.
VIII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank our colleague Gerd Nolden
for the discussion and our student Tobias Franz for performing
real measurements of Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer. Also thanks
to the anonymous reviewers for the valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1]
Markus Ullmann, Thomas Strubbe, and Christian Wieschebrink, “Tech-
nical Limitations, and Privacy Shortcomings of the Vehicle-to-Vehicle
Communication,” in Proceedings VEHICULAR 2016: The Fifth Inter-
national Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies
and Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 15–20.
[2]
——, “V2V Communication - Keeping You Under Non-Disputable
Surveillance (Short Paper),” in Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular
Networking Conference (VNC).
IEEE, 2016.
[3]
Car 2 Car Communication Consortium, “Mission, News, Documents,”
2015, https://www.car-2-car.org/, access date: November 02, 2016.
[4]
ETSI, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Security Header and Cer-
tiﬁcate Formats; ETSI TS 103 097 V1.2.1,” 2013, http://www.etsi.org/,
access date: November 02, 2016.
[5]
European
Commission,
“SCOOP@F,”
2013,
http://inea.ec.europa.eu/en/ten-t, Access Date: June 2, 2017.
[6]
BMVI, “Cooperative ITS Corridor Rotterdam-Franfurt-Vienna Joint
deployment,” 2014, http://www.bmvi.de, Access Date: June 2, 2017.
[7]
Vejdirektoratet,
“NordicWay,”
2016,
http://vejdirektoratet.dk/EN/roadsector/Nordicway/Pages/Default.aspx,
access date: November 2, 2016.
[8]
European
Commission,
“Strategy
Towards
Cooper-
ative,
Connected
and
Automated
Mobility,”
2016,
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/its/news/2016-11-30-c-its-
strategy en, access date: November 30, 2016.
[9]
C-ITS Platform of the EC DG MOVE, “Final Report,” 2016,
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/its/doc/c-its-platform-ﬁnal-report-
january-2016.pdf, access date: November 2, 2016.
[10]
Recommended Elliptic Curves For Federal Government Use, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/toolkit/documents/dss/NISTReCur.pdf,
access date: November 02, 2016
[11]
Brainpool, “ECC Brainpool Standard Curves and Curve Generation,
Version 1.0,” 2005, http://www.ecc-brainpool.org/ecc-standard.htm, ac-
cess date: November 02, 2016.
[12]
G. Samara, W. A. Al-Salihy, and R. Sures, “Security Analysis of Vehic-
ular Ad Hoc Nerworks (VANET),” in Network Applications Protocols
and Services (NETAPPS), 2010 Second International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 55–60.
[13]
P. Papadimitratos, L. Buttyan, J.-P. Hubaux, F. Kargl, A. Kung, and
M. Raya, “Architecture for Secure and Private Vehicular Commu-
nications,” in Telecommunications, 2007. ITST’07. 7th International
Conference on ITS.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–6.
41
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14]
J. Freudiger, M. Raya, M. F´elegyh´azi, P. Papadimitratos et al., “Mix-
Zones for Location Privacy in Vehicular Networks,” in Proceedings of
the ﬁrst international workshop on wireless networking for intelligent
transportation systems (Win-ITS), 2007.
[15]
J. Petit, F. Schaub, M. Feiri, and F. Kargl, “Pseudonym schemes
in vehicular networks: A survey,” IEEE communications surveys &
tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, 2015, pp. 228–255.
[16]
B. Wiedersheim, Z. Ma, F. Kargl, and P. Papadimitratos, “Privacy
in Inter-Vehicular Networks: Why Simple Pseudonym Change is not
Enough,” in Wireless On-demand Network Systems and Services
(WONS), 2010 Seventh International Conference on Wireless On-
demand Network Systems and Services.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 176–183.
[17]
S. S. Yang, Y. G. Kim, and H. Choi, “Vehicle Identiﬁcation using
Discrete Spectrums in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Journal of Networks,
vol. 3, no. 4, 2008, pp. 51–63.
[18]
S. Astapov and A. Riid, “A Multistage Procedure of Mobile Vehicle
Acoustic Identiﬁcation for Single-Sensor Embedded Device,” Interna-
tional Journal of Electronics and Telecommunications, vol. 59, no. 2,
2013, pp. 151–160.
[19]
C. Carpenter, M. Fowler, and T. Adler, “Generating Route-Speciﬁc
Origin-Destination Tables Using Bluetooth Technology,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no.
2308, 2012, pp. 96–102.
[20]
Markus Ullmann, Tobias Franz, and Gerd Nolden, “Vehicle Identiﬁca-
tion Based on Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer - Analysis, and Measure-
ments -,” in Proceedings VEHICULAR 2017: The Sixth International
Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and
Applications.
IARIA, July 2017.
[21]
B. Danev, D. Zanetti, and S. Capkun, “On Physical-Layer Identiﬁcation
of Wireless Devices,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 1,
2012, p. 6.
[22]
T. D. Vo-Huu, T. D. Vo-Huu, and G. Noubir, “Fingerprinting Wi-Fi
Devices Using Software Deﬁned Radios,” in Proceedings of the 9th
ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile
Networks.
ACM, 2016, pp. 3–14.
[23]
G. Baldini, R. Giuliani, and E. Cano Pons, “An analysis of the
privacy threat in vehicular ad hoc networks due to radio frequency
ﬁngerprinting,” Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2017, 2017.
[24]
C. Han, M. Dianati, R. Tafazolli, R. Kernchen, and X. Shen, “Analytical
Study of the IEEE 802.11p MAC Sublayer in Vehicular Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 13, no. 2,
2012, pp. 873–886.
[25]
Q. Wang, S. Leng, H. Fu, and Y. Zhang, “An IEEE 802.11p - based
Multichannel MAC Scheme with Channel Coordination for Vehicular
Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 13, no. 2, 2012, pp. 449–458.
[26]
S. Eichler, “Performance Evaluation of the IEEE 802.11p WAVE
Communication Standard,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007.
VTC-2007 Fall. 2007 IEEE 66th.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 2199–2203.
[27]
ETSI, “ETSI EN 302 665 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
- Communications Architecture,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org/, Access
Date: June 02, 2017.
[28]
——, “ETSI EN 302 637-2 V1.3.2: Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part
2: Speciﬁcation of Cooperative Awareness Basic Service,” 2015,
http://www.etsi.org/, Access Date: June 02, 2017.
[29]
——, “ETSI TS 102 637-3 V1.2.2: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS);
Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part 3: Speci-
ﬁcations of Decentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Basic Service,”
2010, http://www.etsi.org/, access date: November 02, 2016.
[30]
T. Franz, “Bachelor Thesis: Drahtlose Identiﬁer in modernen Fahrzeu-
gen,” Univerity of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhine-Sieg, 2016.
[31]
M. Herrmann, “Ubertooth-Bluetooth Monitoring und Injection,” Net-
work, vol. 19, 2013.
[32]
Markus Ullmann, and Thomas Strubbe, and Christian Wieschebrink,
and Dennis K¨ugler, “Secure Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Communication:
Secure Roadside Stations, Key Management, and Crypto Agility,” in
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 9 no 12.
IARIA,
2016, pp. 80–89.
TABLE II. DIFFERENCES OF V2V IN EUROPE AND US
Europe
US
Standards:
ETSI 102637 1-3
SAE J 2735
ETSI 102 943
IEEE 1609.2
ETSI 103 097 (Naming
derived from IEE 1609.2)
further ETSI standards
possible
Accepted ECC Curves:
NIST P-256r1
NIST P-256r1
BrainpoolP256r1
BrainpoolP256r1
(in discussion)
(in discussion)
Message Types:
CAM
BSM
DENM
RSA
EVA
“unlimited” number of
limited number
types possible
of types
Minimal Message Size without
186 bit
275 bit
Signature and Certiﬁcate:
Minimal Message Size with
˜2 Kbit
˜2 Kbit
Signature and Certiﬁcate:
[33]
SAE, “SAE J2735: Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC)
Message Set Dictionary (issued 2015-09, revised 2016-03),” 2016,
http://www.SAE.org/.
[34]
IEEE, “IEEE 1609.2: Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular En-
vironments Security Services for Applications and Management Mes-
sages,” 2016, http://www.IEEE.org/.
[35]
R. M. Ishtiaq Roufa, H. Mustafaa, S. O. Travis Taylora, W. Xua,
M. Gruteserb, W. Trappeb, and I. Seskarb, “Security and privacy
vulnerabilities of in-car wireless networks: A tire pressure monitoring
system case study,” in 19th USENIX Security Symposium, Washington
DC, 2010, pp. 11–13.
APPENDIX A
DIFFERENCES OF THE V2V COMMUNICATION IN EUROPE
AND US
The V2V communication according to ETSI and the US
standards, SAE J2375 (revised 2016-03)[33] and IEEE 1609.2
[34], use similar concepts, both are based on IEEE 802.11p, but
there are small and major differences between both approaches.
While the European standardization work in this area is
exclusively executed by ETSI, the US standards are executed
by IEEE as well as SAE.
One difference concerns the message types broadcasted by
the ITS stations. In either case, vehicles send pseudonymously
signed messages. But in the US instead of CAMs, Basic Safety
Messages (BSMs) are sent. Both contain mostly identical data
ﬁelds, but differ in precision. E.g., in CAMS the vehicle sizes
are stated in rather vague decimeters, whereas in BSMs vehicle
sizes are stated in more precise centimeters.
There is no direct equivalent to the DENM in the US
standards. Comparable are the Roadside Alerts (RSA), which
are used to inform receivers about certain events in the area,
e.g., an approaching train or icy roads. Based on those,
emergency vehicles send emergency vehicle alert (EVA), that
also contain the type of the vehicle. In contrast to DENMs
in Europe, RSAs and EVAs will not be transmitted by an
hop-by-hop mechanism. So, those location based warnings can
only be received in proximity to the location. BSMs and other
messages used in the US have a larger payload than their
european counterparts, but due to certiﬁcates and signatures
their overall size is not signiﬁcantly larger.
The used cryptographic concepts are quite similar. In
Europe as well an in US the signature algorithms ECDSA will
be used. In the US standards the ECC domain NIST P-256 and
42
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

BrainpoolP-256r1 are deﬁned for usage whereas the ETSI stan-
dards only provide NIST P-256. There are discussions beside
the formal standards concerning ECC domain parameters: In
the US to drop BrainpoolP-256r1 ECC domain parameters and
in Europe to accept BrainpoolP-256r1 ECC domain parameter.
Similar as well is the message frequency. CAMs and BSMs
are both sent with a frequency of up to 10 Hz. A pseudonym
change frequency is neither in the US nor European standards
speciﬁed.
APPENDIX B
ITS VEHICLE IDENTIFIER
The term ITS vehicle identiﬁer is completely independent
from the V2V communication.
Here, we categorize the available identiﬁers of vehicles
into three different classes. Primary vehicle identiﬁer represent
such identiﬁers which will be typically regarded today, e.g.,
the Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN). Secondary Vehicle
Identiﬁer come up with new information technologies used in
modern vehicles. Tertiary vehicle identiﬁer are not sufﬁcient to
directly identify a vehicle but to link CAM respective DENM
messages of an ITS vehicle station.
A. Primary Vehicle Identiﬁer
To date, each vehicle is identiﬁable based on the distinct
VIN. In some areas the VIN is integrated as human readable
information in the windscreen of vehicles.
Besides the VIN, vehicles are marked with a licence plate.
This is a further primary vehicle identiﬁer, which is already
used for identiﬁcation.
With the deployment of the V2V technology vehicles
will be equipped with a long term ECC key pair and an
appropriate certiﬁcate. This certiﬁcate becomes an additional
primary vehicle identiﬁer.
B. Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
Besides these obvious primary vehicle identiﬁers, vehicles
have further identiﬁers. Modern vehicles are equipped with
multi-media components, which are able to etablish communi-
cations with electronic devices of the driver or passengers. Typ-
ically, wireless communication technologies, e.g., Bluetooth,
are used for that purpose.
A Bluetooth multi-media device emits a static 48 bit MAC
identiﬁer. The MAC ID is composed of two parts: the ﬁrst
half is assigned to the manufacturer of the device, and the
second half is assigned to the speciﬁc device. In addition,
each Bluetooth device emits a “User-friendly-name” which is
typically alterable. Bluetooth devices operate in the ISM band
(2.4 to 2.485 GHz).
Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer have no formal character in
contrast to a licence plate or VIN. But it is technically very
easy to capture Bluetooth MAC IDs and SSIDs of a vehicle
and to link them to a vehicle because their primary application
is to establish a communication with other devices. So, attacker
can use them for their purpose.
Moreover, vehicle head-units allow any Wi-Fi equipped
laptop, tablet or mobile phone to access the internet within
the ITS vehicle station while travelling if the head-unit has
mobile communications capabilities. But head-units conﬁgured
as access point need an unique Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID)
or network name to connect devices. According to the IEEE
802.11 workgroup, Wi-Fi can be used in following distinct
frequency ranges: 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, 4.9 GHz, 5 GHz,
and 5.9 GHz bands. Each range is divided into a multitude
of channels. Countries apply their own regulations to the
legitimate channels and maximum power levels within these
frequency ranges. In addition, each head-unit needs an unique
MAC address. This is a further Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer.
If vehicles are equipped with mobile communication capa-
bilities an International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) is
required. That is an unique identiﬁcation number to identify
a mobile device within the network. In addition, a SIM card
with an assigned mobile phone number is needed for mobile
communication.
MAC IDs of Bluetooth interfaces respective Wi-Fi access
points are detectable very easy with every smart phone [20].
Since the 1th of November 2014, vehicles and motorhomes
have to be equipped with a Tire Pressure Monitoring System
(TPMS) within Europe. TPMS can be dived in direct and
indirect TPMS. Direct TPMS means that speciﬁc physical
sensors measure the air pressure of the tires. These sensors
communicate wireless with the vehicle and transmit an iden-
tiﬁer of 28 to 32 bit length. There are different wireless
technologies available for 125 kHz or 315 kHz respective 433
MHz. A detection range of up to 40 m for direct TPMS is
mentioned in [35].
In [22] the physical ﬁngerprinting of IEEE 802.11a com-
pliant transmitter is investigated. As physical identiﬁcation
features the transmitter individual scrambling seed, carrier
frequency offset, and sampling frequency offset are used.
For some IEEE 802.11a transmitter an identiﬁcation accuracy,
based on these physical identiﬁcation features, of up to 100 %
is reported. IEEE 802.11p is technically very similar to IEEE
802.11a. A physical ﬁngerprinting of IEEE 802.11p compliant
transmitters is analyzed in [23].
So far mentioned vehicle identiﬁers are sufﬁcient for identi-
ﬁcation all the time. Furthermore, there exists vehicle identiﬁer
with a limited validity period, e.g., pseudonymous certiﬁcates
(termed authorization tickets by ETSI).
C. Tertiary Vehicle Identiﬁer
CAMs contain a lot of static information, like the vehicle
length and vehicle width and the conﬁdence level of heading,
speed, acceleration, curvature, and yaw rate. These information
enable to link CAMs only based on the CAM data elements.
43
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

