International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
Analysis of Politicians’ Tweets to Explore Political Communication with Social 
Network Analysis 
Heidi Schuhbauer, Sebastian Schötteler, Johannes Niu, Bernhard Schiffer,  
David Wolfarth, Tim Groß, Thomas Kreidl, and Fabian Model 
Computer Science Department 
Nuremberg Institute of Technology 
Nuremberg, Germany 
heidi.schuhbauer@th-nuernberg.de; sebastian.schoetteler@th-nuernberg.de; niujo64943@th-nuernberg.de; 
schifferbe69185@th-nuernberg.de; wolfarthda82341@th-nuernberg.de; grossti74853@th-nuernberg.de; kreidlth74662@th-
nuernberg.de; modelfa74656@th-nuernberg.de  
 
Abstract—This paper illustrates the practical application of 
cluster analysis, social network analysis, sentiment analysis, and 
topic analysis in a case study on Twitter data. These techniques 
provide insights into the public communication patterns 
between German Members of Parliament (MPs) on Twitter 
around the time of the 2021 federal election. The question of this 
work was to determine whether a potential shift in 
communication towards the inaugurated “Ampel” coalition, 
made up of the parties SPD, Greens, and FDP, can be derived 
from Twitter interactions. Twitter data were collected and 
separated into two time slots: before and after the election. In 
distinct scenarios, mention, retweet, and reply interactions are 
first considered together and then separately. In these scenarios, 
the Girvan-Newman Algorithm detects clusters of MPs 
dependent on the interactions observed. Then, the average 
inbreeding homophily and other network metrics of the pre- 
and post-election area are compared. An additional scenario 
focuses on intra- and inter-party sentiments conveyed within 
tweet texts. In a fourth scenario, MPs are grouped according to 
their party affiliation, the average inbreeding homophily values 
of parties, and potential coalitions. A topic analysis handled 
relevant discussion topics between the successful coalition 
parties. Changes in communication behavior at these two 
different time slots are visible. The communication clusters of 
those MPs differ mostly before and after the election. The 
average sentiment of the parties towards each other changed 
positively, although no significant tendency could be derived 
regarding later coalition formations. A determination of the 
density of the network for the topics also indicates that the 
importance of the individual topics before and after the 
formation of the government has a consistent relevance. 
Keywords-Cluster Analysis; Microblog; Network Metrics; 
Sentiment Analysis; Social Network Analysis; Topic Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper is an extended version of the one presented 
in SOTICS 2022 [1]. 
For political communication between parties, politicians, 
and their constituents, social media platforms play an 
important role. By communicating through platforms, such as 
Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, political actors reach wide 
audiences within a short period. On these platforms, 
politicians publicly communicate with each other. As one 
consequence of this trend, social media platforms are 
gradually outclassing traditional media outlets – such as 
television and print media – as the main source of news and 
information. Case in point, a survey conducted in 2018 
determined that social media platforms are the most popular 
information and news sources for American adults aged 
between 18 and 29 [2]. Corroborating, another survey 
conducted in 2021 determined that up to 76% of adults rely on 
social media as a news and information source, depending on 
the country [3]. 
Among those services, Twitter is a very popular microblog 
that is used by many persons also for professional use. Twitter 
promotes the dialogue between politicians and between 
politicians and their constituents via mention and reply 
interactions, which allow users to engage in direct 
communication. Consequently, social media have become a 
central component of political communication. 
Relations between individual MPs can be examined in 
more detail using social network analysis. “A social network 
consists of a finite set or sets of actors (depicted as nodes) and 
the relation or relations defined on them (depicted as ties)” [4]. 
Translated to microblogs, two types of social networks can be 
derived from such platforms – follower and interaction 
networks. A follower network can be defined as a set of 
microblog users connected via follower ties regarding who 
follows whom. An interaction network can be defined as a set 
of microblog users connected via interaction ties that diffuse 
content between said users. The application of social network 
analysis on Twitter data offers a variety of research 
possibilities. Interactions can be derived from public tweets 
referring to other people, i.e., retweets of or replies to another 
user’s tweet, or mentions of a user. Analysis of interaction 
networks explores these relations, as well as their textual 
contents, which can be examined through sentiment analysis. 
 This article applies methods of social network analysis to 
explore changes to the communication of German MPs from 
selected political parties around the 2021 federal election. 
After 16 years of a government led by the Union, made up of 
the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and Christian Social 
Union (CSU), – in coalition with the Social Democratic Party 
of Germany (SPD) for three and the Free Democratic Party 
(FDP) for one legislative period – Germany had a change in 
government after the federal elections in 2021. The new 
government consisting of the SPD, Alliance 90/The Greens 
(Greens), and FDP was formed on December 8, 2021. For the 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
first time in its history, a government formed by a coalition of 
more than two parliamentary groups thus governs the Federal 
Republic of Germany.  
In the past, federal government alliances consisted of 
coalitions between the Union/SPD, Union/FDP, SPD/FDP, 
and SPD/Greens. A coalition between the Greens and FDP 
within a tripartite coalition currently governs in the states of 
Schleswig-Holstein and Rhineland-Palatinate, in a so-called 
Jamaica coalition (together with the CDU) and an Ampel 
(‘traffic light’) coalition with the SPD, respectively. On a 
federal level, however, these two parties had yet to form a 
coalition.  
This article applies social network analysis, cluster 
analysis, sentiment analysis, and topic analysis to explore 
changes to the communication of German MPs from select 
political parties around the 2021 federal election. 
Section II of this paper presents related works, formulates 
the research gap, and specifies the hypotheses. Section III 
introduces the methodology used to aggregate and analyze the 
data for the network scenarios. Section IV presents the results 
of each network scenario and discusses them. Section V 
describes the methods for the topic analysis of relevant 
subjects discussed by the “Ampel” coalition parties who won 
the election. Section VI contains the result of the topic 
analysis. Section VII illustrates the limitations of this research, 
as well as starting points for possible future work. 
II. 
RESEARCH GAP 
Virk [5] compares different Social Network Services 
(SNS) as a type of social media and explores the special role 
of Twitter in public communication. The author examines the 
communication patterns between Twitter users and applies the 
tie strength theory postulated by Granovetter [6] to conclude 
that interactions on Twitter – unlike other SNS – focus on 
content rather than user relationships, and thus can reach 
wider audiences. 
Lassen and Brown [7] examine Twitter use by members 
of congress in the United States of America. They state that 
SNSs enable politicians to communicate more directly and 
personally with peers and supporters by eliminating limits on 
message visibility, allowing content to be redistributed 
beyond one's followers. The application of social network 
analysis to political networks shows the fragmentation and 
clustering of politicians, parties, or political systems. 
Boireau [8] identifies communities among Belgian MPs 
along party and linguistic lines. For this purpose, the Girvan-
Newman Algorithm (GNA) was applied on a network 
generated from the MPs’ connections to followers, and 
retweet interactions to find hidden communities and 
homogeneous clusters by calculating their homophily indices, 
which express the degree of similarity of members within a 
cluster. 
Caetano et al. [9] analyze social networks among Twitter 
users during the 2016 American presidential election by 
analyzing tweets about the candidates. Users were clustered 
based on their sentiment towards a candidate with their 
mentioning behavior and hashtag use. By obtaining 
homophily indices of these clusters, the authors could identify 
users with high degrees of relative similarity. 
Sentiment analysis attempts to quantify attitudes conveyed 
in a text. Giachanou and Crestani [10] discuss common 
procedures for sentiment analysis, as well as their respective 
limitations, e.g., the detection of irony or emotions. The work 
explicitly focuses on methods suitable to retrieve sentiments 
from tweets. 
Boras and Singh [11] show that Twitter is the social 
network most used for political discussions. However, the 
intensity of the discussion is strongly dependent on the topic. 
In Meier et al. [12], among other things, the issue of 
engagement of German politicians on certain topics was 
examined in the election year 2017. To determine which 
topics were intensively discussed on Twitter, a hashtag 
network was created, with which each tweet with a hashtag 
could then be directly assigned to a specific issue. Using 
additional metrics, such as the Z-score or the Q-modularity, it 
was found that the communication behavior of the parties 
changed significantly before the election, especially in terms 
of interaction and discussion with other parties. A topic 
analysis of political discussion topics on Twitter based on 
hashtags was also done by Boras and Singh [11] for the Indian 
political landscape. To examine whether discussion on 
Twitter about the identified topics leads to political 
polarisation, a mention and retweet network was formed. 
These networks can indicate discussion and advocacy. 
Content and sentiment analysis can be used to identify shifts 
in opinion on specific topics as well as internal network 
relationships. Garcia-Sanchez et al. [13] used cluster analysis 
to identify different ideologies concerning various political 
issues of Brazilian parliamentarians in 2019. Using the degree 
of centrality, it was possible to identify particularly active 
users and thus the central key figures. A comparison between 
possible techniques for topic modeling can be found in Egger 
et al. [14]. The techniques investigated here were latent 
Dirichlet allocation (LDA), non-negative matrix factorization 
(NMF), Top2Vec, and BERTopic. Tweets are used as the data 
basis of the comparison, and the advantages and 
disadvantages in the different application areas are discussed. 
Until now, literature does not describe possible changes in 
Twitter communication behavior between MPs before and 
after an election. An exploration of the change in tone by 
analyzing the sentiment of tweets before and after an event has 
also not yet been described. An analysis of the topics 
discussed by the parties is missing. Interesting aspects of 
political communication behavior on social media are 
expected results of this analysis. 
Consequently, this article examines how Twitter 
interactions (mentions, retweets, replies) between MPs of 
possible coalition partners (CDU, CSU, SPD, Greens, FDP) 
changed before and after the 2021 German federal election. It 
furthermore explores potential differences in intra- and inter-
party communication and attempts to show whether the 
political shift towards the inaugurated “Ampel” coalition 
could be derived from the observed changes. Changes in intra- 
and inter-party communication are additionally presented in 
relation to the various topics. 
The following hypotheses form the basis for the 
communication behavior analysis: The article hypothesizes 
that different interactions between MPs can be observed 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
3
during the pre- and post-election period (H1) and that the 
resulting interaction networks for each period show a 
difference in intra- and inter-party communication (H2). The 
article further assumes that “Ampel” MPs’ mutual sentiment 
changed positively (H3). By analyzing the sentiment between 
parties, as well as the average homogeneity within parties and 
party groups, political tendencies towards an “Ampel” 
coalition can be observed (H4). In the topic networks, intra-
party homophily changes to inter-party homophily as a 
function of the observation time points (H5). For the change 
in communication, it is also important to consider the density 
of the social network. The communication intensity of the 
topic networks depends on the observation times (H6). 
Thus, this article attempts to describe the change in 
communication between MPs by analyzing their Twitter 
interactions before and after the federal election 2021. It aims 
to understand whether changing interaction intensities 
between MPs of potential coalition partners yield conclusions 
about the emerging “Ampel” coalition. This would be of 
relevance for future research into the interdependencies of 
political communication on Social Network Services, such as 
Twitter. 
III. 
METHODS FOR SCENARIOS 
Mention, retweet, and reply interactions between MPs 
from the SPD, Greens, FDP, CDU, and CSU were collected 
to explore changes in communication on Twitter. One MP 
using another MP’s handle denotes a mention interaction. A 
Twitter handle, which is commonly known as a username, is 
the name with which a user has registered on Twitter. Since it 
serves as an account’s identifier, no two usernames on the 
social network are the same [16]. Retweets refer to the 
redistribution of another user’s tweet and can contain 
commentary by the retweeter. A reply is defined as a comment 
posted under another MP’s tweet. The resulting social 
networks of MPs connected by their interactions are analyzed 
in four separate scenarios. 
A. Network Scenarios 
Scenario 1 considers all interaction types, while in 
scenario 2, a) mention, b) retweet, and c) reply interactions 
were examined separately. For each scenario, MPs were 
grouped using automated cluster detection and examined for 
modularity and homophily. Modularity measures the strength 
of division of a network into clusters. Networks with high 
modularity have dense connections between the nodes within 
modules but sparse connections between nodes in different 
modules [17]. Homophily in network structures means the 
principle that nodes in a network tend to have links to other 
nodes with similar attributes [14]. 
In scenarios 3 and 4, MPs were grouped based on their 
party affiliation. In scenario 3, interactions were examined for 
the tweet author’s sentiment towards the addressed MP using 
sentiment analysis. The sentiment for every interaction was 
evaluated based on the tweet’s text. To determine changes to 
the inter-party relations, each party’s average sentiment 
toward all other parties was then calculated and compared 
between the pre- and post-election networks. Scenario 4 
examined the average homophily within each party and party 
group. Party groups were based on politically and numerically 
possible coalition compositions (“Ampel”, “Jamaica”) and for 
the Union parties. 
B. Data Aggregation 
Publicly available Twitter data can be divided into three 
categories: (1) User information, such as the username, the 
Twitter handle (identified by @), or account description; (2) 
following and liking behavior of a user, and the user’s 
followers; (3) the user’s tweet timeline, in which all self-
published or retweeted tweets appear, as well as the user’s 
replies to others’ tweets. 
As a basis for this study, publicly available tweets from 
MPs of the 19th (2017-2021) and 20th (2021-2025) legislative 
sessions were collected for the period from July 26, 2021, 0:00 
a.m. to November 26, 2021, 12:00 p.m. The end date was 
chosen to serve as cut-off due to the official presentation of 
the coalition agreement between the SPD, Greens, and FDP 
on November 24, 2021. To collect reactions to this 
announcement, two more days were added. The period 
between the closing of polls on September 26, 2021, at 6 p.m., 
and the end date covers 60 days and is considered as the post-
election period. An equally long time before the closing of 
polls was considered for the pre-election period. 
Twitter accounts were selected from all MPs with a public 
Twitter timeline who are members of the parties SPD, CDU, 
CSU, Greens, and FDP. Members of the parties “The Left” 
and AfD were not included in this analysis, as neither party 
was relevant for coalition negotiations after the election. The 
timelines of all selected accounts were then scraped from 
Twitter’s website. 
Data Collection. Scraping of timelines was done using the 
Python package Scweet [15]. Scweet uses the Chrome plugin 
Selenium [19] to access the desired Twitter page, extract the 
information of the tweet from the page, and save it to a CSV 
file. 
Data Processing. A custom Java application was 
developed to generate uniformly formatted and sanitized 
datasets. The data originally scraped from Twitter included 
the timelines of all MPs, i.e., all their tweets, retweets of, and 
replies to other tweets within the time frame. The information 
generated for each of these messages included the time of 
publication, the author’s username and handle, the textual 
contents of the tweet, as well as information on whether it was 
posted as a retweet of, or reply to another tweet. If other users 
were mentioned within the tweet, they could be identified 
through their handles. 
Additionally, the application enriches the data with 
information on party affiliation and membership of the 19th 
or 20th legislative period. It produced output data in the GEXF 
format [20], which is limited by specified procedures. First, 
all tweets that did not represent a connection between two 
MPs were removed. The dataset was then divided into a pre- 
and a post-election partition. For this purpose, all tweets that 
were created before the time of the closing of polls on 
September 26, 2021, 6:00 p.m. were assigned to a first 
partition. The elements from the timeline after this date were 
assigned to a second partition. Additionally, the output is 
restricted to specific interaction types. This allowed the 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
4
creation of one pre-election and one post-election dataset for 
each of the scenarios defined. 
Data Description. The data set collected from Twitter 
consisted of 26,888 German-language tweets from 736 
Twitter accounts. 15,770 of these tweets were posted before 
and 11,118 after election day. 1,030 MPs were elected for the 
19th and 20th legislative periods. 71.5% of them maintained 
a Twitter account. Once filtered, the dataset consisted of 622 
accounts and 9,582 tweets. After removing all tweets that did 
not connect two MPs, 5,766 tweets from 466 MPs remained 
in the pre-election dataset, and 3,816 from 476 MPs in the 
post-election dataset. Figure 1 shows the percentage 
distribution of all tweets among the parties before and after 
the election. 
 
Figure 1.  Percentage distribution of MPs’ tweets by party 
The pre- and post-election data contain nodes and edges 
depending on the interaction types selected during the data 
processing step. Scenarios 1 and 4 thus contained all MPs, 
while scenario 2 contained three separate data sets, 
differentiated by interaction types. Scenario 3 handled only 
those interaction types whose tweet text fields were not empty. 
The aggregated data and source code can be accessed at [14]. 
C. Cluster Detection 
Cluster detection extracts groups of individuals from a 
network based on the similarity of one or more attributes. This 
work used connectivity-based clustering, which identifies 
clusters based on the connections between nodes in the 
network, as well as the weights of connections. For this 
purpose, the Girvan-Newman Algorithm [22] was used. This 
algorithm assumes that members of a cluster have more 
connections to other members of the same cluster, and fewer 
connections to other nodes in the remaining network. By 
iteratively removing connections whose Edge Betweenness 
Centrality (EBC) is the highest, clusters are separated from 
each other. The EBC is defined as “the number of [the] 
shortest paths between pairs of vertices that run along it” [10]. 
In each step, the edge with the highest EBC is removed from 
the network and its modularity is calculated. The modularity 
of a network denotes how well clusters are separated from 
each other. The iteration continues until every connection 
between nodes has been eliminated. The intermediate step 
with the highest modularity is the result of the algorithm. 
To guarantee that an MP’s allocation to a cluster is based 
on their interactions and not their party affiliation, a 𝜒2 test is 
performed on the network. The test’s p-value denotes the 
probability p of MPs’ party affiliation determining the results 
of the cluster detection.  
D. Sentiment Analysis 
The textual contexts of MPs’ tweets were examined to 
analyze the sentiment for which the Python package TextBlob 
[15] was used. The package uses a lexicon-based approach to 
compute the sentiment. For the analysis of German language 
texts, the plugin TextBlobDE [24] was used. A predefined 
dictionary of words associated with positive or negative 
emotions is used to weigh a text’s sentiment. An individual 
score is assigned to each word in the examined text. The 
overall sentiment is defined by the average sentiment across 
all words in the text. The algorithm generates a polarity score 
from –1.0 to +1.0 for each tweet, which classified the tweet as 
either positive, neutral, or negative. Each tweet in the data set 
is then enriched with the polarity value, as well as the polarity 
class as additional attributes. 
E. Homophily 
The homophily index H measures a cluster’s relative 
homogeneity. To determine H for a cluster i, the connections 
of all nodes of the cluster are examined. Caetano et al. [9] 
calculate 𝐻𝑖 = 
𝑠𝑖
𝑠𝑖+𝑑𝑖  where si denotes homogeneous links, 
i.e., those that connect a node of class i to other nodes of the 
same class, while di denotes heterogeneous connections, i.e., 
those that connect a node of class i to nodes of another class. 
By normalizing Hi over the whole network, H can be 
compared 
across 
different 
clusters. 
This 
inbreeding 
homophily index IH is determined by 𝐼𝐻𝑖 = 
𝐻𝑖−𝑤𝑖
1−𝑤𝑖 , where wi 
denotes the relation of nodes between cluster i and the total 
number of nodes in the network. Clusters whose IHi is greater 
than 0 are considered homogeneous. The average of IH across 
all clusters in a network is used to compare the clusters 
detected in the pre- and post-election networks. 
F. Evaluation 
The procedure resulted in a set of network pairs, each 
consisting of a pre- and a post-election network. The two 
networks created for scenario 1 contained all MPs that have 
interacted via mentions, retweets, or replies within the 
respective timeframe. The number of connections between 
two nodes weighted the edges. 
Scenario 2 generated one network pair for each of the three 
interaction types. Thus, one pre- and one post-election 
network each were generated, which included all those MPs 
that a) mentioned each other, b) replied to one another, and c) 
retweeted each other. Edges represent the connections. They 
are weighted by the interaction count. These scenarios were 
examined separately. For each network, automated cluster 
detection was applied. The H and IH indices were calculated 
to determine the homogeneity of each cluster. Additionally, 
the number of nodes and edges in the network, the number of 
clusters identified by the GNA, as well as their networks’ 
average homophily and inbreeding homophily indices, and the 
maximum 
modularity 
were 
determined. 
Statistical 
significance was ensured using the 𝜒2 test. The results of these 
analyses were then compared for the pre- and post-election 
network pair. To illustrate the results of the automated cluster 
detection, each pre- and post-network pair is visualized as a 
cluster graph. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
5
In scenario 3, each party’s average sentiment towards all 
other parties was examined. For this purpose, MPs were 
clustered according to their party affiliations. 
Scenario 4 looked at the inbreeding homophily of each 
party, as well as the coalition options before and after the 
election. The IH values for the coalitions were also checked 
for statistical significance using the 𝜒2 test and its p-value. 
IV. 
RESULTS OF THE SCENARIOS 
A. Scenario 1: Multiple Interactions 
In scenario 1, automated cluster detection included all 
interaction types. An overview of the collected metrics can be 
found in Table I.  
TABLE I. NETWORK AND CLUSTER METRICS CONSIDERING ALL 
INTERACTIONS  
Metric 
Value 
(pre) 
Value 
(post) 
Difference 
Number of nodes 
466 
476 
10 
Number of edges 
5766 
3816 
-1950 
Number of clusters 
256 
188 
-68 
Maximum modularity 
0.026 
0.356 
0.330 
Average IH 
0.0212 
0.0571 
0.0359 
p-value from 𝜒2-Test 
< 0.001 
< 0.001 
  
The number of MPs (nodes) tweeting after the election did 
not vary much from that before the election. However, the 
number of connections (edges) was reduced by 33%, which 
suggests that tweeting activity was distributed more equally 
among MPs after the election. The GNA identified 256 
clusters of the pre-election network with 466 MPs, and very 
low modularity, homophily, and inbreeding homophily 
indices. After the election, 476 MPs could be assigned to 188 
clusters. The maximum cluster size was reduced by 54.5% to 
97. The modularity increased by 1369%, from 0.026 to 0.356, 
and homophily and inbreeding homophily also increased 
significantly. Figure 2 shows a visualization of these clusters. 
Node colors represent each MP’s party affiliation. The size of 
a node depicts the sum of all incoming and outgoing edges, 
i.e., the node’s degree. Edges were omitted from these figures 
for improved visibility. 
Pre-election, the visualization shows a distinctive, large 
cluster that unites MPs across all parties. Outside of this 
cluster, many MPs are scattered into tiny groups or unassigned 
to any notable cluster. Post-election, four large clusters 
separated along party affiliation can be identified. A 
heterogeneous group of MPs was not assigned to any notable 
cluster. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Clusters found by GNA before and after the election 
considering all interactions 
The pre-election results of scenario 1 show that MPs were 
likely allocated to the dominant cluster based on their general 
activity on Twitter. Nodes with higher degrees were allocated 
to the dominant cluster. Post-election, distinct clusters are 
clearly separable, which consist mainly of MPs of either the 
SPD, CDU, Greens, or FDP. The number of nodes that could 
not be allocated to any major cluster decreased. This indicates 
that post-election, MPs predominantly communicated within 
their parties, while they communicated much more openly 
before the election. The overall count of interactions 
decreased significantly. 
B. Scenario 2: Single Interactions 
When interaction types are considered separately, these 
findings can be analyzed in more detail.  
Mentions. In this particular scenario, clusters were 
determined based on mentions only. Table II shows the 
collected metrics. 
TABLE II. METRICS OF NETWORK AND CLUSTERS DERIVED FROM MENTIONS 
Metric 
Value 
(pre) 
Value 
(post) 
Difference 
Number of nodes 
433 
428 
-5 
Number of edges 
3247 
1758 
-1489 
Number of clusters 
95 
38 
-57 
Maximum modularity 
0.237 
0.441 
0.204 
Average IH 
0.1158 
0.4550 
0.3292 
p-value from 𝜒2-Test 
< 0.001 
< 0.001 
  
Almost as many (433 vs 428) MPs mentioned one another 
in the pre- and post-election period. Interactions decreased by 
54%, and the number of detected clusters decreased by 40%. 
After the election, 38 clusters with a modularity of 0.441 could 
be identified, compared to 95 clusters with a modularity of 
0.237 before the election. The average IH across all clusters 
in both networks increased by more than 300%. Figure 3 
visualizes the detected clusters. 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
6
 
Figure 3.  Clusters found by GNA before and after the election 
considering only mentions 
Pre-election, three distinct clusters can be identified, one 
portraying a large cluster mainly dominated by Greens but 
including MPs across all parties, one dominated by FDP MPs, 
and a smaller one dominated by CDU MPs. The large, 
heterogeneous cluster dominated by Green MPs could be 
caused by many mentions of the Greens’ chancellor candidate, 
Annalena Baerbock. 
Distinct clusters are detected in the post-election network 
separated along party lines. Two SPD clusters are found, as 
well as several smaller but still homogeneous clusters. The 
number of mentions increased. Subsequent analysis revealed 
that the distinct party clusters might be caused by MPs 
congratulating their party peers. 
 In the next analysis, only retweet connections were 
examined. The metrics on this can be found in Table III.  
TABLE III. METRICS OF NETWORK AND CLUSTERS DERIVED FROM RETWEETS  
Metric 
Value (pre) 
Value 
(post) 
Difference 
Number of nodes 
178 
144 
-34 
Number of edges 
253 
151 
-102 
Number of clusters 
19 
26 
7 
Maximum 
modularity 
0.713 
0.825 
0.112 
Average IH 
0.8809 
0.9567 
0.0758 
p-value from 𝜒2-
Test 
< 0.001 
< 0.001 
  
 
The number of nodes was reduced by 19.1% from 178 to 
144, and the number of edges by 40% (253 to 151). Nineteen 
clusters could be identified before the election, and twenty-six 
after, which explains the reduction of the median cluster size 
from 6 to 2.5. Conversely, the modularity increased slightly, 
just like the average IH. Figure 4 shows a visual representation 
of both networks’ clusters. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Clusters found by GNA before and after the election 
considering only retweets 
Clustering detected several well-separated clusters with 
relatively high homogeneity both before and after the election, 
with smaller clusters found in the latter. A possible 
explanation is that MPs attempted to promote the tweets of 
party peers. The clusters in the post-election network were 
smaller. Retweets play a smaller role in communication 
among MPs. 
The last analysis of this section considered reply 
connections only. The metrics can be found in Table IV. 
TABLE IV. METRICS OF NETWORK AND CLUSTERS DERIVED FROM REPLIES  
Metric 
Value 
(pre) 
Value 
(post) 
Difference 
Number of nodes 
351 
388 
37 
Number of edges 
2266 
1907 
-359 
Number of clusters 
233 
24 
-209 
Maximum 
modularity 
0.113 
0.401 
0.288 
Average IH 
0.0636 
0.7112 
0.6476 
p-value from 𝜒2-Test 
< 0.05 
< 0.001 
  
 
More nodes could be identified in the post-election 
network, but fewer connections between them. The algorithm 
identified 233 clusters before and 24 after the election, a 
reduction 
of 
89.7%. 
Modularity 
and IH 
increased 
significantly. A visualization of identified clusters can be 
found in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Clusters found by GNA before and after the election 
considering only replies 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
7
Pre-election, one large and many small clusters were 
found, with the main cluster containing many nodes with a 
high in– and out-degree.  
Post-election, two main clusters were identified, notably 
consisting mainly of SPD and Green party members 
respectively. Another large cluster contained a heterogeneous 
mix of MPs.  
Solely considering reply interactions, one large and many 
small clusters were found in the pre-election network. The 
main cluster contains many nodes with a high in– and out-
degree. In the post-election network, more nodes are identified 
but fewer connections between them are found. Two main 
clusters were identified, notably consisting mainly of SPD and 
Green party members. One cluster of CDU and FDP MPs 
indicates active conversations between these two parties, 
potentially on the FDP’s willingness to enter coalition 
negotiations with the SPD and Greens shortly after the 
election, which supports hypothesis H1. 
C. Scenario 3: Sentiment Analysis 
Each interaction’s textual content was analyzed to retrieve 
the parties’ mutual sentiments. The average sentiment of 
interactions from MPs of one party towards MPs of the other 
parties was calculated. The results are shown in Table V. 
Notably, polarity does not score very highly overall, except 
for the sentiment from MPs of the CSU towards MPs from the 
CDU. FDP MPs communicated neutrally in general. The SPD 
scores positively towards the “Ampel” parties. On average, 
Green party MPs showed positive polarities only towards 
other MPs of their party.  
TABLE V. AVERAGE SENTIMENT BETWEEN PARTIES BEFORE THE ELECTION 
           Target 
Source 
SPD 
FDP 
CDU 
CSU 
Greens 
SPD 
0.25001 
0.21293 
0.00002 
-0.11499 
0.35683 
FDP 
0.05095 
-0.01008 
0.06981 
0.09734 
0.01032 
CDU 
0.00070 
0.02997 
0.13179 
-0.12469 
0.00483 
CSU 
0.04297 
-0.01875 
0.70728 
0.10625 
0.11405 
Greens 
-0.16582 
0.03257 
-0.16458 
0.00053 
0.35588 
 
Table VI shows the average sentiment between parties 
after the election. The post-election sentiments between 
parties notably tend towards an overall positive sentiment. 
The SPD received overall positive interactions, especially 
from the CDU. The SPD communicated relatively neutrally, 
both internally, as well as towards their subsequent coalition 
partners. The polarity of the interactions among MPs of the 
Greens and interactions from MPs of the CSU towards CDU 
MPs did not change significantly from their pre-election 
scores. The overall sentiment across all parties after the 
election was on average more positive than before the 
election. The FDP especially shows notable increases in 
positive sentiments towards the SPD and the Greens, 
considering that the FDP moved towards the “Ampel”. This 
strongly hints at successful coalition negotiations, which 
ended with the signing of the coalition contract. 
TABLE VI. AVERAGE SENTIMENT BETWEEN PARTIES AFTER THE ELECTION 
            Target 
Source 
SPD 
FDP 
CDU 
CSU 
Greens 
SPD 
0.00166 
0.25408 
0.31106 
0.84063 
0.06433 
FDP 
0.33102 
0.54495 
-0.11953 
0.00391 
0.27281 
CDU 
0.79865 
-0.00598 
0.09291 
-0.08487 
0.67012 
CSU 
-0.16250 
0.24688 
0.59688 
0.12500 
0.39146 
Greens 
0.43225 
0.09978 
0.62791 
-0.06024 
0.38109 
D. Scenario 4: Party and Group-Dependent Clustering 
In this scenario, MPs were clustered along party 
affiliation. Additionally, the two potential government 
coalitions, “Ampel” (SPD, Greens, FDP) and Jamaica (CDU, 
CSU, Greens, FDP), as well as the Union (CDU, CSU), were 
clustered. To compare the homogeneity within each cluster, 
the average IH before and after the election was calculated and 
compared. Table VII displays the average IH values of each 
party, as well as the coalition and union clusters for the pre- 
and post-election networks. 
TABLE VII. RELATIVE IH IN PARTIES AND PARTY GROUPS 
 
Before 
After 
Difference 
CDU 
0.4749 
0.5596 
0.0848 
CSU 
0.0721 
0.0516 
-0.0205 
SPD 
0.5272 
0.6392 
0.1120 
Greens 
0.5682 
0.5729 
0.0047 
FDP 
0.5397 
0.4618 
-0.0779 
“Ampel” Coalition 
0.4519 
0.6272 
0.1754 
Jamaica Coalition 
0.5209 
0.5307 
0.0098 
Union Group 
0.4632 
0.5422 
0.0791 
p-value from 𝜒2-Test 0.057764 
0.106983 
 
 
The biggest differences are between the SPD and CDU. 
Their relative homophily increased. CSU and FDP decreased 
in IH. SPD received the biggest increase in homogeneity. This 
could be explained by their win of the election, and the 
positive feedback MPs received from their peers, as well as 
the election of SPD MPs Olaf Scholz as chancellor and Bärbel 
Bas as president of the parliament. The biggest positive 
change among grouped MPs took place in the “Ampel” 
coalition, but IH increased for the Jamaica and Union clusters 
as well. However, a significant statistical independence of 
these findings is not reliably provable, as the 𝜒2-test results in 
relatively high p-values for the pre- and post-election 
homophily.  
V. 
METHODS FOR TOPIC ANALYSIS 
The change of government was preceded by a volatile 
election campaign, which was interspersed with multifaceted 
debates on various topics [25]. The change of working 
communities, which also include public decision-making 
bodies, is often accompanied by a change in the working and 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
8
communication climate because the inner diversity changes 
[26]. The analysis of these changes helps to understand how 
the patterns of interaction within and across parties change 
over this period. In the context of this study, a qualitative 
analysis of the interactions between the members of the 
factions of the governing parties is done based on exploratory 
research. Changes in the social network for certain topics are 
examined. Changes in intra- and inter-party communication 
are presented in relation to relevant topics.  
A. Data Work 
The topic analysis focuses on the communication between 
the traffic light parties because this was the successful 
coalition. For this purpose, a new data acquisition had to be 
done: 
 The tweets of all members of the traffic light coalition are 
used as the data basis for further network analyses. In the first 
step, the Twitter handles of the parliamentarians are fetched 
from a list of all members of the Bundestag, which is 
dynamically managed and made available by Twitter [27]. 
This data scratch is implemented using the Twitter API and 
the Python library Tweepy [28]. The data of the first period 
refers to the time from 26 September 2020 00:00 to 25 
September 2021 23:59. The comparison period is defined 
similarly, offset by one year, from 26 September 2021 00:00 
to 25 September 2022 23:59. This period is longer than the 
period of the previous analysis to get more data. The data 
contains information on the date, the text, the user ID, and the 
tweet ID. In addition, information on retweets, replies, and 
mentions are included, which are important for the formation 
of the networks in the further process of the study. Since party 
affiliation plays an important role, this information is 
subsequently added to the individual tweets with the help of 
master data from the German Parliament [29]. With this 
information, only tweets from members of the Greens, the 
SPD, or the FDP are kept to sort out the tweets from the 
opposition parties. In total, the remaining dataset contains 
tweets from 118 members of the three parties with 
approximately 120,000 tweets. No tweets could be found for 
the remaining 298 members of the government parties. 
 To carry out a topic analysis, the data is first pre-
processed. In this process, only tweets with their conversation 
ID are retained and tweets with a line length of less than 100 
are sorted out. In addition, interfering words and characters 
such as links or Twitter-specific characters are removed from 
the tweets. Pre-processing reduces the size of the data to 
approximately 80,000 tweets, which are analyzed with the 
help of the topic modeling technique BERTopic [30] and 
classified into 10 topics. Only 10 topics are determined to 
prevent fragmentation into several smaller topics. This is 
necessary so that representative networks of an appropriate 
size can be formed. Clustering into many topics greatly 
reduces the number of tweets on a topic.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Word Scores per Topic 
 The 
Topic 
Word 
Scores 
in 
modelfa74656@th-
nuernberg.de 6 show the distribution of the detected topics. 
The most frequent five words are listed for each of the 10 
topics. The division of the topics results in approximately 
65,000 tweets that can be assigned to a topic. This results in 
approximately 55,000 tweets that are present in the original 
data set of 120,000 tweets but could not be assigned to a topic. 
In the next step, connections are detected between the 
assigned and unassigned tweets to be able to assign these 
tweets to a topic. With the help of retweets and replies, about 
10,000 unassigned tweets can be assigned to a topic. It is 
assumed that a reply and a retweet mean that the tweet is about 
the same topic as the original tweet. This procedure results in 
the topics, which are shown in Table VIII and the respective 
number of tweets they contain. 
TABLE VIII. TOPIC EVALUATION 
Topic 
Amount 
IRR 
Precision 
Topic 
Assessment 
0 
6500 
92 % 
95 % 
 (Climate) 
1 
6500 
96 % 
93 % 
 (Ukraine-
Conflict) 
2 
3000 
75 % 
81 % 
 (Education) 
3 
2000 
98 % 
98 % 
 
(Vaccination) 
4 
4500 
89 % 
20 % 
 (Covid) 
5 
5000 
92 % 
100 % 
 (Finance) 
6 
30000 
88 % 
7 % 
 (Elections) 
7 
5500 
73 % 
27 % 
 (Disasters) 
8 
5000 
80 % 
8 % 
 (Europe) 
9 
3000 
68 % 
14 % 
 (Conflicts) 
 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
9
To select suitable topics, it is necessary to determine their 
quality in advance. For this purpose, suitable generic terms for 
the respective topics are sought at the beginning. In 
cooperation with a political scientist, suitable terms are 
defined for the keywords in Figure 6. 
The evaluation of the assessment is done using the 
interrater reliability (IRR) value. This involves verifying 
whether the tweets thematically match the keywords and the 
generic terms. The procedure is based on Newman et al. [31]. 
The IRR value is used to check whether all observers agree on 
the assessment. A representative sample of 50 tweets is 
reviewed for each topic and the IRR value is calculated from 
this. Only topics whose IRR value is high enough are of 
sufficient data quality and are therefore taken into account in 
the subsequent analyses. Values in the range of at least 80 
percent are considered high enough. 
To determine the accuracy of the assignment of the tweets 
to the topics, all tweets of a topic are included for which all 
observers agree that the generic term and the keywords match 
the respective tweet or not. The IRR for the tweet under 
investigation must therefore be 100 percent. The values for 
calculating the accuracy are 0 or 1, depending on whether the 
topic matches the tweet (1) or not (0). The mean value is 
determined from these binary values, which corresponds to 
the accuracy in percent. 
The result of the evaluation indicates that 7 from 10 topics 
have a sufficiently high IRR value. However, the accuracy is 
only high enough for topics climate, the Ukraine conflict, 
education, vaccination, and finance. Topic 1 (Ukraine-
Conflict) is omitted, as this topic is almost exclusively 
discussed after election day, and thus no comparison is 
possible concerning the two observation periods. 
Finally, this leads to the topics of climate, vaccination, and 
finance, which are analyzed because their IRR values and 
accuracies are high enough. 
B. Data Analysis 
First, graphs are generated for visualization and analysis 
with the software Gephi [14a] using the Python package 
NetworkX [32]. These contain all nodes and edges of a 
respective topic. A node corresponds to a participant in the 
communication network of the topic, thus a Twitter account. 
An edge corresponds to a connection between two participants 
in the topic network. The connection can take the form of a 
mention, a retweet, or a reply. During the creation process, 
self-loops are removed from the graph, as they have no 
relevance in the study of interactions between politicians. In 
addition, the attribute "party" with the value FDP, SPD, or 
Greens is added to each node for the subsequent analyses. All 
remaining nodes that cannot be assigned to an “Ampel” party 
are removed. The resulting graphs are visualized in Gephi and 
are exemplarily shown for Topic 0 (Climate) in Figure 7 
before (on the left side) and after (on the right side) the 
election. The colors of the points visible in the following 
images represent the party colors of the SPD (red), FDP 
(yellow), and Greens (green). 
 
 
  
Figure 7.  Network Visualisation Topic 0 (Climate) 
NetworkX offers a variety of functions for calculating 
metrics, which are used to determine basic network properties 
for each topic before and after the election. These include the 
number of nodes and edges of the respective topics, which 
provide information about the change in the number of nodes 
and edges over the observation period and thus the size of the 
network. Based on the nodes and edges, the connectivity of 
each topic area is analyzed using the node density metric. This 
corresponds to the ratio between the number of edges in each 
network and the theoretical number of edges if the network 
were fully connected and is expressed in Stegbauer et al. [33] 
using 𝑝 = 
𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑠
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑠 . The expected number of 
edges in a loop-free directed network is defined as N(N-1), 
where N is the number of nodes. A node density of one would 
correspond to a fully interconnected network. The node 
density is determined across parties at the topic level as well 
as at the party level for each topic. This allows the analysis of 
the change in network node density for the entire topic as well 
as a party-specific breakdown of the change. Node density is 
a metric that enables the measurement of the connectedness of 
a network. The density can be used to compare networks with 
each other and to determine the intensity of social dynamics 
within a network. 
Subsequently, the dyadicity at the party level is 
determined for each topic network. Dyadicity represents the 
connectedness between nodes of the same party relative to the 
standard connectedness of the network. In Wang et al. [34] to 
calculate dyadicity, first, the average connectedness in the 
network of two nodes is determined with 𝑝 = 
2𝑀
𝑁(𝑁−1), where 
N is the number of nodes and M is the number of edges. Within 
a 
party 
i, 
the 
dyadicity 
is 
expressed 
by 𝐷𝑖 =
𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑠
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑠 . The actual number of edges is the 
number of edges between nodes of the same party. The 
expected number of edges is determined by 
𝑁𝑖(𝑁𝑖−1)
2
𝑝, where 
𝑁𝑖 represents the nodes of a party. A network is dyadic if the 
nodes belonging to the same group are more connected to each 
other than in a random network. This is the case for 𝐷 > 1. In 
addition to the intra-party determination of the dyadicity for 
each topic, the average of the intra-party dyadicities for each 
topic is calculated. This provides information about the 
dyadicity of the topic as a whole. 
 The determination of the homophily of the network is 
based on the calculations in Currarini et al. [35]. First, the 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
ratio of nodes of a party to the total number of nodes is 
represented as 𝑤𝑖 =
𝑁𝑖
𝑁 , where i represents the party under 
consideration. The homophily within a party is calculated with 
𝐻𝑖 = 
𝑠𝑖
𝑠𝑖 + 𝑑𝑖, where 𝑠𝑖 represents the edges to nodes of the 
same party and 𝑑𝑖 the edges to nodes of a different party. 
Since this measurement is susceptible to bias and different 
group sizes, the result is normalized to the internal homophily 
with 𝐼𝐻𝑖 =
𝐻𝑖 − 𝑤𝑖
1− 𝑤𝑖 . Here the distortion is placed in relation to 
the maximum possible distortion 1 − 𝑤𝑖. If 𝐼𝐻𝑖 < 0, it is a 
heterophilic network. A homophilic network is defined with 
𝐼𝐻𝑖 > 0. With 𝐻̅𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 
1
𝑛 ∑
𝐼𝐻𝑖
𝑛
𝑖 =1
, the homophily is then 
built over the entire network, where n corresponds to the 
number of parties. 
VI. 
RESULTS OF TOPIC ANALYSIS 
 Figure 8 shows the number of nodes for each topic and 
both periods under consideration. It can be observed that the 
number of nodes for the topic areas is almost similar in both 
periods. Only for topic 3 (Vaccination), there is a slightly 
higher deviation in the number of nodes. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Network Nodes Distribution 
 Figure 9 shows the number of edges of the selected topics 
for both periods. The number of edges refers to the actual sum 
of interactions between accounts. Multiple interactions 
between the same nodes are also listed as multiple edges. It 
should be emphasized that the number of edges has only 
increased for topic 0 (Climate) over the course of the 
observation period. For all other topic areas, there is a 
reduction in the number of edges in the second period 
compared to the first period. The popularity of topics 3 
(Vaccination) and 5 (Finance) decreased over time, whereby 
a lower need for discussion has led to a lower number of 
edges. For topic 3 (Vaccination), this development can be 
explained by the course of the pandemic countermeasures.  
 
Figure 9.   Network Edges Distribution 
The results of the network node density analysis are shown 
in Figure 10. The node density is determined based on a 
directed network; it is the directed node density of the entire 
network. For topic 0 (Climate), the network node density 
increases slightly over time, this topic is examined in more 
detail. Figure 11 serves as an example of a breakdown of the 
party node density based on a topic.  
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Network Node Density 
 
Figure 11.  Party Node Density Topic 0 (Climate) 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
Table IX shows the average value of the node density for 
each party as well as for the entire network over the period for 
all topics.  
TABLE IX.  PARTY NODE DENSITY PARTY AVERAGES 
Party 
Before 
Election 
After 
Election 
Difference 
FDP 
0.20 
0.19 
-0.01 
SPD 
0.12 
0.17 
+0.05 
Greens 
0.20 
0.22 
+0.02 
All 
0.07 
0.08 
+0.01 
 
The results of the analysis of the dyadicity of the parties 
are explained through the lens of the individual topics. Figure 
12 shows the dyadicities of the networks of the individual 
topics. For topic 3 (Vaccination), the dyadicity increases over 
the period under observation. For topics 0 (Climate) and 5 
(Finance), the dyadicity value decreases slightly. An increase 
in 
dyadicity 
indicates 
an 
increase 
in 
intra-party 
communication for the respective topic, while a decrease in 
dyadicity indicates an increase in inter-party communication.  
 
Figure 12.   Network Dyadicity Distribution 
Table X shows the development of the average dyadicity 
of the parties across all topics. The dyadicity values of the 
individual parties lead to the conclusion that the Greens and 
the FDP cultivate strong intra-party communication, while the 
SPD prefers inter-party communication. The developments 
shown in Table X suggest that the SPD has slightly increased 
its intra-party communication over time, while the FPD and 
the Greens have developed a slight trend towards inter-party 
communication. 
TABLE X. PARTY DYADICITY PARTY AVERAGES 
Party 
Before 
Election 
After 
Election 
Difference 
FDP 
1.85 
1.54 
-0.31 
SPD 
0.80 
1.08 
+0.28 
Greens 
1.99 
1.70 
-0.29 
  
Figure 13 shows the analysis of party dyadicity for topic 0 
(Climate). Here it can be seen that the dyadicity decreases at 
the FPD and the Greens. The dyadicity of the SPD increases 
for the same topic. This suggests that, compared to the 
previous period, the FDP and the Greens have stronger inter-
party communication than the SPD. However, the SPD has 
strengthened its intra-party communication.  
 
Figure 13.  Party Dyadicity Topic 0 (Climate) 
Table XI shows the change in the average homophily of 
the parties for all topics. A decrease in homophily can be 
observed for all parties. It indicates a reduction in intra-party 
debate in relation to inter-party communication. This means 
that the parties developed a trend towards communication 
between each other rather than communication within their 
party boundaries. 
TABLE XI. INBREED HOMOPHILY PARTY AVERAGES 
Party 
Before 
Election 
After 
Election 
Difference 
FDP 
0.85 
0.83 
-0.02 
SPD 
0.20 
0.07 
-0.13 
Greens 
0.75 
0.64 
-0.11 
 
Overall, there have been changes in the parties' 
communication behavior concerning the analyzed topics. The 
SPD’s homophily declines. At both other parties, the changes 
are small and the homophily remains at a high level, which 
does not align with the initial expectations. An answer to the 
research question can therefore be formulated as follows: 
The communication behavior of the traffic light parties for 
the period under consideration concerning the selected topics 
has not changed as a result of the formation of the government 
in 2021. From the perspective of a political scientist, this can 
be attributed to the way compromises are reached in 
government circles. While compromises are discussed and 
found in the respective committees, social media platforms 
such as Twitter usually serve to profile successes, at least 
among coalition partners. In general, public criticism is 
avoided among coalition partners and rather expressed 
towards the opposition. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper illustrates the application of techniques from 
social network analysis, sentiment analysis, cluster analysis, 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
and topic analysis in combination to explore communication 
on social media, especially on microblogs.  
H1 is proven, as differences are found for mention and 
reply interactions. The networks for each interaction type 
yield differences in both intra- and inter-party interactions, 
which is shown by the results of the GNA. These findings are 
statistically significant due to the low p-values. H2 can 
therefore be considered true. The p-value of the χ² test 
indicates a low likelihood that party affiliation influences the 
assigned cluster.  
H3 cannot be answered clearly. MPs’ mutual sentiment 
changed positively. The FDP’s positive change towards the 
coalition partners SPD and Greens can be considered a sign of 
a generally improved attitude towards these parties. However, 
the notable overall increase in positivity across most parties 
could indicate that the findings of the FDP are not unique. The 
generally positive attitude between parties after the election 
can be caused by MPs congratulating one another. A lack of 
German language sentiment analysis models for short text 
fragments limits this research. Improved models utilize 
machine learning techniques and so can comprehend 
sentiments on a broader level and can also recognize nuances. 
Statements about H4 are not reliable. However, while 
positive tendencies towards an “Ampel” coalition can be 
shown from both the sentiment analysis and the inter-party 
and intra-coalition homogeneity, neither can be proven as 
statistically significant.  
 Concerning hypothesis H5, the specific metrics do not 
indicate a change in homophily. No significant change in 
homophily can be detected in the topic networks depending 
on the observation period. 
Concerning 
hypothesis 
H6, 
the 
intensity 
of 
communication has decreased across all topics. The 
communication intensity is determined by the number of 
edges per topic.  
Different interactions between MPs can be observed 
during the pre- and post-election periods and the resulting 
interaction networks for each period show a difference in 
intra- and inter-party communication. However, this paper 
handles political communication only via Twitter. Results are 
partially transferable to other countries. 
Future work may include “The Left” and AfD in these 
considerations to produce more information. Expanding the 
evaluated timeframes or continuous monitoring would 
produce more data. Analyzing follower and friend networks 
and MPs’ liking behavior in combination with the findings of 
this article would yield insights into differences in parties’ 
mutual relationships around elections.  
 The change of communication networks within German 
parties based on political issues could be of interest to several 
actors. The results of this study could contribute to a better 
understanding and analysis of the political climate within the 
"traffic light parties" in the context of political analysis. The 
results of this study can help to understand the behavior of 
people in groups and their communication within political 
parties. This could be of interest to social scientists working 
on questions of group dynamics and political socialization. 
Findings from this study could also be useful for 
communication practitioners by providing insights into the 
way communication networks develop and change within 
political parties. This could be of interest to communication 
professionals involved in the design and management of 
communication strategies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Schuhbauer, S. Schötteler, J. Niu, B. Schiffer, and D. 
Wolfarth, “A Quantitative Social Network Analysis of 
Politicians’ Tweets to Explore Political Communication”. 
Proceedings of The Twelfth International Conference on Social 
Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics 
(SOTICS 22). Lisbon, Portugal, Oct. 2022. 
[2] E. Shearer, “Social Media Outpaces Print Newspapers in the 
U.S. as a News Source”, Pew Research Center, [Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2018/12/10/social-media-outpaces-print-newspapers-in-
the-u-s-as-a-news-source/, 2018. 
[3] A. Watson, “Usage of Social Media as a News Source 
Worldwide 2021”, Statista, [Online]. Available from 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/718019/social-media-
news-source/, 2021. 
[4] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, “Social Network Analysis – 
Methods and Applications”, 1st edn. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, USA, 1994.  
[5] A. Virk, “Twitter: The Strength of Weak Ties”, University of 
Auckland Business Review, Vol. 13, No. 1. University of 
Auckland, Auckland, AUK, NZL, pp. 19-21, Jan. 2011. 
[6] M. S. Granovetter, “The Strength of Weak Ties”, American 
Journal of Sociology, Vol. 78, No. 6. The University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, USA, pp. 1360-1380, May 1973. 
 [7] D. S. Lassen and A. R. Brown, “Twitter: The Electoral 
Connection?”, Social Science Computer Review, Vol. 29, No. 
4. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, pp. 419-
436, Nov. 2011. 
 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0894439310382749 
 [8] M. Boireau, “Uncovering Online Political Communities of 
Belgian MPs through Social Network Clustering Analysis”, 
Proceedings of the 2015 2nd International Conference on 
Electronic Governance and Open Society: Challenges in 
Eurasia (EGOSE '15). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
pp. 
150-163, 
Nov. 
2015. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2846012.2846049. 
[9] J. A. Caetano, H. S. Lima, M. F. Santos, and H. T. Marques-
Neto, “Using sentiment analysis to define Twitter political 
users’ classes and their homophily during the 2016 American 
presidential election”, Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, Vol. 9, Article 18, Sep. 2018. Springer Open, 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13174-018-0089-0. 
[10] A. Giachanou and F. Crestani, “Like It or Not: A Survey of 
Twitter Sentiment Analysis Methods”, ACM Computing 
Surveys, Vol 49, No. 28. Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1-41, Jun. 2017. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2938640. 
[11] A. Boras and S. R. Singh,  “Investigating political polarization 
in India through the lens of Twitter”, Springer, 2022. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-022-00939-z. 
[12] F. Meier, A. Bazo, and D. Elsweiler, “Using Social Media Data 
to Analyse Issue Engagement During the 2017 German Federal 
Election”, Commun. ACM 22, 1, 25, pp. 1-25, Feb. 2021. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3467020.  
[13] E. Garcia-Sanchez, P. R. Benetti, G. L. Higa, M. C. Alvarez, 
and E. Gomez-Nieto, ”Political discourses, ideologies, and 
online coalitions in the Brazilian Congress on Twitter during 
2019”. New Media & Society, 25(5), p.1130-1152, 2021. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448211017920. 

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
[14] R. Egger and J.A. Yu, “Topic Modeling Comparison Between 
LDA, NMF, Top2Vec, and BERTopic to Demystify Twitter 
Posts”. 
Front. 
Sociol. 
2022, 
7, 
886498. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsoc.2022.886498 
[15] Y. A. Jeddi, Scweet (Version 1.6), [Online]. Available from:  
https://github.com/Altimis/Scweet, Dec. 2021. 
[16] Twitter Handle, [Online]. Available from: 
 
https://influencermarketinghub.com/glossary/twitter-
handle/#:~:text=What%20is%20Twitter%20Handle%3F%20
A%20Twitter%20handle%2C%20which,usernames%20on%2
0the%20social%20network%20are%20the%20same, 
Dec. 
2022. 
[17] U. Brandes,  D. Delling, M. Gaertler, R. Gorke, M. Hoefer, Z. 
Nikoloski, and D. Wagner, "On Modularity Clustering". IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 20 (2): 
172–188, Feb. 2008. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2007.190689 . 
S2CID 150684. 
[18] A. Evtushenko and J. Kleinberg, “The paradox of second-order 
homophily in networks”, Sci Rep 11, 13360, Jun. 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-92719-6 
[19] The Selenium Project, Selenium (Version 4.1.0), [Online]. 
Available from: https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium, Dec. 
2021. 
[20] GEXF Working Group, GEXF File Format (Version 1.2), The 
Gephi Community Project, 2009. [Online]. Available from:  
http://gexf.net, Dec. 2021. 
[21] Data work, [Online]. Available from: https://git.informatik.fh-
nuernberg.de/wolfarthda82341/sna-germanys-members-of-
parliament-on-twitter, Oct. 2022.  
[22] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, “Community structure in 
social and biological networks”, Proceedings of the National 
Academy, Vol. 99, No. 12. National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, Washington DC, USA, pp. 7821-
7826, Jun. 2002.  
 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122653799. 
[23] S. Loria, TextBlob (Release v0.16.0) Documentation. 
TextBlob: Simplified Text Processing. [Online]. Available 
from: https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/index.html#, Dec. 
2021. 
[24] M. Killer, textblob-de. (Version 0.4.3), German language 
support for TextBlob by Steven Loria. [Online]. Available 
from: https://github.com/markuskiller/textblob-de, Dec. 2019. 
[25] E. 
Quadbeck, 
"Früh 
und 
schmutzig 
– 
der 
Bundestagswahlkampf 
2021," 
RedaktionsNetzwerk 
Deutschland,  [Online]. Available from:  
 
https://www.rnd.de/politik/bundestagswahlkampf-2021-
haerter-und-schmutziger-
MAAJZPIDTFAD7OMUJXUXE2OE5I.html, May 2023. 
[26] S. K. Horwitz and I. B. Horwitz, “The Effects of Team 
Diversity on Team Outcomes: A Meta-Analytic Review of 
Team Demography”, Journal of Management, 33(6), pp. 987–
1015, 2007. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206307308587 
[27] Twitter Account Deutscher Bundestag, List members [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://mobile.twitter.com/i/lists/912241909002833921/memb
ers, Nov. 2022 
[28] J. Roesslein, “Tweepy Documentation” [Online]. Available 
from: https://docs.tweepy.org/en/stable/index.html, Jan. 2023. 
[29] Deutscher Bundestag, “The Open Graph Viz Platform” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.bundestag.de/services/opendata, Jan. 2023 
[30] M. Grootendorst, “Bertopic: Neural topic modeling with a 
class- 
based tf-idf procedure”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05794, 
2022. 
[31] D. Newman, Y. Noh, E. Talley, S. Karimi, and T. Baldwin, 
“Evaluating topic models for digital libraries”,  Proceedings of 
the 10th annual joint conference on Digital libraries (JCDL 
'10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 
pp. 
215–224, 
2010. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1816123.1816156 
[32] NetworkX Developers, Software for Complex Networks 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/index.html, 
Jan. 
2023 
[33] C. Stegbauer and R. Häußling. Handbuch Netzwerkforschung. 
Verlag 
für 
Sozialwissenschaften, 
2010. 
ISBN: 
9783531158082. 
[34] X. Wang, O. Varol, and T. Eliassi-Rad, “Information access 
equality on generative models of complex networks”, Appl. 
Netw. Sci. 7, 54,  2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41109-022-
00494-8 
[35] S. Currarini, M.O. Jackson, and P. Pin, “An Economic Model 
of Friendship: Homophily, Minorities, and Segregation”. 
Econometrica, 
77: 
pp. 
1003-1045, 
2009. 
https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA7528 
 
 

