Pipeline Monitoring and Spillage Prevention Using Wireless Sensors and High Density 
Polyethylene Pipe Encasement System 
 
Mohammed Yusuf Agetegba                                               
College of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Sudan University of Science and Technology  
Khartoum, Sudan 
email: mylislan@yahoo.com 
 
                                  Pascal Lorenz 
University of Haute Alsace 
34 rue du Grillenbreit, Colmar - France. 
email: pascal.lorenz@uha.fr
 
Abstract—Nigerian Niger Delta region is bedeviled with rampant 
oil spills, making it almost impossible for her indigenous people 
to enjoy economic activities derived from farming and fishing. 
Incessant oil thefts, corroded pipelines, vandalism, sabotage and 
extreme protests by sections of Niger Delta indigenous people are 
responsible for most oil spills in the region. Our proposed eco-
friendly solution uses wireless motes and High Density 
Polyethylene Pipe System. While the former monitor attempts to 
vandalize encased crude oil pipelines, the latter collects crude oil 
seeping from corroded or damaged portions of encased steel or 
iron pipeline. This prevents spilled crude oil from causing 
ecological damage on land, rivers and seas in the region. Wireless 
sensors are arranged linearly within High Density Polyethylene 
Pipe System, linear clustering is adopted for rapid reporting 
within each cluster. Pipe monitoring is achieved by engaging light 
sensor of wireless motes, while crude oil spillage is detected and 
reported to mote using float switches. 
 
 
Keywords—Monitoring; 
Sensors; 
 
Pipes; 
Cluster; 
Linear; Mote 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Various projects [1][2][3][12] demonstrated the ability of 
wireless sensors to “sense” deployed environment and 
transmit “sensed” data to a central data collection gateway. 
Data packets are transmitted using multi-hop transmission 
from sender to receiver. This ensures packets hops along until 
it reaches intended destination (usually personal area network 
coordinator, abbreviated as PAN). Wireless sensor nodes are 
arranged within clusters to optimize both packet transmission 
and power consumption [4]. 
Essentially, a wireless node is a miniaturize computer 
which runs on low power, a typical sensor hardware comprises 
of one or more sensors, a signal conditioning unit, an analog to 
digital conversion module (ADC), a central processing unit 
(CPU), Memory, a radio transceiver and an energy power 
supply unit [5][6]. Wireless sensors are often encased in a 
protective housing which offers some level of protection 
against physical or chemical damage. 
Advances in wireless sensor’s MAC layer has made it 
possible for sensor nodes to operate for a year or more on a 
pair of AA batteries [6][7][18][19]. However, due to the high 
cost of removing and replacing pipes in order to access and 
replace spent AA batteries, our proposed deployment 
environment will not rely on pairs of AA batteries to power 
each wireless node. Rather, power will be supplied to nodes 
from power banks which are strategically located along 
deployed pipeline route. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Wireless Sensor Node Architecture 
 
 
Sensors nodes typically adopt IEEE 802.15.4/ZigBee 
standard [8][9]. This standard introduces two types of devices 
within a wireless sensor network (WSN), a full-function 
device (FFD) and a reduced-function device (RFD). An FFD 
is capable of the following: 
• Become a personal area network (PAN) coordinator 
which controls network initialization and manage the 
entire network. 
• Become a coordinator, which removes network 
initialization, but retains complete management of 
entire network. 
• Become a normal sensor device responsible for sensing 
deployed environment and forwarding sensed data to 
cluster’s PAN coordinator. 
 
An RFD is used to perform simple tasks like connect to 
sensors and send collated readings to the network coordinator 
or PAN.  
This research paper propose encasing pipelines within high 
density polyethylene (HDPE) pipes fitted with wireless 
sensors and float switches, making it easier to monitor  both 
pipeline vandalism and oil spills. 
12
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

To reduce cost, we propose using RFD sensors to both 
monitor ambient light and spilled crude oil within HDPE 
pipeline. Sensed data are forwarded via multi-hop to an FFD 
acting as the wireless sensor network (WSN) PAN 
coordinator. 
This research encapsulates the effect of encasing crude oil 
within specially modified high density polyethylene (HDPE) 
pipes.  
We modified the upper inner portion of the HDPE pipe to 
accommodate both FFD and RFD sensor (Figure 2) within 
separate compartments or segments. The lower portion of the 
pipe was equally modified to accommodate float switches and 
reusable spilled crude oil removal seal. The paper equally 
proposed powering sensors and float switches through external 
power banks, this ensures steady operations by eliminating 
periodic replacement of batteries powering each mote and 
requirement of opening of HDPE pipes to replace spent sensor 
AA batteries. 
HDPE pipes were chosen for the following reasons: 
• Resistance to corrosive chemicals available in crude 
oil 
• Cheaper cost of manufacturing  
• Fast and simple deployment options 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Top half of HDPE pipe fitted with sensors, wires conveying 
power and encased pipeline supports 
 
 
Figure 3. Bottom half of HDPE pipe fitted with float switches, wires 
conveying power and encased pipeline supports 
 
 
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II presents background motivation behind our 
proposal, along with details on the corrosive nature of crude 
oil, and inherent benefits of using HDPE pipes to encase oil 
pipelines. Section III examines current state of the art research 
in this field, which explores various methods used to monitor 
pipelines for vandalism, natural disaster, and leakages. While 
Section IV presents our proposed work. Section V presents 
and discusses the simulation results. Finally, Section VI 
concludes the paper with pointers to further research works. 
 
 
      
 
II.   BACKGROUND 
 
Generally, oil spills poses serious long-term ecological 
disaster in affected communities [10][1]. Oil spills occur when 
pipelines transporting crude oil ruptures; pipeline rupture 
occurs under the following circumstances: (1) rust resulting 
from corrosive crude oil, (2) rust as a result of aging pipes, (3) 
acts of vandalism and extreme economic protest (especially in 
places like Nigeria), and (4) equipment failure due to natural 
disasters (earthquakes or landslides) [10] [11]. 
A major challenge facing oil companies is inherent delay 
in detecting oil spills, such delay allow spilled crude oil to 
13
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

spread further from the ruptured pipe, leading to greater 
ecological damage and expensive litigations/settlements. 
Yarin [10] in his excellent work on crude oil corrosiveness; 
enumerated six components found in crude oil that makes it 
corrosive, these are summarized below: 
• Brackish Water (Chlorides): Available in most crude 
oil, it contains the following chloride salts MgCI2, 
CaCI2 and NaCI. Preheating affected crude oil to a 
temperature higher than 240° F (120° C) breaks these 
salts down to HCI. However, HCI is only corrosive 
when it cools down to a temperature lower than 
morning dew, leading to the production of 
hydrochloric acid (H2S), which is highly corrosive. 
Listed below are various chemical degradations 
caused by these salts [10][11]: 
CaCI2 + H2O = CaO + 2HCI 
HCI + Fe = FeCI2 + H2 
FeCI2 + H2S = FeS + 2 HCI 
 
• Carbon Dioxide (CO2): When CO2 mixes with 
water, it produces a severely corrosive acid known as 
carbonic acid (H2CO3). Carbonic acid is corrosive to 
normal steel pipes, however, it does not affect 
stainless steel pipes [10][11]. 
 
• Phantom Chlorides (Organic Chlorides): These salts 
decompose into HCI during preheating process. 
Corrosive actions triggered by these salts severely 
affect overhead or downstream units [10][11]. 
 
• Organic Acids: Naphthenic acid corrosion (NAC) 
occurs in refiner distillation units (furnace tubes, 
transfer lines, sidecut piping etc). Temperatures in 
these areas are between 446° F and 752° F (230° C 
and 400° C). Naphthenic acids react with steel to 
produce hydrogen as shown below [10][11]: 
Fe + 2 RCOOH = (RCOO) 2 + H 
 
Presence of sulfides in crude oil causes Fe (RCOO) 2 
to react with H2S and produce FeS as shown below 
[11]: 
Fe (RCOO) 2 + H2S = Fes + 2RCOOH 
 
• Sulfur: Sulfides are highly corrosive to plain and 
alloy steel at temperatures higher than 466° F or 
(230°C), 
higher 
sulfidation 
occurs 
at 
higher 
temperatures, especially when H2S decomposes to 
elemental sulfur [11]. 
 
• Bacteria: Microbiologically influenced corrosion 
(MIC) is widespread in oil and gas storage and 
transportation facilities. Sulfate reduction bacteria 
(SRB) are responsible for over 75% corrosion of such 
facilities in the US alone. SRB uses sulfate as an 
acceptor to create sulfide using the following reaction 
[10][11]: 
SO42 + H2 = H2S + H2O 
The foregoing reveals the possibility of oil spills occurring 
outside acts of vandalism. Such spills are caused when 
corrosive crude oil corrodes the pipeline along which it 
travels; this implies oil spills can happen anytime and 
anywhere. Hence the need to for a innovative research into 
what can be done to maintain the ecological balance along 
pipeline deployment routes. Encasing crude oil pipelines 
within a second protective and intelligent layer greatly reduce 
incidence of late detection of oil spills. 
Interestingly, various HDPE pipes already convene crude 
oil. Tests [11] conducted by Shell International, The Hague, 
confirmed HDPE pipe can service pressure of up to 150 bar 
(2,175 psi) in temperatures of -30° C. (-22° C.) to 30° C. (86° 
F.). According to [11], the pipe used in this test is 
manufactured by Tubes d'Aquitaine, Carsac, France, and 
supplied as Reinforced Thermo Plastic (RTP) pipe (see image 
below): 
 
 
 
Figure 4. RTP pipe consists of a primary tube in HDPE (left), several 
crossed layers of Aramid yarns coated with HDPE (center), and an outer layer 
(right) of HDPE for external protection [13] 
 
From the foregoing, our proposal to use HDPE pipes as 
encasement for existing or new crude oil pipelines is feasible. 
 
. 
 
III.   STATE OF THE ART 
 
Several methods have been devised in order to monitor and 
report pipeline status. The most common and popular ones 
includes Acoustic Sensors – this employs acoustic or vibration 
measurement for pipeline monitoring [1][13][14][15]. Vision 
based systems – this is based on PIG (Pipeline Inspection 
Gauge) which must be inserted into the pipe. It works like 
image processor or laser scanner which main function is to 
detect leakages [13][15]. Ground penetrating radar (GPR) 
based systems – this is best suitable for use on environment 
with dry soil, but is not good for large network of pipes 
monitoring [13][14][15]. Fiber optic Sensors - this is suitable 
for present day pipeline monitoring systems, it can handle 
most present day pipelines issues, some of its drawbacks is the 
probability for redundancy and some challenges with 
deployment [13][16]. Multi modal underground wireless 
system – this uses low power, as the name implies it is meant 
for an underground installation, it has the advantage of 
camouflaging, but one of the disadvantages is that it has to be 
buried underground, that is a trench has to be created [13][15]. 
14
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Every single Sensor has a distinctive feature and typical 
operating condition. Choosing a sensor for pipeline 
monitoring to a large extent depends on the environment to be 
deployed and the deployment method. 
Our earlier work [1] proposed the following (1) concealing 
motes along buried pipeline route, while monitoring attempts 
to unearth the pipes, (2) attaching motes magnetically to 
exposed pipelines, while monitoring ambient sounds and 
vibrations coming from both pipeline and environ, (3) finally, 
we proposed a process for detecting when motes are damaged 
or stolen. 
Ismail et al. [17] demonstrated the ability of IRIS and 
MICAz mote to detect and record sounds while eliminating 
ambient noise levels. Their paper allows a parent mote to 
assign recording tasks to motes within their cluster. 
Lou et al. [14] demonstrated the ability of MICAz to detect 
and record environmental acoustics using the Microphone on 
MTS310CA sensor boards. 
Kim et al. [15] also show the feasibility of using MICA 
based mobile wireless sensor with attached RFID in pipe line 
monitoring and maintenance. 
This paper differs from [1][14][15][17] in the following 
areas: (1) It proposed an innovative solution which involves 
encasing existing or new crude oil pipelines within smart 
HDPE pipes.  (2) Inner top layer of HDPE pipes are lined with 
motes and light sensors, while inner bottom layer of HDPE 
pipes are lined with float switches. (3) The paper breaks from 
related works since motes and light sensors monitors changes 
in ambient light, while motes respond to float switches 
interrupt during oil spills. (4) Unlike previous projects, this 
paper proposes external power source to power motes, 
external light sensors and float switches. This guarantees 
mote’s lifetime operations, while discarding replaceable AA 
batteries. (5) Finally, this paper proposes changes to mote’s 
design to accommodate both float switch connectors, and in 
some cases external light sensors (particularly when distances 
between supports are widely spaced, which implies a single 
mote will not be able to monitor ambient light within deployed 
segment). 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Side view of deployment plan, showing encased crude oil pipe 
 
(6) Our research work prevents false positives since a 
crack in the outer HDPE pipe system implies either ongoing 
act of vandalism or a manufacturing defect. Either way, such 
cracks are quickly detected and reported. (7) Finally, this 
project 
utilizes 
wireless 
communication 
over 
wired 
communication [20][21][22] for two reasons (a) to maintain 
simplicity and (b) to reduce deployment and maintenance cost. 
 
 
 
IV 
PROPOSED WORK 
 
This paper recommends using wireless motes, light sensors 
and float switches to (1) sense ambient light, (2) respond to oil 
spills, and (3) report either pipeline damage or oil spills. Our 
earlier project [14] recommended using Mica2, Micaz and 
IRIS motes; however, in this paper, we propose a totally 
different kind of mote which we specifically designed for this 
project. 
Our proposed mote will retain existing communication 
stack available in radio controllers used by Micaz and related 
products, the main difference between existing motes and our 
proposed mote are external connectors for light sensors and 
float switches. 
As stated earlier, each mote will be powered from a central 
power bank, and where applicable, power banks will be 
repeated along pipeline deployment route. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Propose mote design 
 
 
In addition to the inbuilt light sensor, our proposed mote 
design accommodates two three-pin connectors for additional 
external light sensors and two two-pin connectors for float 
switches.  
Sensors connected to the connectors trigger hardware 
interrupts each time ambience data is sensed, forcing the mote 
to suspend whatever it is doing and attend to the interrupt 
request. 
15
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Each interrupt request is queued and processed one at a 
time. This approach ensures race conditions do not arise, 
especially when float switches and light sensors send event 
signals at the same time.  
While each mote will come with its light sensor, we 
recommend additional connectors for external light sensors, 
especially where distances between segments exceeds the 
capabilities of a single light sensor. Similar reasoning drives 
the adoption of a two two-pin connectors on our proposed 
mote, to allow two float switches within a segment. 
A segment is the space between encased pipeline supports. 
These supports are designed to tightly fit around encased 
pipes, preventing both light and crude oil from other segments 
from filtering in. This ensures any mote reporting changes in 
ambient light will send its true location info to the base 
station, sending accurate location enable response teams to 
quickly pinpoint disaster area. However, each segment is 
designed to allow crude oil to flow into adjacent segments via 
an overflow hole. This prevents the oil from reaching and the 
motes. 
 
A. Mote Location Identification 
 
We propose assigning each mote a unique identification 
based on pipe section and deployment segment. For example, 
assuming a hundred HDPE smart pipes are used to encase 
crude oil pipeline from Warri to Sapele (towns in the Niger 
Delta region of Nigeria), the following identification will be 
employed. 
 
WS001001 - WS100500 
 
 Where WS represents Warri to Sapele pipeline system, 
001 to 100 represents each HDPE pipe section and 001 to 500 
represents identification number for each mote/segment 
deployed along Warri – Sapele pipeline system. 
The Gateway system responsible for processing reports 
from motes is installed with Oracle MySQL database server 
[17], the database table contains the following fields: 
 
Table I. Propose MySQL database table layout 
Field 
Type/Length 
Description 
Recorded 
Auto increment, 
Big Int, Primary 
Field 
Record identification field 
Moteid 
Varchar(10) 
Mote’s ID for example 
WS001001 
Description 
Varchar(255) 
Describes each mote 
deployment information  
Status 
Varchar(12) 
Sets mote’s status, with 
either “alive” or 
“unreachable” 
Lastupdate 
Datetime 
Date and time when mote’s 
last pings Gateway 
Motetype 
Varchar(6) 
Two values, either 
“Master” or “Backup” 
The description field describes the location of each mote 
along pipeline deployment route. This approach eliminates 
any requirement for GPS sensors, while providing accurate 
location info for pipeline maintenance crew. 
Enumerated below is a sample record for mote 001: 
 
Table II. Sample record for mote 001 
Recorded 
1 
Moteid 
WS001001 
Description 
Warri Sapele pipeline system, Pipe Section 1, 
Segment 1. A KM from refinery east gate 
Status 
Unreachable 
Lastupdate 
2016-12-11 08:10:03 
Motetype 
Master 
 
The Status field in Table 2 above is periodically updated 
by a stored procedure; this field can contain two values, 
namely alive or unreachable.  
Lastupdate field is set whenever a mote contact the PAN 
Coordinator. Mote information is extracted from each mote’s 
source identification parameters [23] as encoded in the MAC 
Header. 
 
Table III. Generic MAC Frame Format 
 
 
Both sensing motes and PAN Coordinator are programmed 
to periodically exchange awareness information during 
networks Contention Access Periods (CAP), or in response to 
beacon signal sent by PAN Coordinator. 
As stated earlier, the stored procedure on the MySQL 
database runs a check on the table every 24 hours and updates 
the status field.  
Motes that failed to communicate with the PAN 
Coordinator within each 24 hour window are marked as 
unreachable by the stored procedure’s SQL commands. 
Reports generated by the Gateway enable maintenance 
crews to either activate segment backup mote or visit mote 
location to ascertain why it is unreachable. 
Therefore, a suggested deployment scenario encourages 
placing two motes within a segment - a master mote and a 
backup/redundant mote. Redundant motes can be remotely 
programmed to assume sensing operation whenever the master 
mote breakdown or is unreachable. Remote instruction equally 
reprograms redundant mote with the identification of failed 
master mote.  
16
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Each 
redundant 
or 
backup 
motes 
share 
similar 
identification with their master mote; however, the letter B is 
appended to differentiate each on the network. For example, 
backup mote for a mote with identification WS001001 is 
WS001001B. 
 
B. Mote Message Forwarding 
 
Our proposed motes uses predictive multi-hop when 
forwarding messages from sender to receiver. For instance 
mote WS001001 will predicatively send messages to 
WS001002, which in turn will predicatively send messages to 
WS001003. 
Our predictive multi-hop can be succinctly summarized as:  
mote with identification x sends event messages to mote with 
identification x – 1. 
Predictive message forwarding ensures the channel is 
always clear to forward messages between sender and 
receiver. This is possible when motes are appropriately 
spaced, ensuring mote to mote hopping and not mote to multi-
mote. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Predictive multi-hop 
 
 
C.  Mote Security 
 
Motes are required to periodically communicate with their 
PAN Coordinator every 24 hours. Failure in communicating 
implies the mote is either lost to theft, or simply damaged. 
 
D. Mote/Gateway Messaging 
 
Proper messaging technique ensures hassle free operations 
amongst various technologies that make up our propose 
works. For example, mote status request is initiated by the 
central gateway to each cluster’s PAN, while pipeline related 
reports are initiated by monitoring motes upon positive 
feedback from attached sensors. 
Message flow representation via process flowcharts are 
enumerated below. 
 
 
Figure 8. Gateway status request and response flowchart 
 
 
The flowchart above depicts messaging process between 
gateway, PAN and mote. Cluster’s PAN reports “unreachable” 
only after failing to reach target mote after the third attempt. 
Response from PAN is used by the Gateway to update mote’s 
status. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Light Sensor interrupt handling flowchart 
 
 
17
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 10. Float Switch interrupt handling flowchart 
 
 
Figures 9 and 10 represent process flowcharts for handling 
detected events via interrupts. Interrupts requests are queued, 
processed (by reporting detected ambient event) and removed 
from queue. 
 
D. Mote/Gateway Messaging 
 
Proper messaging technique ensures hassle free operations 
amongst various technologies that make up our propose 
works. For example, mote status request is initiated by the 
central gateway to each cluster’s PAN, while pipeline related 
reports are initiated by monitoring motes upon positive 
feedback from attached sensors. 
 
E. Preventing Light Sensor False Positives 
 
Like the Mica mote sensor boards MTS300 MTS310 our 
proposed sensor board uses a simple CdSe photocell, with a 
maximum light wavelength of 690 nm. The resistance of this 
photocell while exposed to light is 2 kΩ, while the off 
resistance, while in dark conditions is 520 kΩ [24]. 
Our design encapsulates the light sensor in a completely 
dark vacuum (the three-layered HDPE pipe completely 
encases the crude oil pipeline, while preventing any light from 
filtering in). Therefore, any light that filters in implies the 
protective outer HDPE pipe has been compromised, either 
through vandalism, weather conditions, manufacturing or 
installation flaw. 
From the foregoing, false positives can be prevented by 
ensuring zero manufacturing defect and foolproof installation 
during deployment. 
 
E. Preventing Float Switch False Positives 
 
Our design position float switches at the bottom of the 
HDPE pipe. This design ensures any leakage from the encased 
crude oil pipeline collects at the bottom of the HDPE pipe. As 
soon as sufficient crude oil has collected at the bottom of the 
HDPE pipe, the float switch naturally snap shut, triggering the 
mote’s overflow interrupt. 
False positives can be prevented by the clean up crew, all 
they need do is ensure the float switch snaps back to the open 
position after spilled crude oil has been drained from the 
HDPE pipe. 
 
 
V 
SIMULATION RESULT 
 
Linear placement of motes within HDPE pipe sections 
constrains the project to adopt linear cluster. However, by 
adopting predictive multi-hop, we believe packet loss and 
collusions will either be minimized or completely eliminated 
from the personal area network. 
Moreover, since power is provided from a external power 
bank, it is imperative to compute the final power consumption 
prior to deployment 
 To confirm our expectations, the following simulations 
were conducted using OPNET 14.5: 
 
• 
Network Throughput 
• 
End to end delay 
• 
Number of hops 
• 
Network Power Consumption 
 
OPNET 
implements 
IEEE 
802.15.4/ZigBee 
communication protocol using the following objects: 
• 
ZigBee Coordinator 
• 
ZigBee Station 
• 
ZigBee Router 
• 
ZigBee End-device 
 
Each ZigBee object enumerated above can function as 
mobile or fixed devices. Since pipelines are fixed, we 
implemented our simulation using fixed ZigBee objects. Our 
simulation focused on the benefits of predictive hops over 
random hops within a linear cluster. 
However, ZigBee End-devices cannot multi-hop from 
sender to receiver; rather they are designed to send their 
messages directly to their PAN ZigBee Coordinator, hence a 
ZigBee End-device that is not attached to a personal network 
ZigBee Coordinator automatically becomes an uninitialized 
network orphan. Therefore, this paper eventually discarded 
simulation results for Zigbee End-devices. 
 General simulation parameters are listed below: 
• 
Simulation Time: 3000 s 
• 
Packet Size: 1024 
• 
Start Time: Different Start Time 
• 
Packet Inter Arrival Time: Constant , Mean 1.0 s 
• 
Scenario Size: 1000 x 1000 meters 
 
 
A. Throughput Simulation Test Using Random Hops  
 
This simulation examines the success rate of message 
delivery within the pipeline, using one ZigBee Coordinator 
with five ZigBee Routers: 
 
 
18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 11. Layout of new simulation objects (ZigBee Coordinator and ZigBee 
Router) in OPNET Simulator 
 
Parameters for each node are listed below: 
ZIGBEE COORDINATOR 
1. 
Name 
PAN 
2. 
Network Type 
Mesh 
3. 
Start Time 
Uniform (20, 21) 
FIRST ZIGBEE ROUTER 
1. 
Name 
WS001001 
2. 
Destination 
PAN/Random 
3. 
Start Time 
Uniform (180, 181) 
SECOND ZIGBEE ROUTER 
1. 
Name 
WS001002 
2. 
Destination 
PAN/Random 
3. 
Start Time 
Uniform (150, 151) 
THIRD ZIGBEE ROUTER 
1. 
Name 
WS001003 
2. 
Destination 
PAN/Random 
3. 
Start Time 
Uniform (120, 121) 
FOURTH ZIGBEE ROUTER 
1. 
Name 
WS001004 
2. 
Destination 
PAN/Random 
3. 
Start Time 
Uniform (90, 91) 
FIFTH ZIGBEE ROUTER 
1. 
Name 
WS001005 
2. 
Destination 
PAN/Random 
3. 
Start Time 
Uniform (60, 61) 
 
The next set of simulation through results demonstrates the 
ability of nodes outside PAN coordinator coverage area to 
adopt multi-hop in delivery messages. We modified the 
Scenario size to 500 x 1500 meters to accommodate more 
nodes. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. ZigBee PAN Throughput Simulation Result 
 
 
 
Figure 13. ZigBee Router (WS001001) Throughput Simulation Result 
 
 
19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 14. ZigBee Router (WS001002) Throughput Simulation Result 
 
 
 
Figure 15. ZigBee Router (WS001003) Throughput Simulation Result 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. ZigBee Router (WS001004) Throughput Simulation Result 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. ZigBee Router (WS001005) Throughput Simulation Result 
 
 
All five nodes were able to transmit data to their PAN 
Coordinator, including the last three nodes which were outside 
the PAN Coordinator’s coverage area. 
 Implementing our simulation result in real life will reduce 
deployment costs through deployment of RFD (ZigBee End-
devices) within PAN Coordinator’s coverage area. 
20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

However, a FFD (ZigBee Router) will be deployed close to 
PAN Coordinator coverage boundary or perimeter. This 
placement allows nodes outside the coverage zone to route 
their requests through the borderline FFD. 
 
 
B. End to End Delay Simulation Results 
 
End to end delay simulation results displays the time it 
takes for transmitted packets from source node to reach 
destination node. Higher end to end delay results may indicate 
problems in the network deployment plan. 
 
 
 
Figure 18. ZigBee Coordinator (PAN) End to End Simulation Result 
 
 
 
Figure 19. ZigBee Router (WS001001) End to End Simulation Result 
 
 
 
Figure 20. ZigBee Router (WS001002) End to End Simulation Result 
 
 
 
Figure 21. ZigBee Router (WS001003) End to End Simulation Result 
 
 
 
Figure 22. ZigBee Router (WS001004) End to End Simulation Result 
21
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 23. ZigBee Router (WS001005) End to End Simulation Result 
C. Number of Hops from Sender to Receiver 
 
A hop represents a node in the path between source and 
destination nodes. Wireless sensors network data packets pass 
through nodes as they travel between source and destination. 
Each time packets are passed to the next node, a hop occurs. 
The hop count refers to the number of intermediary nodes 
through which data must pass between source and destination. 
 
 
 
Figure 24. ZigBee Coordinator (PAN) Number of Hops Result 
 
 
 
Figure 25. ZigBee Router (WS001001) Number of Hops Result 
 
 
 
Figure 26. ZigBee Router (WS001002) Number of Hops Result 
 
 
 
Figure 27. ZigBee Router (WS001003) End to End Simulation Result 
22
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 28. ZigBee Router (WS001004) End to End Simulation Result 
 
 
 
 
Figure 29. ZigBee Router (WS001005) End to End Simulation Result 
 
We conducted the power consumption simulation using 
OPNET 14.5, via Open-ZB IEEE 802.15.4/ZigBee OPNET 
Simulation Model [25]. Our simulation model consists of the 
following objects: 
• 
1 Network Analyzer 
• 
1 Node Coordinator 
• 
4 GTS-enabled End-devices 
 
 
 
Figure 30. Layout of Open-ZB network Analyzer and Nodes 
 
 
 
 
Figure 31. Battery Consumed (Energy) Graph 
23
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The energy consumption graph in Figure 31 reveals high 
energy consumption at the start of the simulation; however, 
this balances out as the simulation proceeds. This implies 
more energy is consumed when the network initializes and 
less is consumed when the network is fully operational. 
 
VI 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
Messages between sender and receiver within a linear 
cluster depend on multiple hops, which is determined by the 
number of nodes between sender and receiver (as 
demonstrated by our simulation results). 
Moreover, the advantages of predictive multi-hops within a 
pipe system is enormous, since it prevents nodes belonging to 
pipeline Segment A from communicating with Segment B or 
Z Coordinator, especially if such Coordinators are within 
range as a result of pipeline meandering downhill or around a 
bend. 
Our future work is deployment of our proposal using live 
motes specially manufactured to our requirements. We believe 
a successful deployment will create demand, giving rise to a 
thriving industry, especially in countries grappling with 
incessant oil spills. Finally, the environmental benefits of this 
project should reduce oppositions to crude oil pipeline 
construction along environmentally delicate routes. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] 
M. Y Agetegba and P. Lorenz “Using Sensor Technology to Monitor 
and Report Vandalized Pipelines” INNOV 2016: The Fifth International 
Conference 
on 
Communications, 
Computation, 
Networks 
and 
Technologies, August 2016, pp. 1 - 6   
  
[2] 
N. Bhavana, S. Anuradha, K. Sanjay, and P. Vinod “Energy Efficient 
MAC Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey” Computer 
Science and Engineering Survey Vol.2, No. 3, August 2011, pp. 122-
129.  
  
[3] 
L. M. L. Oliveira and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Wireless Sensor Networks: 
a Monitoring” Journal of Communications, April 2011, Vol. 6, No. 2, 
pp. 3-16.  
 
[4] 
L. M. L. Oliveira, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, A. G. F. Elias, and B. B. 
Zarpelão, “Ubiquitous monitoring solution for Wireless Sensor 
Networks with push notiﬁcations and end-to-end connectivity” 2014 pp. 
1 - 2. 
 
[5] 
G. Han, X. Jiang, A. Qian, J. J. .P. C. Rodrigues, and L. Cheng, “A 
Wireless Comparative Study of Routing Protocols of Heterogeneous 
Sensor Networks” Research Article, June 2014, pp. 1-3. 
 
[6] 
E. Romero, A. Araujo, J. Blesa, and O. Nieto-Taladriz “Developing 
Cognitive Strategies for Reducing Energy Consumption in Wireless  
Sensor Networks” The Second International Conference on Advances in  
Cognitive Radio, COCORA 2012, pp. 64 – 65. 
 
[7] 
O. Diallo, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, and M. Sene, “Real-time data   
Management   on wireless sensor networks: A survey” Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications, www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca   
December 2011, pp.2 – 8.    
 
[8] 
V. N. G. J. Soares and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Cooperation in DTN-
Based Network Architectures” V2-05, April 2011, pp. 103 – 107. 
 
[9] 
K. Lin, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, H. Ge, Naixue Xiong, and X. Liang 
“Energy Efﬁciency QoS Assurance Routing in Wireless   Multimedia 
Sensor Networks“, IEEE Systems Journal, Vol. 5, December 2011 pp.1-
3.     
 
[10] Mehdi Yari. “The 6 Corrosive Components That Can Be Found in Crude 
Oil” Corrosionpedia, August 21, 2015. 
https://www.corrosionpedia.com/2/1424/corrosion/the-6-corrosive-
components-that-can-be-found-in-crude-oil 
 
[11] Tests confirm polyethylene pipe for high-pressure oil, gas service. 
http://www.ogj.com/articles/print/volume-94/issue-37/in-this-
issue/general-interest/tests-confirm-polyethylene-pipe-for-high-pressure-
oil-gas-service.html. Oil and Gas Journal, 1996 
  
[12] S. A. Ahlam and A. Manal “Medium Access Control Protocols for 
Wireless Sensor Networks Classifications and Cross-Layering” Science 
Direct, 
Procedure 
Computer 
Science, 
www.ScienceDirect.com, 
ICCMIT, 2015, pp. 2-13. 
 
 [13] A. M. Sadeghion, N. Metje, D. N. Chapman, and C. J. Anthony    
“Smartpipes: Smart Wireless Sensor Networks for Leak Detection In 
Water Pipelines” Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks,   February 
2014, pp. 1-15. 
 
 [14] L. Luo, Q. Cao, C. Huang, T. Abdelzaher, John A. Stankovic, and M. 
Ward, “EnviroMic: Toward Cooperative Storage and Retrieval in Audio 
Sensor Networks”, 2009, pp. 1- 22 
 
 [15] J. Kim, G. Sharma, N. Boudriga, and S. S. Iyengar “SPAMMS: A    
Sensor-based Pipeline Autonomous Monitoring and Maintenance  
System” IEEE Explore, 2010, pp.2-11. 
 
 [16] M. Alnuem “Performance Analysis of Node Placement in Linear 
Wireless Sensor Networks” Journal of Emerging Trends in Computing 
and Information Sciences, January 2014, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp.1 – 8 
 
 [17] M. F. F. Bin Ismail and Wai Yie “Acoustic Monitoring System Using 
Wireless Sensor Networks” International Symposium on Robotics and 
Intelligent Sensors, 2012, pp. 2-7. 
 
 [18] C. Pandeeswaran, N. Pappa, and S.G. Jayesh” Hybrid MAC Protocol for 
Wireless Sensor Networks used in Time Critical Applications” 
Computer Science and Information Technology, 2014, pp. 3- 9. 
 
 [19] M. Lujuan, L. Henry, and L. Deshi “Hybrid TDMA/CDMA MAC 
Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks” Journal of Network, Vol. 9,   
No.10, October 2014, pp. 2665 – 2673. 
 
 [20] Aubrey Kagan “Combining power and data wires, Part 1”. May, 2015 
http://www.embedded.com/electronics-blogs/without-a-
paddle/4439353/Combining-power-and-data-wires--Part-1 
 
 [21] Paul Pickering “Power & Signal Over A Single Wire Do More With 
Less”. May, 2015. 
http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1326167& 
 
 [22] Wikipedia “Highway Addressable Remote Transducer Protocol” 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highway_Addressable_Remote_Transduce
r_Protocol 
 
 [23] RF Wireless World “Zigbee MAC layer frames”. 2012. 
http://www.rfwireless-world.com/Tutorials/Zigbee-MAC-layer-frame-
format.html 
 
 [24] Crossbow Technologies “MTS/MDA Sensor Board Users Manual 
Revision B, June 2006” 
 
 [25] Petr Jurcik Open-ZB IEEE 802.15.4/ZigBee OPNET Simulation Model. 
http://www.open-zb.net/wpan_simulator.php 
24
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

