118
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Heterogeneous Wireless Network Selection: Load Balancing and Multicast Scenario
Svetlana Boudko
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
svetlana.boudko@nr.no
Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
wolfgang.leister@nr.no
Stein Gjessing
University of Oslo
Norway
steing@iﬁ.uio.no
Abstract—The increasing demand for real-time multimedia
streaming from mobile users makes important deployment of
network selection in wireless networks. Coexistence of various
wireless access networks and ability of mobile terminals to
switch between them make an optimal selection of serving mobile
networks for groups of mobile clients a challenging problem.
Since scalability can easily become a bottleneck in large-scale
networks, we study the decision-making process and selection of
the data that needs to be exchanged between different network
components. In this paper, we present two decentralized solutions
to this problem that we compare and evaluate in the OMNet++
simulation environment.
Keywords—Wireless networking; mobile network selection; de-
centralized algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
This article extends the work presented by Boudko et al.
[1, 2] and studies load balancing and multicast communication
over heterogeneous mobile networks. This article is also an
extention of [3, 4].
Availability of various wireless network technologies and
continuous development of mobile devices and services lead
to complex and highly dynamic networking and challenge
resource limitations of wireless access networks. According to
a recent forecast [5], monthly data consumption for wireless
networks will increase over 15 times in the years between
2011 and 2016. In 2016, the demand for mobile bandwidth will
exceed the average capacity by about 32 %. Despite constantly
increasing demand, the range of frequencies is the same. Con-
sequently, during peak demands when the bandwidth becomes
an insufﬁcient resource the consumer is likely to experience
degradations in the form of reduced service, slow service, or
even no service.
To avoid some of these negative effects of a network that
is challenged by resource limitations we need to consider the
resource allocation problem from a different angle, including
collaboration between mobile user nodes and networks to
improve the overall utilization of resources. Referring to
wireless access networks, the ability to be connected to several
network technologies simultaneously offers new possibilities
to formulate effective strategies for network selection.
The network selection problem inspired by the “always
best connected” concept was mostly focused on the deﬁnition
of metrics to address the best end user quality of service
for each single consumer, neglecting the impact to the other
consumers in the network. Contrary to this, we use metrics
that express quality of service for all users collectively and
evaluate beneﬁts for the system components from complexly
applied network selection. In our problem formulation, we
take into account that 1) a large number of mobile devices
can operate simultaneously inside an area with overlapping
coverage of various mobile networks; 2) some of the networks
can experience degradation of service while some of them
can accommodate more users; and 3) some groups of these
devices can listen to the same feeds from the same Internet
locations while being connected to different access points.
We consider the network selection problem to use for multi-
user environments with possible multicast conﬁgurations that
allows the network to perform load balancing, improve the
users’ overall QoS, and increase the networks’ throughput.
Being originally introduced for use in the wired Internet,
multicast is an efﬁcient method for point-to-multipoint com-
munications, which reduces drastically the trafﬁc load when
the same content is sent to a large group of users. The
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) and its succes-
sor 3GPP2 deﬁned the Multimedia Broadcast and Multicast
Service (MBMS) and the Broadcast and Multicast Service
(BCMCS) [6], respectively. The Long-Term Evolution (LTE)
project introduced LTE Broadcast, also denoted as evolved
Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (eMBMS) [7]. Dif-
ferent types of applications like video conferencing, ﬁle dis-
tribution, live multimedia streaming, IPTV can beneﬁt from
deploying multicast networking. It is also advantageous in
cases of the ﬂash crowd phenomenon when the popularity of
a certain item increases rapidly over a short period of time.
The LTE whitepaper [8] shows that already from three to ﬁve
subscribers in one cell site achieve break-even of cost between
unicast and multicast.
However, the complexity of managing multicast networks
makes the deployment of multicast even more challenging
in wireless environments when mobility issues have to be
considered. Also, the notion of a link interface for a wireless
multicast channel differs from that for a wired network.
Multicast management in wireless heterogeneous networking
also involves mobile network selection for a group of clients in
addition to construction of multicast trees like in conventional
multicast protocols.
In this paper, we consider a solution for the network selec-
tion problem for heterogeneous mobile networking as a part of
multicast group management. Previously, we have proposed a
method that provides an optimal network selection for a given
network topology, network conditions and user preferences
assuming that all needed information can be collected from the
network and is available for a central decision-making unit that

119
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1.
LTE Advanced Heterogeneous Network Architecture.
computes the assignment of mobile multicast groups of nodes
to networks [1, 2]. In this paper, we reﬁne the aforementioned
method and apply it as an upper bound for evaluating methods
that use only limited information shared among the decision
makers.
The work proposed in this paper includes the following
contributions: 1) We propose two approaches that allow net-
work selection in a decentralized manner with only limited
information shared among the decision makers. 2) Through
extensive simulations, we study how different sets of informa-
tion available to decision makers inﬂuence the performance of
the system. 3) We discuss how the evaluated approaches can
be combined and propose ideas for further improvements.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After
presenting an overview of related work in Section II, we
discuss two representative scenarios for load balancing and for
multicast networking in Section III. Load balancing problem
in heterogeneous wireless network is addressed as follows. We
present the problem as a team-decision problem in Section IV,
and outline suitable algorithms. The simulation set-up and the
results of simulations are presented and analyzed in Section V
Multicast transmission in heterogeneous wireless network is
covered in the following sections. We present the problem
formulation and outline an optimal solution to the problem
in Section VI. The system components are considered in
Section VII. Two decentralized solutions are presented in
Section VIII. Simulation results are given in Section X. We
discuss future work and conclude in Section XI.
II. RELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, the research ﬁeld regarding
resource allocation and selection of a network in heteroge-
neous wireless networks from a perspective of load balancing
and multicast delivery is not well explored. In what concerns
network selection for mobile multicast groups, four research
areas can be considered as related work 1) handoff manage-
ment; 2) network selection in wireless networks; 3) multicast
in wireless networks; 4) LTE-Advanced Heterogeneous Net-
works.
A. Handoff Management in Mobile Networks
Prediction-based techniques have been suggested in several
studies [9–12] aiming to reduce handoff delays.
To represent the movement behavior of a mobile user,
Paramvir et al. [9] propose a two-level user mobility model
consisting of a local level and a global level. A hierarchical
location prediction algorithm is proposed based on an approx-
imate pattern-matching algorithm implemented in the global
level and Kalman ﬁltering techniques implemented in the local
level.
Akyildiz and Wang [10] propose a mobility model that
uses historical records and stochastic behavior of mobile
users to predict their future position. The model is built
upon a framework of user mobility proﬁles (UMP). In the
proposed prediction algorithms, many factors are taken into
consideration including velocity and direction of mobile users,
historical records, stochastic model of cell residence time and
path characteristics. The authors claim that these algorithms
predict more accurately than previous schemes. However,
the complexity of the algorithms make them impractical for
mobile applications.
In two studies, Tseng et al. [11] and Choi et al. [12] propose
using cross-layer information to perform layer-3 handoff in
parallel with or prior to the layer-2 handoff. However, these
schemes can lead to false alarms and cause unnecessary MIP
registrations. Ray et al. [13] conclude that deciding upon the
ideal choice and timing of cross-layer triggers in order to
reduce layer-3 latency is still an open problem.
Vertical handoff is the handoff between the networks of
different wireless technologies and has been addressed in
several studies [14–20]. While horizontal handoffs are typ-
ically triggered when the received signal strength (RSS) of
the serving access router drops below a certain threshold the
vertical handoff can be initiated due to other reasons such
as user preferences or network conditions including coverage,
bandwidth, cost and power consumption. The decision process
is therefore more complex for vertical handoffs than for
horizontal ones.
While some authors only use RSS as an input parameter
for the handoff decision process [10, 21], others combine the
use of RSS with bandwidth information [22–24]. Using cost
functions has been proposed earlier [14–16]. Nasser et al. [25]
propose a cost function that depends of the cost of service,
security, power consumption, network conditions and network
performance. However, in their evaluation, all weights except
the bandwidth weight are set to zero. This renders their cost
function to a function of one parameter: bandwidth.
Algorithms based on fuzzy logic or artiﬁcial neural net-
works in combination with multiple criteria [17–19] suffer
from high handover delay because of their complexity and the
training process. Unfortunately, the authors of these algorithms
did not provide throughput results.

120
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Recently, some studies [26, 27], proposed solutions for
group vertical handoffs in heterogeneous environments. These
studies consider scenarios when many mobile users send han-
dover requests almost at the same time. In these scenarios, the
inﬂuence of multiple users is important to consider for optimal
network selection. The solutions presented in both studies
require a centralized approach to be adopted to implement the
proposed schemes. The obvious drawback of this approach is
a poor scalability of these solutions.
B. Admission control and network selection in wireless net-
works
Ormond and Murphy [28] propose a network selection
strategy that explores a number of possible utility functions.
The solution is user-centric, and an interplay between different
users and networks is not considered. Ormond and Murphy
conclude that the impact of multiple users operating in the
same region needs to be further examined.
Gluhak et al. [29] consider the problem of selecting the
optimal bearer paths for multicast services with groups of
heterogeneous receivers. The proposed algorithm selects the
bearer path based on different optimization goals. However,
Gluhak et al. address the problem only for the ideal static
multicast case without taking into account users crossing
different cells. In their work, multicast membership does not
change during the duration of a service, and multicast groups
are not built with consideration of users’ movements. In our
opinion, this is not a realistic case for wireless networks.
Jang et al. [30] present a mechanism for efﬁcient network
resource usage in a mobile multicast scenario. This mechanism
is developed for heterogeneous networks and implements net-
work selection based on network and terminal characteristics
and QoS. However, in the proposed mechanism, the network
selection is performed purely based on terminal’s preferences,
the network perspective is not considered, and the solution
does not optimize the utilization of network resources.
Tragos et al. [31] propose a generic admission control
algorithm that allows network selection for 4G heterogeneous
wireless networks. The algorithm aims to provide maximum
utilization of the network, prevent overloading situations and
ensure best QoS. However, implementation of the algorithm
requires the presence of a centralized entity.
Khan et al. [32] present a game theoretic solution for
resource allocation and call admission in wireless networks
using cooperative games. The main goal is to increase the
utilization of the available bandwidth and to reduce the
call blocking. The solution is applicable to wireless network
scenarios where networks are willing to cooperate. Kalai-
Smorodinsky Bargaining Solution is used to solve the cooper-
ative game. The authors also propose the request distribution
algorithm that allows to allocate the request to several different
networks and split the requested bandwidth between these
networks. Simular to Tragos et al. [31], the implementation
requires also a centralized entity that is responsible to handle
bargins between the participating networks.
In our analysis, we recognize that several problems are
not yet addressed, or where the currently available solutions
need to be improved. Decentralized algorithms that rely on
information only partly shared between the decision-makers
need to be implemented and evaluated in multi-user scenarios.
These considerations motivate us to look at distributed and
computationally efﬁcient methods of network selection in
heterogeneous mobile environments.
C. Network Selection in Wireless Networks
Ormond and Murphy [28] propose a network selection
approach that uses a number of possible utility functions. Their
solution is user-centric and does not present any multicast
scenario. An interplay between different users and networks is
not considered either. Ormond and Murphy conclude that the
impact of multiple users operating in the same region needs
to be further examined.
Gluhak et al. [29] consider the problem of selecting the
optimal bearer paths for multicast services with groups of
heterogeneous receivers. The proposed algorithm selects the
bearer path based on different optimization goals. However,
Gluhak et al. address the problem only for the ideal static
multicast case without taking into account users crossing
different cells. In addition, it requires that the knowledge of the
conditions in wireless networks and preferences of receivers
is fully shared. In their work, multicast membership does not
change during the duration of a service, and multicast groups
are not built with consideration of users’ movements. In our
opinion, this is not a realistic case for wireless networks.
Also, the proposed selection algorithm is built upon a rule
according to which the receivers are partitioned into two sets:
the receivers for which only one network is available versus
the receivers for which several networks are available. The
impact of the users inside the second group, as a result of this
partitioning, is neglected.
Yang and Chen [33] propose a bandwidth-efﬁcient mul-
ticast algorithm for heterogeneous wireless networks that is
formulated as an Integer Linear Programming problem that is
solved using Lagrangian relaxation [34]. The algorithm deals
only with constructing optimal shortest path trees for multicast
groups. In this approach, important parameters, such as cost
of service or the user’s velocity, are not considered.
Jang et al. [30] present a mechanism for efﬁcient network
resource usage in a mobile multicast scenario. This mechanism
is developed for heterogeneous networks and implements net-
work selection based on network and terminal characteristics
and Quality of Service (QoS). However, in the proposed
mechanism, the network selection is performed purely based
on terminal’s preferences, the network perspective is not
considered, and the solution does not optimize the utilization
of network resources.
Hou et al. [35] propose a cooperative multicast scheduling
scheme for multimedia services in IEEE 802.16 based wire-
less metropolitan area networks (WMAN). The scheduling is
considered for one base station that further re-sends the data to
multiple subscriber stations. These are grouped into different

121
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
multicast groups and the users are assigned to the groups. The
authors consider two approaches to select multicast groups
for services: the random selection and the channel state aware
selection. The process is controlled by the base station and
limited to one network technology. No network heterogeneity
is considered.
D. Multicast in Wireless Networks
The Multicast Mobility (multimob) working group [36] fo-
cuses its activity on supporting multicast in a mobile environ-
ment. The main goals of the group are to work out mechanisms
for supporting multicast source mobility and mechanisms that
optimize multicast trafﬁc during a handover. The group also
documents the conﬁguration of IGMPv3/MLDv2 in mobile
environments. In this sense, they extend the IGMPv3/MLDv2
protocols for implementation in the mobile domain and im-
prove Proxy Mobile IPv6 to handle multicast efﬁciently. How-
ever, they do not consider any modiﬁcations across different
access networks.
The Long-Term Evolution (LTE) project introduces evolved
Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (eMBMS) [7]. This
standard covers technically the terminal, radio, core network,
and user service aspects that provide a point-to-multipoint
service for transmitting data from a single source to multiple
recipients. The performance is improved due to higher and
more ﬂexible LTE bit rates, single frequency network (SFN)
operations, and carrier conﬁguration ﬂexibility. The eMBMS
Service Layer offers a Streaming- and a Download Delivery
Method and is enhanced with video codec for higher resolu-
tions and frame rates and forward error correction (FEC), and
the radio network with procedures to ensure MBMS reception
in a multifrequency LTE network. eMBMS also allows LTE
network and backhaul ofﬂoads.
E. LTE-Advanced: Heterogeneous Networks
Though several improvements were introduced in the LTE-
Advanced standard [37], the homogeneous networks with only
macrocells deployments will not be able to cope with future
mobile trafﬁc. A step towards optimization of performance
in wireless networks is done by LTE-Advanced [38] through
enhancements in network topology. The LTE-Advanced pro-
posed implementation of heterogeneous networks (HetNets)
topologies that combine utilization of both macrocells and
small cells, the latter including micro, pico, femtocells and
relays, each having different transmit power and access rules
for user devices.
1) Macrocells: Macrocell is an outdoor base station and the
main base station in the cell. The transmitted power is about
45 dBm. Macro cells are connected with each other through
backhaul that are usually built upon a wired infrastructure. In
some cases, e.g., for rural areas, wireless links can also be
used.
2) Micro and Picocells: These cells are, usually, an outdoor
low cost base stations with open access and a small cover-
age.They are connected with the macro cell using a backhaul
link. The transmitted power is about 35 dBm. The range is
about two kilometers wide for microcell and about 200 meters
for picocell.
3) Femtocells: Femtocells are indoor base stations either
with open or limited access and low transmitted power that
is less than 23 dBm. Though these cells are positioned as an
alternative to micro and picocells, their coordination with the
macrocell still is not fully achieved in current deployments.
4) Relays: Relay stations receive, demodulate and retrans-
mit the signals between base stations and mobile users. They
can decode the data and provide error correction. Relays are
used to increase throughput and to extend coverage of cellular
networks. Relays do not need wired connection to the base
station; therefore, the backhaul costs can be saved.
In the HetNet network model, macrocells provide full cover-
age for a wide area and small cells cover some areas with extra
trafﬁc demand. It is a useful network architectural feature since
the bandwidth demand is not uniform across the area and users
and trafﬁc are often concentrated in particular areas. Another
important beneﬁt of using small cells inside of a macrocell is
to improve coverage in places where coverage of the macrocell
is not sufﬁcient, e.g., in cell edges. Since deploying extra
macro cells in these areas results in additional interferences,
the deployment of lower power picos is a better solution and
can give a cost reduction. A typical LTE-Advanced HetNet
scenario with a macro base station and several small cells is
illustrated in Figure 1.
For the purpose of this paper, we evaluate network selection
solutions considering both the LTE-Advanced HetNet network
model and a general heterogeneous mobile network system
with overlapping of several wireless technologies, e.g., Wi-Fi
and cellular networks.
In our analysis, we recognize that the presented previous
work has not addressed several important aspects related to
the network selection for mobile multicast groups. We need
to study how the users’ movements inﬂuence the optimal
selection of members for multicast groups and how the in-
formation needed for network selection is exchanged between
the decision makers.
III. SCENARIO
A. Load Balancing Scenario
We consider a network selection scenario for a group of
users in a hotspot area like a crowded city center, a public
transportation node or an exhibition site where a coverage of
several base stations or access points from different networks
is possible. We assume a substantial overlap in coverage
of these stations. The networks implement different network
technologies. We also consider a situation with multiple over-
lapping IEEE 802.22 wireless regional area networks where
self-coexistence is allowed. A representative scenario of such
networking is illustrated in Figure 2. These user terminals are
capable of connecting to several access networks, and vertical
handoffs between different networks are technically possible.
The terminals periodically receive beacon signals from base
stations or access points of the available access networks that
are typically broadcast once per second.

122
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2.
Network topology built upon multiple mobile networks with
heterogeneous technologies to serve a group of clients.
Users located in the same cell of a mobile network can
experience degradation in quality due to shortage of avail-
able bandwidth. Though admission control mechanisms are
designed to ensure the quality of wireless connections and to
prevent network congestion, there is still a possibility that a
user is admitted to the network while requiring low bandwidth,
e.g., for web browsing, will require more resources for video
streaming shortly after. We consider also a situation when
a base station may act in a proactive way and monitor the
available resources in adjacent cells. The users that are going
to move to a cell that, at the moment, is not able to admit new
users can be notiﬁed to perform a vertical handoff to another
available network. Since users may have different preferences
and request different types of service their utility functions are
built upon different criteria.
To provide better load balancing between the networks, and
to avoid disturbing ping-pong effects, joint coordination, and
information exchange between the users and the base stations
is essential; both the clients and the networks can beneﬁt
from cooperative handoffs. However, due to strict bandwidth
and power limitations of mobile networks, and also due to
scalability issues, a complete information exchange between
mobile users and networks is not feasible. Decentralized
network selection is therefore essential.
B. Multicast Scenario
To illustrate the yet unsolved challenges for optimal network
selection in multicast networks, we consider a multimedia
streaming scenario for a group of mobile users that concur-
rently receive the same content from the Internet. We assume
that a backbone proxy server (BPS) is placed at the network
edge. The BPS is a member of a content distribution system
(CDN). This scenario is an extension of a scenario that we
previously have considered to illustrate an adaptive multimedia
streaming architecture to mobile nodes [39].
The BPS streams content that either is hosted on a streaming
server, or re-sends the streaming content as a part of an appli-
Figure 3.
Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients served
by several mobile networks before regrouping.
Figure 4. Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients switched
to one mobile network after regrouping.
cation layer multicast. The users of this network are located
in an area with a substantial overlap in coverage of several
mobile networks, and are connected to different networks. One
of examples of such networking is Heterogeneous networks
(HetNets) in LTE-Advanced [38].
The base stations of the system have multicast capabilities,
implementing, for example, Multimedia Broadcast Multicast
Service [40]. A representative scenario of such networking is
illustrated in Figure 3.
In our scenario, we assume that the mobile terminals are
capable to connect to several access networks, and vertical
handoffs between these networks are technically possible.
Further, we assume that these terminals are equipped with GPS
receivers, so that their location information can be transmitted
to the BPS. The BPS can use this information to determine
how users can be regrouped in multicast groups. Such regroup-
ing is beneﬁcial as it saves network resources. Hence, users

123
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
that get the same content can exploit the same wireless link
because the content can be broadcasted to them. The resources
in the backhaul network are also better utilized because the
content is now delivered only to one mobile network instead
of being spread to several networks. An example of such
regrouping is depicted in Figure 4.
Technically, to facilitate such a mechanism, the user ter-
minals will have the possibility to switch to other mobile
networks after receiving certain messages from the BPS.
Since users may have different preferences depending on
diverse criteria, for example, power consumption, security,
or network cost of service, the interplay between the users’
utilities and the networks’ utilities is important to consider.
Network selection support for multi-access networks can be
implemented at any layer of the protocol stack. There are
certain tradeoffs to consider at the design stage. Cross-layer
signaling can potentially be added to allow the application
level to control the process, hence, to prevent breakup of
ongoing sessions.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION FOR LOAD BALANCING IN
HETEROGENEOUS WIRELESS NETWORKS
Decentralized network selection can be formulated as a team
decision problem [41, 42] where several decision variables
are involved. These decisions are made by different decision
makers that have access to different information but participate
in a common goal.
Team decision theory is concerned with determining the op-
timal decisions, given a set of information for each of several
decision makers, that work together to achieve a payoff. In
team decision problems, these sets of information are different
though often correlated for different decision makers. These
optimal decisions can be either person-by-person optimal or
team optimal. In person-by-person optimal cases, each person
makes the decisions that optimize the individual’s payoff, but
not necessarily the team payoff. These cases are optimal for
a particular team member, given that the decision functions
for other members are ﬁxed. In team optimal cases, the group
payoff is optimized. Team optimality is a stronger condition,
and is thus harder to achieve. Taking into account that person-
by-person optimal strategies may result in unfair distribution
of the resources, we focus our research on team optimal
strategies.
A. System Model
Taking into consideration our understanding about prefer-
ences of mobile nodes and the networks, we are now ready to
formalize our observations into a system model. We consider a
set of networks N = 1, 2, ..., n and a set of mobile terminals
M = 1, 2, ..., m. For each terminal mj and network ni the
following is deﬁned. Streaming bitrate requirements of mobile
nodes are denoted by rj; rssi,j is the received signal strength
in network i for terminal mj while power consumption and
cost of service in network ni for terminal mj are denoted
by pi,j and ci,j, respectively. The total available bandwidth
of network ni is denoted by bi. For each terminal mj, we
deﬁne a user preference proﬁle that is described by a tuple
containing Thp
i,j, Thc
i,j, and Thrss
i,j . These denote thresholds,
or user preferences, for respectively power consumption, cost
of service and received signal strength. We deﬁne a time period
τi,j during which terminal mj is served by network ni before
performing a handoff and moving to the next cell of this
network.
For each mobile terminal mj and each network ni we deﬁne
the function xi,j which mimics the decision taken by a mobile
terminal mj to switch to or to stay in mobile network ni.
xi,j =
(
1,
if mj has roamed to or stays in ni
0,
otherwise
(1)
We deﬁne the common goal of the set of networks and
users of these networks as maximization of consumed band-
width over a period of time, minimization of the number of
handoffs and reduction of signalling between the networks
and terminals. To achieve this goal, the participating networks
and the terminals need to cooperate while trying to maximize
their own performance. To facilitate a decentralized approach,
we deﬁne two components, the network component and the
mobile node component. We formulate the problem and solve
it separately for these two components.
1) Network Component: For each network ni, we deﬁne
a utility function Ui as a sum of consumed bandwidth of all
users of this network over the time the user is connected to it,
as deﬁned in Eq. (2).
∀{i} : Ui =
X
j
xi,j · rj · τi,j
(2)
In this sense, the networks beneﬁt if they select the users
that not only request a higher bandwidth but also intend to
stay in the network for longer periods of time, which also
can eliminate the ping-pong effect when the user needs to
change the network again recently after the handoff. Basing
our decision on research done by other research groups [43–
48], we assume that a mobile network is capable of predicting
the residence time of a mobile node inside the network based
on mobile node’s velocity, movement patterns and the local
area. We realize that this problem is an ongoing research work.
For the purpose of this paper, we assume that the prediction
can be performed with acceptable precision.
The common goal is the maximization of the expected value
of the sum of network utility functions.
max
X
i
E[Ui]
(3)
The utility function is constrained by the network resources.
As any network of the system has a limited knowledge about
the resources and decisions of the rest of the system, xi,j is
given as its expected value.
∀{i} :
X
j
E[xi,j] · rj ≤ bi
(4)

124
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
At Mobile Node mj :
if Network Selection is triggered
search for available networks
for each available network ni
if (pi,j < Thp
i,j, ci,j < Thc
i,j, rssi,j < Thrss
i,j ) then
add the network to list of candidate networks
for each network ni in list of candidate networks
send requests to candidate network ni
wait for response from candidate networks
upon reception of response from candidate network ni
if (admitted value == true) then
add response to response list
if (response list == null)
stay in the current network
else
for all responses in response list
choose the network with the highest τi,j
Figure 5.
Distributed Algorithm for Network Selection, Mobile Node
Component
At Candidate Network ni :
wait for admission requests from mobile nodes
upon reception of admission requests from mobile node mj
using available knowledge solve Eq. (2) with constraints Eq. (4)
return admission message containing
admitted value = true/false and expected time
Figure 6.
Distributed Algorithm for Mobile Node Admission, Network
Component
2) Mobile Node Component: For each user we deﬁne a
utility function fj as a function of power consumption, cost of
service, available bandwidth and received signal strength. We
realize that the set of parameters that deﬁne user preferences
can be larger than the one mentioned above and can also differ
from user to user. We also realize that users might employ
different utility functions but for this work we limit us to this
deﬁnition.
max fj(pi,j, ci,j, rj, rssi,j)
(5)
Eq. (5) poses a multiparameter optimization problem that
can be solved by introducing weights and normalization. An-
other solution is to relax the optimization problem by reducing
it to a one variable optimization Eq. (6). Consequently, we
introduce a set of constraints in Eq. (7), where some of
parameters z ∈ {p, c, rss}), namely power consumption, cost
of service, and received signal strength, are limited by their
thresholds Thz
i,j deﬁned by the user’s preferences.
max
X
i
xi,j · rj · τi,j
(6)
pi,j ≤ Thp
i,j,
ci,j ≤ Thc
i,j,
rssi,j ≤ Thrss
i,j
(7)
B. Algorithm
The system model deﬁned in Section IV-A is used in the
decentralized algorithm for network selection outlined below.
We build the algorithm based on the following a) maxi-
mization of the total consumed bandwidth by distributing the
users between the networks taking into account the networks’
available bandwidth, and b) minimization of the number of
performed handoffs between the networks.
There are two events that may trigger the execution of
the network selection algorithm: 1) based on monitoring of
available resources in its cells, and the prediction of users’
location information, the network informs mobile nodes that
are about to move to a congested cell to switch to another
available network instead; 2) mobile terminal mj experiences
degradation of network performance detected by increased
packet loss or delay on the mobile terminal.
When the network selection is triggered, the effected termi-
nal runs the selection algorithm as shown in Figure 5. As a
consequence, the network receives calls from mobile nodes
it runs the algorithm shown in Figure 6. To calculate the
expected values of the utility function deﬁned by Eq. (2),
this algorithm takes as input the knowledge available for this
network. Depending on how the knowledge of the system is
shared among the networks, we differ between two versions
of the algorithm: Algorithm A and Algorithm B.
1. Algorithm A: Each mobile node mj, while sending a
request to the network ni, informs the network about the
requests sent to other networks. Based on this information,
each network calculates the probability of mobile node mj
to choose this network if accepted.
2. Algorithm B: Each network ni shares its information with
exactly one more network nk. The network ni does not
accept a mobile node mj if the node is accepted by the
network nk and τi,j < τk,j.
Also, we consider using a combination of these two ver-
sions, refered further as Algorithm AB. In this version, in
addition to the information exchanged between the networks
as in Algorithm B, the nodes specify in their requests the
number of all requested networks, as in Algorithm A.
C. Algorithm Evaluation
To evaluate the algorithms, we deﬁne upper and lower
bounds to their operation. The upper bound is achieved by
applying a centralized solution with fully shared knowledge
of the conditions in all evaluated networks and is further
referred as global knowledge reference. This reference can
also be viewed as a modiﬁcation of the algorithms [26, 27, 31]
discussed in Section II-B The algorithm [31] is now extended
to a multi-user scenario. Its utility function is deﬁned in
Eq. (8). The utility function is constrained by resource lim-
itations of networks as described in Eq. (4) and preferences
of mobiles nodes described in Eq. (7). This problem belongs
to the class of integer linear programming problems, which
is known to be NP-complete, thus problematic for real-time
tractable implementation and in most cases can be used only
as a reference for evaluating algorithms.
U =
X
i
X
j
xi,j · rj · τi,j
(8)
The lower bound corresponds to a situation when all networks
base their decisions only on local knowledge (Eq. (2)) and
is further referred as local knowledge reference. The local

125
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
knowledge reference can also be viewed as a modiﬁcation
of algorithm [28] discussed in Section II-B and applied to a
multi-user scenario. In this sence, the algorithms are compared
with the related work.
V. SIMULATIONS FOR LOAD BALANCING IN
HETEROGENEOUS WIRELESS NETWORKS
The performance and functionality of the algorithms have
been evaluated through multiple simulation runs. We have
implemented both versions of our algorithm in the OMNet++
environment [49]. In Algorithm A, the network gets the
information about how many other networks are requested by
the same mobile node. This information is submitted to the
network by the mobile node along with the request to join
the network. As no other information is available, we assume
that the probability of being assigned to any of the networks
is equal for all participating networks. In Algorithm B, each
network shares its information with exactly one more network.
In our testing scenario, these networks do not overlap. We
compare the algorithms with the global knowledge reference
and the local knowledge reference.
A. Simulation Setup
For the sake of simplicity, we simulate a scenario with four
wireless networks, which covers quite well the scope of the
evaluation. In this scenario, a group of users from one network
is about to move from one cell of the network to another cell
of the same network that experiences a shortage of available
bandwidth. In consequence, the cell that the users move to is
not able to accommodate all these users.
For our evaluation, we run tests with 100, 200, and 300 users
moving to this congested cell. Further, we divide the users into
four categories in terms of requested bandwidth. To deﬁne
these categories we use service class characteristics deﬁned
by Tragos et al. [31] as follows: a) at 64 kbps, for simple
telephony and messaging b) at 512 kbps, for web browsing
c) at 1024 kbps, for interactive media and d) at 2000 kbps,
for video streaming, each category having approximately the
same number of users.
Note that none of the networks have enough resources to
accommodate all users alone. All four networks must be used
in order to meet the requirements of all users. We run also
tests when total bandwidth of all networks is not sufﬁcient
to accommodate all users. The tests are done for network
conditions that result in 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%
dropped calls if the global knowledge reference is applied.
The time τi,j for the user j to stay in the network ni before
performing a horizontal handoff, or a cell residence time, is
randomly distributed in the range [1, 100] time units.
B. Simulation Results
We evaluate how mobile nodes are distributed among the
networks after one iteration of the algorithm run. We calculate
the number of decision errors as a number of users whose
connection ends up in dropped calls due to wrong network
allocation. These errors are the results of wrong assignments
to networks that do not have sufﬁcient bandwidth to accom-
modate the assigned users. For each group of users (100, 200,
300 users), we repeat the experiment 1000 times with different
sets of τi,j.
For all tests done, the top and bottom 5 % of the results are
excluded from the evaluation. The results are averaged over
these simulation runs and are depicted for minimum value
results in Figure 7(a), for average value results in Figure 7(b),
for maximum value results in Figure 7(c), for cumulative
distribution function in Figure 8. The global knowledge refer-
ence is 0 for all experiments meaning that in the centralized
solution, all users were assigned to the networks without any
dropped calls. The results with dropped calls in the global
knowledge reference are depicted in Figure 9. The ﬁgure
shows the results for 200 mobile nodes. The results for 100
and 300 mobile nodes are very similar to the results for 200
nodes and, therefore, are not included in the paper.
The tests show that all three proposed algorithms can
distribute the users between the networks signiﬁcantly better
than the local knowledge reference. Algorithm AB performs
better than Algorithm A and Algorithm A performs better than
Algorithm B for all user groups through all tested values for
dropped calls in the optimum solution.
It shows that sharing partial information about network
status as in Algorithm B makes little use of extra information
from just one network. It also shows that this information
when used in Algorithm AB does not give any signiﬁcant
reduction of decision errors in comparison with Algorithm A.
However, Algorithms B and AB require signiﬁcantly more
information to exchange between the networks than Algo-
rithm A. It also requires more sophisticated mechanisms
and protocols to be implemented in the networks, including
security considerations and synchronization of the information
ﬂow. Though the information ﬂow initiated by Algorithms AB
and B is signiﬁcantly less than the one initiated by the
global knowledge reference, it still demands the exchange of
network information across the mobile networks on a fast time
scale and low-latency basis, making it quite challenging to
implement the algorithms in practice for large scale networks,
as the global knowledge reference.
We also evaluate the dynamic scenario. For these tests, the
algorithms are run until all clients are assigned to the networks
with sufﬁcient bandwidth, also considering the arriving calls.
The arrival rate of new calls is modeled with a Poisson stream.
The graphs depicted in Figure 10 show the averaged results for
100, 200, and 300 users over 1000 test runs. The x-axis shows
the number of iterations of the algorithm. The y-axis shows the
percentage of decision errors. Clearly, Algorithms A, B and
AB converge faster than the local knowledge reference. There
is very little difference between Algorithms A, B and AB even
though Algorithms AB and B rely on more information.
C. Signaling Overhead
We estimate signaling overhead So for the algorithms and
the references. As signaling required to trigger network selec-
tion is the same for the references and the algorithms these

126
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) Minimum value
(b) Average values
(c) Maximum value
Figure 7.
Decision errors from the simulation using one iteration of the algorithm run after network selection is triggered. The results for 100, 200, 300
mobile nodes are based on 1000 simulation runs for each group of nodes.
messages are excluded from the estimation. For the global
knowledge reference all n networks in consideration need to
exchange the information about m users that get triggered
network selection, and the overhead is estimated as follows
(Eq. (9)).
So = n · (n − 1) · m
(9)
To make estimations for Algorithms A, B and AB and
the local reference deﬁned respectively by Eq. (10), Eq. (11),
Eq. (12), Eq. (13), we use the results of the dynamic scenario
that are depicted in Figure 10.
So = 0.17 · m · (n − 1)
(10)
So = 0.18 · m · (n − 1)
(11)
So = 0.32 · m · (n − 1)
(12)
So = 1.06 · m · (n − 1)
(13)
Clearly, Algorithm A provides a signiﬁcant reduction of the
signaling overhead.
VI. PROBLEM FORMULATION FOR MULTICAST
TRANSMISSION IN HETEROGENEOUS WIRELESS
NETWORKS
In this section, the scenario discussed in Section III is
formalized as a centralized system model, as illustrated in
Figure 11. The system model for this scenario was previously
presented [2]. For the sake of completeness, we revisit the
model in this section. In addition, we implement some modi-
ﬁcations to its prior deﬁnition.
A. System Model
We consider a set of networks N = 1, 2, . . . , n, a set of
mobile nodes M = 1, 2, . . . , m and a set of streaming contents
S = 1, 2, . . . , s. The contents are hosted in different BPSs.
Each content sk can be delivered to more than one mobile
node mj. Therefore, using multicast for data dissemination
is beneﬁcial. For each node mj, content sk and network ni,
the following is deﬁned: available bandwidths of networks
Figure 8.
Cumulative distribution function for percentage of decision errors
using one iteration of the algorithm run after network selection is triggered.
The results are based on 1000 simulation runs for a system consisting of 200
mobile nodes.
Figure 9.
Dropped calls from the simulation using one algorithm run with
total available bandwidth less than total required bandwidth.The results are
based on 1000 simulation runs for a system consisting of 200 mobile nodes.
The x-axis shows the percentage of dropped calls for the optimum (global
knowledge reference). The y-axis shows the percentage of dropped calls.

127
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 10.
Percent of users received dropped calls, dynamic scenario.The
x-axis shows the number of iterations of the algorithm. The y-axis shows the
percentage of decision errors. The results are based on 1000 test runs.
Figure 11.
Centralized Approach: Mobile nodes convey their data to
their BPSs, the BPSs send the data to the central unit. The central unit
collects information about resource availability from the networks, performs
the network selection, sends results to the BPSs. The BPSs send the results
to their mobile nodes.
are denoted by bi; streaming bitrate requirements of mobile
nodes that request content sk are denoted by rk; rssi,j is the
received signal strength in network ni for node mj, while
power consumption and the cost of service in network ni for
node mj are denoted by pi,j and ci,j, respectively.
For each node mj, we deﬁne node preferences that are
described by a tuple containing Thp
j, Thc
j, and Thrss
j
. These
denote thresholds for, respectively, power consumption, cost of
service and received signal strength. Without loss of generality,
we consider these three parameters in our work, however,
this list can include other conditions. The thresholds for these
parameters are determined by each node according to its own
optimization policies and used as an input that constrains
optimization solved locally by each mobile node for available
networks. The objective function is also deﬁned based on the
node’s optimization policies. Its deﬁnition is beyond the scope
of our work.
∀{i, j} : δ(i, j) · pi,j ≤ Thp
j
(14)
∀{i, j} : δ(i, j) · ci,j ≤ Thc
j
(15)
∀{i, j} : δ(i, j) · rssi,j ≥ Thrssj
(16)
The output of this optimization is a list of mobile networks
that satisfy the user’s requirements. It is further referred to
as a node’s network proﬁle captured by a function δj. This
function is used as input for computing an optimal allocation
of mobile nodes to the available networks in the model and is
deﬁned as follows.
δj(i) =
(
1, if ni is selected by mj
0, otherwise
(17)
We deﬁne a binary decision variable xi,k as follows:
x(i, k) =
(
1, if ni is allocated for sk
0, otherwise
(18)
To ﬁnd the best possible allocation of the requested streams
to the available networks in terms of minimization of con-
sumed bandwidth, we minimize the following objective func-
tion:
min
X
ni∈N
X
sk∈S
xi,k · rk
(19)
The objective function is subject to the set of constraints
given below.
For each mobile node mj, we need to guarantee that it
can receive the requested content from at least one network
belonging to nodes proﬁle. We need to specify that user
preferences deﬁned in their proﬁles are satisﬁed.
∀{j} :
X
j
δj(i) · xi,k ≥ 1
(20)
For each network, the availability of its bandwidth is
checked.
∀{i} :
X
k
xi,k · rk ≤ bi
(21)
After the results for xi,k are computed, these are send to the
nodes. If there are several networks that receive the requested
content, a node can narrow its selection criteria to choose
among these alternatives.
The deﬁned problem is a typical location allocation problem
that belongs to a class of integer programming problems. To
solve this problem, we have taken advantage of the GNU
Linear Programming Kit (GLPK) version 4.49 [50]. This is an
ANSI C package that is intended for solving large-scale linear
programming and mixed integer programming problems. We
tested the performance of the package for solving the afore-
mentioned problem that consisted of respectively 500 and 1000
nodes, 5 mobile networks and 10 different streaming contents

128
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(505 and 1005 constraints respectively and 50 variables). For
this test, the constraint matrix and the coefﬁcients of the objec-
tive function were randomly generated, as in the Monte Carlo
simulation. For a 2.83GHz Intel processor, the average CPU
time estimates based on 1000 algorithm runs are 710 ms and
230 ms for 1000 nodes and 500 nodes respectively. Though
these estimates are computer conﬁguration-speciﬁc, they show
that the problem can be solved within reasonable time for a
relatively large number of nodes. Here, we assume that all
necessary information is locally available for the computation.
For a component, the CPU time can be precomputed and used
as a threshold for deciding whether or not the optimization can
be applied to a particular problem scope. On the other hand,
collecting this information from different network locations
can become a bottleneck for the algorithm operation.
Please note, that a node can, in fact, exploit the multipath
streaming scheme and receive data from several networks
concurrently. The problem is then reduced to a class of
linear programming problems, which is less complex to solve
using, for example, the Simplex method. For this problem, the
variable xi,k denotes the share of the content sk delivered to
the network ni.
VII. SYSTEM COMPONENTS, THEIR FUNCTIONS AND
FEEDBACK EXCHANGE FOR MULTICAST TRANSMISSION IN
HETEROGENEOUS WIRELESS NETWORKS
In this section, we look at architectural aspects of a system
that supports the scenario considered in Section III. For this,
we consider several entities and decision making components
that are responsible for decisions in the system and have access
to different information necessary for optimal regrouping of
the mobile users. Since the decision-making process requires
access to various data that originate from different network
components, our system needs to implement a signaling in-
frastructure for the exchange of such information.
A. BPS Component
The BPS component runs on a backbone server. It either
hosts the content or acts as a proxy server that re-sends the
content to the user. The component maintains multimedia ses-
sions and controls multicast groups. It receives and processes
feedback from its mobile clients and the access networks these
clients are connected to. Based on results of processing the
data, the component can trigger the network selection. The
component can also send data to other components upon their
requests.
B. Mobile Network Component
This component is located inside a mobile network. It
monitors network’s resources including available bandwidth. It
also maintains various information about clients and multicast
groups of the network. The component implements the follow-
ing: 1) processes this information; 2) sends the information
to other components for further processing; and 3) initiate
network selection for multicast groups.
Figure 12.
Decentralized Approach: BPSs convey some information to
the BPS or other component that is elected to compute the selection. This
component also collects information about resource availability from the
networks and performs the network selection. The results are sent back to
participated BPSs. The BPSs send the results to their mobile nodes.
C. Mobile Client Component
This component runs on mobile device and maintains its
wireless channel state information monitoring the availability
of mobile networks and received signal strength in these
networks. It maintains its preferences towards these networks
based on the following: 1) power consumption in these net-
works; 2) security issues; 3) network cost of service; and
4) channel state information.
D. Information Exchange
To achieve an optimal solution, all required information
need to be exchanged between the decision components and to
be communicated to some centralized unit that computes this
optimal allocation, as shown in Figure 11. This centralized
unit can be a predeﬁned component of the system that other
components are aware of or it can be elected on a vote-
basis among the components from the mobile networks and
the backbone network. The centralized approach demands the
exchange of network data across the mobile networks on a fast
time scale and low-latency basis. This makes it unrealistic to
implement the algorithms in practice for large scale networks.
It also requires the implementation of a centralized component
that runs this operation and solving a computational problem
of high complexity in real time.
The information overhead can be overcome by using dis-
tributed designs as illustrated in Figure 12. As an alternative to
the centralized approach, we present a distributed solution in
which the networks and the BPSes handle the problem com-
pletely independently from each other or in a cooperative and
coordinated manner with some limited information exchange
between the components. We consider the following problems:
1) How much information of any given BPS/network/user
data needs to be exchanged?

129
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) From the architectural design, how to disseminate this
information mostly efﬁciently?
In our work, we focus on the usage of the application
speciﬁc message (APP) of the RTP/RTCP protocol suite [51]
to convey client-related information to the respective mobile
networks and BPS components. These protocols are designed
for multicast architectures with multicast channels speciﬁed
for data transmission from the sender to the receivers. In the
considered model, only BPS and network components receive
feedback from the clients, meaning that the client-to-client
feedback exchange is not required. In addition, these feedback
reports do not consume much bandwidth and are sent only
when the client-related information is changed. Therefore, to
deliver feedback reports, unicast transmission is used.
VIII. DECENTRALIZED APPROACH FOR MULTICAST
TRANSMISSION IN HETEROGENEOUS WIRELESS
NETWORKS
In this section we consider two decentralized approaches
that solve the previously deﬁned network selection problem.
Since not all knowledge for the network selection is available
on these nodes the algorithms make their decisions based on
the currently available knowledge. We consider the solutions
(1) when all backbone proxies in the system perform the net-
work selection independently from each other, further referred
to as a BPS solution, and (2) when an access network performs
the network selection for a set of multicast groups, further
referred to as a mobile network (MN) solution.
Both approaches rely on the information acquired from
mobile nodes regarding their network proﬁles. To maintain
its network proﬁle, the mobile node component periodically
monitors the availability of mobile networks. As the node does
not need to keep all its interfaces active all the time and the
power consumption in idle mode is less than under receiving
of data, this operation is not expected to drastically increase
the battery use.
To disseminate the information, we make use of the ap-
plication speciﬁc message (APP) of the RTP/RTCP protocol
[51]. After a node’s network proﬁle changes, for example, a
new network becomes available, this information is packed
into the APP message. It requires that this protocol is im-
plemented for communication and all needed modiﬁcations
that allow interpreting of the message are made. This way, the
information can also becomes available for the access network.
If the RTP/RTCP protocol is not used, any application layer
messaging can be implemented to convey feedback from nodes
to other components for further processing.
A. BPS Solution
In the BPS solution, all backbone proxies in the system
perform the network selection for their clients independently
from each other, that is no cooperation or information ex-
change is performed between different proxies. We consider
two versions of the solution: a) the network selection is run for
all multicast groups of the BPS and b) the network selection
involves only multicast groups that receive the same content.
At Backbone Proxy Server
read APP messages from RTP/RTCP stream
maintain nodes’ network proﬁles
if network proﬁle is changed
if threshold ≤ number of nodes
do selection for all nodes
else
do selection for one content
foreach node that changes network
instruct node to change network: send switch message
(a) Backbone Proxy Server Component
At Mobile Node mj
monitor available networks
if new network is available
compute new network proﬁle
send APP message with network proﬁle to BPS
wait for response from BPS
upon reception switch message from BPS
switch to new mobile network
(b) Mobile Node Component
Figure 13.
Network Selection Algorithm for BPS
These two versions perform the same operations and differ
only in scale of involved nodes.
The network selection algorithm is depicted in Figure 13.
It is initiated by the backbone proxy component when net-
work proﬁles of nodes receiving any of the proxy’s multicast
streaming sessions change. The changes include: a new node
joins the session, one of the nodes leaves the session, or a
network proﬁle of any node is updated, e.g., a new network
becomes available. To check whether a reconﬁguration of
multicast groups is needed, the BPS solves the optimization
problem deﬁned in Section VI. We use the CPU threshold,
also discussed in Section VI, to determine which of the two
above versions of the algorithm to apply.
We solve the problem for all multicast groups of the BPS if
the threshold allows for it. Otherwise, the problem is solved for
one content only. We shall evaluate both possible algorithms
separately in Section X. That way, the effect of reducing the
problem’s input data can be shown better.
B. Mobile Network Solution
In this solution, we consider an access network that initiates
and performs the network selection for a set of multicast
groups. The network maintains nodes’ network proﬁles based
on information extracted from the RTP/RTCP stream. The
network selection operation is triggered by the network com-
ponent when the network’s available bandwidth goes below a
predeﬁned threshold. For each multicast group, the network
deﬁnes a set of networks that is a conjunction of nodes’
network proﬁles that comprise the group. The groups with high
cardinality of such sets are selected. The network requests the
BPSs that host the content received by the selected groups
about network proﬁles of other nodes from other networks
receiving the same content. The network solves the optimiza-
tion problem deﬁned in Section VI for the nodes detected
by the above selection operation. The threshold is adjusted
accordingly, if the result of the optimization exceeds the

130
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
At Mobile Network ni
read APP messages from RTP/RTCP stream
maintain nodes’ network proﬁles
monitor available bandwidth
if available bandwidth ≥ threshold
compute conjunctions for each multicast group
order groups by cardinality of conjunction sets
select candidates for optimization
request network proﬁles from involved BPSs
upon replies from servers
do selection for deﬁned scope of problem
foreach node mj that changes network
if mj ∈ ni
instruct node to change network: send switch message
else
send response to server
(a) Mobile Network Component
At BPS
upon request from mobile network
select network proﬁles for requested contents
send network proﬁles to mobile network
upon response from mobile network
foreach node that changes network
advise node to change network
(b) BPS Component
At Mobile Node mj
monitor available networks
if new network is available
compute new network proﬁle
send APP message with network proﬁle to BPS
wait for response from BPS
upon reception switch message from BPS
switch to new mobile network
wait for response from mobile network
upon reception switch message from mobile network
switch to new mobile network
(c) Mobile Node Component
Figure 14.
Network Selection Algorithm for Mobile Network
current threshold of the bandwidth. In this case, the network
component periodically checks the bandwidth to detect if the
threshold can be reduced to its previous value.
The selection algorithm depicted in Figure 14 requires
the implementation of infrastructure that supports interactivity
between the involved components and signaling mechanisms
that invoke exchange of information about users’ proﬁles and
network conditions and initiate network selection.
IX. LTE-ADVANCED HETNET APPROACH
In this section, we consider a solution for a network system
discussed in Section II-E that is depicted in Figure 1. Usually
in such systems, small cells are connected to a macrocell via
the wired backhaul infrastructure, thus, wireless resources are
not used for the exchange of control messages and the ex-
change of the channel information and multicast decisions can
be performed within reasonable time period. More importantly,
these networks combine a high transmit power and long range
base station with several lower power short range stations.
Handoff of users moving with high velocity to short range
small cells will require a new handoff soon when the user
leaves this cell. Therefore, from the point of view of network
capacity and avoidance of the ping-pong effect, it is important
to consider the mobile terminal velocity for network selection.
Here, we assume that a mobile network is capable to predict
the residence time of a mobile node inside a cell of the network
based on terminal velocity, the local area, movement patterns,
and other statistical information. We base our decision making
process on research done by other authors [43–45]. While the
prediction of the residence time of mobile nodes is ongoing
work, we consider this beyond our scope. For the purpose of
this paper, we assume that the prediction can be performed
with acceptable precision.
X. SIMULATIONS FOR MULTICAST TRANSMISSION IN
HETEROGENEOUS WIRELESS NETWORKS
In this section, we evaluate the algorithms described in Sec-
tion VIII. We present the simulation setup, then the evaluation
metrics, and ﬁnally discuss the simulation results.
A. Simulation Setup
Because full-scale ﬁeld experiments for several wireless
networks and several hundred users are problematic and
expensive to carry out, we used simulations to evaluate the
validity of the proposed solutions. The performance and func-
tionality of the system is analyzed through multiple simulation
runs. We evaluate two types of network systems: a general
heterogeneous wireless network system and an LTE-Advanced
HetNet network.
1) Setup for Users and Streaming Content: For the simu-
lations, we consider a scenario with ﬁve backbone streaming
servers each having ﬁve different streaming contents. Video
streaming content is used for the evaluation. In terms of
required bandwidth, we divide the requested content into
ﬁve categories: 500 kbps, 800 kbps, 1200 kbps, 1800 kbps,
and 2400 kbps. These rates are recommended bit rates for
live streaming for the Adobe Media Server [52]. Further, we
consider that mobile users are randomly assigned to the servers
and their content. The users arrive at one user per time unit,
and they stay in the system for 200, 300 or 400 time units.
This time period is randomly selected for each user. Except
for the initial stage of 200 time units, there are always at least
200 users in the system. The initial stage is excluded from the
evaluation.
2) Modeling of Movements: We realise that usage of real
world traces evaluates performance only for these particu-
lar scenarios. Therefore, we chose to use random generated
sintetic data since these data allow more comprehensive per-
formance evaluation by using a large number of variations.
Several parameters for modeling of movements are important
for our evaluation. For the simulation of movements of mobile
nodes, we looked at different studies concerning mobility
models for the wireless communications [53, 54]. In the
random waypoint model, the location of mobile nodes, their
velocity and direction of the movement are chosen randomly
and independently of other nodes. We captured the randomness

131
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
At Backbone Proxy Server
for each request { δj(i), sk } received from mobile node mj
deﬁne set of mobile networks Nk receiving sk and satisfying δj(i)
if Nk ̸= ∅
return Nk to node mj
else return NULL
(a) Backbone Proxy Server Component
At Mobile Node mj
compute δj(i)
send request { δj(i), sk } to Backbone Proxy Server
wait for response from Backbone Proxy Server
upon reply from Backbone Proxy Server
if reply ̸= NULL
select network from reply
else select network from network proﬁle
(b) Mobile Node Component
Figure 15.
Algorithm for Computing Lower Bound Reference
of these parameters by random time during which any mobile
network in consideration is available to a mobile user.
In the simulation, we also have a number of users who
do not move, e.g., people in public places like internet caf´e
or train stations. For these users, the subset of the available
networks is the same during the whole simulation run. We also
distinguish between single users moving alone and groups of
users moving together using, e.g., public transport. For users
belonging to the same group, the availability of the networks
changes likewise while the streaming content can differ. Since
we do not have any observations for realistic distribution of
these different types of users, we model them as roughly
equally distributed, varying from 25% to 40% of users in each
group.
3) General Heterogeneous Wireless Network Setup: In this
setup, we consider a scenario with four wireless networks.
The networks only cover parts of the area in consideration.
Therefore, only a selection of them is available for each user
at a given time. We have implemented different scenarios
for network availability. In all these scenarios, each user has
access to at least one network continuously during the whole
session of an experiment run. Some users have access to all
networks during the whole session. We vary the percentage of
these users in different scenarios. For the rest of the users and
networks in each scenario, the users can access these networks
during some period of the session randomly chosen from the
session duration.
4) LTE Heterogeneous Network Scenario: We evaluate an
LTE Advanced Heterogeneous Network scenario, the so called
macro-pico scenario [38], with several picocells deployed
inside a macrocell as illustrated in Figure 1. We consider
four picocells deployed inside one macrocell. All users can
access the macrocell and some of users have access to one
of picocells. The access areas of the picocells do not overlap.
The picocells that the users can access during the session are
randomly chosen for each user. Accordingly, the periods when
picocells are available for the users are randomly chosen from
the session duration.
Figure 16.
Total Bandwidth Consumption for simulations with background
trafﬁc changes applied. The x-axis shows time units. The y-axis shows
consumed bandwidth in kbits. The results are an average of 500 simulation
runs. The duration of one simulation run is 600 time units.
Figure 17.
Total Bandwidth Consumption for simulations with applied
background trafﬁc changes and insertion of a ﬂashcrowd. The x-axis shows
time units. The y-axis shows consumed bandwidth in kbits. The results are
an average of 500 simulation runs. The duration of one simulation run is 600
time units.
B. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the algorithms, we deﬁne upper and lower
bounds to their operation. By the upper bound, we mean
the theoretical best possible allocation of nodes to multicast
groups that can be achieved in terms of resource utilization.
It is established by applying a centralized solution with
fully shared knowledge of the conditions in all evaluated
networks and preference proﬁles of all nodes. It is deﬁned
in Section VI-A and is further referred to as an upper bound
reference.
The lower bound corresponds to an algorithm depicted in
Figure 15. Upon a request from a node, which speciﬁes the
requested content sk and the node’s network proﬁle δj(i),
the server assigns the node to a multicast group, if any
that satisﬁes the node’s network proﬁle exists. If no such

132
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 18.
Dropped Connections. The x-axis shows the percentage of
bandwidth surplus compared to the Upper Bound Reference. The y-axis
shows the number of dropped connections for each algorithm. The number
of dropped connections for the Upper Bound Reference is 0 for all algorithm
runs. The results are an average of 2000 simulation runs.
group exists, the server opens streaming to a network that
meets the user’s preferences. This simple algorithm uses a
low number of operations and input information to establish
multicast groups. We decided to use this algorithm instead
of a trivial unicast scenario to provide a fairer comparison
of the proposed solutions. In our evaluation, it is referred
to as a lower bound reference. The lower bound reference is
also used as a initialization algorithm for the mobile network
solution. Note that the MN algorithm is triggered only when
the available resources in a network are dropped below a
certain threshold. Thus, some initialization is required and the
MN solution evaluated in this section is a hybrid approach.
We evaluate the performance of the algorithms using two
performance metrics: total bandwidth consumption and a num-
ber of dropped calls, as follows.
Total bandwidth consumption is a direct measure of the
bandwidth usage of all multicast groups in the system. We
measure the total bandwidth consumption for two different
bandwidth variation proﬁles for the available bandwidth of
the access networks. These bandwidth variations model the
background trafﬁc for each network.
1) Changes in bandwidth are applied to all access networks,
and their values are normally distributed in the range
[−0.1, 0.1] of the currently available bandwidth. The
results for this test are depicted in Figure 16.
2) In addition to the bandwidth ﬂuctuations formulated
above, we simulate a ﬂashcrowd scenario with an number
of nodes arriving within short-time intervals. For all
access networks, we inserted from 30 to 50 additional
nodes once for each session. The simulation results are
depicted in Figure 17.
Note that none of the networks have enough capacity to
accommodate all multicast groups alone even if the nodes are
optimally allocated to their networks. All four networks must
be used in order to meet the requirements of all users.
The number of dropped connections is measured for all
multicast groups in the system for the following ﬁve condition
cases: 1) The total available bandwidth of the system equals to
the bandwidth utilized by the upper bound reference. 2) The
total available bandwidth exceeds the amount of bandwidth
utilized by the upper bound reference by 5%; 3) by 10% ;
4) by 15%; 5) by 20%, respectively. To compute the setup for
this type of tests, we applied a relaxation to the upper bound
reference. The optimization problem is relaxed by removing
the network bandwidth constraint depicted in Eq. (21). The
available bandwidths of the evaluated networks are then calcu-
lated from the optimization results. For these tests, bandwidth
ﬂuctuations have not been applied. Also, once assigned, the
availability of the networks does not change within a test run,
meaning that the algorithms have been evaluated statically.
The results for this test are depicted in Figure 18.
C. Performance Results
The simulation results are drawn from the average of 500
simulation runs to evaluate the total bandwidth consumption,
and of 2000 simulation runs to evaluate the number of dropped
connections that are discussed in Section X-B. The perfor-
mance metrics to evaluate the total bandwidth consumption are
collected for 600 time units. We excluded results for which the
optimum solution has not been found, i.e., when no optimum
existed. For the evaluation of dropped connections, we also
excluded the top and bottom 5% of the results of all performed
tests.
When evaluated in terms of consumed bandwidth, the
tests show that applying any of the proposed solutions can
save up to 50% of available bandwidth if compared to the
lower bound reference. As expected, the all-content version
of the BPS algorithm gives better results than the one-content
version though it requires longer processing time and, what
is more important, more signaling and reconﬁgurations for
mobile nodes. The trade-off between these two versions can
be studied. The MN algorithm behaved very close to the BPS
algorithm most of the time.
For the ﬂashcrowd scenario, the MN algorithm was able
to handle better the insertion of new nodes than the BPS
algorithms. This can be explained by the fact that the MN
algorithm is applied across several cutting planes of the total
solution space while the BPS algorithm is applied across one
cutting plane. In other words, the BPS algorithm relies only on
the information from one server while the MN algorithm takes
information from several servers as an input. Certainly, the MN
algorithm requires exchange of signiﬁcantly more information
across the system. To disseminate this information, we need to
implement an appropriate protocol and develop mechanisms
that allow the components, namely the networks and the
BPSs, to cooperate with each other and exchange information
about their users and network conditions, which also involves
certain security considerations. Contrary to the MN algorithm,
the operation of the BPS algorithm can thoroughly rely on
information received from the RTP/RTCP feedback messages.

133
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Evaluations of dropped connections show the same tendency
as the evaluation of consumed bandwidth. Both the MN solu-
tion and the BPS solution give a good reduction of dropped
connections, up to 50%, if compared to the lower bound
reference. Compared to the BPS solution, the MN algorithm
gives roughly from 10% to 20% less dropped connections.
As expected, the BPS algorithm for all streams performs
better than the algorithm for one stream, giving roughly 10%
to 20% difference in evaluation. At the same time, the BPS
algorithm for one stream still gives good reduction in dropped
connections and consumed bandwidth compared to the lower
bound reference. Therefore, this version can be applied if solv-
ing the all-streams version is not computationally reasonable.
XI. CONCLUSION
The paper studied the problem of load balancing and
forming mobile multicast groups in heterogeneous network
environments. An efﬁcient decentralized network selection
solution is important for future mobile networks, since it
improves utilization of the network resources and QoS of
users and reduces signalling overheads. We study how the
solution results depend on the information available for the
decision making. The problem is considered for a multi-stream
multi-server scenario. The candidate networks are selected for
multicast groups based on their mobile nodes’ preferences and
available resources of the networks.
For load balancing scenario, the solution provides a substan-
tial improvement in reduction of decision errors and signalling
overhead in comparison to the work speciﬁed in Section II.
The simulation results of our algorithms show that blocked
calls can be reduced with approximately 60-50 % compared
to the local knowledge reference. The test results do not differ
much for 100, 200 and 300 users, and we expect that these
results can be extended to the general case.
All three evaluated algorithms deliver similar results in
terms of number of blocked calls. The implementation of
Algorithms AB and B requires development of mechanisms
for synchronizing information about the network conditions
and careful security considerations when information from
one network is available to other networks. Operation of
Algorithms AB and B requires signiﬁcantly higher signalling
between the networks and the users. We therefore conclude
that Algorithm A is to be preferred over Algorithms AB and
B.
For multicast scenario, we proposed two solutions that
establish multicast groups and assign them to networks based
on incomplete information of the whole system. The operation
is also performed by different components of the system with
limited cooperation between the components.
Compared to the work speciﬁed in Section II, our main
achievement is decentralization of the network selection for
multicast groups, consideration of the impact of several mul-
ticast groups and incompleteness of information. An efﬁcient
decentralized network selection solution for multicast is impor-
tant for future mobile networks, since it improves utilization of
the network resources and QoS of users and reduces signaling
overheads.
We studied how the solution results depend on the informa-
tion sets available for the decision making. Evaluating dropped
connections shows that both algorithms provide a substantial
improvement in reduction of dropped connections compared
the the lower bound reference. According to our ﬁndings, the
MN algorithm performs better than the BPS algorithm.
In terms of consumed bandwidth, both solutions deliver
similar results for monotonous variations in available band-
width and arrivals of nodes. For the tests with insertions of
extra users, the MN solution performs better than the BPS
solution. However, the operation of the MN solution requires
complex signaling across several mobile networks and BPSs.
In addition, it requires implementation and deployment of
mechanisms and communication protocols that provide coop-
eration between the involved components. The disadvantage
of using the BPS algorithm is the necessity of the network
reconﬁguration of mobile nodes each time the network proﬁle
of a node changes. Therefore, a mechanism that is similar to
monitoring bandwidth threshold in the MN algorithm can be
considered as a next improvement.
As a further step, we intend to investigate how the system
can beneﬁt from joint operation of these solutions and limited
feedback signaling. We need to implement mechanisms that
detect which of two solutions is preferable for certain events.
Since, the BPS solution deliver good results for the most
of the cases, the operation of the MN solution is going to
be triggered only under predeﬁned circumstances. Thus, we
avoid unnecessary messaging between the components. We
also intend to perform more expanded tests by extending the
simulation scenarios by, for example, taking down one of the
networks during the simulation.
Finally, we mention that the centralized approach still can
be applied for some scenarios and network conﬁgurations
like small cell networks deployed by the same provider.
We intend to investigate better the conditions for applying
this approach and consider also implementation of partially
centralized solutions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described in this paper has been conducted
as a part of the ADIMUS (Adaptive Internet Multimedia
Streaming) project, which is funded by the NORDUnet-3
programme.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Boudko, W. Leister, and S. Gjessing, “Multicast
group management for users of heterogeneous wireless
networks,” in CONTENT 2012: The Fourth International
Conference on Creative Content Technologies.
Inter-
national Academy, Research and Industry Association
(IARIA), 2012, pp. 24–27.
[2] ——, “Optimal network selection for mobile multicast
groups,” in ICSNC 2012 The Seventh International Con-
ference on Systems and Networks Communications. In-

134
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ternational Academy, Research and Industry Association
(IARIA), 2012, pp. 224–227.
[3] ——, “Team decision approach for decentralized net-
work selection of mobile clients,” in Proceedings of
2012 5th Joint IFIP Wireless and Mobile Networking
Conference.
IEEE Computer Society, 2012, pp. 88–94.
[4] S. Boudko and W. Leister, “Network selection for mul-
ticast groups in heterogeneous wireless environments,”
in MoMM ’13: Proc. 11th Int’l Conf. on Advances in
Mobile Computing and Multimedia.
ACM, 2013, pp.
167–176.
[5] I.
Gillott
et
al.,
“The
potential
for
LTE
broad-
cast/eMBMS,” iGR, white paper, January 2013.
[6] 3GPP,
“Multimedia
Broadcast/Multicast
Service
(MBMS); Stage 1,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), TS 22.146, Jun. 2008, [Online]. Available:
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/22146.htm,
accessed September 6, 2013.
[7] ——, “LTE; evolved universal terrestrial radio access
(E-UTRA); long term evolution (LTE) physical layer;
general description,” ETSI, technical speciﬁcation 3GPP
TS 36.201, 2009, version 8.3.0 Release 8.
[8] Ericsson
AB,
Qualcomm
Technologies,
Inc.,
and
Qualcomm Labs, Inc., “LTE broadcast,” white paper,
February
2013,
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
ericsson.com/res/docs/whitepapers/wp-lte-broadcast.pdf,
accessed September 6, 2013.
[9] T. L. Paramvir, T. Liu, P. Bahl, S. Member, and I. Chlam-
tac, “Mobility modeling, location tracking, and trajectory
prediction in wireless atm networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 16, 1998, pp. 922–936.
[10] I. F. Akyildiz and W. Wang, “The predictive user mobility
proﬁle framework for wireless multimedia networks,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw, vol. 12, 2004, pp. 1021–1035.
[11] C.-C. Tseng, L.-H. Yen, H.-H. Chang, and K.-C. Hsu,
“Topology-aided cross-layer fast handoff designs for
IEEE 802.11/mobile IP environments,” Communications
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 43, no. 12, Dec. 2005, pp. 156–
163.
[12] Y.-H. Choi, J. Park, Y.-U. Chung, and H. Lee, “Cross-
layer handover optimization using linear regression
model,” in ICOIN 2008. Int’l Conf. on Information
Networking, Jan. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[13] S. Ray, K. Pawlikowski, and H. Sirisena, “Handover in
mobile wimax networks: The state of art and research is-
sues,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 12,
no. 3, 2010, pp. 376–399.
[14] Q. Song and A. Jamalipour, “A network selection mech-
anism for next generation networks,” in IEEE Int’l Conf.
on Communications, ICC, vol. 2, May 2005, pp. 1418–
1422.
[15] A. Hasswa, N. Nasser, and H. Hassanein, “Tramcar: A
context-aware cross-layer architecture for next generation
heterogeneous wireless networks,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on
Communications, ICC, vol. 1, Jun. 2006, pp. 240–245.
[16] F. Zhu and J. McNair, “Optimizations for vertical handoff
decision algorithms,” in IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference, WCNC2004, vol. 2, Mar.
2004, pp. 867– 872.
[17] P. M. L. Chan, Y. F. Hu, and R. E. Sheriff, “Implemen-
tation of fuzzy multiple objective decision making algo-
rithm in a heterogeneous mobile environment,” in IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference,
WCNC2002, vol. 1, Mar. 2002, pp. 332–336.
[18] L. Xia, L. Jiang, and C. He, “A novel fuzzy logic vertical
handoff algorithm with aid of differential prediction and
pre-decision method,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communi-
cations, ICC, Jun. 2007, pp. 5665–5670.
[19] N. Nasser, S. Guizani, and E. Al-Masri, “Middleware
vertical handoff manager: A neural network-based solu-
tion,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communications, ICC, Jun.
2007, pp. 5671–5676.
[20] G. Karetsos, E. Tragos, and G. Tsiropoulos, “A holistic
approach to minimizing handover latency in heteroge-
neous wireless networking environments,” Telecommu-
nication Systems, 2011, pp. 1–14.
[21] A. H. Zahran, B. Liang, and A. Saleh, “Signal threshold
adaptation for vertical handoff in heterogeneous wireless
networks,” Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 11, Aug. 2006, pp.
625–640.
[22] C. W. Lee, L. M. Chen, M. C. Chen, and Y. S. Sun,
“A framework of handoffs in wireless overlay networks
based on mobile IPv6,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 23, no. 11, Nov. 2005, pp. 2118–2128.
[23] K. Yang, I. Gondal, B. Qiu, and L. Dooley, “Com-
bined SINR based vertical handoff algorithm for next
generation heterogeneous wireless networks,” in IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM
’07, Nov. 2007, pp. 4483–4487.
[24] C. Chi, X. Cai, R. Hao, and F. Liu, “Modeling and anal-
ysis of handover algorithms,” in IEEE Global Telecom-
munications Conference, GLOBECOM ’07, Nov. 2007,
pp. 4473–4477.
[25] N. Nasser, A. Hasswa, and H. Hassanein, “Handoffs in
fourth generation heterogeneous networks,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, vol. 44, no. 10, Oct. 2006, pp.
96–103.
[26] G. Zhang and F. Liu, “An auction approach to group
handover with mobility prediction in heterogeneous ve-
hicular networks,” in ITS Telecommunications (ITST),
2011 11th International Conference on, aug. 2011, pp.
584–589.
[27] L. Sun, H. Tian, and P. Zhang, “Decision-making models
for group vertical handover in vehicular communica-
tions,” Telecommunication Systems, vol. 50, 2012, pp.
257–266.
[28] O. Ormond and J. Murphy, “Utility-based intelligent net-
work selection,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communications,
ICC, 2006.
[29] A. Gluhak, K. Chew, K. Moessner, and R. Tafazolli,
“Multicast bearer selection in heterogeneous wireless
networks,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communications, ICC,

135
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
vol. 2, May 2005, pp. 1372–1377.
[30] I.-S. Jang, W.-T. Kim, J.-M. Park, and Y.-J. Park, “Mobile
multicast mechanism based mih for efﬁcient network
resource usage in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc.
of the 12th Int’l Conf. on Advanced Communication
Technology, ser. ICACT’10, 2010, pp. 850–854.
[31] E. Tragos, G. Tsiropoulos, G. Karetsos, and S. Kyriaza-
kos, “Admission control for QoS support in heteroge-
neous 4G wireless networks,” Network, IEEE, vol. 22,
no. 3, 2008, pp. 30–37.
[32] M. A. Khan, A. C. Toker, F. Sivrikaya, and S. Albayrak,
“Cooperation-based resource allocation and call admis-
sion for wireless network operators,” Telecommunication
Systems, vol. 51, 2012, pp. 29–41.
[33] D.-N. Yang and M.-S. Chen, “Efﬁcient resource alloca-
tion for wireless multicast,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, Apr. 2008, pp. 387–400.
[34] M. L. Fisher, “The lagrangian relaxation method for
solving integer programming problems,” Manage. Sci.,
vol. 50, no. 12 Supplement, Dec. 2004, pp. 1861–1871.
[35] F. Hou, L. Cai, P.-H. Ho, X. Shen, and J. Zhang, “A
cooperative multicast scheduling scheme for multimedia
services in ieee 802.16 networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 3, 2009, pp. 1508–
1519.
[36] Multicast Mobility Working Group, “Charter for Working
Group,” 2010, [Online]. Available: http://datatracker.ietf.
org/wg/multimob/charter/, accessed July 30, 2013.
[37] 3GPP, “LTE; evolved universal terrestrial radio access
(E-UTRA) and evolved universal terrestrial radio access
network (E-UTRAN); overall description; stage 2,” ETSI,
technical speciﬁcation 3GPP TS 36.300, 2013, version
11.6.0 Release 11.
[38] ——, “Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-
UTRA); mobility enhancements in heterogeneous net-
works,” ETSI, technical speciﬁcation 3GPP TS 36.839,
2013, version 11.1.0 Release 11.
[39] W. Leister, T. Sutinen, S. Boudko, I. Marsh, C. Griwodz,
and P. Halvorsen, “An architecture for adaptive multime-
dia streaming to mobile nodes,” in MoMM ’08: Proc.
6th Int’l Conf. on Advances in Mobile Computing and
Multimedia.
ACM, 2008, pp. 313–316.
[40] G. Xylomenos, V. Vogkas, and G. Thanos, “The multi-
media broadcast/multicast service,” Wireless Communi-
cations and Mobile Computing, vol. 8, no. 2, 2008, pp.
255–265.
[41] R. Radner, “Team decision problems,” Ann. Math.
Statist., vol. 33, no. 3, 1962.
[42] Y.-C. Ho, “Team decision theory and information struc-
tures,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 68, no. 6, june 1980,
pp. 644–654.
[43] B. Liang and Z. J. Haas, “Predictive distance-based mo-
bility management for multidimensional PCS networks,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 11, no. 5, Oct. 2003, pp.
718–732.
[44] I. Akyildiz, J. S. Ho, and Y.-B. Lin, “Movement-based
location update and selective paging for PCS networks,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw, vol. 4, no. 4, 1996.
[45] G. Yavas, D. Katsaros, O. Ulusoy, and Y. Manolopoulos,
“A data mining approach for location prediction in mo-
bile environments,” Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 54, August
2005, pp. 121–146.
[46] B. Jabbari, Y. Zhou, and F. Hillier, “A decomposable
random walk model for mobility in wireless communi-
cations,” Telecommunication Systems, vol. 16, 2001, pp.
523–537.
[47] M. Canales, J. G´allego, ´A. Hern´andez, and A. Val-
dovinos, “An adaptive location management scheme for
mobile broadband cellular systems,” Telecommunication
Systems, 2011, pp. 1–17.
[48] A. Ulvan, R. Bestak, and M. Ulvan, “Handover procedure
and decision strategy in lte-based femtocell network,”
Telecommunication Systems, 2011, pp. 1–16.
[49] G. Pongor, “Omnet: Objective modular network testbed,”
in MASCOTS ’93: Proc. Int’l Workshop on Modeling,
Analysis, and Simulation on Computer and Telecommu-
nication Systems.
Society for Computer Simulation,
1993, pp. 323–326.
[50] A.
Makhorin,
“GLPK
(GNU
Linear
Programming
Kit),” Free Software Foundation, 2010–2012, [Online].
Available: http://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/, accessed
September 6, 2013.
[51] H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, and V. Jacobson,
“RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications,”
RFC 3550 (Standard), Jul. 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3550.txt [Accessed: 10. Dec
2013].
[52] A.
Kapoor,
“Recommended
bit
rates
for
live
streaming,”
January
12,
2009,
[Online].
Available:
http://www.adobe.com/devnet/adobe-media-server/
articles/dynstream on demand.html, accessed July 25,
2013.
[53] C. Bettstetter, H. Hartenstein, and X. P´erez-Costa,
“Stochastic properties of the random waypoint mobility
model,” Wirel. Netw., vol. 10, no. 5, Sep. 2004, pp. 555–
567.
[54] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, “A survey of mobility
models for ad hoc network research,” Wireless Commu-
nications & Mobile Computing (WCMC): Special issue
on Mobile ad hoc Networking: Research, Trends and
Applications, vol. 2, 2002, pp. 483–502.

