80
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Optimized Resource Management using Linear
Programming in Integrated Heterogeneous Networks
Umar Toseef ∗†, Yasir Zaki‡, Andreas Timm-Giel∗, and Carmelita G¨org†
∗Institute of Communication Networks, Hamburg University of Technology, Hamburg, Germany
Email: {umar.toseef, timm-giel}@tuhh.de
†TZI ComNets, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany, Email: {umr, cg}@comnets.uni-bremen.de
‡Computer Science Department, New York University, Abu Dhabi, UAE, Email: yz48@nyu.edu
Abstract—There have been tremendous advances over the
past decades when it comes to wireless access technologies.
Nowadays, several wireless access technologies are available
everywhere. Even mobile devices have evolved to support multiple
access technologies (e.g., 3G, 4G or WiFi) in providing the best
possible access to the Internet. However, all of these devices
can communicate using only one access technology at a time.
It is foreseen that an integration of these access technologies
to offer users a network access through multiple simultaneous
connections would be beneﬁcial for both end users and the
mobile network operators. This paper investigates how to tackle
the simultaneous usage of multiple wireless access technologies
in the downlink. For this purpose, a practical example of
heterogeneous network is considered where 3GPP LTE and
non-3GPP WLAN access technologies are integrated together.
Furthermore, a novel decision mechanism is proposed, that
focuses on optimizing the network resource management based
on a mathematical formulation of the system. The mathematical
model is implemented using the Linear Programming techniques.
The paper demonstrates the gains that are achieved from using
such innovative decision mechanism as well as the beneﬁts
that arise from the simultaneous usage of multiple wireless
heterogeneous accesses.
Keywords— LTE and WLAN interworking, User QoE optimiza-
tion, Linear programming, Access link modeling, Heuristic methods
I. INTRODUCTION
The Long Term Evolution (LTE) of the Universal Mobile
Telecommunication System (UMTS) is one of the latest mile-
stones achieved in an advancing series of mobile telecommu-
nication systems by the Third Mobile Generation Partnership
Project (3GPP). LTE is well positioned today, and is already
meeting the requirements of future mobile networks. On the
other hand, the technology of handheld mobile devices has also
made signiﬁcant advancements in recent years. This has made
mobile broadband subscriptions to increase rapidly worldwide.
Every year, hundreds of millions of users are subscribing
for mobile broadband services. This is because a number of
broadband applications have been redesigned to substantially
enhance user experience by taking advantage of mobility
support and large data rates of new access technologies.
Such applications include social-networking (e.g., Facebook,
Google+, Twitter etc.), multi-player gaming, content sharing
(e.g., Youtube, Cloud Storage etc.), WebTV, video telephony,
search engines etc. The trafﬁc data generated by the rapidly
increasing broadband subscribers due to use of the aforemen-
tioned applications is manifold higher in volume compared to
pure voice trafﬁc. The existing 3GPP mobile communication
networks (e.g., HSPA and LTE) are already facing difﬁculties
to meet this high demand for wireless data. This has made
users and operators to rely onto Wireless Local Area Networks
(WLAN) based on IEEE 802.11 set of standards. The modern
WLANs are capable of offering very high data rates but
provide a small coverage area and limited mobility support.
Therefore, they are more suitable to areas with highly dense
demand for high data rate wireless access with limited mobility
support. On the other hand, 3GPP networks are designed
to provide ubiquitous coverage through mobility support and
therefore better suited to areas with moderately dense demand
for wireless access with high mobility. In this way, WLAN and
3GPP networks can complement each other in making high-
speed Internet access a reality for a large population. This work
discusses how the integration of these two technology types
can be realized, what beneﬁts are possible for the users and
operators from this integration, and what are the challenges
involved in the resource management of these heterogeneous
networks. This work also proposes several mechanisms for
efﬁcient resource management of heterogeneous networks and
evaluates their performance with the help of simulation based
studies.
Fig. 1 shows how 3GPP and non-3GPP access technologies
can be integrated to build heterogeneous networks according
to the 3GPP standards [2]. This architecture called as, System
Architecture Evolution (SAE), also allows mobile users to
roam between the two access technology types. For this
purpose, a seamless mobility is achieved by employing Proxy
Mobile IPv6 (network based mobility) or Dual Stack Mobile
IPv6 (host based mobility) [2]. The 3GPP SAE architecture,
however, has certain limitations when it comes to supporting
multi-homed users. This implies that a user can be associated
with only one of the available access networks but cannot
connect to more than one network simultaneously.
This work is an extension of [1] which investigates how the
multihoming support can be realized in 3GPP SAE architec-
ture. In addition, it discusses how the network operators can
make an optimum use of the aggregated bandwidth resources
and network diversity in a multihoming scenario through
trafﬁc ﬂow management. The rest of the paper is organized

81
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
PDN gateway
MME
2G/3G SGSN
eNB
Serving gateway
S1u
S5
S6c
S11
S3
3GPP AAA server
Untrusted non-3GPP IP 
access
S2b
Wn
Trusted/untrusted non 
3GPP (Host based) IP 
access
Trusted non-3GPP IP 
access (network based)
S2a
S2c
Wa*
S1(CP)
HSS
S6a
ePDG
UE/Mobile Node
Fig. 1.
3GPP proposed SAE architecture for the integration of non-3GPP
and 3GPP access technologies
as follows: related work has been discussed in Section II,
Section III describes how the current 3GPP SAE architecture
can be extended to provide user multihoming support. Section
IV describes the importance of ﬂow management function in
a heterogeneous network, and Section V explains the Linear
Programming technique to do optimized ﬂow management
operation. Section VI provides proof of concepts through the
discussion of simulation results of the investigated realistic
scenarios. Finally, in Section VII a heuristic based resource
management algorithm is devised that offers near-optimum
performance without high computational complexity.
II. RELATED WORK
A number of research studies can be found in literature
making use of cross-layer techniques and soft handover to
optimize handover cost in terms of packet delay and loss in
heterogeneous networks. For example, Song and Jamalipour
[3] describe an intelligent scheme of vertical handover de-
cisions in selecting the best handover target from several
candidate heterogeneous networks. Several other proposals
have been made to improve the performance of cellular and
802.11 networks. Song et. al. [4] has discussed admission
control schemes to improve the performance of integrated
networks. Fei and Vikram [5] propose a service differentiated
admission control scheme based on semi-Markov chain that
although very accurate but has high computational complexity.
Similarly, Zhai et. al. [6] has shown that by controlling the
collision probability with the help of input trafﬁc rate of users,
the maximum throughput can be achieved by keeping 802.11
network in a non-saturated state. Other studies have focused
on developing solutions for load balancing in the integrated
heterogeneous network environment. Such a proposal can be
found in [8], where policy based load balancing framework has
been presented to effectively utilize the aggregated resources
of loosely coupled cellular/WLAN network. In this work, we
explore the practical limits of the achievable performance
in a heterogeneous network scenario by going down to the
MAC layer functionalities of the involved access technolo-
gies. The goal is to maximize the spectral efﬁciency of the
network bandwidth resources and fulﬁll the application QoS
requirements at the same time. In contrast to other studies, we
provide an analytical solution to the problem that adapts to the
time varying channel conditions of the user and dynamically
decides the best network paths for user trafﬁc ﬂows in order
to achieve system wide optimized performance and improved
user QoE. The focus of this work is, however, restricted to the
downlink transmission of access technologies.
III. NETWORK SIMULATION MODEL
This work follows the proposal of the 3GPP speciﬁcations in
the integration of 3GPP access technology (namely, LTE) and
trusted non-3GPP access technology (namely, legacy WLAN
802.11a) where host based mobility solutions, i.e., Dual Stack
Mobile IPv6 is considered. For this purpose, a simulation
network model has been implemented using the OPNET [9]
network simulator. This includes the detailed implementation
of LTE network entities following the 3GPP speciﬁcations. In
this simulation model, home agent (HA) function is located at
the Packet Data Network (PDN) gateway. The remote server
acts as a correspondent node (CN) from where mobile users
access application services like VoIP, video, HTTP and FTP
(see Fig. 4).
OPNET model library implements the basic MIPv6 func-
tionality. This implies that a mobile node may have several
care-of addresses but only one, called the primary care-
of address, can be registered with its home agent and the
correspondent nodes. In order to achieve multi-homing, this
basic support has been extended according to the IETF RFC
for multiple care-of address (MCoA) registration [10]. This
enables the user to register the care-of addresses from all of
its active network interfaces with its home agent. This work
assumes that the user never attaches to its home network, and
both LTE and WLAN networks are seen as foreign networks
by the user. Therefore, a user conﬁgures one IPv6 care-of
address when it is in the coverage of LTE and still another
care-of address is obtained when WLAN access is available.
Though MCoA extension enables a user to register up to
two care-of addresses with its home agent, user cannot com-
municate over the two network interfaces simultaneously. This
is because MCoA recommends using only that single care-of
address, which has been most recently registered/refreshed.
This calls for the need of another MIPv6 extension namely
Flow Binding Support [11] that permits UE to bind one or
more trafﬁc ﬂows to a care-of address. A trafﬁc ﬂow, in
this extension, is deﬁned as a set of IP packets matching a
trafﬁc selector [12]. Trafﬁc selector helps identify the ﬂow to
which a particular packet belongs through the matching of the
source and destination IP addresses, transport protocol number,
the source and destination port numbers and other ﬁelds in
IP and higher-layer headers. The Trafﬁc selector information
is carried as a sub option inside the new mobility option
“Flow Identiﬁcation Mobility Option” introduced by the ﬂow
binding support extension. A comprehensive description of this
heterogeneous network simulator can be found in [13].

82
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
It should be noted that our focus is only on the downlink
access for LTE and WLAN. This implies that no uplink
transmissions are performed for WLAN during the whole
simulation time. Instead uplink trafﬁc (e.g., TCP ACK packet
etc.) is transmitted by the user through the LTE uplink access.
Fig. 2 presents the resource management architecture to be
used in conjunction with the heterogeneous network simulator.
This is an open and ﬂexible architectural framework, where
the resource management task is performed in 3 steps: (1)
information collection; (2) decision making; (3) decision en-
forcement [14]. These steps are handled by three functional
entities:
• Information Management Entity (IE) is in charge of
gathering the information required by the decision mak-
ing, e.g., link quality, power limitation, load and conges-
tion of the networks. IE also pre-processes and ﬁlters the
gathered information before it is delivered to the other
entities.
• Decision Making Entity (DE) is the most intelligent
part of this system architecture. It makes use of the
information available from the IEs to take a decision in
accordance with pre-deﬁned policies. Examples of such
decisions are association to a certain access network,
vertical handover hints, change in a service treatment,
grant or deny user access to a service/network etc. A
decision making entity residing in the network is denoted
with DEn and that in the user terminal by DEu.
• Execution and Enforcement Entity (EE) ﬁnally executes
or performs the decision made by DE. In this work, DEn
entity takes all resource management decisions. These
decisions are executed locally using the ODE interface to
EE entity. The decisions to be executed at user terminal
are propagated via the ODD interface to the DEu that
enforce them using the local EE entity.
The algorithms and policies used by the DEn in making
decisions will be discussed in more detail in the next sections
of this chapter. Typical examples of these decisions are: when
a particular user terminal should attach or de-attach to WLAN
access network and how much trafﬁc should be directed to
each network path for uplink and downlink communication of
a multihomed user. The decisions related to the association
with the WLAN access network are executed at the user
terminal via the DEu entity. The decisions regarding trafﬁc
distribution have to be executed at home agent as well as at
user terminal.
IV. FLOW MANAGEMENT
In the developed simulation environment, a user can com-
municate simultaneously through 3GPP access technology
(i.e., LTE) as well as through non-3GPP access networks (i.e.,
WLAN). The question still remains how a network operator
or a user can make an efﬁcient use of the two network
paths from two access technologies. For this purpose a ﬂow
management function is introduced at the home agent. In other
words, it speciﬁes how DEn entity should function. The ﬂow
management function makes use of the MIPv6 extensions and
allows controlling the user data rate on each network path. In
general, there are two options of managing trafﬁc ﬂows for
a multi-homed user. The ﬁrst option is to carry one complete
application trafﬁc ﬂow over one path of choice, this is known
as “trafﬁc ﬂow switching”. The second option is to divide the
trafﬁc ﬂow into several smaller sub-ﬂows where each sub-ﬂow
is carried over one network path. This will be called “trafﬁc
ﬂow splitting”.
If ﬂow management is performed properly a considerable
improvement in network capacity and user satisfaction can
be achieved. That is why the decision engine (i.e., DEn)
of the ﬂow management function, which controls the user
data rate over the network paths is of core importance. In
order to attain the goals of optimized network performance,
the decision engine needs to know the precise information
of the available network resources and the user demands.
Once this information is available, DEn with the help of
the proposed mathematical techniques, can optimally assign
network resources to the users fulﬁlling their demands while
making use of all available network paths.
Each wireless access network usually has a ﬁxed amount of
network resources (e.g., spectrum bandwidth), and the network
performance itself depends on the fact with what (spectral) ef-
ﬁciency these resources are utilized. In order to achieve higher
data rates, a network resource management function should
select those users more often who can attain high spectral
efﬁciency. This work adopts the term “network path cost” to
denote the required network resources per unit data rate. For a
user, its network path cost can be accessed through cross layer
information from the MAC layer of the corresponding access
technologies. In the following subsections, it is shown how
the network path cost can be computed for users in WLAN
and LTE networks.
A. Network path cost for WLAN
Most modern wireless LAN access networks follow IEEE
802.11 standards, marketed under the name of Wi-Fi. In the
infrastructure mode of 802.11 typically a number of stations
are associated to an access point (AP) (which is normally a
router) that serves as a bridge to a wired infrastructure net-
work. 802.11 MAC uses one of the following three techniques
to provide channel access control mechanisms.
1) Point coordination function (PCF): resides on the access
point to coordinate the channel access for all asso-
ciated stations through polling. A polled station can
communicate with the access point in a contention free
manner within a time slot. PCF is not part of the Wi-
Fi Alliance interoperability and therefore is rarely found
implemented on a portable device.
2) Distributed coordination function (DCF): is a random ac-
cess scheme based on the Carrier Sense Multiple Access
with Collision Avoidance protocol (CSMA/CA) with a
binary exponential back-off algorithm. The DCF has two
operating modes: the basic channel access mode and the
RTS/CTS (Request-to-Send/Clear-To-Send) mode. DCF
does not provide a contention free medium access and

83
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IE
EE
DEn
IE
EE
DEu
IE
IE
IE
IE
Home 
Agent
ODI
ODE
ODI
ODI
ODI
ODD
ODI
ODI
ODI
ODE
Serving
Gateway
eNode-B
WLAN AP
PDN 
Gateway
User 
terminal
Fig. 2.
Resource management architecture for the heterogenous network simulator.
therefore collisions can occur during the transmission if
other stations also start transmitting at the same time.
DCF is the de-facto default setting for Wi-Fi hardware.
3) Hybrid coordination function (HCF): has been designed
to provide a differentiated medium access. Though HFC
does not provide service guarantees, it establishes a
probabilistic priority mechanism to allocate bandwidth
based on trafﬁc categories. HCF was introduced for
the 802.11e standard, but it is hard to ﬁnd complaint
hardware. In recent time the 802.11n standard has in-
corporated HCF, which though becoming increasingly
popular, is still available for a limited number of portable
devices.
From the above description it can be deduced that a dom-
inant percentage of today’s portable Wi-Fi capable devices
operate in the DCF mode of 802.11a/b/g. Three ﬂavors of
802.11, i.e., a,b&g, follow very similar procedures in medium
access mechanism therefore in this work we focus only on
one of the ﬂavors, i.e. 802.11a. The readers are encouraged to
refer to [15]- [17] for further details on 802.11 speciﬁcations
and performance.
Now, in order to explain the network path cost computa-
tions for WLAN, consider a scenario where a WLAN access
network consists of a station associated with an access point.
Assume that the station is just receiving a downlink trafﬁc ﬂow
from the access point and does not transmit anything in the
uplink. In this way, there is no contention for medium access.
The transmission of one data frame with RTS/CTS enabled
takes TS seconds including the exchange of control frames
such as RTS/CTS, SIFS (Short Interframe Space), DIFS (DCF
Interframe Space), and ACK frames, where
TS = Tbackoff +TDIF S +TRT S +TCT S +Tdata +3·TSIF S,
Tbackoff = Wmin − 1
2
· TslotT ime,
TDIF S = TSIF S + 2 · TslotT ime
All components of TS except Tdata can be found in the
802.11 standards (see Table II and I). The value of Tdata can
be computed based on the PHY data rate of transmission, i.e.,
TABLE I
MAC/PHYSICAL LAYER PARAMETERS OF 802.11A.
SIFS
SlotTime
RTS
CTS
ACK
Wmin
Wmax
16µs
9µs
160 bit
116 bit
116 bit
16
1024
TABLE II
DURATION OF CONTROL FRAMES IN 802.11A FOR DIFFERENT PHYSICAL
LAYER DATA.
Data Rate
Modulation
Bits per
RTS
CTS/ACK
(Mbps)
Sym.
Sym.
µs
Sym.
µs
6
BPSK
24
7
28
5
20
9
BPSK
36
5
20
4
16
12
QPSK
48
4
16
3
12
18
QPSK
72
3
12
2
8
24
16-QAM
96
2
8
2
8
36
16-QAM
144
2
8
1
4
48
64-QAM
192
1
4
1
4
54
64-QAM
216
1
4
1
4
Tdata = σ
ϕ, where σ is the data frame size in kbit, and ϕ is
the PHY transmission data rate in [kbit/sec]. Accordingly, the
maximum downlink capacity η can be estimated as follows:
η =
σ
TS [kbit/sec].
It is clear that 802.11 MAC follows the Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA) like scheme, where users share the
wireless access medium for short periods of time. Considering
resource allocation time intervals of 1 second, a user needs an
exclusive medium access for a γ fraction of that interval to
achieve a unitary data rate of 1 kbit/sec. This way, the γ that
is expressed in units of [
sec
kbit/sec] represents the network path
cost. Its value directly depends on TS, which is the delay
experienced in transmitting one data packet of average size σ
[bit] operating at PHY data rate ϕ [kbit/sec]. That is, γ = TS
σ .
B. Network path cost for LTE
In contrast to 802.11, LTE performs a managed scheduling
of available bandwidth resources. The smallest unit of band-
width resource is referred as a physical resource block (PRB)
in the LTE speciﬁcation. Based on the allocated frequency
spectrum size, LTE has a certain number of PRBs. The LTE
MAC scheduler residing at the eNodeB schedules these PRBs
using a 1ms transmission time interval (TTI). The LTE MAC

84
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
scheduler has a very complex way of assigning resources to
the associated users. Without digging into the details of the
MAC scheduler operation, we focus on the last stage of the
resource assignment procedure in a certain TTI. Upon reaching
this stage, the MAC scheduler already builded up a list of
users which will be transmitting/receiving data in that TTI.
For each user entry in the list, there is a corresponding value
of the allocated number of PRBs, as well as the channel
dependent Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) index. The
MCS index is then used to lookup the Transport Block Size
Index (TBS index). With the help of TBS index and number of
allocated PRBs, the Transport Block Size (TBS) is obtained
from a table deﬁned in the 3GPP speciﬁcations [21]. This
is a two dimensional table where each row lists TBS sizes
corresponding to the number of PRBs for a particular TBS
index. The obtained TBS value deﬁnes the size of the MAC
frame transmitted to the user in that TTI. In this way, the user
received throughput at the MAC layer in a certain TTI can be
estimated if the TBS value for that user is known.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of PRBs
Throughput (Mbps)
LTE Throughput VS Number of PRBs
 
 
TBS Index: 2
TBS Index: 10
TBS Index: 18
TBS Index: 26
Fig. 3.
Relationship of LTE air interface throughput and number of PRBs
for different TBS index values [21]. Each curve represents one TBS index.
Fig. 3 shows that for a particular TBS index, the LTE
throughput value has almost a linear relationship with the used
number of PRBs. If described mathematically, this relationship
can be used to determine the required number p of PRBs/TTI
to achieve a certain data rate X [kbit/sec] for a user having
TBS index i. That is
p = αi · X + βi
αi is the slope of a straight line (as shown in 3) described
in units of PRBs/kbps. βi is the intercept of straight line at
the y-axis and is expressed in units of number of PRBs. Both
α and β together determine the network path cost of a user’s
LTE access link.
V. OPTIMIZED NETWORK RESOURCE UTILIZATION
When the network path costs for a multi-homed user are
known, the problem of optimal resource utilization can be
solved using mathematical techniques. In this work, we prefer
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) to solve this problem. This
choice has been made due to several reasons. For example,
ILP guarantees an optimum solution for a correctly formulated
problem, the problem formulated in ILP can be extended or
restricted by introducing appropriate constraints as well as
it saves additional implementation work by making use of
already available Linear Programming solvers.
TABLE III
MATHEMATICAL MODEL FOR THE OPTIMIZED RESOURCE UTILIZATION IN
ALGEBRAIC FORM
Given
U
a set of users
αj
Data rate dependent part of the LTE link cost in PRBs per kbps
for user j, for each j ∈ U
βj
Data rate independent part of the LTE link cost in PRBs for user j,
for each j ∈ U
γj
Cost of WLAN link in seconds per kbps for user j, for each j ∈ U
δj
Minimum data rate (kbps) demand of a trafﬁc ﬂow destined to
user j, for each j ∈ U
∆j
Maximum data rate (kbps) allocation for a trafﬁc ﬂow destined to
user j, for each j ∈ U
Ω
Number of available PRBs for the LTE access network
Deﬁned variables
Xj
Size of sub-ﬂow in kbps sent over the LTE access link to user j,
for each j ∈ U
Yj
Size of sub-ﬂow in kbps sent over WLAN access link to user j,
for each j ∈ U
Zj
Auxiliary binary variable; its value for a user j is either 1 if
Xj > 0 or 0 otherwise, for each j ∈ U
Maximize
P
j∈U Xj + Yj
Subject to
1.
P
j∈U αj · Xj + βj · Zj ≤ Ω
2.
P
j∈U γj · Yj ≤ 1
3.
δj ≤ Xj + Yj ≤ ∆j for each j ∈ U
4.
Zj ≤ Xj · 1020 for each j ∈ U
5.
Zj ≥ Xj/∆j for each j ∈ U
6.
0 ≤ Xj ≤ ∆j for each j ∈ U
7.
0 ≤ Yj ≤ ∆j for each j ∈ U
8.
Zj ∈ {0, 1} for each j ∈ U
Table. III shows the formulation of the problem in algebraic
form. The model deﬁnes U as the set of multi-homed users.
Each element of this set has a number of input parameters,
e.g., network path costs for LTE (α,β) and WLAN network (γ)
according to the user channel conditions in the corresponding
network. The maximum and minimum range of user data
rate demands (δ, ∆) based on the individual user application.
The amount of available network resources in LTE (Ω) and
WLAN (which is 1 second) are also considered as input
parameters. The output parameters for each user in set U
include the assigned data rate over the LTE network and the
WLAN network paths (X,Y ). It is obvious that the goal of
this model is to achieve the highest possible spectral efﬁciency
from the two network access technologies. The higher the
spectral efﬁciency, the higher the network throughput. Hence,

85
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the objective is to maximize the user data rate over the two
network paths, i.e., X and Y for every multi-homed user.
The model imposes eight constraints, which are listed at
the bottom of Table III. The ﬁrst two constraints ensure that
the available network resources should not be exceeded when
allocating the data rates for users. The third constraint dictates
that the user data rate allocation should lie in the speciﬁed
range. The 4th and 5th constraint determine the value of
variable Z based on the X value. If there is a need, a user
is allowed to receive its whole demanded data rate over a
single network path as shown in constraint number 6 and 7.
Constraint 8 is set in order to emphasis that Z is a binary
variable, which has value either 0 or 1.
It is assumed here that each user is running only one
application. For a constant bit rate application, e.g., VoIP or
video the minimum data rate is set equal to the maximum
data rate in the model input parameters. For TCP based ﬂows,
these two values can be set according to the network operator’s
policy. It should be noted that the problem has been formulated
in a way that it guarantees the minimum data rate for all users
and then assigns an additional data rate up to the maximum
data rate while optimizing the spectral efﬁciency of the access
networks.
In the investigated scenario, the LTE coverage is available
in the whole area of user movement while WLAN coverage is
limited in a circular area of 100 meter radius around a hotspot.
This implies the users always have LTE access available and
WLAN coverage is only found in the vicinity of the hotspot
(see Fig. 4). During the resource assignment process, the ﬂow
management function classiﬁes users into the following three
categories (i) users with LTE access only and running VoIP
or video applications (ii) users with LTE and WLAN access
running any type of application (iii) users running FTP or
HTTP applications with LTE access only. Users in the ﬁrst
category must be assigned the required minimum data rate
through LTE as there is no other access available for them.
Users in the second category are multi-homed users whose
data rate will be decided by the aforementioned mathematical
model. For users belonging to the third category, they must
get their trafﬁc through the LTE path; however, it is not clear
how much data rate should be allocated to them in order to
achieve the optimized resource allocation objective. This issue
is resolved by using the following work around: the users are
assigned a WLAN network path cost greater than unity and
they are put into the second category. The WLAN network
cost greater than unity will refrain the LP solver to assign
any data rate for these users over the WLAN path while the
data rate for the LTE path will be decided based on the global
objective of the optimized resource allocation.
The resource assignment process by the ﬂow management
function is carried out periodically every 100ms1 in order
to adapt to any changes in the user channel conditions. For
this purpose user channel condition parameters are obtained
through cross layer information from the base stations of the
1Section VI-A analyzes the selection of this time period
two access technologies. With the help of these parameters,
costs for each user network path is computed and fed to the
above described mathematical model as the input arguments
accompanied with the user data rate demands. As described
earlier, the mathematical model is formulated using Linear
Programming and solved using the C application programming
interface (API) of ILOG CPLEX from IBM [22], which has
been integrated inside the OPNET simulator by the authors.
The output of this process consists of user data rates on each
network path. These decided data rates are then implemented
for each user through a trafﬁc shaping function residing at the
home agent.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the performance of the proposed scheme
for optimized resource allocation is evaluated with the help
of a simulation scenario. Fig. 4 shows an overview of the
scenario in OPNET. The system is populated with 12 users
generating a rich trafﬁc mixture of: Voice over IP (VoIP),
downlink File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Hyper Text Transfer
Protocol (HTTP), video conference (i.e., Skype video call),
and video streaming. The users move within one LTE eNodeB
cell, and within this cell one wireless access point is present.
Table IV shows the parameter conﬁguration for this scenario.
The network performance achieved by the Linear Pro-
gramming approach will be compared with the other two
approaches discussed in [26], i.e., “3GPP-HO” and “Channel
Aware”. In the “3GPP-HO” approach user multihoming is not
supported; instead the policy is to serve a user preferably
over WLAN access network in the overlapped coverage of
WLAN & LTE access networks. In contrast to this, the “Chan-
nel Aware” approach makes use of multihoming and ﬂow
management to serve users efﬁciently. In this approach the
capacity of each of the user access links is precisely estimated
and all available bandwidth resources are bundled together in
achieving the best user Quality of Experience (QoE). Now
with the help of the Linear Programming approach, data rates
are assigned to the users in a way that network capacity is
maximized as well as the minimum data rate demands are met
for all users. For this purpose, the DEn employs the resource
allocation model shown in Table III. At each decision instant,
the model is solved using updated parameters of user channel
conditions and QoS demands and the resulted data rates are
then imposed on the user access links by the EE entities.
Fig. 5 shows the performance of the FTP downlink appli-
cation in terms of IP throughput and ﬁle download time. It is
evident that the “Linear Programming” approach achieves the
highest performance among the three competing approaches.
The optimized resource allocation strategy of the “Linear
Programming” approach helps increasing user QoE experience
by 25% in terms of ﬁle download time compared to “3GPP-
HO” approach. The “Linear Programming” approach also
outperforms the “Channel Aware” approach by reducing the
ﬁle download time up to 13%.
Similar conclusions can also be drawn for the HTTP ap-
plication whose performance has been shown in Fig. 6. It

86
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Profile 
Application 
Mobility User database 
Application Server 
PDN-GW 
Serving-GW 
Home Agent 
Router1 
Router2 
eNode-B 
WAP1 
Fig. 4.
Simulation scenario setup in the OPNET simulator. The large circular area shows the coverage of LTE and the smaller circular area represents the
WLAN network coverage. The user movement is restricted to the rectangular area.
TABLE IV
SIMULATION CONFIGURATIONS FOR EVALUATION OF THE DOWNLINK FLOW MANAGEMENT SCHEME USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING.
Parameter
Conﬁgurations
Total number of PRBs
25 PRBs (5 MHz specturm)
Mobility model
Random Direction (RD) with 6 Km/h
Number of users
2 VoIP calls, 1 video streaming, 3 Skype video calls, 2 HTTP and 4 FTP downlink users
LTE channel model
Macroscopic pathloss model [23], Correlated Slow Fading.
LTE MAC scheduler
Time domain: Optimized Service Aware [24],
Frequency domain: Iterative RR approach [25]
WLAN access technology
802.11a, RTS/CTS enabled, coverage ≈ 100 m, operation in non-overlapping channels
Transport network
1Gbps Ethernet links, no link congestion
VoIP trafﬁc model
G.722.2 wideband codec, 23.05 kbps data rate and 50frame/s
Skype video model
MPEG-4 codec, 512 kbps, 30frame/s, 640x480 resolution, play-out delay: 250ms
Streaming video model
MPEG-4 codec, 1 Mbps, 30frame/s, 720x480 resolution, play-out delay: 250ms
HTTP trafﬁc model
100 bytes html page with 5 objects each of 100Kbytes, page reading time: 12s
FTP trafﬁc model
FTP File size: constant 10MByte, as soon as one ﬁle download ﬁnishes, the next FTP ﬁle starts immediately.
TCP conﬁgurations
TCP new Reno, Receiver buffer: 1Mbyte, Window scaling: enabled,
Maximum segment size: 1300Byte, TCP reorder timer: 50ms
DEn decision interval
Every 100ms
Data rate demands [δ, ∆]
[200 kbps, 25 Mbps] for FTP and HTTP users
Simulation run time
1000 seconds, 10 random seeds, 95% Conﬁdence interval
can be noticed that the HTTP application could attain much
less IP throughput compared to the FTP application. This
is due to small sized embedded objects of web pages. The
download of these objects ﬁnishes before the TCP connection
could achieve the maximum possible throughput. Owing to
this fact, even the “Linear Programming” approach could not
signiﬁcantly improve user QoE over the “Channel Aware”
approach. However, a substantial gain is observed compared
to the default “3GPP-HO” approach. A large variation in
web page download can also be noticed for the “3GPP-HO”
approach, the reason of which is as follows. If an HTTP user
is found in WLAN coverage, “3GPP-HO” approach serves it
solely over the WLAN access link. Now if the WLAN access
network is not heavily loaded because there are no FTP users
at that instant, then the HTTP users get high throughput and
ﬁnish page download fast. In other situations, they have to
share bandwidth resources with the demanding FTP users and
hence page download time elongates.
The performance gain of “Channel Aware” and “Linear
Programming” over “3GPP-HO” approach can be attributed
to manifold factors. For example, both of them are capable of
aggregating bandwidth resources from multiple access links,
they can accurately estimate the capacity of an access link
and utilize it accordingly, they can periodically reevaluate their

87
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Scenario type
Downlink mean IP throughput (Mbps)
FTP Throughput
 
 
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware
Linear−Programming
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Scenario type
Mean file download time (sec)
FTP Download Time
(b)
Fig. 5.
FTP downlink performance comparison for “3GPP-HO”, “Channel
Aware”, and “Linear Programming” approaches.
assessment about the network conditions and the capacity of
user access links, etc. In addition, “Linear Programming” is
capable of performing optimized resource allocations. Among
all of them, the ability to estimate user access link capacity
is the feature that helps these approaches to establish a
deﬁnite superiority over the default “3GPP-HO” approach.
Without access link capacity estimation, the buffers at the air
interface could have very large occupancy. On the one hand,
employing large buffers leads to long queuing delays, which
adversely affects realtime applications in particular. On the
other hand, keeping buffer capacity small causes numerous
packet drops that degrades, especially, the performance of TCP
based applications. By exploiting the knowledge of user access
link capacity, “Channel Aware” and “Linear Programming”
approaches just send the exact sufﬁcient amount of data to
the air interface schedulers that avoids both the large queuing
delays and packet drops. In addition, it also minimizes the risk
of losing the buffered packets at the access point during the
instants of link failure or vertical handover.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Scenario type
Downlink mean IP throughput (Mbps)
Throughput for HTTP Users
 
 
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware
Linear−Programing
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Scenario type
Mean file download time (sec)
Webpage Download Time
(b)
Fig. 6.
HTTP downlink performance comparison for “3GPP-HO”, “Channel
Aware”, and “Linear Programming” approaches.
The user QoE for VoIP application has been depicted in
Fig. 7. The Box plot shows the sample values of Mean Opinion
Score (MOS)2 [28] computed for a user employed wideband
2MOS gives a numerical indication of the perceived user QoE of realtime
applications. MOS is expressed on a scale from 1 to 5, 1 being the worst and
5 the best.
codec. A Box plot graphically depicts the groups of numerical
data through their ﬁve number summary, i.e., (1) minimum,
(2) maximum, (3) median (or second quartile), (4) the ﬁrst
quartile, and (5) the third quartile. The bottom and top of the
box are the ﬁrst and third quartiles, respectively. The band near
the middle of the box is the median. The whiskers represent
the maximum and minimum of all the data values. Moreover,
any data not included between the whiskers is plotted as an
outlier with a cross ‘+’ sign.
It can be seen in Fig. 7 that both “Channel Aware”
and “Linear Programming” deliver excellent performance by
keeping MOS values at the maximum level for most of the
time. However, the “3GPP-HO” approach fails to achieve a
matched performance. Though the median value lies close to
the MOS score 4.0, the other values show quite lower score
due to long queuing delays at WLAN access point. Even some
of the outliers fall below MOS score 2.2, which could be
very annoying for the users. The reason for the “3GPP-HO”
approach to sometimes achieve a very high MOS score (i.e.,
above 4.0) lies in the fact that when the VoIP users are being
served over the LTE access network, they are provided with
the guaranteed QoS service. The problem arises only when
these users are handed over to the WLAN access network.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware Linear−Programming
VoIP MOS
MOS
Fig. 7.
Downlink performance comparison of VoIP application for “3GPP-
HO”, “Channel Aware”, and “Linear Programming” approaches.
The “Linear Programming” approach also offers excellent
user QoE for video applications. This can be conﬁrmed
by referring to Fig. 8, which shows the Box plot of user
experienced MOS score for their video applications, i.e., video
conference and video streaming. Almost all video quality eval-
uations result in the best MOS score for video applications for
both “Channel Aware” and “Linear Programming” approaches.
However, “3GPP-HO” fails again to offer an acceptable perfor-
mance for video application users. Its performance pattern is
similar to that of the VoIP application, i.e., the median value
stays at the best MOS score while the 3rd & 4th quartiles
show the suboptimal performance. As already explained for
VoIP case, this phenomenon can be understood with the help of
end-to-end packet delay plots shown in Fig. 9. Considering the

88
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
play-out delay limit of 250ms, any packet arriving later than
this limit is assumed as lost by the video quality evaluation
mechanism. Such packet losses in turn lead to performance
degradation. It is evident from Fig. 9 that a large number of
packets experience more than 250ms delay for the case where
“3GPP-HO” approach is employed. It is mainly the large MAC
queue occupancy at the WLAN access point that is the main
reason behind these delays. During the times when video users
are served over LTE packet end-to-end delays remain under
control due to QoS aware scheduling employed in the LTE
MAC scheduler. In these situations, the users are satisﬁed with
the service as indicated by the best MOS score. However,
during the time when users receive their video application
trafﬁc over the WLAN access link, the chances are higher
that they have to encounter a congested network.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware Linear−Programming
News Video MOS
MOS
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware Linear−Programming
Skype Video MOS
MOS
(b)
Fig. 8.
Downlink performance comparison of video applications for “3GPP-
HO”, “Channel Aware”, and “Linear Programming” approaches.
Now that the performance of all applications has been ob-
served, it can be inferred that both the “Linear Programming”
and “Channel Aware” approaches provide similar performance
for realtime applications. However, the “Linear Programming”
approach excels when it comes to non-realtime applications
like FTP, HTTP etc. This is because realtime applications
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware
Linear−Programming
News Video Packet Delay
Delay (sec)
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
3GPP−HO
Channel−Aware
Linear−Programming
Skype Video Packet Delay
Delay (sec)
(b)
Fig. 9.
Packet delay comparison of video applications for “3GPP-HO”,
“Channel Aware”, and “Linear Programming” approaches.
have stringent QoS requirements, which have to be fulﬁlled
at all costs in order to keep users satisﬁed. Therefore, both
approaches preferably deliver the data rate demands of the
realtime services. However, the “Linear Programming” ap-
proach, with the help of optimized resource allocation tech-
niques, manages to offer these data rates by consuming lower
network resources. This way, larger network resources are
made available to non-realtime application users in order to
enhance their QoE as well as to increase network capacity.
The discussion on downlink communication is concluded by
comparing the performance of “Channel Aware”, and “Linear
Programming” approaches in another scenario where only FTP
users exist within an area of complete LTE and WLAN cover-
age overlap. Each of these seven FTP users download 10Mbyte
ﬁles continuously, i.e., as soon as one ﬁle download ends, a
new ﬁle download is started. Fig. 10 shows the FTP application
throughput and ﬁle download time as experienced by the users.
In this particular scenario, the “Linear Programming” approach
manages to achieve 16% higher throughput compared to the
“Channel Aware” approach. This is slightly higher than 13%,
which was observed in the case of the previous scenario with
mixed trafﬁc. The reason behind this improved performance
is the lower ‘minimum data rate’ requirement of FTP users
compared to video users. Owing to the fact that the ‘minimum
data rate’ requirements must be fulﬁlled, the users with bad

89
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
channel conditions consume lots of resources in achieving
that data rate. On the other hand, if this requirement is less,
fewer network resources will be consumed even when a user
is suffering from bad channel conditions.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Scenario type
Downlink mean IP throughput (Mbps)
FTP Throughput
 
 
Channel−Aware
Linear−Programing
(a)
0
5
10
15
Scenario type
Mean file download time (sec)
FTP Download Time
(b)
Fig. 10.
FTP downlink performance comparison between the “Channel
Aware” and the “Linear Programming” approaches.
A. Sensitivity Analysis of DEn Decision Intervals
It has been explained that the decision making entity (DEn)
of the ﬂow management overlay architecture that resides
in the network, is responsible for the resource management
decisions. These decisions are based on the network informa-
tion (e.g., user channel conditions, application QoS demands,
trafﬁc load, congestion, etc.) supplied by the information
management entities (IE) installed at different monitoring
points across the network and at the UE. Owing to the
dynamic load conditions of the networks and variable channel
conditions of mobile users, the information provided by IEs
has a short validity period after which it must be refreshed. In
this way, the resource management decisions made by DEn at
a certain time instant remain no longer the optimal decisions as
soon as the IE supplied information on which these decisions
were based becomes obsolete. Therefore, the IEs must send
the fresh information to the DEn periodically to prevent
the aforementioned situation. As soon as the DEn receives
the updated information, it revises its resource management
decisions and enforces them to achieve an optimal network
performance over time. There can be two reasons that the DEn
receives a delayed information from IE entities set up across
the network. First, there exists congestion in the network due
to which it takes longer for the information data to reach the
DEn. Second, an operator wants to cut down the signalling
trafﬁc load generated by that information element by reducing
the frequency of updates. In such situations the question is how
long is the validity period of the IEs provided information
and what could be the consequences if resource management
decisions are not updated in due time?
The above questions can be answered with the help of
the simulation results shown in Figs. 11, 12, and 13. For
this purpose the same simulation scenario, which has been
discussed earlier in this section and whose conﬁgurations has
been listed in Table IV is employed. In this simulation study,
the DEn decision interval is varied from 10ms to 15s and the
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.3
0.5
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Downlink AP throughput (Mbps)
Resource management decision interval (sec)
WLAN Network Performance
Fig. 11.
Downlink throughput variations of WLAN access point for different
values of the DEn decision interval. The “Linear Programming” approach
has been used for resource management decisions.
“Linear Programming” approach is used to make the resource
management decisions. It is clear that the optimal resource
management decisions should provide an optimum network
capacity for both WLAN and LTE networks. It can be seen
in the Fig. 11 that the WLAN access point throughput, which
represents that network’s capacity, remains at the optimum
point until the DEn updates the resource management de-
cisions at least every 1 second. Any further delays would
cause the system throughput to reduce. This is due to the user
movements (at 6 km/h speed) because of which their channel
conditions vary and hence their PHY data rates change. When
these variations are not tracked by the DEn due to lack of
fresh information the optimal resource management decisions
cannot be carried out. For example, if a user’s PHY data rate
has increased from 24 Mbps to 36 Mbps during the elongated
decision interval, his throughput will not be upgraded by the
DEn until the information about this change reaches DEn
and it revises the resource management decisions. Similarly a
high trafﬁc volume will be continuously sent to a user whose
PHY data rate has decreased from 36 Mbps to 24 Mbps during
the decision interval. This will cause that user to experience
large packet delays due the fact that some of the data are being
buffered at the access point due to PHY data rate downgrade.
Due to such events the WLAN network performance degrades.
It can be noticed from the Fig. 11 that increasing the DEn
decision interval to 15s causes approximately 30% degradation
in the network capacity.
Fig. 12 shows a similar behavior for the LTE network,
which may undergo cell throughput degradations due to the
elongated DEn decision intervals. The cell throughput can
reduce up to 9% compared to its optimal value if a decision
interval of 15s is considered. However, it can be observed
that the performance of the LTE network is less sensitive
to DEn decision intervals compared to WLAN network. For
example, a noticeable capacity degradation is seen for the LTE
network for a 5s decision interval while such a behavior was
observed for the WLAN network at a 3s decision interval.
The reason for this phenomenon lies in the fact that WLAN

90
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.3
0.5
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Downlink cell throughput (Mbps)
Resource management decision interval (sec)
LTE Network Performance
Fig. 12.
LTE downlink cell throughput variations for different values of the
DEn decision interval. The “Linear Programming” approach has been used
for resource management decisions.
has a smaller coverage area and the user PHY data rates
decrease sharply when commuting away from the access point.
Therefore, the information about user PHY data rate becomes
stale relatively faster and, in turn, affects the optimality of the
resource management decisions.
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.3
0.5
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
File download time (sec)
Resource management decision interval (sec)
FTP Downlink Performance
Fig. 13.
Mean ﬁle download time experienced by FTP users. The ﬁgure
shows how the FTP performance is affected by different values of DEn
decision interval. The “Linear Programming” approach has been used for
resource management decisions.
It has been seen that when the resource management de-
cisions are not optimal, capacities of access networks are
reduced. A natural consequence of this will be deteriorations
in the perceived user QoE. An example of this is illustrated
in Fig. 13, which shows the mean ﬁle download time for FTP
users. It can be observed that the users have to wait longer
for ﬁle download completion if DEn fails to make optimal
resource management decisions. Actually, this is because of
the reduced network capacities that the users can no longer
achieve high throughput and hence suffer from QoE degrada-
tions. The simulation results show that ﬁle download time can
increase up to 24% compared to the optimal value, if DEn
makes resource management decisions every 15s.
The above discussion implies that a decision interval of at
most 1 second should be employed in order to achieve an
optimal network performance. However, this value is speciﬁc
to the simulation scenario being discussed and may not hold
for other scenarios. For example, in the current scenario the
users are moving with a speed of 6km/h following the random
direction mobility model. If this conﬁguration is changed or
some additional dynamic background trafﬁc load is added to
the network, a rerun of this sensitivity analysis will be needed.
VII. HEURISTIC ALGORITHMS
The solution of the resource allocation problem obtained
through mathematical modeling using Linear Programming
provides an upper limit on the achievable network capacity. A
common practice in this regard is to consider that maximum
achievable performance as a target and then devise some
heuristic algorithms, which try to attain a similar perfor-
mance. The rationale behind this practice is the involved
high complexity of Linear Programming problem. The high
complexity requires substantial computing power and time
to solve these problems. This makes the use of Linear Pro-
gramming unsuitable for realtime optimization tasks in most
of the cases. In this section, ﬁrst of all the complexity of
the proposed Linear Programming approaches is discussed
and then two heuristic algorithms are developed for downlink
and uplink communication scenarios. The effectiveness of the
suggested algorithms is also evaluated by comparing it with
the corresponding Linear Programming approaches.
A customary way of analyzing the complexity of a Linear
Programming problem is through the number of involved
variables and constraints. Fig. 14 depicts the complexity of the
Linear Programming problem for downlink communication.
The two curves indicate that the number of variables and
constraints increase linearly with the number of active users in
the network. Moreover, even for a large number of users (e.g.,
100) the Linear Programming problem seems to have fairly
small computational complexity. This is because only few
hundreds of variable and constraints are involved at that user
count. This fact is also veriﬁed by examining the wall-clock
time required to solve these Linear Programming problems
on a laboratory server computer 3. The machine was able to
solve any of such problems in less than 10ms of wall-clock
time. The observation is based on an analysis involving 20,000
random problems with active number of users varying from 3
to 100.
TABLE V
AN EXAMPLE PROBLEM OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN DOWNLINK
COMMUNICATION.
User
Normalized network
Data rate demand [kbps]
path cost per kbps
Minimum
Maximum
WLAN
LTE
UE1
6 × 10−5
4 × 10−5
103
103
UE2
9 × 10−5
5 × 10−5
103
103
Before the development of the heuristic algorithm, an un-
derstanding of the resource allocation problem is developed
3Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 Enterprise 64bit, Intel c⃝Xeon CPU
@ 2.67GHz, 48GB RAM

91
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Number of active users
Complexity of Problem − Downlink
 
 
Number of variables
Number of constraints
Fig. 14.
The complexity of Linear Programming problem for downlink
communication described in Table III.
with the help of a simple example presented in Table V. In
this example, there are two multihomed users who require a
ﬁxed data rate of 1 Mbps to run a realtime service, e.g., video
streaming. The normalized network path cost on each access
link of the user is also mentioned in the table. The normalized
cost represents the fraction of total access network resources
to offer a user with 1 Kbps data rate over that access network.
The normalized costs help to directly compare the resource
consumption of WLAN and LTE access networks for a given
amount of data rate, e.g., it can be seen that UE1 has less path
cost for the LTE access link compared to its WLAN access
link.
The most suitable strategy to allocate resources in such a
situation is through the greedy approach. This implies that
users should be served over that particular access link that
costs less network resources. It can be noticed from the table
that both users have less normalized cost for LTE access links
compared to that of WLAN access links. Therefore, according
to the greedy strategy both users should be served over their
LTE access link. Serving them with their minimum data rate
over the LTE access network will consume 4 × 10−2 and 5 ×
10−2 fraction of resources, respectively. In other words, it will
require a total of 9% of the available LTE resources.
This strategy of the greedy approach is the main driver
behind the heuristic algorithm developed for resource allo-
cation in downlink communication as depicted in Fig. 16.
The algorithm takes the network path costs and user data rate
demands as inputs. It traverses through the list of multihomed
users and serve them with the minimum data demands over
their less expensive access links. If it happens that the available
network resources are already assigned, then the rest of the
users are served over the other access network. In case, the
network resources of both access networks are consumed
without satisfying the minimum data rate demands of all users,
the algorithm returns an error message. The error message
indicates that the provided problem is infeasible and there is
no solution to the problem.
After fulﬁlling the minimum data rate demands of all users,
the left over network resources should be assigned to the
users whose maximum data rate demand is greater than their
minimum data rate demand. Typically, they are the FTP/HTTP
users. Though the same greedy approach can also be employed
here once again, it has to be slightly modiﬁed. This is because
satisfying the maximum data rate demand of ‘each’ user is
not compulsory. Therefore, only those users should be served
who can achieve greater data rates with the available network
resources. For this purpose, a list is prepared where the
network path cost of each user for ‘both’ of its access links
is added. The size of this list is twice the number of users.
Sorting this list in ascending order, users are served in the
same order in which their access link costs appear in the list.
This procedure of serving users up to their maximum data rate
demand is performed in subprocess (A) in Fig. 16. A ﬂow chart
of subprocess (A) has been shown in Fig. 17. At the end, the
heuristic algorithm returns the user data rate assignments over
each of their access links.
In order to evaluate the performance of the heuristic al-
gorithm described in Figs. 16 and 17, its results are com-
pared with that of the “Linear Programming” approach. The
evaluation is made more comprehensive and thorough by
solving 20,000 random problems of resource allocation using
both the heuristic and “Linear Programming” approaches. The
problems are generated automatically with the help of a script
that considers a large range of active users from 3 to 100. A
probability of 50% is used to determine if a user in a random
problem should be using the realtime service (i.e., minimum
and maximum data rate demands are same) or the non-realtime
service (i.e., maximum data rate demand is greater than
minimum data rate demand). Fig. 15 summarizes the outcome
of this evaluation process. The ﬁgure shows a CDF and PDF
curves of values representing how large the total network
capacity is achieved using “Linear Programming” approach
compared to that obtained by the heuristic algorithm in random
resource allocation problems. The CDF curve depicts that
in 90% of the problems, the heuristic approach achieved a
network capacity, which was at most 3% less than the optimum
achievable capacity computed by the “Linear Programming”
approach. Considering the simple complexity of the heuristic
approach it is a great performance.
A question can be raised at this point; why the simple greedy
approach cannot achieve the same performance as shown by
“Linear Programming” approach. This can be explained with
the help of an example shown in Table VI. It is a slightly
modiﬁed version of the example presented in Table V where
the maximum data rate demands of users have been raised to
23.75 Mbps. The resource allocation problem in this example
is solved using the developed heuristic algorithm as follows.
First of all, both users are served with their minimum data
rate demands (i.e., 1 Mbps) over LTE access network due
to minimum involved resource consumption. This costs 9%
of LTE resources. As there are still 91% of LTE and 100%
of WLAN access network resources available, a sorted list
of network path costs is prepared to utilize the remaining

92
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF Plot
Difference to optimum network capacity (percentage)
Probability
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Difference to optimum network capacity (percentage)
PDF Plot
Probability
(b)
Fig. 15.
The performance of the proposed heuristic algorithm for downlink
communication. The CDF and PDF curves show the difference of the achieved
network capacity using the heuristic algorithm compared to the optimum value
obtained using “Linear Programming” approach.
resources. The cost 4 × 10−5 of LTE access link from UE1
comes at the top, therefore 91% of LTE access network
resources are allocated to UE1, which translates to a data rate
of 22.75 Mbps. This way UE1 is assigned with a total data rate
of 23.75 Mbps considering also 1 Mbps data rate allocation
in the ﬁrst step. The next lowest access link cost is of UE2
for its LTE access link (i.e., 5 × 10−5), however, there are
no resources left on the LTE access network. Therefore, no
action is taken for UE2 this time. The next lowest cost would
be 6 × 10−5 of UE1 for its WLAN access link, but this user
has already been served up to its maximum data rate demand.
Hence no additional resource can be assigned to UE1. The last
entry in the sorted list of cost would be 9×10−5 of UE2 over
its WLAN access link. 100% of the WLAN access network
resources are assigned to this user, which amount to a data rate
of 11.1 Mbps. This way, UE2 gets a total data rate allocation
of 12.2 Mbps considering also 1 Mbps data rate allocation in
the ﬁrst step. Hence, the total network capacity amounts to
22.75+12.2=34.95 Mbps, in this case.
Start
INPUT: LTE & WLAN network 
path costs and  data rate 
demands of users
Make one list of network path costs from all 
users for their WLAN & LTE access links
Any WLAN or LTE 
network resources 
left?
End
OUTPUT: Assigned data 
rates over LTE & WLAN 
access links for each user
This user has lower 
path cost for LTE?
Are there any LTE 
network resources 
left?
Are there any WLAN 
network resources 
left?
Serve the user with the minimum data 
rate demand over LTE access link
Yes
Serve the user with the minimum data 
rate demand over WLAN access link
Yes
All users served with 
minimum data rate 
demand?
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Sort this  list in ascending order. Serve 
users up to their maximum data 
demands, if possible.
No
OUTPUT: ERROR 
(Infeasible problem)
Fetch an 
unserved user
A
Fig. 16.
Flow chart of the heuristic algorithm to solve the resource allocation
problem in downlink communication.
TABLE VI
ANOTHER EXAMPLE PROBLEM OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN DOWNLINK
COMMUNICATION.
User
Normalized network
Data rate demand [kbps]
path cost per kbps
Minimum
Maximum
WLAN
LTE
UE1
6 × 10−5
4 × 10−5
103
23.75 × 103
UE2
9 × 10−5
5 × 10−5
103
23.75 × 103

93
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Any WLAN or LTE 
network resources 
left?
This path cost is of 
LTE access link?
Are there any LTE 
network resources 
left?
Are there any WLAN 
network resources 
left?
Serve the user up to maximum data or 
up to the available LTE resources
Yes
Serve the user up to maximum data or 
up to the available WLAN resources
Yes
Is the list empty?
No
Yes
No
Remove this user from the list
User linked to this
 cost has been served up 
to its max data rate 
demand?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Fetch the next path cost entry 
from the list
Start
INPUT: LTE & WLAN network path 
costs and  data rate demands of 
users; sorted list of costs
End
OUTPUT: Assigned data 
rates over LTE & WLAN 
access links for each user
No
Yes
A
Fig. 17.
Flow chart of the subprocess (A) in Fig. 16.
Solving the same problem using the “Linear Programming”
approach serves UE1 completely over WLAN access network
despite the fact that it has lower cost for LTE access link. This
is because assigning all LTE resources to UE1 means that UE2
will have to be served over its WLAN access link that has
the highest path cost. This would be a bad move that could
decrease the over spectral efﬁciency of the network. There-
fore, the “Linear Programming” approach takes an intelligent
decision of serving UE1 over WLAN access network and keep
LTE resources for UE2. Following this strategy, UE1 is served
completely over WLAN access network with data rate of 16.67
Mbps and UE1 over the LTE access network with data rate of
20 Mbps. This way, total network capacity amounts to 36.67
Mbps which is 4.9% higher than that attained by using the
heuristic approach.
A sophisticated heuristic algorithm that mimics the “Linear
Programming” approach in conceiving the effects of resource
allocation of a user on the achievable spectral efﬁciency of
the other users will be overly complex. This is because as the
user count increases, each resource allocation will have to get
feedback from many of the users in a recursive way. Based on
this feedback, the algorithm would have to decide whether per-
forming this resource allocation could degrade the achievable
spectral efﬁciency of other users. Above all, devising such an
advanced scheme would not offer a signiﬁcant performance
gain and would be against the idea of developing a simple
alternative approach.
The performance of the developed heuristic approach is
evaluated using the simulation scenario discussed in Sec-
tion VI. This way, the results of the heuristic approach can be
compared with that of the “Linear Programming” approach.
Fig. 18 compares the performance of the FTP downlink
application for two competing approaches. It is expected
that the heuristic approach might not be able to deliver a
performance matching to that of “Linear Programming”. The
FTP downlink throughput as well as ﬁle download time verify
this expected behavior. However, the performance degradation
is not signiﬁcant. A comparison of numerical values reveals
that the loss of performance is as low as 4%. A very similar
observation is also made for HTTP application performance.
In this case users encountered just 3% degradation in their
QoE for webpage downloads. Moreover, the absolute values
of increase in download times are in the range of milliseconds.
Such a slight increase in download time remains unnoticed for
human users.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Scenario type
Downlink mean IP throughput (Mbps)
FTP Throughput
 
 
Heuristic−Algorithm
Linear−Programming
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Scenario type
Mean file download time (sec)
FTP Download Time
(b)
Fig. 18.
FTP downlink performance comparison for “Heuristic Algorithm”
and “Linear Programming” approaches.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Scenario type
Downlink mean IP throughput (Mbps)
Throughput for HTTP Users
 
 
Heuristic−Algorithm
Linear−Programming
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Scenario type
Mean file download time (sec)
Webpage Download Time
(b)
Fig. 19. HTTP downlink performance comparison for “‘Heuristic Algorithm”
and “Linear Programming” approaches.
Though non-realtime applications suffer slightly due to
the use of the approach based on heuristic algorithm, the
performance of realtime applications essentially remains un-
altered. The reason behind this phenomenon has already been

94
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
discussed. That is, the foremost target of the heuristic approach
is to satisfy the minimum data rate demands of all users.
Owing to the fact that realtime applications require a ﬁxed
amount data rate, their minimum data rate demands are always
fulﬁlled. Only after allocating the minimum required data
rates to all users, the heuristic approach distributes the left-
over resources among the non-realtime users. Therefore, if
the resources are not utilized optimally, there will be fewer
resources left to serve the TCP users with the data rates surplus
to their minimum data rate demands.
The simulation results of realtime applications (i.e., VoIP
and video) has not been shown here in order to avoid unnec-
essary repetitions.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This work highlights the importance of multihoming support
in the integrated heterogeneous wireless networks of 3GPP and
non-3GPP access technologies. The existing 3GPP speciﬁca-
tions for integration of two types of the access technologies
are extended to realize multihoming support for the users. Fol-
lowing the proposed extensions, a network simulation model
is developed, where LTE and WLAN co-exist. This work also
focuses on the problem of optimum resource utilization in such
heterogeneous networks, where the users and network opera-
tors can take advantage of multihoming support. The problem
of optimum network resource allocation is mathematically
modeled using the Linear Programming technique. The proof
of concept is provided through the simulation results. With the
help of simulation results it is shown that the proposed scheme
of resource allocation brings twofold beneﬁts when compared
to the 3GPP proposal. On the one hand, it signiﬁcantly
improves the network capacity and on the other hand it fulﬁlls
the user application QoS demands, which otherwise cannot be
satisﬁed from QoS unaware non-3GPP access technologies. In
addition to the Linear Programming based solution, this work
also proposes a heuristic based method for network resource
management. This method not only exhibits less computational
complexity but also accomplishes a performance gain close to
that attained by mathematical optimization techniques. This
makes it feasible for use in real world network equipment.
REFERENCES
[1] U. Toseef, Y. Zaki, A. Timm-Giel, and C. G¨org, Optimized Flow
Management using Linear Programming in Integrated Heterogeneous Net-
works, The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks
Communications, Lisbon, Portugal, November 2012.
[2] 3GPP Technical Report TS 23.402, Architecture enhancements for non-
3GPP accesses, 3rd Generation Partnership Project, v10.6.0, December
2011.
[3] Q. Song and A. Jamalipour, Network Selection in an Integrated Wire-
less LAN and UMTS Environment using Mathematical Modeling and
Computing Techniques, IEEE Wireless Commun., June 2005.
[4] W. Song, H. Jiang, and W. Zhuang, Performance analysis of the WLAN-
ﬁrst scheme in cellular/WLAN interworking, IEEE Trans. Wireless Com-
mun., vol. 6, May 2007.
[5] F. Yu and V. Krishnamurthy, Optimal Joint Session Admission Control in
Integrated WLAN and CDMA Cellular Networks with Vertical Handoff,
IEEE Transaction on Mobile Computing, vol. 6, January 2007.
[6] H. Zhai, X. Chen, and Y. Fang, How Well Can the IEEE 802.11 Wireless
LAN Support Quality of Service?, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol.
4, 2005.
[7] W. Song, H. Jiang, and W. Zhuang, “Call admission control for integrated
voice/data services in cellular/WLAN interworking”, IEEE ICC06, vol.
12, June 2006.
[8] S. Lincke-Salecket, Load shared integrated networks, Personal Mobile
Communications Conference, 2003.
[9] OPNET website, http://www.opnet.com, as accessed in June 2013.
[10] R. Wakikawa, V. Devarapalli, G. Tsirtsis, T. Ernst, and K. Nagami,
Multiple care-of addresses registration (RFC 5648), 2009.
[11] G. Tsirtsis, H. Soliman, G. Giaretta, and K. Kuladinithi, Flow bindings
in mobile IPv6 and NEMO basic support (RFC 6089), 2010.
[12] G. Tsirtsis, G. Giaretta, H. Soliman, and N. Montavont, Trafﬁc selectors
for ﬂow bindings (RFC 6088), 2011.
[13] U. Toseef, Y. Zaki, A. Timm-Giel, C. G¨org., Development of Simulation
Environment for Multi-homed Devices in Integrated 3GPP and non-3GPP
Networks, The 10th MobiWAC conference, Paphos, 2012.
[14] SAIL consortium, D.C.1: Architectural Concepts of Connectivity Ser-
vices, July 2011.
[15] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Speciﬁcations ISO/IEC 8802-11:1999(E); ANSI/IEEE Std 802.11.
[16] G. Bianchi, Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coor-
dination Function, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 535-547, March 2000.
[17] R. Litjens, F. Roijers, J. L. van den Berg, R. J. Boucherie, and
M. Fleuren, Performance Analysis of wireless LANs: an Integrated
Packet/Flow Level Approach, ITC Conference, Berlin, Germany, August
2003.
[18] J. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz, EvalVid - A Framework for Video
Transmission and Quality Evaluation, 13th International Conference on
Modeling Techniques and Tools for Computer Performance Evaluation,
pp. 255-272, Illinois, USA, September 2003.
[19] Recommendation ITU-T G.722.2, “Wideband coding of speech at
around 16 kbit/s using Adaptive Multi-Rate Wideband (AMR-WB)”,
Approved in July 2003.
[20] U. Toseef, M. Li, A. Balazs, X. Li, A. Timm-Giel, C. G¨org, Investigating
the Impacts of IP Transport Impairments on VoIP service in LTE
Networks, 16th VDE/ITG Fachtagung Mobilkommunikation, 2011
[21] 3GPP Technical Report TS 36.213, Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio
Access (E-UTRA); Physical layer procedures, v10.2.0, June 2011.
[22] IBM CPLEX Optimizer, http://www.ibm.com, as accessed in June 2013
[23] 3GPP Technical Report TS 25.814, Physical layer aspects for E-UTRA,
3rd Generation Partnership Project, v.7.1.0, September 2006.
[24] N. Zahariev, Y. Zaki, T. Weerawardane, C. G¨org, and A. Timm-Giel.
Optimized service aware lte mac scheduler with comparison against
other well known schedulers. In 10th International Conference on
Wired/Wireless Internet Communications, WWIC 2012, June 2012.
[25] S. N. K. Marwat, T. Weerawardane, Y. Zaki, C. G¨org, and A. Timm-Giel,
Design and Performance Analysis of Bandwidth and QoS Aware LTE
Uplink Scheduler in Heterogeneous Trafﬁc Environment, 8th International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference, Limassol,
Cyprus, August 2012.
[26] U. Toseef, Y. Zaki, L. Zhao, A. Timm-Giel, and C. G¨org, QoS Aware
Multi-homing in Integrated 3GPP and non-3GPP Future Networks, The
7th International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications,
Lisbon, Portugal, November 2012.
[27] Y. Zaki, T. Weerawardane, C. G¨org, and A. Timm-Giel, Multi-QoS-
Aware Fair Scheduling for LTE, VTC Spring, 2011.
[28] Recommendation P.800, Methods for subjective determination of trans-
mission quality, Approved in August 1996.

