183
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Policy for Group Handover Attempts over Heterogeneous Networks
Nivia Cruz Quental and Paulo Andr´e da S. Gonc¸alves
Centro de Inform´atica – CIn
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco – UFPE
Recife, Brazil
Email: ncq@cin.ufpe.br, pasg@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract—The proliferation of heterogeneous wireless networks
and devices with multiple wireless link-layer technologies have
called attention to the development of efﬁcient vertical handover
policies. Research on providing efﬁcient vertical handover in-
cludes either the proposal of novel solutions or adaptations into
existing horizontal handover schemes. In this work, we propose
a policy for Group Vertical Handover (GVHO) attempts. We
apply such a policy to an existing GVHO scheme, which handles
vertical group handover based on a threshold that limits handover
blocking probability. Performance is evaluated through simula-
tion under several scenarios. To provide more realistic situations,
we consider channel holding time in our studies. In addition,
we study the fraction of blocked nodes and we vary threshold
values for blocking probability. We compare our solution to that
of the studied GVHO scheme. Results show that our solution
reduces the handover latency and the fraction of blocked nodes
while maintaining the handover blocking probability under a
predeﬁned threshold. In particular, latency is reduced from 11%
to 51.5% in some of the scenarios studied.
Keywords-GVHO; handover; policy of attempts.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Load balancing and handover among different Radio Ac-
cess Technologies (RATs) are the main concerns in Group
Vertical Handover (GVHO) studies [1]-[3]. Research on
GVHO covers simultaneously issues from Group Handover
(GHO) [4]-[6] and Vertical Handover (VHO) [7]-[18].
GHO takes place when two or more Mobile Nodes (MNs)
intend to request handover at the same time to the same base
station. During GHO, MNs are not necessarily aware of the
presence of each other. Thus, GHO procedures must carry out
load balancing. To achieve this, criteria such as energy saving,
available bandwidth, and type of service may be considered.
The continuity of telephone calls and streaming sessions
over heterogeneous networks are covered by the VHO research
ﬁeld. Quality of Service (QoS) and the type of trafﬁc may
also deﬁne requirements for handover decisions apart from the
underlying network technology available. IEEE 802.21 [19]
is an example of effort to standardize VHO procedures and
facilitate the proposal of new VHO solutions.
Providing support to GVHO has been motivated by the
recent popularity of devices such as tablets and smartphones,
which are capable of supporting multiple link-layer technolo-
gies and handling different kinds of trafﬁc. Additionally, use
cases involving users moving in trains and on buses are
becoming more common and introduce new challenges. At
the IP level, protocols like Proxy Mobile IPv6 [20] manage
mobility sessions at the network layer. In this paper, we are
particularly interested in the link layer handover.
Research on GVHO may involve the three main handover
phases: discovery, decision, and execution [18]. The decision
phase interests us the most, since the decision process in
GVHO is still an open issue and it may impact the GVHO
overall performance. Further, the decision algorithm itself must
be associated to an optimized policy for GVHO attempts to
guarantee better handover performance. Research on GVHO
seeks to provide efﬁcient decision-making techniques with
their own policy for handover attempts. Some of them are
based on centralized entities [21], distributed algorithms [22],
random delays [2], reinforcement learning [23], game the-
ory [2], and optimization problems [3]. We give special atten-
tion to Lee et al. [3], since it addresses the latency reduction
while considering load balancing, support to legacy networks,
and handover blocking probability. A reduced GVHO latency
means less time spent in the GVHO operation. Load balanc-
ing is the consequence of a efﬁcient resource management.
Controlling the handover blocking probability means that the
probability of the MN having its handover request denied by
the target network is limited. Those issues are fundamental
for advances in GVHO. The objective of Lee et al. [3] is to
model GVHO decision as an optimization problem. Latency
is minimized given the condition of maintaining the handover
blocking probability under a predeﬁned threshold. Although
Lee et al. [3] present encouraging results, we ﬁnd optimization
opportunities in the policy for handover attempts.
In this paper, we propose a policy of attempts for GVHO.
Our policy is based on exponential backoff and uses in-
formation from the GVHO scheme itself. We improve on
previous experiments [1] by considering channel holding time
in performance evaluations, which makes studied scenarios
more realistic. In addition, we study the fraction of blocked
nodes and several thresholds for the blocking probability. The
proposed solution reduces average latency and the fraction of
blocked nodes in comparison to results found in [3].
The remainder of paper is organized as follows: we present
GVHO concepts in Section
II. We present related work in
Section III. We detail the GVHO scheme proposed in [3]
in Section IV. We present the proposed policy for GVHO
attempts in Section V. We present performance evaluation
results in Section VI. Finally, we highlight our conclusions

184
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in Section VII.
II.
GROUP VERTICAL HANDOVER - GVHO
Recently, the concept of handover has evolved to take into
account the continuity of communication sessions even among
different RATs [24]. Technological evolution has allowed the
rising of cheaper gadgets supplied with multiple network inter-
faces. The appearance of such gadgets, in turn, has encouraged
new research in mobility management considering brand-new
use-cases. Studies in the Group Vertical Handover (GVHO)
area of interest aim at managing different connections taking
place at the same time in public spaces with a diverse number
of available technologies.
An example of GVHO scenario is illustrated in Figure 1.
Suppose an open event, like a music festival where users
desire to communicate with friends and transmit multimedia
data. In this scenario, users are constantly changing their
location. There may be several available RATs and dozens of
devices in communication sessions simultaneously. If there are
commercial agreements among the telecommunication carriers,
it must be possible to maintain a communication session even
if a group of users move from one network to another at the
same time.
LTE
WiMAX
Figure 1. A GVHO scenario.
The integration between heterogeneous networks can be di-
vided in two approaches: loose coupling and tight coupling [7].
In the loose approach, heterogeneous networks are integrated
a the IP level, but they operate independently at the link layer.
In this case, it is necessary to rely on a gateway to support
authentication and accounting. Since handover is done at
link layer, routing tables and authentication information must
be updated. In order to accomplish this operation, mobility
support is added to IPv4 and IPv6 protocols. The Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) efforts in mobility management
are concentrated at the IP level and layers above. The main
protocols derived from that effort are Mobile IP [25], Mobile
IPv6 Fast Handovers [26], PMIPv6 [20], and Fast Handovers
for Proxy Mobile IPv6 (FPMIPv6) [27]. These standards
allow the MN to maintain its initial IP address, even when
it is out of its home network. The main advantage of loose
coupling is the simple adaptation to legacy systems. However,
handling handover only at the IP level may not entirely solve
the problem of interruption of communication during this
operation.
In the tight approach for heterogeneous networks coupling,
the network entities of each technology must explicitly col-
laborate with each other. The authentication, communication
management, and accounting are integrated. This approach
requires more standardization effort than the loose approach.
However, the handover management becomes more effective
in terms of the number of lost packets.
For all layers of the protocol stack, the proposal of efﬁcient
and effective handover procedures for mobility management
including handover decisions and optimal resource allocation
is a critical need. In this paper, we are particularly interested
in the efﬁciency of GVHO at link layer, when tight coupling
takes place. In that context, proposals may involve the three
handover phases [18]:
•
Discovery - Service discovery and network infor-
mation gathering. A speciﬁc criterion is adopted to
determine if handover is necessary. According to [28],
the gathered information may have a predetermined
nature, like user policies and preferences, or time-
varying nature, like signal-to-noise ratio, transmission
rate, Point of Attachment (PoA) load, battery con-
sumption, Received Signal Strength (RSS), RSS with
threshold, RSS with hysteresis, etc.
•
Decision - One network in a list of candidates is
chosen, taking into consideration data collected in the
earlier phase. Depending on the network technology,
handover may be MN-initiated or network-initiated.
The decision technique and the policy for handover
attempts strongly impacts the resource management
and the overall handover performance. Thus, the de-
cision phase is the focus of this paper.
•
Execution - Networks and MNs exchange control mes-
sages to make channel switching. This phase should
minimize service interruption in order to appear im-
perceptible to the user. This phase is strongly media-
dependent. The Hard Handover (HHO) implementa-
tion is mandatory for all technologies. HHO takes
place when the MN disconnects from its original
PoA before making the ﬁrst contact with its target
PoA. Since packages may be lost during that in-
terval, optional Soft Handover (SHO) mechanisms
are proposed. SHO mechanisms include Seamless
Handover; Entry Before Break (EBB); Multicarrier
Handover; Fast Base Station Switch (FBSS), or
Fast Cell Selection (FCS); and Macro-Diversity Han-
dover(MDHO) [12].
IEEE 802.21 standard [19], which describes the Media
Independent Handover (MIH) can help determining the re-
quirements for discovery and decision phases. MIH intends
to be a common mean over the link layer in order to al-
low different RATs to communicate with each other during
handover, abstracting implementation details. MIH is still a
relatively new standard and, therefore, it faces challenges
such as abstracting wireless technologies in a single interface,
incorporation into existing handover schemes, security issues,
power management, and storage issues at the information
service.
Each RAT must provide its own implementation of MIH
and must map the MIH messages to its media-dependent
primitives. The main elements of MIH are:
•
MIH Function (MIHF) - It detects changes in link
layer, controls link state and provide neighborhood
information;
•
Service Access Points (SAPs) - It deﬁnes media-
dependent/independent interfaces;

185
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
MIH Users - Entities that make use of MIH services.
A handover scenario with MIH assumes the existence of
an information service to help MNs to ﬁnd neighborhood
information. It avoids the MN to waste energy ant time making
scanning operations by itself. There are plenty of studies on
handover performance adopting MIH as an auxiliary tool for
discovery and decision processes [3][29]-[32].
There may be many different decision criteria for GVHO
such as available bandwidth, expected QoS, or battery con-
sumption. The type of service (voice or data) is a deter-
minant factor for choosing the most suitable criterion for
GVHO decision. Decisions made without network analysis and
without considering the MNs in the neighborhood may bring
disastrous performance results. Wrong handover decisions may
cause MNs to choose the same PoA, overloading it, or to
choose an inadequate network for the application in use. The
main handover decision approaches found in GVHO research
include:
•
Centralized entities [21][33] - A relay station han-
dles GVHO management, removing complexity from
MNs. This approach also reduces the uncertainty level
and ensures better performance than decentralized
approaches. The main drawback is the lower fault
tolerance. Figure 2 illustrates an architecture based
on central entity. If the entity suffers a failure, the
mobility management would be damaged.
Entity
Central
info
info
decision
decision
info
info
decision
decision
Figure 2. Central-entity-based approach.
•
Distributed algorithms [22] - The decision algorithm
makes use of well-known parallelism and synchro-
nization techniques. Distributed algorithms are usually
simple to understand. Figure 3 shows an example of
distributed approach. The architecture is fault-tolerant,
however, the algorithms are not built to adapt them-
selves to new scenarios.
•
Random delays [2] - MNs attempt to handover after
a random delay. This procedure minimizes simultane-
ous handover attempts and is considered a subtype
of the distributed algorithm approach. In Figure 4,
we present an example of handover that happens in
different instants of time for each MN. This approach
avoids collision among MNs, distributing handover
requests over time.
•
Reinforcement learning [23] - It employs Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) techniques to make MNs learn about
their surrounding environment as they make handover
P1
P2
P2’
P1’
Figure 3. Distributed-algorithm-based approach.
t
free
free
free
busy
rand2
rand1
Figure 4. Random-delay-based approach.
attempts. This approach does not require message ex-
change among users; they use the information received
from other entities over time. Figure 5 presents this
interaction. However, learning algorithms may cause
performance issues due to the complex processing.
History
History
info
info
info
info
decision
decision
Figure 5. Reinforcement-learning-based approach.
•
Game theory [2][23] - This approach maps handover
scenarios in cooperative or non-cooperative games in
which MNs are players interested in getting the best
payoff as possible, shown in Figure 6. The payoff
may be a larger bandwidth, energy saving, or better
security. Nash equilibrium is the desired stable state
in which all MNs do not have anymore strategies to
obtain better payoffs. The main advantage of this ap-
proach is the almost perfect match between a GVHO

186
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
scenario and the Game Theory competitive models.
On the other hand, it is not always possible to model
additional parameters.
Figure 6. Game-theory-based approach.
•
Mathematical optimization problems [3] - Mathemat-
ical equations are used to describe the handover
decision under predetermined conditions. Figure 7
illustrates that approach. The optimization problem
is solved by ﬁnding the ideal value for the equation
variables. This approach requires a more complex
modeling and is more ﬂexible than Game Theory-
based models.
x−>0 f(x)
lim
x−>0 f(x)
lim
Figure 7. Optimization-problem-based approach.
For any GVHO approach, the MN or the serving PoA may
determine if it is possible to request handover in a certain
time, or if it is preferable to postpone it, given the network
conditions. Policies for handover attempts can inﬂuence han-
dover performance, for better or for worse, depending upon
the adopted solution.
III.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we present a critical analysis of recent
research related to GHO, VHO, and GVHO.
A. Group Handover
Chowdhury et al. [5] propose a resource management
scheme using a dynamic bandwidth reservation policy in
mobile femtocellular network deployment. The scheme aims at
the vehicular scenario and uses the proximity of new stations
and required QoS as information to allocate the corresponding
bandwidth only when necessary. Simulation results show a
reduction in the handover call drop probability and maintains
bandwidth utilization when compared to schemes without QoS
criteria and without priority.
Jeong et al. [4] propose a speciﬁc handover scheme for
the IEEE 802.16e standard. It consists on reducing the number
of packets necessary to accomplish handover, by means of a
group-based channel scan. The MNs form groups and inside
each group there is a handover schedule for the MNs. Com-
puter simulations and Markov models were used to compare
the scheme performance with the existing scheme in the IEEE
802.16e standard. The authors observed that the proposed
scheme reduces blocking probability.
Fu et al. [6] highlight a group-based authentication scheme
for WiMAX networks. That scheme consists on the PoA
sending security context to a group of MNs if a member of
this group requests handover. The main objective is to reduce
handover latency while maintaining privacy preservation. The
metrics evaluated are latency, communication overhead and
computation cost. Simulation results show that the two earlier
metrics are reduced, however, the latter is increased.
B. Vertical Handover
The state-of-art in VHO schemes can be found in [12].
The authors give more highlights on IEEE 802.16m and 3GPP
LTE-Advanced technologies. According to the authors, IEEE
802.16m offers enhancements to link layer performance, such
as multicarrier handover, in comparison to IEEE 802.16 legacy.
The paper also presents the supported handover procedures
besides Hard Handover, such as Seamless Handover and Entry
Before Break.
In [7], Park et al. propose integration between WiMAX and
cdma2000 networks. Their approach takes elements from tight
coupling and loose coupling, introducing new messages in link
layer and establishing tunnels in the IP layer. Simulations with
OPNET measured delay in function of the elapsed time and the
speed of nodes. Packet loss ratio is also measured in function
of the elapsed time. According to the authors, those metrics
are reduced in comparison to a loosely-coupled scheme.
Kim et al. [8] present a proposal for the Hierarchical
Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6). They propose to execute IP-level
handover and link-layer handover simultaneously, in order to
reduce total time. Results show the reduction of latency and
package loss in a intra-domain scenario in comparison to
HMIPv6.
Shen et al. [9] propose a cost-function-based network se-
lection. The authors consider available bandwidth information,
trafﬁc load and RSS. Simulation results show the scheme
behavior in different scenarios. The authors conclude that the
proposed scheme affects several system parameters, which
need to be handled carefully.
Stevens-Navarro et al. [10] uses a Markov decision process
for VHO having the maximization of the total expected reward
per connection as objective. Performance evaluation considers
voice and data applications. Numerical results show that the
proposed algorithm performs better than the simple-additive-
weighting algorithm.
Yeh et al. [11] propose the Fast Intra-Network and Cross-
layer Handover (FINCH). It is a complementary mechanism to
Mobile IPv4 for intra-domain mobility management. The main
objective is to reduce latency at the IP layer. FINCH uses cross-
layering techniques, which allows a more efﬁcient localization

187
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and path optimization. The authors use numerical simulation to
compare FINCH to Mobile IP, Fast Mobile IP, HMIP, Cellular
IP, and HAWAII. The authors observe that FINCH reduces
location cost and overall latency.
Gondi et al. [13] propose to use network context informa-
tion during handover. These information include location, re-
quired bandwidth, battery status, available network interfaces,
and authentication key. The authors give special attention
to security in VHO. Experiments are run in a testbed to
demonstrate how the proposal can be deployed.
Choi et al. [14] propose a new metric for VHO decision:
Interference to other Interferences-plus-Noise Ratio (IINR).
The main objective is to enhance throughput by analyzing
the interference among cells in a cooperative fashion. The
MN only handover to another cell if there are possibility of
throughput gains. The authors use simulation to prove that the
proposed scheme increases throughput at the scenarios studied
in comparison to schemes that use Signal to Interference-plus-
Noise Ratios (SINRs) as decision metric.
Koh et al. [15] study the fast handover in wireless multicast
networks. According to the authors, the message calls to the
IGMP protocol can be optimized when introducing Multicast
Handover Agents (MHAs) at the base stations. Numerical
simulations show a reduction of delay in the scenarios studied.
Kim et al. [16] propose a common link layer for 3G,
WiMAX, and WiBRO networks. Additionally, three decision
schemes are presented based on available bandwidth and cost
employing neural networks. Simulations measure throughput,
cost, and handover success rate and show better results than
RSSI-based schemes.
The work in [17] concerns with the TCP throughput during
handover in a FPMIPv6 network. The solution includes MIH
to make QoS negotiations, preregister, and pre-authentication.
Simulations with OPNET show that the proposal reduces TCP
overhead in comparison to FPMIPv6.
Zekri et al. [18] present a survey on VHO solutions.
It highlights the main technical challenges in heterogeneous
wireless networks underlying seamless vertical handover. The
authors also presents the standards involved and present com-
prehensively the mobility management process.
C. Group Vertical Handover
In [21], a relay station is used as a centralized entity to
coordinate GVHO. The scenario studied is the movement of
users in a train. Handover blocking and interruption proba-
bilities are evaluated with the increase of the calls-per-minute
ratio. The evaluation compares schemes with and without the
relay station. The authors conclude that the proposed scheme
reduces handover blocking and interruption probabilities. In
this case, the relay station is responsible for executing the
policy for handover attempts. The solution has limitations
if co-existence with legacy systems is needed. This is due
to the need of introducing a new infrastructure with special
requirements.
Ning et al. [33] propose that a network entity called
Radio Resource Management Center (RRMC) is responsible
for collecting data from the nodes and network candidates.
Thus, the RRMC decides which group of nodes may handover
to a given network. The decision is based on Fuzzy Clustering,
which is used to group nodes with similar characteristics. The
policy for handover attempts is totally controlled by that entity.
Results show that the solution reduces the blocking probability
in comparison to [3], a decentralized scheme. However, it does
not give results for the latency and does not make comparisons
to another centralized scheme.
Cai et al. propose three decentralized algorithms for GVHO
in [2]. The ﬁrst is a Nash equilibrium-based algorithm where
the policy for handover attempts is based on the game strategy
of each player. The second algorithm adopts random delays,
thus using a simpler policy for handover attempts. The third
algorithm is a more reﬁned version of the previous one. It
considers latency as a basis for delay calculations. Performance
evaluations show that latency values under the three algorithms
are similar. Handover blocking probability is not considered.
Niyato et al. propose a model for network selection that is
based on evolutionary games [23]. The model consider two ap-
proaches: a central entity-based approach and a decentralized-
based approach that uses a reinforcement learning model.
In the ﬁrst approach, the central entity controls handover
attempts. In the second approach, MNs are allowed to infer
the best period of time to request a handover. The fraction
of MNs choosing the same PoA is the load-balancing metric
adopted. They conclude that each approach has its advantages
in accordance with the scenario. One drawback is not evalu-
ating the impact of the approaches on latency.
Lei et al. [22] present three GVHO schemes. The ﬁrst
scheme schedules simultaneous attempts to random time peri-
ods. In the second scheme, MNs select PoAs using a predeﬁned
probability as a base. In this case, the policy of handover
attempts consists in an immediate attempt. The last scheme
requires the network to be responsible for the handover de-
cision. Results show that the last approach is more efﬁcient.
However, it may be difﬁcult to adapt it to legacy systems.
Lee et al. [3] propose a GVHO scheme, which is based
on the solution of an optimization problem. The MN is
responsible for the handover decision. The main objective is to
minimize latency while limiting the handover blocking prob-
ability. Some factors make the scheme in [3] more promising
than the other researches:
•
it does not require the presence of a relay station.
•
it may work together with legacy systems.
•
it considers two of the main GVHO metrics: load
balancing and latency.
We detail such scheme in Section IV.
IV.
REFERENCE GVHO SCHEME
Lee et al. [3] propose an optimization for the total handover
latency L, considering the handover blocking probability as
follows:
Minimize L
Subject to PHoBlock(t) ≤ PHoBlockT hreshold ,
where PHoBlock(t) is the handover blocking probability in
a time t and PHoBlockT hreshold is the maximum acceptable

188
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
value for the handover blocking probability. Latency is calcu-
lated as follows:
L = NHO.∆t,
(1)
where NHO is the total number of attempts until the MN
requests the handover; ∆t is the period of time between
consecutive attempts. If the MN decides to request in the ﬁrst
attempt, total latency would be ∆t. This is because in [3],
execution time is also equal to ∆t.
Equation (2) presents the calculation of PHoBlock(t). The
value of PHoBlock(t) is dependent on the number of candi-
date networks, their available bandwidth, and the number of
participating MNs in GVHO. In [3], it is considered that these
values can be obtained by using IEEE 802.21 MIH (Media
Independent Handover) queries and ad hoc communication.
PHoBlock(t) =
K
X
k=1
M−1
X
i=Ck(t)
(i + 1 − Ck(t)).(M − 1)!
(i + 1)!.(M − 1 − i)!
×
((P k
sel)i+1.(1 − P k
sel)M−1−i),
(2)
Where:
•
M represents the number of participating MNs.
•
K represents the number of candidate networks with
overlapping areas.
•
Ck(t) is the available bandwidth in a time t for
a networkk. The model considers that the available
bandwidth is represented by an integer value. Each
MN requires one unity for handover;
•
P k
sel : The probability of selecting networkk.
The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) condition is used in opti-
mization problems and it can be applied to (2) to determine
the P k
sel value. However, P k
sel can be obtained by using (3),
which is simpler than using KKT and induces minor changes
in results.
P k
sel(t) = Ck(t)/
K
X
k=1
Ck(t).
(3)
Now, we can ﬁnd the Moptimal(t) value that ensures the
optimization problem condition. This value can be found
by setting it initially to one, then increasing it by one
unit while the PHoBlock(t) value is still less than or equal
to PHoBlockT hreshold. This procedure is described in Algo-
rithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Find Moptimal value
Moptimal = 0 ;
repeat
p = Equation (2) ;
Moptimal = Moptimal +1 ;
until p ≤ PHoBlockT hreshold;
The probability PHO(t) with which a MN can request
handover is given by:
PHO(t) = Moptimal(t)/M.
(4)
If the MN decides not to request the handover immediately,
a new attempt will be made after a constant time interval.
The MN requires the number of attempts necessary to have a
well-succeeded handover with blocking probability less than
or equal to PHoBlockT hreshold. Algorithm 2 summarizes this
process and can also be found in [3].
Algorithm 2: Reference GVHO scheme
L = 0;
c_atts = 1;
Mtotal = number of GVHO participants;
Mremaining = Mtotal;
while Mremaining ≤ 0 do
find Moptimal
in function of (2);
calculate PHO;
if decision(PHO) then
choose networkk depending on P k
sel;
NHO = c_atts;
break ;
else
L += t_atts(c_atts);
c_atts++;
end
Mremaining = Mremaining - Moptimal
end
L += LHOexec;
Where:
•
Mtotal is the total number of MNs in GVHO.
•
Mremaining is a counter that checks for the end of
algorithm.
•
decision() is a function that returns true with
probability PHO(t).
•
LHOexec is the handover execution time. It is equal to
∆t.
•
t_atts() is a function to calculate the period of
time between consecutive attempts. In [3], the return
value of this function is always ∆t.
•
c_atts counts the number of attempts. When
decision() is true in the ﬁrst attempt, the total
execution latency is LHOexec.
Function t_atts() characterizes the policy for handover
attempts. In this case, it is a function that returns a constant
value and it is equals to the execution latency LHOexec.
V.
THE PROPOSED POLICY FOR GVHO ATTEMPTS
Despite of presenting a promising GVHO scheme, the work
in [3] lacks a good policy for handover attempts. It is based on
a constant delay, which causes a negative impact on the overall
GVHO performance as the number of MNs increases. In this
section, we present a policy for GVHO attempts that aims at
providing reduced handover latency for GVHO schemes like
the one proposed in [3]. At the same time, we intend to reduce
the latency and the number of blocked nodes, maintaining the
blocking probability premise.
In order to enhance performance results, we propose to
modify the t_atts() function in Algorithm 2. Our proposed

189
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
solution is exponential backoff-based. It depends upon the
c_atts counter and the duration of a reference slot time.
It is a particular case of random delay. Exponential backoff
algorithms have the particularity of keeping the probability
of collision and the probability of transmission stable as the
number of nodes which are sharing a medium grows [34].
Although our solution is motivated by the performance issues
in [3], it is generic enough to be applied in other schemes.
Equation (5) shows our modiﬁed version of t_atts():
t atts(c atts) =





random[0..2c atts − 1] . timeSlot ,
if c atts ≤ LimBackFactor
random[0..2LimBackF actor − 1] . timeSlot ,
otherwise
(5)
where random picks a uniformly distributed number over the
given interval; LimBackFactor is the number of attempts
that limits the range of values for random; and timeSlot is
the duration of a reference time slot, which depends on the
target network. This information is obtained via MIH.
Total latency depends directly on the number of attempts,
which varies with the return of decision(). The expo-
nential backoff approach in t_atts() gives to the MN an
opportunity for a new handover attempt after a time interval
shorter than ∆t, or even immediately. When the MN chooses
not to request handover, other MNs may request it, reduc-
ing concurrency during the next attempts. Thus, MNs ﬁnish
their handover sooner, decreasing total latency. Additionally,
the number of nodes that have their handover blocked also
decreases, making the handover more effective.
In [3], the return value of t_atts() is constant and
equals to the execution latency LHOexec. In that case, latency
always grows by a constant factor. It causes a negative effect in
the overall handover performance as the number of MN grows,
as shown in [3]. Figure 8 presents the behavior of t_atts()
in function of the number of attempts. We observe that the
interval between attempts in (5) is always smaller than the
approach in [3]. Analysis of the effect of the proposal in the
overall performance is presented in the next section.
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0
 2000  4000  6000  8000  10000 12000 14000
Constant backoff
Exponential backoff
# attempts
Backoff time (s)
Figure 8. Comparison between the different implementations for the
t_atts() function.
VI.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND COMPARISON
In this section, we extend the experiments made in [1]
introducing new parameter values and simulation conditions.
The metrics evaluated in this paper are latency and handover
blocking probability, as in [3] and
[1], and additionally,
the fraction of blocked MNs. The fraction of blocked MNs
measures the fraction of nodes that decided to request handover
and, for lack of bandwidth, had their request denied by the
destination network. This metric helps us to evaluate the
effectiveness of the GVHO scheme. All metrics are plotted
in function of the number of MNs.
The majority of the parameters also follows the work in [3]
and [1]. The value of ∆t is set to 0.1s. We study scenarios
with different values for PHoBlockT hreshold: 0.01, which is the
recommended value according to Telecordia [35]; 0.02, which
is a typical value [36][37]; and 0.05, in order to observe the
effects of a less conservative parameter. The thresholds of 0.02
and 0.05 has been addressed in the former experiments [3][1]
and the threshold of 0.01 is introduced in this paper. The
number of MNs varies from 20 to 100, as in [1]. It differs
from Lee et al. [3], where this number varies from 20 to 65.
In this paper, we introduce the Channel Holding Time
(CHT) in the simulations. CHT is the time elapsed while
a mobile node occupies a channel in a cell due to new
connections or handover in an ongoing call [38]. In [1] and
[3] is considered that all nodes leave network as soon as
they handover to it. The introduction of the CHT factor
give us a more realistic environment for analysis. The CHT
modeling usually depends on the call holding time, the cell
dimensions, cell residence time, resource allocation strategy,
and the network architecture [39]. However, studies has shown
that CHT can be approximated to a random variable with
exponential distribution [38][39]. We consider 60s as the mean
CHT. In other words, in our simulation, a set of nodes arrive,
make handover attempts according to the policy adopted ; then,
each one remain consuming a unit of bandwidth resource by
a time deﬁned by a random variable exponentially distributed
with mean 60s.
We maintain the characterization of heterogeneity as the
use of different available bandwidths to be compliant with the
modeling presented in [3]. The number of available PoAs is
5, considering the following scenarios:
Scenario 1 - All PoAs have 20 bandwidth units.
Scenario 2 - Two PoAs have 15, two PoAs have 17, and one
PoA has 20 bandwidth units, respectively.
Scenario 2 is only used in [3] for validating their simulator
and in a situation of co-existing individual handover, which
is out of the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, we include
Scenario 2 in our evaluations. The FatorLimBack parameter
is set to 10. This value is based on preliminary experiments.
We consider that MNs are switching from an arbitrary network
to an IEEE 802.11 area. The parameter timeSlot is set to
9.10−6s, which is equivalent to the SIFS time slot in IEEE
802.11 standard.
We have implemented the reference scheme and our solu-
tion in a discrete-event simulator, which was written in C++.
Figure 9 illustrates how our scheduler operates in a given

190
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
state, when node 3 has its decision made. In this example,
we have a queue of events, ordered by the scheduled time.
Initially, we have n events of MNs trying to handover at the
same time, in time t = 0. Then, each event is dequeued and
processed according to the Algorithm 2. In this case, node 3
decided to postpone handover request to time t3, enqueuing
the corresponding event. In that state, node 1 already had its
event in t = 0 processed and the decision to retry handover
at time t1 have been put at the queue. There is also another
event for node 2, which decided to execute handover at time t2.
Thus we can simulate parallelism in events, since bandwidth
allocation will only happen in another event, when the node
will in fact execute handover.
Node n
t=0
Tries HO
Node 1
t=t1
Tries HO
Node 4
t=0
Tries HO
Node 3
t=t3
Tries HO
Node 3
t=0
Tries HO
Process
Node 2
t=t2
Exec HO
...
Dequeue
Decision
Enqueue
Queue − ordered by time
Figure 9. Example of scheduler instance in our discrete-event simulator.
The implementation of the reference scheme in our simula-
tor was validated by the authors of [3]. We consider a group of
MNs simultaneously entering a new coverage area and starting
handover procedures deﬁned by the GVHO scheme studied.
We represent conﬁdence intervals with 99% of conﬁdence
level. Conﬁdence intervals appear imperceptible in Figures 10-
14. It is important to point out that we are not interested in
evaluating the decision algorithm itself, but the impact of our
policy for GVHO attempts on performance.
A. Results for Scenario 1
Figure 10 shows results for handover blocking probability
under Scenario 1. The probability increases as the number of
MNs grows from 55 for threshold 0.01, from 60 for threshold
0.02, and from 70 MNs for threshold 0.05. Thereafter, the
curves are stable. This happens because blocking probability
is getting closer to the threshold deﬁned in the optimization
problem. Since blocking probability is directly related to the
cell utilization [40], it is necessary to limit the number of MNs
entering a new cell at the same time in order to maintain the
blocking probability under the threshold. When the blocking
probability reaches the threshold, the value of Moptimal(t)
that is calculated in function of (2) can not increase anymore.
This leads the remaining MNs to wait for another handover
attempt. Thus, the stabilization of the blocking probability
curve as the number of MN grows always implies the increase
of the average latency. It is important to notice that the
curves with and without our solution are similar because the
optimization problem conditions are still the same. It means
that the application of the proposed solution does not cause
damages to the handover blocking probability, despite of the
shorter time between attempts.
Figure 11 shows results for the fraction of blocked nodes
under Scenario 1. We can observe that, as the number of
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average handover blocking probability
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Reference, threshold 0.01
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.01
Figure 10. Handover blocking probability versus the number of MNs in
Scenario 1.
MNs approximates to 100, the number of blocked MNs in the
scheme in [3] is greater than the value found in the proposed
solution. This is reﬂected in the blocking probability graph
in Figure 10. For all thresholds, the blocking probability is
slightly smaller when the number of nodes is between 95 and
100. It is due to the random nature of the attempts, which
avoids collision among MNs.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Fraction of blocked MNs(%)
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Reference, threshold 0.01
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.01
Figure 11. Fraction of blocked nodes versus the number of MNs in Scenario
1.
Figure 12 shows results for latency in Scenario 1. With
respect to the scheme in [3], we can observe that latency starts
growing from 55 MNs for threshold 0.01. For the threshold of
0.02, values start to grow at 60 MNs. Values in that curve
are greater than those for threshold 0.05, which starts growing
from 70 MNs. As we have stated before, the stabilization of the
blocking probability curve observed in Figure 10 implies the
increase of the average latency. Also, there is a greater number
of handover attempts when we use a lower threshold. It tends
to make MNs wait for more time with thresholds 0.01 and 0.02
than those using threshold 0.05. The lower the threshold is, the
more conservative is the scheme and the greater is the average

191
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
latency. We can also observe in Figure 12 the impact of the
proposed solution on the latency curve. The curve is much
smoother than the curve that does not adopt the solution.
For threshold 0.05, the latency is 11% smaller in the case
of 80 MNs and 38% smaller for 100 MNs. For threshold
0.02, latency is 18% smaller for 80 MNs and 50% smaller
for 100 MNs. Finally, for the threshold of 0.01, we observe a
reduction of 22.5% for 80 MNs and 58% for 100 MNs.
The latency reduction is due to the proposed solution,
which makes the delay between attempts more ﬂexible. The
exponential backoff also brought randomization to the scheme
allowing MNs to try handover again sooner and in different
periods of time, eventually reducing the total number of
attempts.
 0.1
 0.12
 0.14
 0.16
 0.18
 0.2
 0.22
 0.24
 0.26
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average latency (s)
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Reference, threshold 0.01
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.01
Figure 12. Latency versus the number of MNs in Scenario 1.
B. Results for Scenario 2
Figure 13 presents results for the Scenario 2. This ﬁgure
presents similarities with Figure 10 but the curves stop growing
sooner: from 50 MNs for the thresholds 0.01 and 0.02, and
from 55 MNs for the threshold 0.05. This anticipation is due
to the shorter total available bandwidth in the scenario studied.
Thus, handover blocking probability increases faster, but it also
gets stable in accordance with the established threshold.
However, we observe that the blocking probability starts
to reduce again, from 85MNs. The explanation for this phe-
nomenon is found in Figure 14. Figure 14 presents the fraction
of blocked MNs for the Scenario 2. It is important to notice
the expressive increase of the number of blocked nodes in the
scheme in [3], which causes some nodes leave the concurrency
because they were blocked. Thus, for the remaining nodes the
blocking probability gets smaller. A similar phenomenon hap-
pens to the proposed solution, however, the number of blocked
nodes is smaller, because the randomization of attempts makes
handover requests less risky. We observe this behavior in all
thresholds.
Figure 15 shows results for latency in Scenario 2. As
in Scenario 1, the curves for thresholds 0.01 and 0.02 have
greater latency values than the one with threshold 0.05. In [3],
latency starts growing from 60 MNs for threshold 0.01, from
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average handover blocking probability
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Reference, threshold 0.01
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.01
Figure 13. Handover blocking probability versus the number of MNs in
Scenario 2.
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
 4.5
 5
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Fraction of blocked MNs(%)
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Reference, threshold 0.01
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.01
Figure 14. Fraction of blocked nodes versus the number of MNs in Scenario
2.
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 1.1
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average latency (s)
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Reference, threshold 0.01
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.01
Figure 15. Latency versus the number of MNs in Scenario 2.

192
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
65 MNs for threshold 0.02, and from 70 MNs for threshold
0.05. Greater latency values are expected because the total
available bandwidth is shorter than in Scenario 1.
Figure 15 also shows that for the threshold 0.05, latency
has a reduction of 30% for 80 MNs. For the threshold 0.02,
we observe a reduction of 42% for 80 MNs. In the threshold
of 0.02, the latency is 51.5% smaller for 80 MNs. We also
notice that from 95 MNs, our solution presents a greater
latency than that one in [3]. The latency for 100MNs with
our solution is 25%, 22%, and 17% greater than the scheme
in [3] with the thresholds of 0.05, 0.02, and 0.01, respectively.
It happens because, since our solution has a smaller percentage
of blocked nodes, as shown in Figure 14. The remaining nodes,
instead of being blocked as in [3], wait for more time for
a handover opportunity and consequently, they increase the
average latency.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have proposed a policy for GVHO
attempts. Our solution uses exponential backoff in order to
allow a better distribution of handover attempts over time.
Performance evaluations have shown that our proposal makes
it possible to reduce handover latency and the percentage
of blocked nodes during handover. In particular, results have
shown that latency was reduced up to 51.5% in accordance
with the scenarios evaluated. Our future efforts will focus on
including MIH queries in the solution design and including
the information gathering phase in performance evaluation.
Although this solution is well-suited to resolve performance
issues in the scheme presented in [3], we are also interested in
studying the impact of our solution on other GVHO schemes.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. C. Quental and P. A. S.Gonc¸alves, “A Policy for Group Vertical
Handover Attempts,” in Proc. of the 13th International Conference on
Networks (ICN), Nice, 2014, pp. 154–159.
[2]
X. Cai and F. Liu, “Network Selection for Group Handover in Multi-
access Networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Beijing, 2008, pp. 2164–2168.
[3]
W. Lee and D. Cho, “Enhanced Group Handover Scheme in Multi-
Access Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60,
no. 5, 2011, pp. 2389–2395.
[4]
H. Jeong, J. Choi, H. Kang, and H. Youn, “An Efﬁcient Group-Based
Channel Scanning Scheme for Handover with IEEE 802.16e,” in Proc.
of the 26th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA), Fukuoka, 2012,
pp. 639–644.
[5]
M. Chowdhury, S. H. Chae, and Y. M. Jang, “Group Handover Man-
agement in Mobile Femtocellular Network Deployment,” in Proc. of
the 4th International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks
(ICUFN), Phuket, 2012, pp. 162 – 165.
[6]
A. Fu, S. Lan, B. Huang, Z. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “A Novel Group-Based
Handover Authentication Scheme with Privacy Preservation for Mobile
WiMAX Networks,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 11,
2012, pp. 1744–1747.
[7]
S. Park, J. Yu, and J. Ihm, “A Performance Evaluation of Vertical
Handoff Scheme between Mobile-WiMax and Cellular Networks,” in
Proc. of 16th International Conference on Computer Communications
and Networks (ICCCN), Honolulu, 2007, pp. 894 – 899.
[8]
D. Kim, H. Shin, and D. Shin, “A network-based handover scheme
for hierarchical mobile ipv6 over ieee 802.16 e,” in Proc. of the 10th
International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology
(ICACT), vol. 1.
Gangwon-Do: IEEE, 2008, pp. 468–472.
[9]
W. Shen and Q. Zeng, “Cost-function-based network selection strategy
in integrated wireless and mobile networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 6, 2008, pp. 3778–3788.
[10]
E. Stevens-Navarro, Y. Lin, and V. Wong, “An MDP-Based Vertical
Handoff Decision Algorithm for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 2, 2008, pp.
1243–1254.
[11]
J. Yeh, J. Chen, and P. Agrawal, “Fast intra-network and cross-layer
handover (ﬁnch) for wimax and mobile internet,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 8, no. 4, 2009, pp. 558–574.
[12]
R. Y. Kim, I. Jung, X. Yang, and C.-C. Chou, “Advanced Handover
Schemes in IMT-Advanced Systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 48, no. 8, 2010, pp. 78–85.
[13]
V. Gondi and N. Agoulmine, “Low latency handover and roaming
using security context transfer for heterogeneous wireless and cellular
networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE Asia-Paciﬁc Services Computing
Conference (APSCC).
Hangzhou: IEEE, 2010, pp. 548–554.
[14]
H. Choi, “An optimal handover decision for throughput enhancement,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 9, 2010, pp. 851–853.
[15]
S. Koh and M. Gohar, “Multicast Handover Agents for Fast Handover in
Wireless Multicast Networks,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14,
no. 7, 2010, pp. 676–678.
[16]
T.-S. Kim, R. Oh, S.-J. Lee, C.-H. Lim, S. Ryu, and C.-H. Cho, “Cell
selection and trigger point decision for next generation heterogeneous
wireless networking environment: Algorithm & evaluation,” in Proc. of
the 5th International Conference on New Trends in Information Science
and Service Science (NISS), Macao, 2011, pp. 247–254.
[17]
I. Kim and Y. Kim, “Performance Evaluation and Improvement of TCP
Throughput over PFMIPv6 with MIH,” in Proc. of the 12th IFIP/IEEE
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management (IM),
Dublin, 2011, pp. 997–1004.
[18]
M. Zekri, B. Jouaber, and D. Zeghlache, “A Review on Mobility
Management and Vertical Handover Solutions over Heterogeneous
Wireless Networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 35, no. 17, 2012,
pp. 2055–2068.
[19]
K. Taniuchi, Y. Ohba, V. Fajardo, S. Das, M. Tauil, Y. Cheng,
A. Dutta, D. Baker, M. Yajnik, and D. Famolari, “IEEE 802.21: Media
Independent Handover: Features, Applicability, and Realization,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 1, 2009, pp. 112–120.
[20]
S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and B. Patil,
“Proxy Mobile IPv6,” RFC 5213, aug 2008, [Accessed Nov. 11, 2014].
[Online]. Available: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5213
[21]
L. Shan, F. Liu, L. Wang, and Y. Ji, “Predictive Group Handover
Scheme with Channel Borrowing for Mobile Relay Systems,” in Proc.
of the International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
Conference (IWCMC), Crete Island, 2008, pp. 153–158.
[22]
S. Lei, T. Hui, and H. Zheng, “Group Vertical Handover in Heteroge-
neous Radio Access Networks,” in Proc. of the 72nd IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference Fall (VTC), Ottawa, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[23]
D. Niyato and E. Hossain, “Dynamics of Network Selection in Hetero-
geneous Wireless Networks: an Evolutionary Game Approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 58, no. 4, 2009, pp. 2008–
2017.
[24]
S. Lee, K. Sriram, K. Kim, Y. Kim, and N. Golmie, “Vertical Handoff
Decision Algorithms for Providing Optimized Performance in Heteroge-
neous Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 58, no. 2, 2009, pp. 865–881.
[25]
D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6,”
RFC 3775, june 2004, [Accessed Nov. 11, 2014]. [Online]. Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3775
[26]
E.
R.
Koodli,
“Mobile
IPv6
Fast
Handovers,”
RFC
5568,
july
2009,
[Accessed
Nov.
11,
2014].
[Online].
Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5568
[27]
H.
Yokota,
K.
Chowdhury,
R.
Koodli,
B.
Patil,
and
F. Xia, “Fast Handovers
for Proxy Mobile
IPv6,” RFC 5949,
september
201,
[Accessed
Nov. 11,
2014].
[Online].
Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5949
[28]
K. P. C. Viho, A. Ksentini, and J.-M. Bonnin, “Resource Management
in Mobile Heterogeneous Networks: State of the Art and Challenges,”
INRIA, Tech. Rep., 2008.

193
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[29]
S. J. Bae, M. Y. Chung, and J. So, “Handover Triggering Mechanism
Based on IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Networks with LTE and
WLAN,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Information
Networking (ICOIN), Barcelona, 2011, pp. 399–403.
[30]
M. Q. Khan and S. H. Andresen, “PoA Selection in 802.11 Networks
Using Media Independent Information Server (MIIS),” in Proc. of the
26th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking
and Applications Workshops (WAINA), Fukuoka, Japan, 2012, pp. 454–
459.
[31]
Y.-H. Liang, B.-J. Chang, and C.-T. Chen, “Media Independent
Handover-based Competitive On-Line CAC for Seamless Mobile Wire-
less Networks,” Journal Wireless Personal Networks, 2011.
[32]
R. Silva, P. Carvalho, P. Sousa, and P. Neves, “Heterogeneous Mobility
in Next Generation Devices: An Android-Based Case Study,” Mobile
Multimedia Communications, vol. 77, 2012, pp. 316–330.
[33]
L. Ning, Z. Wang, Q. Guo, and K. Jiang, “Fuzzy Clustering based Group
Vertical Handover Decision for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,” in
Proc. of the IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Confer-
ence (WCNC), Changai, 2013, pp. 1231–1336.
[34]
B. Kwak, N. Song, and L. Miller, “Performance Analysis of Exponential
Backoff,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 13, no. 2, 2005,
pp. 343–355.
[35]
Transport Systems Generic Requirements (TSGR): Common Require-
ments. GR-499, Issue 2, Telecordia Report 2009.
[36]
M. K. Karray, “Evaluation of the Blocking Probability and the Through-
put in the Uplink of Wireless Cellular Networks,” in Proc. of the In-
ternational Conference on Communications and Networking (ComNet),
Tozeur, Tunisia, 2010, pp. 1–8.
[37]
C. Chekuri, K. Ramanan, P. Whiting, and L. Zhang, “Blocking Prob-
ability Estimates in a Partitioned Sector TDMA System,” in Proc. of
the 4th International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods
for Mobile Computing and Communications (DIAL-M), Boston, USA,
2000, pp. 28–34.
[38]
H. Khedher, F. Valois, and S. Tabbane, “Channel Holding Time Char-
acterization in Real GSM Network,” in Proc. of the 14th International
Symposium on Personal,Indoor and Mobile Radio Communication
(PIMRC), Beijing, 2003, pp. 46–49.
[39]
Y. Zhang and B.-H. Soong, “Channel Holding Time in Hierarchical
Cellular Systems,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 10, 2004,
pp. 614–616.
[40]
G. Haring, R. Marie, R. Puigjaner, and K. Trivedi, “Loss Formulas
and Their Application to Optimization for Cellular Networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 43, no. 3, 2001, pp. 664–
673.

