Distributed Monitoring Systems for Agriculture based on Wireless Sensor Network
Technology
Davide Di Palma, Luca Bencini, Giovanni Collodi,
Gianfranco Manes, Francesco Chiti, Romano Fantacci
Department of Electronics and Telecommunications
University of Florence
Via di Santa Marta 3, 50019 Florence Italy
name.surname@uniﬁ.it
Antonio Manes
Netsens S.r.l.
Via Tevere 70, 50019 Florence Italy
antonio.manes@netsens.it
Abstract—The adoption of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)
for wide area environmental monitoring is currently considered
one of the most challenging application scenarios for this
emerging technology. The promise of an unmanaged, self-
conﬁguring and self-powered wireless infrastructure, with a
continuously decreasing cost per unit, attracts the attention of
both ﬁnal users and system integrators, replacing previously de-
ployed wired solutions and opening new business opportunities.
Agricultural scenarios seem to be one of the most promising
application areas for WSN due to the necessity of improving the
agro-food production chain in terms of precision and quality.
This involves a careful system design, since a rural scenario
consists of an extensive area devoid of an electrical power
supply and availabile wired connections. This paper shows and
describes a practical case study, starting from a real problem
and reaching the best architectural solutions with particular
focus on hardware implementation and communication proto-
col design. Moreover, encouraging and unprecedented results
are shown, achieved with this approach and supported by
several pilot sites in different vineyards throughout Italy and
France. Finally, the commercial system ”VineSense”, born from
previous experimental solutions, and its agronomic results are
also presented.
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Network, Distributed Agricultural
Monitoring, Hardware and Protocol Design, Physiology and
Pathogens Control, Pilot Sites.
I. INTRODUCTION
Agriculture is one of the most ancient activities of man in
which innovation and technology are usually accepted with
difﬁcultly, unless real and immediate solutions are found for
speciﬁc problems or for improving production and quality.
Nevertheless, a new approach, of gathering information from
the environment, could represent an important step towards
high quality and ecosustainable agriculture.
Nowadays, irrigation, fertilization and pesticides manage-
ment are often left to the farmer and agronomist’s discretion:
common criteria used to guarantee safe culture and plant
growth is often giving a greater amount of chemicals and wa-
ter than necessary. There is no direct feedback between the
decision of treating or irrigating plants and the real effects in
the ﬁeld. Plant conditions are usually committed to sporadic
and faraway weather stations which cannot provide accurate
and local measurements of the fundamental parameters in
each zone of the ﬁeld. Also, agronomic models, based on
these monitored data, cannot provide reliable information.
On the contrary, agriculture needs detailed monitoring in
order to obtain real time feedback between plants, local
climate conditions and man’s decisions.
The most suitable technology to ﬁt an invasive method of
monitoring the environment is a Wireless Sensor Network
(WSN) system [2].
The requirements that adopting a WSN are expected to
satisfy in effective agricultural monitoring concern both
system level issues (i.e., unattended operation, maximum net-
work life time, adaptability or even self-reconﬁgurability of
functionalities and protocols) and ﬁnal user needs (i.e., com-
munication reliability and robustness, user friendly, versatile
and powerful graphical user interfaces). The most relevant
mainly concerns the supply of stand-alone operations. To
this end, the system must be able to run unattended for
a long period, as nodes are expected to be deployed in
zones that are difﬁcult to maintain. This calls for optimal
energy management. An additional requirement is robust
operative conditions, which needs fault management since a
node may fail for several reasons. Other important properties
are scalability and adaptability of the network’s topology, in
terms of the number of nodes and their density in unexpected
events with a higher degree of responsiveness and reconﬁg-
urability. Finally, several user-oriented attributes, including
fairness, latency, throughput and enhanced data querying
schemes [3] need to be taken into account even if they could
be considered secondary with respect to our application
purposes because the WSN’s cost/performance trade-off [4].
The before mentioned requirements call for a carefully
designed and optimized overall system for the case study
under consideration.
In this paper an end-to-end monitoring solution is pre-
sented [1], joining hardware optimization with communica-
tions protocols design and a suitable interface. In particular,
Section II provides an overview of the related works. Sec-
18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

tion III presents the overall system in terms of hardware,
protocol and software design. Section IV describes the
real experiences, focusing on several case studies analyses
for highlighting the effectiveness and accurateness of the
developed system. Section V and Section VI describe respec-
tively the commercial system ”VineSense”, born from the
experimental solution, and some agronomic results. Finally,
in Section VII some conclusions are drawn in order to
explain the future direction of the current research study.
II. RELATED WORKS
The concept of precision agriculture has been around for
some time now.
Starting from 1994, Blackmore et al. [5] deﬁned it as
a comprehensive system designed to optimize agricultural
production by carefully tailoring soil and crop management
to correspond to the unique condition found in each ﬁeld
while maintaining environmental quality. The early adopters
during that time found precision agriculture to be unprof-
itable. Moreover they found the instances of implementation
of precision agriculture were few and far between. Further,
the high initial investment in the form of electronic equip-
ment for sensing and communication meant that only large
farms could afford it. The technologies proposed at that point
comprised of three aspects: Remote Sensing (RS), Global
Positioning System (GPS) and Geographical Information
System (GIS). RS coupled with GPS coordinates produced
accurate maps and models of the agricultural ﬁelds. The
sampling was typically through electronic sensors such as
soil probes and remote optical scanners from satellites. The
collection of such data in the form of electronic computer
databases gave birth to the GIS. Statistical analyses were
then conducted on the data and the variability of agricul-
tural land with respect to its properties was charted. The
technology apart from being non real-time, involved the use
of expensive technologies like satellite sensing and was labor
intensive where the maps charting the agricultural ﬁelds
were mostly manually done.
Over the last seven years, the advancement in sensing and
communication technologies has signiﬁcantly brought down
the cost of deployment and running of a feasible precision
agriculture framework. Emerging wireless technologies with
low power needs and low data rate capabilities, which per-
fectly suites precision agriculture, have been developed [6].
The sensing and communication can now be done on a
real-time basis leading to better response times. The wireless
sensors are cheap enough for wide spread deployment in the
form of a mesh network and offers robust communication
through redundant propagation paths [7]. Wireless sensor
networks allow faster deployment and installation of various
types of sensors because many of these networks provide
self-organizing, self-conﬁguring, self-diagnosing and self-
healing capabilities to the sensor nodes.
The applications using wireless sensor technology for
precision agriculture are brieﬂy explored below.
Cugati et al. [8] developed an automated fertilizer applica-
tor for tree crops. The system consisted of an input module
for GPS and real-time sensor data acquisition, a decision
module for calculating the optimal quantity and spread
pattern for a fertilizer, and an output module to regulate
the fertilizer application rate. Data communications among
the modules were established using a Bluetooth network.
Evans and Bergman [9] are leading a USDA research
group to study precision irrigation control of self-propelled,
linear-move and center-pivot irrigation systems. Wireless
sensors were used in the system to assist irrigation schedul-
ing using combined on-site weather data, remotely sensed
data and grower preferences.
The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) [10] con-
ducted a research in Mississippi to develop a high-speed
wireless networking system to help farmers download aerial
images via WLAN to their PCs, laptops or PDAs. The
images were mainly used for precision farming applications.
Mahan and Wanjura [11] cooperated with a private com-
pany to develop a wireless, infrared thermometer system
for in-ﬁeld data collection. The system consisted of infrared
sensors, programmable logic controllers and low power radio
transceivers to collect data in the ﬁeld and transmit it to a
remote receiver outside the ﬁeld.
The Institut F¨ur Chemie und Dynamik der Geosph¨are [12]
developed a soil moisture sensor network for monitoring soil
water content changes at high spatial and temporal scale.
III. OVERALL SYSTEM CHARACTERIZATION
The overall system is shown in Figure 1. It is comprised
of a self-organizing WSN endowed with sensing capabilities,
a GPRS Gateway which gathers data and provides a TCP-
IP based connection toward a Remote Server and a Web
Application which manages information and makes the
ﬁnal user capable of monitoring and interacting with the
instrumented environment.
In the following subsections, an end-to-end system de-
scription of the hardware, protocol and software design is
presented.
A. Hardware Design
Focusing on an end-to-end system architecture, every
constitutive element has to be selected according to the
application requirements and scenario issues, especially the
hardware platform. Many details have to be considered,
involving the energetic consumption of the sensor readings,
the power-on and power-save states management and a good
trade-off between the maximum radio coverage and the
transmitted power. After an accurate investigation of the
out-of-the-shelf solutions, accordingly to these constraints
and to the reference scenarios, 868 MHz Mica2 motes [13]
were adopted. The Tiny Operative System (TinyOS), running
19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Wireless Sensor 
Network
Gateway
GPRS
over 
TCP-IP
Remote Server
GUI
Figure 1.
Wireless Sensor Network System.
on this platform, ensures a full control of mote communi-
cation capabilities to attain optimized power management
and provides necessary system portability towards future
hardware advancements or changes. Nevertheless, Mica2
motes are far from perfection especially in the RF sec-
tion, since the power provided by the transceiver (Chipcon
CC1000) is not completely available for transmission, but it
is lost to imperfect coupling with the antenna, thus reducing
the radio coverage area. An improvement of this section
was performed, using more suitable antennas and coupling
circuits and increasing the transmitting power with a power
ampliﬁer, thus increasing the output power up to 15 dBm,
respecting international restrictions and standards. These op-
timizations allow for a larger radio coverage (about 200 m)
and better power management. In order to manage different
kinds of sensors, a compliant sensor board was adopted,
allowing up to 16 sensor plugs on the same node, this
makes a single mote capable of sensing many environmental
parameters at a time [14]. Sensor boards recognize the
sensors and send Transducer Electronic Datasheets (TEDS)
through the network up to the server, making an automatic
sensor recognition possible by the system. The overall node
stack architecture is shown in Figure 2.
Communication Board
Power Board
Sensor Board
Overall size: 58x32x25 mm
Figure 2.
Node Stack Architecture.
The GPRS embedded Gateway [15], shown in Figure 3, is
a stand-alone communication platform designed to provide
transparent bi-directional wireless TCP-IP connectivity for
remote monitoring in conjunction with Remote Data Acqui-
sition (RDA) equipment, such as WSN where it acts when
connected with a Master node or when directly connected
to sensors and transducers (i.e., Stand-Alone weather sta-
tion, Stand-Alone monitoring camera). The Gateway can be
Figure 3.
GPRS Gateway.
conﬁgured to operate in several ways like ”always on”, ”on
demand”, or ”periodically connected”. The Gateway sub-
system has been designed to operate unattended, in outdoor
environments, since there is usually no access to a power
supply infrastructure. Therefore, the hardware design has
been oriented to implement low power operating modalities,
using a 12 V rechargeable battery and a 20 W solar panel.
Data between the Gateway and Protocol Handler are carried
out over TCP-IP communication and encapsulated in a
custom protocol; from both local and remote interfaces it is
also possible to access part of the Gateway’s conﬁguration
settings.
B. Protocol Design
The most relevant system requirements, which lead the
design of an efﬁcient Medium Access Control (MAC) and
Routing protocol for an environmental monitoring WSN,
mainly concern power consumption issues and the possiblity
of a quick set-up and end-to-end communication infras-
tructure that supports both synchronous and asynchronous
queries. The most relevant challenge is to make a system
capable of running unattended for a long period, as nodes
are expected to be deployed in zones that are difﬁcult to
maintain. This calls for optimal energy management since a
limited resource and node failure may compromise WSN
connectivity. Therefore, the MAC and the network layer
must be perfected ensuring that the energy used is directly
related to the amount of handled trafﬁc and not to the overall
working time.
Other important properties are scalability and adaptability
of network topology, in terms of number of nodes and their
20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

density. As a matter of fact, some nodes may either be turned
off may join the network afterward.
Taking these requirements into account, a MAC protocol
and a routing protocol were implemented.
1) MAC Layer Protocol: Taking the IEEE 802.11 Dis-
tributed Coordination Function (DCF) [16] as a starting
point, several more energy efﬁcient techniques have been
proposed in literature to avoid excessive power waste due to
so called idle listening. They are based on periodical pream-
ble sampling performed at the receiver side in order to leave
a low power state and receive the incoming messages, as
in the WiseMAC protocol [17]. Deriving from the classical
contention-based scheme, several protocols (S-MAC [18], T-
MAC [19] and DMAC [20]) have been proposed to address
the overhead idle listening by synchronizing the nodes and
implementing a duty cycle within each slot.
Resorting to the above considerations, a class of MAC
protocols was derived, named Synchronous Transmission
Asynchronous Reception (STAR) which is particularly suited
for a ﬂat network topology and beneﬁts from both WiseMAC
and S-MAC schemes. More speciﬁcally, due to the intro-
duction of a duty-cycle, it joins the power saving capability
together with the advantages provided by the offset schedul-
ing, without excessive overhead signaling. According to the
STAR MAC protocol, each node might be either in an idle
mode, in which it remains for a time interval Tl (listening
time), or in an energy saving sleeping state for a Ts (sleeping
time). The transitions between states are synchronous with
a period frame equal to Tf = Tl + Ts partitioned in two
sub-intervals; as a consequence, a duty-cycle function can
also be introduced:
d =
Tl
Tl + Ts
(1)
To provide the network with full communication capabilities,
all the nodes need to be weakly synchronized, meaning
that they are aware at least of the awaking time of all
their neighbors. To this end, as Figure 4 shows, a node
sends a synchronization message (SYNC) frame by frame
to each of its neighbor nodes known to be in the listening
mode (Synchronous Transmission), whereas, during the set-
up phase in which each node discovers the network topology,
the control messages are asynchronously broadcasted. On
the other hand, its neighbors periodically awake and enter
the listening state independently (Asynchronous Reception).
The header of the synchronization message contains the fol-
lowing ﬁelds: a unique node identiﬁer, the message sequence
number and the phase, or the time interval after which the
sender claims to be in the listening status waiting for both
synchronization and data messages from its neighbors. The
phase φ is evaluated according to the following rule:
φ1 = τ − Tl
(2)
if the node is in the sleeping mode, where τ is the time
remaining to the next frame beginning. Conversely, if the
NODE 1
NODE 3
NODE 2
t
t
t
l
T
sT
f
T
l
T
sT
sT
Tl
f
T
f
T
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
SYN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
SYNC
YN
YN
Figure 4.
STAR MAC Protocol Synchronization Messages Exchange.
Table I
POWER CONSUMPTION PARAMETERS FOR THE CONSIDERED
PLATFORM.
crx
12
mA
csleep
0.01
mA
Ctx
30
mAh
ctx
0.001
mA
mote is in the listening status, φ is computed as:
φ2 = τ + Ts
(3)
In order to fully characterize the STAR MAC approach,
the related energy cost normalized can be evaluated as it
follows:
C = crxdTf + csleep[Tf(1 − d) − NTpkt] + NCtx
[mAh]
where csleep and crx represent the sleeping and the receiving
costs [mA] and Ctx is the single packet transmission costs
[mAh], while Trx and Ts are the receiving and sleeping
times [s], Tpkt is the synchronization packet time length
[s] and ﬁnally N is the number of neighbors. When the
following inequality is hold:
NTpkt ≪ Tf
then:
C ≃ crxdTf + csleepTf(1 − d) + NCtx
[mAh]
The protocol cost normalized to the synchronization time is
ﬁnally:
C
Tf
= crxd + csleep(1 − d) + NCtx
Tf
[mA]
(4)
As highlighted in Table I, it usually happens that ctx ≪
csleep ≪ crx , where ctx = Ctx/Tpkt and Tpkt is the packet
transmission time [s] assumed equal to 100 ms as worst
case. This means that the major contribution to the overall
cost is represented by the listening period that the STAR
MAC protocol tries to suitably minimize.
In Figure 5(a) the normalized cost versus the number
of neighbor nodes is shown for the S-MAC and STAR
MAC schemes. It is worth noticing that the performance of
the proposed protocol is better with respect to the existing
21
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Table II
ROUTING TABLE GENERAL STRUCTURE.
Target
NH
HC
PH
LQ
BL
CL
Sink 1
A
NA
φA
ηA
BA
CA
B
NB
φB
ηB
BB
CB
Sink 2
C
NC
φC
ηC
BC
CC
D
ND
φD
ηD
BD
CD
approach for a number of neighbor nodes greater than 7.
Finally, in Figure 5(b) the normalized costs of S-MAC and
STAR MAC approaches are compared with respect to the
duty cycle duration for a number of neighbor nodes equal
to 8. It is possible to notice that for d < 3.5% the proposed
protocol provide a signiﬁcant gain.
2) Network Layer Protocol: In order to evaluate the
capability of the proposed MAC scheme in establishing ef-
fective end-to-end communications within a WSN, a routing
protocol was introduced and integrated according to the
cross layer design principle [21]. In particular, we refer
to a proactive algorithm belonging to the class link-state
protocol that enhance the capabilities of the Link Estimation
Parent Selection (LEPS) protocol. It is based on periodically
information needed for building and maintaining the local
routing table, depicted in Table II. However, our approach
resorts both to the signaling introduced by the MAC layer
(i.e., synchronization message) and by the Network layer
(i.e., ping message), with the aim of minimizing the over-
head and make the system more adaptive in a cross layer
fashion. In particular, the parameters transmitted along a
MAC synchronization message, with period Tf, are the
following:
• next hop (NH) to reach the gateway, that is, the MAC
address of the one hop neighbor;
• distance (HC) to the gateway in terms of number of
needed hops;
• phase (PH) that is the schedule time at which the
neighbor enter in listening mode according to (2) and
(3);
• link quality (LQ) estimation as the ratio of correctly
received and the expected synchronization messages
from a certain neighbor.
On the other hand, the parameters related to long-term
phenomena are carried out by the ping messages, with period
Tp ≫ Tf, in order to avoid unnecessary control trafﬁcs and,
thus, reducing congestion. Particularly, they are:
• battery level (BL) (i.e., an estimation of the energy
available at that node);
• congestion level (CL) in terms of the ratio between the
number of packets present in the local buffer and the
maximum number of packets to be stored in.
Once, the routing table has been ﬁlled with these parameters,
it is possible to derive the proper metric by means of a
weighted summation of them. It is worth mentioning that
the routing table might indicate more than one destination
(sink) thanks to the ping messages that keep trace of the
intermediate nodes within the message header.
C. Software and End User Interface Design
The software implementation was developed, considering
a node as both a single element in charge of accomplishing
prearranged tasks and as a part of a complex network in
which each component plays a crucial role in the network’s
maintenance. As far as the former aspect is concerned,
several TinyOS modules were implemented for managing
high and low power states and for realizing a ﬁnite state
machine, querying sensors at ﬁxed intervals and achieving
anti-blocking procedures, in order to avoid software failure
or deadlocks and provide a robust stand alone system. On
the other hand, the node has to interact with neighbors and
provide adequate connectivity to carry the messages through
the network, regardless of the destination. Consequently,
additional modules were developed according to a cross
layer approach that are in charge of managing STAR MAC
and multihop protocols. Furthermore, other modules are
responsible for handling and forwarding messages, coming
from other nodes or from the gateway itself. Messages
are not only sensing (i.e., measures, battery level) but also
control and management messages (i.e., synchronization,
node reset). As a result, a full interaction between the ﬁnal
user and the WSN is guaranteed.
The ﬁnal user may check the system status through
graphical user interface (GUI) accessible via web. After
the log-in phase, the user can select the proper pilot site.
For each site the deployed WSN together with the gateway
is schematically represented through an interactive map. In
addition to this, the related sensors display individual or ag-
gregate time diagrams for each node with an adjustable time
interval (Start/Stop) for the observation. System monitoring
could be performed both at a high level with a user friendly
GUI and at a low level by means of message logging.
Figure 6 shows some friendly Flash Player applications
that, based on mathematical models, analyze the entire
amount of data in a selectable period and provide ready-to-
use information. Figure 6(a) speciﬁcally shows the aggregate
data models for three macro-parameters, such as vineyard
water management, plant physiological activity and pest
management. The application, using cross light colors for
each parameter, points out normal (green), mild (yellow) or
heavy (red) stress conditions and provides suggestions to
the farmer on how to apply pesticides or water in a certain
part of the vineyard. Figure 6(b) shows a graphical repre-
sentation of the soil moisture measurement. Soil moisture
sensors positioned at different depths in the vineyard make
it possible to verify whether a summer rain runs off on the
soil surface or seeps into the earth and provokes beneﬁcial
effects on the plants: this can be appreciated with a rapid
look at the soil moisture aggregate report which, shows the
22
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Neighbour Nodes
Normalized Cost [mA]
 
 
STAR MAC
S−MAC
(a) Normalized Cost vs. Neighbor Nodes.
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Duty Cycle [%]
Normalized Cost [mA]
 
 
S−MAC
STAR MAC
(b) Normalized Cost vs. Duty Cycle Duration.
Figure 5.
STAR MAC Performance
moisture sensors at two depths with the moisture differences
colore in green tones. Finally, Figure 6(c) highlights stress
conditions on plants, due to dry soil and/or to hot weather
thanks to the accurate trunk diametric growth sensor that can
follow each minimal variation in the trunk giving important
information on plant living activity.
IV. REAL WORLD EXPERIENCES
The WSN system described above was developed and
deployed in three pilot sites and in a greenhouse. Since 2005,
an amount of 198 sensors and 50 nodes have continuously
sent data to a remote server. The collected data represents a
unique database of information on grape growth useful for
investigating the differences between cultivation procedures,
environments and treatments.
A. Pilot Sites Description
The ﬁrst pilot site was deployed in November 2005 on
a sloped vineyard of the Montepaldi farm in Chianti Area
(Tuscany - Italy). The vineyard is a wide area where 13
nodes (including the master node) with 24 sensors, running
STAR MAC and dynamic routing protocols were success-
fully deployed. The deployment took place in two different
steps: during the ﬁrst one, 6 nodes (nodes 9,10,14,15,16,17)
were placed to perform an exhaustive one week test. The
most important result regards the multi-hop routing efﬁ-
ciency, estimated as:
ηMHop = MEU
Mex
(5)
where ηMHop is the efﬁciency, MEU are the messages cor-
rectly received by the remote user and Mex are the expected
transmitted messages. For the gateway neighbors, ηMHop
is very high, over 90%. However, even nodes far from
the gateway (i.e., concerning an end-to-end multihop path)
show a message delivery rate (MDR) of over 80%. This
Table III
MESSAGE DELIVERY RATE FOR THE MONTEPALDI FARM PILOT SITE
Location
MDR
Node 9
72.2
Node 10
73.7
Node 11
88.5
Node 12
71.4
Node 13
60.4
Node 14
57.2
Node 15
45.6
Node 16
45.4
Node 17
92.1
Node 18
87.5
Node 19
84.1
means that the implemented routing protocol does not affect
communication reliability. After the second deployment, in
which nodes 11,12,13,18,19,20 were arranged, the increased
number of collisions changed the global efﬁciency, thus de-
creasing the messages that arrived to the end user, except for
nodes 18,19,20, in which an upgraded ﬁrmware release was
implemented. The related results are detailed in Table III.
This conﬁrms the robustness of the network installed and
the reliability of the adopted communications solution, also
considering the power consumption issues: batteries were
replaced on March 11th 2006 in order to face the entire
farming season. After that, eleven months passed before
the ﬁrst battery replacement occurred on February 11th
2007, conﬁrming our expectations and fully matching the
user requirements. The overall Montepaldi system has been
running unattended for one year and a half and is going to be
a permanent pilot site. So far, nearly 2 million samples from
the Montepaldi vineyard have been collected and stored in
the server at the University of Florence Information Services
Centre (CSIAF), helping agronomist experts improve wine
quality through deeper insight on physical phenomena (such
23
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
GoodFood   EU Integrated Project
Food Safety and Quality Monitoring with Microsystems
 
Home
 
Logout
 Site 1 - Montepaldi Farm 
 
 
 
This site requires Macromedia Flash Player. Download it  
GoodFood - EU Integrated Project © All rights reserved  
 
 
 
 
Powered by  
C.S.I.A.F. Università degli Studi di Firenze  
 
  
29/09/2009
http://www.unifi.it/midra/goodfood/dashboard.php
(a) Aggregate Data Models for Vineyard Water Management, Plant
Physiological Activity and Pest Management.
 
This site requires Macromedia Flash Player. Download it  
GoodFood - EU Integrated Project © All rights reserved  
 
 
 
 
Powered by  
C.S.I.A.F. Università degli Studi di Firenze  
 
  
01/10/2009
http://www.unifi.it/midra/goodfood/showIDW.php
(b) Soil Moisture Aggregation Report: the upper map represent soil
moisture @ 10 cm in the soil and the lower map represents soil
moisture @ 35cm in the vineyard after a slipping rain.
(c) Trunk Diametric Growth Diagram: daily and nightly metabolic
phases.
Figure 6.
Flash Player User Interface
as weather and soil) and the relationship with grape growth.
The second pilot site was deployed on a farm in the
Chianti Classico with 10 nodes and 50 sensors at about
500 m above sea level on a stony hill area of 2.5 hectares.
The environmental variations of the the ”terroir” have been
monitored since July 2007, producing one of the most
appreciated wines in the world.
Finally, the third WSN was installed in Southern France
in the vineyard of Peach Rouge at Gruissan. High sensor
density was established to guarantee measurement redun-
dancy and to provide a deeper knowledge of the phenomena
variation in an experimental vineyard where micro-zonation
has been applied and where water management experiments
have been performed for studying plant reactions and grape
quality.
B. Greenhouse
An additional deployment at the University of Florence
Greenhouse was performed to let the agronomist experts
conduct experiments even in seasons like Fall and Winter,
where plants are quiescent, thus breaking free from the nat-
ural growth trend. This habitat also creates the opportunity
to run several experiments on the test plants, in order to
evaluate their responses under different stimuli using in situ
sensors.
The greenhouse environmental features are completely
different from those of the vineyard: as a matter of fact, the
multipath propagation effects become relevant, due to the
indoor scenario and the presence of a metal infrastructure.
A highly dense node deployment, in terms of both nodes
and sensors, might imply an increased network trafﬁc load.
Nevertheless, the same node ﬁrmware and hardware used in
24
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

the vineyard are herein adopted; this leads to a resulting
star topology as far as end-to-end communications are
concerned.
Furthermore, 6 nodes have been in the greenhouse since
June 2005, and 30 sensors have constantly monitored air
temperature and humidity, plants soil moisture and tem-
perature, differential leaf temperature and trunk diametric
growth. The sensing period is equal to 10 minutes, less than
the climate/plant parameter variations, providing redundant
data storage. The WSN message delivery rate is extremely
high: the efﬁciency is over 95%, showing that a low number
of messages are lost.
V. VINESENSE
The fruitful experience of the three pilot sites was gath-
ered by a new Italian company, Netsens, founded as a spin
off of the University of Florence. Netsens has designed a
new monitoring system called VineSense based on WSN
technology and oriented towards market and user applica-
tions.
VineSense exalts the positive characteristics of the exper-
imental system and overcomes the problems encountered in
past experiences, thus achieving an important position in the
wireless monitoring market.
The ﬁrst important outcome of the experimental system,
enhanced by VineSense is the idea of an end-to-end sys-
tem. Sensors deployed in the ﬁeld constantly monitor and
send measurements to a remote server throught the WSN.
Data can be queried and analyzed by ﬁnal users thanks to
the professional and user-friendly VineSense web interface.
Qualiﬁed mathematic models are applied to monitoring
parameters and provide predictions on diseases and plant
growth, increasing agronomists’ knowledge, reducing costs,
while paving the road for new vineyard management.
VineSense improves many aspects of the experimental
system, both in electronics and telecommunications.
The new wireless nodes are smaller, more economical,
more robust and suited for vineyard operations with ma-
chines and tractors. The electronics is more fault tolerant,
easier to install and more energy efﬁcient: only a 2200 mAh
lithium battery for 2-3 years of continuous running without
human intervation. Radio coverage has been improved up to
350 m and nodes deployment can be easily performed by
end users who can rely on a smart installation system with
instantaneous radio coverage recognition. Sensors used in
the VineSense system are low-cost, state-of-the-art devices
designed by Netsens in order to guarantee the best accuracy-
reliability-price ratio.
The VineSense wireless-sensor unit is shown in Figure 7.
Recovery strategies and communication capabilities of the
stand-alone GPRS gateway have been improved: in fact,
data received by wireless nodes are both forwarded in real
time to a remote server and temporarily stored on board
Figure 7.
VineSense Wireless Unit.
in case of abrupt disconnections; moreover, automatic reset
and restart procedures avoid possible software deadlocks
or GPRS network failures; ﬁnally, a high gain antenna
guarantees a good GPRS coverage almost everywhere. The
GPRS gateway ﬁrmware has been implemented to allow
the remote management of the acquisition settings, relieving
users from the necessity of ﬁeld maintenance.
In Figure 8 the GPRS gateway with weather sensors is
shown.
Figure 8.
VineSense GPRS Gateway with Weather Sensors.
The web interface is the last part of VineSense’s end-to-
end: the great amount of data gathered by the sensors and
stored in the database needs a smart analysis tool to become
useful and usable. For this reason different instruments are
at the disposal of various kinds of users: on one hand,
some innovative tools such as control panels for real time
monitoring or 2D chromatic maps create a quick and easy
approach to the interface; on the other hand, professional
plots and data ﬁltering options allow experts or agronomists
to study them more closely.
VI. AGRONOMIC RESULTS
The use of VineSense in different scenarios with different
agronomic aims has brought a large amount of important
results.
25
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

When VineSense is adopted to monitor soil moisture
positive effects can be obtained for plants and saving water,
thus optimizing irrigation schedules. Some examples of
this application can be found in systems installed in the
Egyptian desert where agriculture is successful only through
wise irrigation management. In such a terroir, plants suffer
continuous hydric stress during daylight due to high air
temperature, low air humidity and hot sandy soils with a low
water retention capacity. Water is essential for plant survival
and growth, an irrigation delay can be fatal for the seasonal
harvest therefore, a reliable monitoring system is necessary.
The adoption of VineSense in this scenario immediately
resulted in continuous monitoring of the irrigating system,
providing an early warning whenever pump failure occurred.
On the other hand, the possibility to measure soil moisture
at different depths allows agronomists to decide on the right
amount of water to provide plants; depending on different
day temperatures and soil moisture, pipe schedules can be
changed in order to reduce water waste and increase water
available for plants.
An example of different pipe schedules is shown in
Figure 9 . Originally, the irrigation system was opened
Figure 9.
Different Pipe Schedules in Accordance with Soil Moisture
Levels.
once a day for 5 hours giving 20 liters per day (schedule
1); since sandy soils reach saturation very rapidly most
of this water was wasted in deeper soil layers; afterwards
irrigation schedules were changed (schedule 2), giving the
same amount of water in two or more times per day; the
water remained in upper soil layers at plant root level,
reducing wastes and increasing the amount of available water
for plants, as highlighted by soil moisture at 60 cm (blue
plot).
Another important application of the VineSense system
uses the dendrometer to monitor plant physiology. The trunk
diametric sensor is a mechanical sensor with +/− 5 microns
of accuracy; such an accurate sensor can appreciate stem
micro variations occurring during day and night, due to the
xilematic ﬂux inside the plant. Wireless nodes measure plant
diameter every 15 minutes, an appropriate time interval for
following these changes and for creating a plot showing this
trend. In normal weather conditions, common physiologic
activity can be recognized by agronomists the same as
a doctor can do reading an electrocardiogram; when air
temperature increases and air humidity falls in combining
low soil moisture levels, plants change their activity in order
to face water stress, preserve their grapes and especially
themselves. This changed behavior can be registered by the
dendrometer and plotted in the VineSense interface, warning
agronomists about incoming risks; as a consequence, new
irrigation schedules can be carried into effect.
Figure 10 shows an example of a plant diametric trend
versus air temperature. The blue plot represents the air
Figure 10.
Plant Diametric Trend vs. Air Temperature.
temperature in 10 days, from 13th August until the 22nd
August 2009 in Italy; the blue line becomes red when the
temperature goes over a 35 degree threshold. During the
period in which the temperature is so high, plant stem
variations are reduced due to the lower amount of xilematic
ﬂux ﬂowing in its vessels, a symptom of water leakage.
WSN in agriculture are also useful for creating new
databases with historical data: storing information high-
lighting peculiarities and differences of vineyards provides
agronomists an important archive for better understanding
variations in plant production capabilities and grape ripen-
ing. Deploying wireless nodes on plants in interesting areas
increases the knowledge about a speciﬁc vineyard or a
speciﬁc terroir, thus recording and proving the speciﬁcity
of a certain wine. I.E., the quality of important wines such
CRU, coming from only one speciﬁc vineyard, can be easily
related to ”grape history”: data on air temperature and
humidity, plant stress, irrigation and rain occurring during
the farming season can assess a quality growing process,
that can be declared to buyers.
Finally, VineSense can be used to reduce environmental
impact thanks to a more optimized management of pesticides
in order to reach a sustainable viticulture. Since many of the
most virulent vine diseases can grow in wet leaf conditions,
it is very important to monitor leaf wetness in a continuous
and distributed way. Sensors deployed in different parts of
26
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

vineyards are a key element for agronomists in monitoring
risky conditions: since wetness can change very rapidly
during the night in a vineyard and it is not homogeneous in
a ﬁeld, a real time distributed system is the right solution for
identifying risky conditions and deciding when and where
to apply chemical treatments. As a result, chemicals can
be used only when they are strictly necessary and only in
small parts of the vineyard where they are really needed, thus
reducing the number of treatments per year and decreasing
the amount of active substances sprayed in the ﬁeld and in
the environment. In some tests performed in 2009 in Chianti,
the amount of pesticides was reduced by 65% compared to
the 2008 season.
Figure 11 shows a vineyard map: the green spots are
wireless units, distributed in a vineyard of one hectare. Leaf
Figure 11.
Distributed Wireless Nodes in a Vineyard.
wetness sensors on nodes 2 and 3 measure different wetness
conditions as shown in Figure 12. The upper part of the
Figure 12.
Different Leaf Wetness Conditions in a Small Vineyard.
vineyard is usually wetter (brown plot) than the lower part
(blue plot) and sometimes leaf wetness persists for many
hours, increasing the risk of attacks on plants.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper deals with the design, optimization and devel-
opment of a practical solution for application to the agro-
food chain monitoring and control. The overall system was
addressed in terms of the experienced platform, network
issues related both to communication protocols between
nodes and gateway operations up to the suitable remote user
interface. Every constitutive element of the system chain was
described in detail in order to point out the features and the
remarkable advantages in terms of complexity reduction and
usability.
To highlight the effectiveness and accurateness of the de-
veloped system, several case studies were presented. More-
over, the encouraging and unprecedented results achieved
by this approach and supported by several pilot sites into
different vineyard in Italy and France were shown.
The fruitful experience of some pilot sites was gathered
by a new Italian company, Netsens, founded as a spin
off of the University of Florence. Netsens has designed a
new monitoring system called VineSense based on WSN
technology and oriented towards market and user applica-
tions. In order to point out the improvements of the new
solution respect to the experimental one, the main features
of VineSense were described. Moreover, some important
agronomic results achieved by the use of VineSense in
different scenarios were sketched out, thus emphasizing the
positive effects of the WSN technology in the agricultural
environment.
Nowadays, the application of the solution described in
this paper is under investigation to the more general ﬁeld of
environmental monitoring, due to its ﬂexibility, scalability,
adaptability and self-reconﬁgurability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the ”GoodFood”’ project
partners and Netsens S.r.l. for their supporting in this re-
search.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Bencini, F. Chiti, G. Collodi, D. Di Palma, R. Fantacci,
A. Manes, and G. Manes, Agricultural Monitoring based on
Wireless Sensor Network Technology: Real Long Life De-
ployments for Physiology and Pathogens Control, in Proc. of
SENSORCOMM 2009, pp. 372-377, June 2009.
[2] I. Akyldiz, S. Weilian, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci,
A Survey on Sensor Networks, IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 40, pp.
102-114, August 2002.
[3] J. Al-Karaki and A. Kamal, Routing Techniques in Wireless
Sensor Networks: a Survey, IEEE Comm. Mag, vol. 11, pp.
6-28, May 2004.
[4] K. Langendoen and G. Halkes, Energy-Efﬁcient Medium Ac-
cess Control, Delft University of Technology.
27
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

[5] S. Blackmore, Precision Farming: An Introduction, Outlook
on Agriculture Journal, vol. 23, pp. 275-280, February 1994.
[6] N. Wang, N. Zhang, and M. Wang, Wireless sensors in agri-
culture and food industry - Recent development and future
perspective, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture Journal,
vol.50, pp. 114, January 2006.
[7] I.F. Akyildiz and W. Xudong, A Survey on Wireless Mesh
Networks, IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 43, pp. S23-S30, Settembre
2005.
[8] S. Cugati, W. Miller, and J. Schueller, Automation concepts
for the variable rate fertilizer applicator for tree farming, in
Proc. of 4th European Conference in Precision Agriculture,
June 2003.
[9] R. Evans and J. Bergman, Relationships Between Cropping
Sequences and Irrigation Frequency under Self-Propelled Ir-
rigation Systems in the Northern Great Plains (Ngp), USDA
Annual Report, December 2007.
[10] A. Flores, Speeding up data delivery for precision agriculture,
Agriculture Research Magazine, June 2003.
[11] J. Mahan and D. Wanjura, 2004. Upchurch, Design and Con-
struction of a Wireless Infrared Thermometry System, USDA
Annual Report, May 2004.
[12] Institute Of Chemistry And Dynamics Of The Geosphere
(ICG), SoilNet: A Zigbee based soil moisture sensor network,
[avaiable: http://www.fz-juelich.de/icg/icg-4/index.php?index=
739].
[13] Mica2 Series, Avaiable on: http://www.xbow.com
[14] V. Mattoli, A. Mondini, K.M. Razeeb, B. Oﬂynn, F. Murphy,
S. Bellis, G. Collodi, A. Manes, P. Pennacchia, B. Mazzolai,
and P. Dario, Development of a Programmable Sensor Inter-
face for Wireless Network Nodes for Intelligent Agricultural
Applications, in Proc. of IE 2005, pp. 1-6, June 2005.
[15] F. Chiti, M. Ciabatti, G. Collodi, D. Di Palma, and A. Manes,
An Embedded GPRS Gateway for Environmental Monitoring
Wireless Sensor Networks, in Proc. of EWSN 2006, February
2006.
[16] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical
Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations, IEEE Standard 802.11, 1999.
[17] A. El-Hoiydi, J. Decotignie, C. Enz, and E. Le Roux,
WiseMAC, an Ultra Low Power MAC Protocol for the WiseNET
Wireless Sensor Network, in Proc. of SENSYS 2003, vol. 1,
pp. 244-251, November 2003.
[18] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, An Energy-Efﬁcient MAC
Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks, in Proc. of INFOCOM
2002, vol. 3, pp. 1567-1576 June 2002.
[19] T. Dam and K. Langendoen, An Adaptive Energy-Efﬁcient
MAC Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks, in Proc. of
SENSYS 2003, pp. 171-180, November 2003.
[20] G. Lu, B. Krishnamachari, and C. Raghavendra, Adaptive
Energy-Efﬁcient and Low-Latency MAC for Data Gathering
in Sensor Networks, in Proc. of WMAN 2004, pp. 2440-2443,
April 2004.
[21] S. Shakkottai, T. Rappaport, and P. Karlsson, Cross-Layer
Design for Wireless Networks, IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 41,
pp. 74-80, October 2003.
28
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

