SLS Management Validation for End to End QoS Management in a Multidomain 
Testbed Environment 
 
 
Şerban Georgică Obreja, Member IEEE  
University Politehnica Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: serban@radio.pub.ro 
 
Radu Lupu, Member IEEE  
University Politehnica Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: rlupu@elcom.pub.ro 
Eugen Borcoci, Member IEEE  
University Politehnica Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
 
Silviu Ciochină, Member IEEE  
University Politehnica Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: silviu@comm.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract — This paper presents the validation of an end-to-end 
QoS integrated management system in a multidomain test-bed 
environment. The integrated management system was designed 
and implemented in the framework of the ENTHRONE 
European project. This paper focuses on the network service 
management validation at both the Service Provider and 
Network Provider. The Network Service Management is based 
on the SLS management: in the core network the pSLS 
management is used to deal with users aggregated services, 
while cSLS management is used to deal with individual users 
services. Both functionality and scalability tests for SLS 
management are presented 
Keywords-SLS, end to end QoS Management, testbed, 
functional and scalability tests. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today’s high speed networks together with enhanced 
coding techniques for audio and video have made the real 
time delivery of multimedia services over internet possible. 
These real time multimedia services raise new challenges for 
the network regarding the quality of services (QoS) control 
in order to ensure the proper delivery of the services from 
content provider (source) to content consumer (destination). 
An integrated management system should exist, capable of 
managing the high level services with E2E (end to end) QoS 
guarantees, while preserving the independency of each 
network domain to be administrated autonomously in terms 
of its resources. This management system should also be 
capable 
to 
accommodate 
heterogeneous 
network 
technologies utilized today in the Internet. 
An integrated end to end QoS management system has 
been designed, implemented and validated in the framework 
of ENTHRONE project (FP6 IST-507637 European project) 
[3][4][5][6][7]. The ENTHRONE Integrated Management 
Supervisor (EIMS) [5][6] is the main management entity 
designed according to the MPEG-21 standard, sitting at the 
top of a heterogeneous network infrastructure. The EIMS 
offers a unified management framework in the audio-visual 
distribution chain. It assures E2E QoS provisioning using 
service management based on Service Level Agreements/ 
Specifications (SLA/SLS) concepts. The QoS approach 
includes the content adaptation, i.e., the adjustment of the 
application to the network and terminal capabilities and/or to 
compensate for the deficiencies of the network.  
Several works exist, dealing with end to end QoS 
management. The IMS solution for 3G mobile network has 
been standardized by the 3GPP consortium [13]. Also, for 
the IP world the TISPAN IMS architecture was proposed by 
NGN group [12]. Both are based on Integrated Services 
(Intserv) approach for QoS management. A separate 
signaling path-coupled session, crossing IP core domains, 
e.g., based on RSVP or NSIS approach, is run for each 
individual call. Such a solution could raise scalability 
problems. 
The 
European 
projects 
CADENUS, 
TEQUILA, 
MESCAL and EuQoS [9][10][11], have also been dedicated 
to the E2E QoS issues. The projects have developed 
solutions to provision IP premium services. Efficient 
solutions have been proposed for services and resources 
management in single domain networks, while extension 
over multi-domain heterogeneous networking infrastructure 
is still an open issue.  
CADENUS focused especially on service management. 
It did not get into details of how static and dynamic resource 
management is achieved. TEQUILA [11] and MESCAL [10] 
basically focused on QoS aware IP connectivity network 
services, intra-domain and inter-domain respectively. The 
MESCAL did not consider the end-user services or service 
creation, i.e., the process of (automated) service definition 
and service offering by the SPs, and the business-related 
aspects of high-level service offerings and the different roles 
of stakeholders. The EuQoS project developed and 
integrated an E2E QoS system to support QoS aware 
applications, but uses per-individual flow signaling for 
resource provisioning thus having scalability problems.  
195
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
Business Actors  
End to end Quality of Services 
Content 
Provider 
Core Network 
Providers 
Service 
 Provider 
omer 
r 
Customer 
Management  
and control 
pSLS link 
Universal 
Multimedia  
Access 
Metadata 
Multimedia 
content 
Appl.  and High Level Services  
Content  
Preparation 
Content  Handling 
& Adaptation 
Content  
Adaptation 
Content 
consumption 
Media control middleware 
Service Management (Planning, Provisioning, Offering and Monitoring) 
Service and Session control 
Transport Services 
Inter-domain Network Resources  Management and Control, Access and Core 
 
Management and  Control Planes 
Applications 
Applications 
EIMS scope 
Intra-domain Network Resources Management and Control,  Access and Core  
  
Access 
Network 
Provider 
Access 
Network 
Provider 
Media Flow 
Control Flow 
Control Flow 
Media Flow 
Control  
Flow 
Access Specific Pipe 
Access  
Specific Pipes 
 
Figure 1.   Multiple plane high level view of the ENTHRONE architecture 
ENTHRONE architecture deals with both service level 
and resource management. Its EIMS is independent of 
network technology and harmonizes the inter-domain 
functioning while the network domains are autonomic in 
terms of resource management. 
The ENTHRONE EIMS supports different business 
models and entities having their own resources and 
capabilities, but cooperating to offer value-added services for 
end-users. These business entities are: Service Providers 
(SP), Content Providers (CP)-owning Content Servers (CS), 
Network Providers (NP), Content Consumers (CC), Access 
Network 
Providers 
(ANP), 
Brokers/Resellers, 
etc., 
[3][4][5][6][7][8]. The SP provides high level services to the 
end-users, while the NPs manage their autonomous network 
domains. The ANPs manage the Access Networks.  
ENTHRONE testbeds are set-up in several countries, that 
are interconnected in order to build an international pilot. 
Each testbed consists of a networking infrastructure (core IP 
domains, various access networks) and hosts having installed 
the relevant software components, corresponding to the 
business entities (SP, NP, ANP, CC, CP/CS). The testbeds 
are aimed at several objectives to be fulfilled: the 
development and validation of the software components to 
be integrated in the management and control system; 
validation of the transport services management (or IP level 
network services) in both access and core IP part of the 
network; validation and deployment of the high level 
services. Both functional (i.e. correctness) and scalability 
aspects are targeted in the test campaigns. Appropriate 
scenarios are specified for each kind of test. 
This paper presents the implementation and infrastructure 
of a complex multiple domain testbed developed at 
University “Politehnica” of Bucharest (UPB), based on the 
ENTHRONE architecture. Examples are given of functional 
validation results. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shortly presents 
the ENTHRONE network service management framework. 
Section 3 describes the Pilot set up at University 
“Politehnica” of Bucharest. Section 4 presents samples of 
scenarios for functional and performance level testing. 
196
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Section 5 presents the test results and Section 6 contains the 
conclusions. 
II. 
ENTHRONE ARCHITECTURE AND NETWORK 
SERVICE MANAGEMENT SUMMARY 
ENTHRONE has defined an E2E QoS multi-domain 
ENTHRONE Integrated Management Supervisor (EIMS). 
The service management (SM) is a part of the EIMS. It 
considers all actors mentioned above and their contractual 
service related relationships, Service Level Agreements 
(SLA) and Service Level Specifications (SLS), as defined in 
[3][4][5][6][7][8]. The SM is independent on particular 
management systems used by different NPs in their 
domains. The SM entities should cooperate to realize the 
E2E chain. They are present in different amounts in SP, CP, 
NP CC entities, depending on the entity role in the E2E 
chain. The SM located in NPs should cooperate with each 
domain manager and also with other actors in the E2E 
chain. 
The QoS control is accomplished at the service level by 
logical QoS enabled aggregated pipes, built through the 
domains crossed by the path from source to destination, and 
logical QoS enabled individual pipes, built for each user in 
the access network. Several individual QoS enabled pipes 
are included in an aggregated pipe at the core network level. 
The pSLS is a contract performed at the Management 
Plane, and established by horizontal negotiation signaling 
between two peer managers, e.g., SM@NP, in which the 
requested NP agrees or does not agree to offer to the 
requester the QoS-enabled service (in the terms of QoS 
enabled pipes). Negotiations are required to establish an 
end-to-end pipe.  
The EIMS architecture at NP (EIMS@NP) contains four 
functional planes (Figure 1): the Service Plane (SPl) 
establishes appropriate SLAs/SLSs among the operators/ 
providers/customers. 
The 
Management 
Plane 
(MPl) 
performs long term actions related to resource and traffic 
management. The Control Plane (CPl) performs the short 
term actions for resource and traffic engineering and 
control, including routing. In a multi-domain environment 
the MPl and CPl are logically divided in two sub-planes:  
inter-domain and intra-domain. Therefore, each domain may 
have its own management and control policies and 
mechanisms. The Data Plane (DPl) is responsible to 
transfer the multimedia data and to set the DiffServ traffic 
control mechanisms to assure the desired level of QoS. 
The main task of the EIMS@NP is to find, negotiate and 
establish a QoS enabled pipe, from a Content Server (CS), 
belonging to a Content Provider, to a region where potential 
clients are located. This unidirectional pipe is referred as 
pSLS pipe, and it could cross multiple domains. Each pipe 
is established and identified by a chain of pSLS agreements 
between successive NP managers. The forwarded cascaded 
model is used to build the pSLS pipes [7]. The pipes are 
unidirectional ones. An end to end negotiation protocol is 
used to negotiate the pSLS pipe construction across multiple 
network domains [7]. 
The process of establishing a pSLS–link/pipe is 
triggered by the SP. It decides, based on market analyses 
and users recorded requirements, to build a set of QoS 
enabled pipes, with QoS parameters described by a pSLS 
agreement. It starts a new negotiation session for each pSLS 
pipe establishment. It sends a pSLS Subscribe request to the 
EIMS@NP manager of the Content Consumer network 
domain. The EIMS@NP manager performs the QoS 
specific tasks such as admission control (AC), routing and 
service provisioning. To this aim, it splits the pSLS request 
into intra-domain respectively inter-domain pSLS request. It 
also performs intra-domain routing, to find the intra-domain 
route for the requested pSLS, and then it performs intra-
domain AC. If these actions are successfully accomplished, 
and if the pSLS pipe is an inter-domain one, then the 
manager uses the routing agent to find the ingress point in 
the next domain, does inter-domain Admission Control and 
then send a pSLS Subscribe request towards the next 
domain. This negotiation is continued in the chain up to the 
destination domain, i.e., the domain of the CC access 
network. If the negotiation ends successfully, the QoS 
enabled pipe is considered logically established along the 
path from source to destination.  
The Network Service Management (NSM) is the EIMS 
subsystem offering network connectivity service to the 
applications. The NSM manages the services and network 
resources by using an overlay based approach. This means 
that a network domain is abstracted with a virtual domain 
and the services and domain resources management is 
performed based on the virtual domain information. Each 
domain has its own local manager, called Intra-domain 
Resource Manager, which is in charge with the local domain 
management. Also it applies the decisions taken at the virtual 
level in the managed domain [7][15]. 
The network connectivity service is first built at the 
overlay level. This is done during the pSLS Subscription 
phase, which is performed using pSLS negotiation between 
the SP and the NP of the first domain and between the 
successive NPs along the service path. The negotiation result 
is an aggregated pipe built for the service traffic between the 
content source and the destination access network. During 
the pSLS Invocation phase, the pSLS pipe is installed on the 
network equipments of each domain, crossed by the 
aggregated pipe, by the associated Intra-domain Resource 
Managers. The pSLS pipe resources could be invoked totally 
or partially, depending on the amount of traffic estimated for 
the pSLS associated services in the following time period. 
With the pSLS pipe built, the SP can now offer the 
service to the users by allocating pSLS pipe slices, cSLS 
pipes, to the individual users’ calls. These cSLS pipes are 
built at the access network level. In this way the 
ENTHRONE solution avoid per flow signaling in the core 
domain. 
197
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

III. 
ROMANIAN PILOT TOPOLOGY 
The Romania Pilot island (RPI) general infrastructure 
consists of three sections: 
• 
Core IP – The Core IP network consists of three 
autonomous domains, each managed by the 
ENTHRONE EIMS at Network Provider subsystem. 
The Core network is linked via GEANT with the 
other ENTHRONE pilots; 
• 
Access Networks – We have implemented several 
type access technologies i.e., IP/Ethernet; wireless - 
WIMAX 802.16d, and DVB-T. For the WiMAX 
access based network we have developed, in 
ENTHRONE project, a WiMAX Resource Manager 
which is integrated with the ENTHRONE EIMS. It 
is capable of cSLS management inside the WiMAX 
network; 
• 
ENTHRONE Terminals with wired or wireless 
access based on WLAN-802.11b/g. They are 
supporting the ENTHRONE signaling via the 
Terminal Device Manager, which is used to connect 
the terminal to the ENTHRONE EIMS system. 
This infrastructure allows experimentations of full 
ENTHRONE scenarios locally, but can be interconnected to 
other countries’ pilots too. The terminals can be fixed or 
mobile, with single mode or hybrid mode access. The 
ENTHRONE business entities supported are CC, CP, SP, 
NP. The relevant EIMS entities are located in: Core IP; 
Access (Aggregation) Networks; User Terminals; Content 
Providers hosts.  
The UPB pilot was focused on the SLS management 
validation, both pSLS and cSLS management. In Figure 9 
the simplified version of the pilot topology, showing only the 
components involved in the validation tests, is presented. 
There are three core IP network domains NP1, NP2 and 
NP3, each one managed by its own NetSrvMNgr@NP (in the 
current implementation it includes also the Inter-domain 
Network Resource Manager). The Intra-domain Resource 
Manager (IntraResMngr@NP) manages the resources at the 
local domain level. In particular, the access network 
technology used in our example is IEEE 802.16d/WIMAX, 
[5]. The AN is managed by its Resource Manager 
(ResMngr@ANP), which reserves resources on the WiMAX 
links at SP requests. 
The structure of the core network is detailed: the 
allocated IP addresses, the name of the border routers and the 
applications installed on the testbed. The core routers are 
implemented using the Linux machines and the resource 
control in the data plane is done using the Linux Traffic 
Control application. The network management modules are 
communicating using the Web Services technology, the 
interfaces between them are defined using the WSDL 
description language [7][18][19]. 
The NP1 domain has four border routers (border_an, 
border_elcom, border_as1as2 and border_as1as3). The 
border_elcom router is connected through the GEANT 
backbone with other ENTHRONE pilots. The AN connected 
to border_an router contains the EIMS SP machines and also 
the CP machines. The EIMS SP and CP machines are 
implemented using virtual machines. 
The NP2 domain has two border routers (border_as2as1, 
border_an103). The WiMAX AN is connected to the 
border_an103. In this network we have the ENTHRONE 
terminal and player. The NP3 domain contains only one 
machine, with a simulated virtual domain containing three 
border 
routers 
(border_as3as1, 
border_as3as2, 
border_an105).  
The main ENTHRONE components and their placement 
are shown in Figure 9. In red are highlighted the modules 
involved in the network service management: Network 
Service Manager at Service Provider and Network Provider 
(NetSrvMngr), the Intra-domain Network Resource Manager 
at Network Provider and the WiMAX Resource Manager at 
Access Network. A detailed description of the ENTHRONE 
modules could be found in [3][5][7][16]. The main task of 
the Network Service Manager is to find, negotiate and 
establish a QoS enabled pipe from a Content Server to a 
Content Consumer. The following components are installed 
at each IP domain: 
• 
Network Service Manager at Network Provider  
• 
Intra-domain Resource Manager: specific blocks of 
NP for resource management and traffic engineering 
• 
Node monitoring and Network Monitoring  
The assembly of these components provides the service 
and resource management for support of the network 
connectivity in the core network. 
The overall goal of the UPB testbed was the deployment, 
validation and demo for a subset of the ENTHRONE general 
functionalities. Specifically, we targeted to test and validate 
the network IP connectivity QoS enabled services over 
several core IP domains and heterogeneous access networks 
(ANs), in unicast and multicast mode.  
Appropriate scenarios have been defined to provide the 
necessary framework for functional and performance system 
validation. Each scenario defines the test environment and a 
sequence of actions (inputs, internal actions and expected 
outputs) to perform. We define Operational Scenarios (in 
terms of functionality), technically-oriented (correctness, 
scalability, stability, etc.), and usability-oriented (cost/benefit 
to provider and end-user) relatively to a given subsystem to 
be tested; High level services Scenarios- oriented towards 
services like VoD, streaming, E-learning, etc., aimed to 
measure the related performance and benefits seen from user 
perspective [20].   
IV. 
SCENARIOS FOR NETWORK CONNECTIVITY SERVICES 
FUNCTIONAL VALIDATION  
In this section we will present samples of operational 
scenarios to validate the inter-domain negotiation signaling 
and processing for the pSLS-links (in core IP domains) and 
cSLS-links (in AN) installation in the network.  
These tests are aimed at validating the correctness of the 
EIMS Network Service Manager (NSM) implementation 
behavior, relative to p/cSLS subscription and invocation, in a 
multi-domain environment for unicast case.  
198
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

The Figure 2 shows an example of a message sequence 
launched by SP in order to install in the networks (three IP 
domains) a pSLS-link. The pSLS-link invocation phase is 
considered. It is supposed that the pSLS-link has been 
already subscribed, through a similar sequence of actions. 
The EQoS-pSLS negotiation protocol has the task to 
transport the negotiation messages between entities [6][8]. 
This protocol has been implemented as Web Services, 
[7][18][19]. The pSLS subscription invocation scenario main 
phases are described below. The modification and deletion 
scenarios derive from this one. 
1 The SP administrator decides, based on current needs 
data, to invoke, partially or totally, a previously subscribed 
pSLS-link. It configures the pSLS parameters in the web 
management interface and then it triggers the subscription of 
a new pSLS link. See action 0 on Figure 2. The SLS 
parameters specify among others, the bandwidth required, 
delay, and class of services associated to this request. 
2 The NetSrvMngr@SP starts an invocation signaling 
session. So, it sends the pSLS invocation request, using the 
EQoS client, to the first NetSrvMngr@NP(action 1).  
3 The negotiation is carried in cascaded forwarding mode 
between the NetSrvMngrs@NPs, down to the last core IP 
domain where the potential CCs are located. See actions 2, 3. 
4. It is assumed a successful scenario where all resource 
checks are successful, therefore vertical commands are given 
by each NetSrvMngr@NP to its IntraResMngr@NP in order 
to install the pipe in the network (actually configuration of  
the Diffserv LINUX Traffic Control for the associated QoS 
class is done). See (4,5; 7,8; 10,11) actions. 
5. 
Responses 
are 
returned 
to 
the 
upstream 
NetSrvMngr@NPs, (6, 9, 12) and then, finally, to SP Admin. 
The Figure 3 shows a scenario in which a client (CC) 
browses a website (which can be based on a Digital Item 
Description -DID) which offers the latest Digital Items for 
consumption. The module Customer Service Manager 
(CustSrvMngr) is in charge with the high level service 
management. It is the main subsystem which coordinates all 
the other subsystems of the Service Provider. Then the 
following message sequence is performed in order to allow 
users access to the ENTHRONE services: 
1 The CC chooses a specific DI and sends a request for it 
to Service Provider Frontend (SP-FE) 
2 The SP-FE forwards it to CustSrvMngr. The 
parameters are: the content ID, class of service, the initial 
(i.e., the static) usage environment (UED) of the client 
(Terminal Capabilities, User Characteristics/ Preferences, 
Natural 
Environment 
Characteristics 
and 
Network 
Characteristics), IP address of the client. 
3. CustSrvMngr@SP selects a content variation list (in 
cooperation with other EIMS blocks not shown here) 
4. The CustSrvMngr@SP queries the NetSrvMngr@SP 
about the available pSLS(s) between each content variation 
and the CC. Then (4.1, 4.2) NetSrvMngr@SP queries the 
repository to obtain a list of the appropriate pSLSes  
5. NetSrvMngr@SP returns a list with available pSLSs, 
between the content sources and the access network, to the 
CustSrvMngr 
6. After getting pSLS status, the CustSrvMngr performs 
other actions. Among others, it selects an appropriate pSLS 
link. 
7. CustSrvMngr@SP requests cLS subscription to 
NetSrvMngr@SP. Then a sequence of actions denoted with 
7.1-7.6 follows: NetSrvMngr@SP checks for available 
resources on the pSLS link, then negotiate with the access 
network resource manager (ResMngr@ANP) to reserve 
resources for the cSLS link in the access network. If all these 
actions 
are 
successfully 
accomplished, 
then 
the 
NetSrvMngr@SP updates the resources status and records 
the cSLS agreement.  
8. NetSrvMngr@SP responds to CustSrvMngr@SP with 
the new cSLS subscription data. Other actions may be 
performed by the CustSrvMngr@SP- not detailed here. 
9. 10 CustSrvMngr@SP responds to the CC, via SP-FE, 
about the success of the DI selection. 
 
 
AS1 
NetSrvMngr 
@NP1 
EQoS-pSLS 
EQoS-pSLS 
1 
2 
6 
12 
0. pSLS inv req 
 
NetSrvMngr@SP 
SP Admin 
interface 
SP 
13 
CP/CS 
Intra-NRM 
@NP1 
AS3 
NetSrvMngr 
@NP3 
Intra-NRM 
@NP3 
4 
5 
AS2 
NetSrvMngr 
@NP2 
Intra-NRM 
@NP2 
8 
7 
3 
11 
9 
10 
pSLS - link 
 
Figure 2.  Basic pSLS invocation chain of signalling (3 IP domains). 
199
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
   
Service Provider (SP) 
CC 
CustSrvMng 
SP FE 
NetSrvMng@SP 
1 
cSLA 
Access Network 
ResMng@ANP 
Core Network(s) 
CS/ 
sTVM1 
(NSM&RM)@NP 
Existing pSLS links - 
installed 
2 
4 
ER 
cSLS ReqHandler 
pSLS/ 
cSLS 
Rep 
4.1 
7 
7.2 
9 
Split 
cSLS 
(7.1) 
AC 
(7.5) 
8 
4.2 
CS/ 
sTVM2 
AR 
ER 
5 
Network 
Service 
Provisioning 
7.4 
7.6 
10 
(3) 
(6) 
(7.3) 
 
Figure 3.   Message Sequence showing the pSLS status query and cSLS subscription related actions 
The Figure 9 shows, in graphical form, on the testbed 
diagram, the results for the two scenarios above, aiming to 
construct a pSLS-link in the NP1 and NP2 IP domains and 
complete it with a cSLS-link, as a last mile installed in the 
WiMAX AN network. The pSLS link is subscribed spanning 
from Border_an up to Border_an103. The concatenated 
pipes at the left side (subscription phase) represent the pSLS-
link subscribed. This is done at EIMS overlay level in each 
domain; EIMS knows only the ingress and egress points in 
each domain and the inter-domain links. The inter-domain 
route selection [21] is not the subject of this paper. The 
actual path established in invocation phase within each IP 
domain is different from the overlay one; e.g., in NP1 the 
path is A1, E4 and E3. The arrows 1, 2, 3, 4 represent the 
horizontal signaling actions between NetSrvMngr@SP and 
NetSrvMngr@NPs for pSLS subscription. The arrows 
5,6,7,8 represent the similar actions for pSLS invocation. 
The arrows 6’ and 7’ represent the vertical commands given 
by the IntraNetResMngr@NP to routers in order to install 
the pipes (i.e. Traffic Control parameters configuration). The 
arrows 9, 10 and 11, 12 represent respectively the signaling 
actions between the NetSrvMngr@SP and ResMngr@AN to 
subscribe and invoke the cSLS-link in the WiMAX segment. 
The arrow 11’ represents the command given to the WiMAX 
Base Station (BS) to install the associate service flow 
between BS and Subscriber Station (SS). The thick line in 
the Figure 9 represents the path of the future media flow 
through the domains, form CP up to the CC. A lot of 
experiments for other different scenarios are reported in [17]. 
V. 
TESTS PERFORMED IN THE UPB TESTBED 
The testbed focused on validating the SLS management 
as standalone functionality and also integrated with the 
overall ENTHRONE end to end QoS management system. 
Functionality and scalability tests were done for the SLS 
management [1][2][16][17]. 
A. Functionality tests 
1) pSLS management  
In this section there are presented some functionality tests 
performed. The complete description of tests suit performed 
in UPB testbed can be found in [16]. 
The first suit of functionality tests refers to the pSLS 
subscription. The pSLS subscription request is triggered by 
the Service Provider’s Network Service Manager in order to 
reserve resources, at the overlay (virtual domain) level, in the 
core network. As a result of the pSLS subscription a logical 
pipe, pSLS pipe, is built in the core network. We made tests 
for intra-domain and inter-domain pSLS subscription and 
invocation. 
As an example, for intra-domain case it was built a pSLS 
pipe between the border_an and border_elcom border 
routers (Figure 9). For inter-domain case a pSLS pipe was 
subscribed between the border_an machine (on NP1 
domain) and border_an103 machine (on NP2 domain). The 
border_an machine is the border router for the Content 
Server access network, and border_an103 is the border 
router for the access network containing the ENTHRONE 
terminal. The pslsSubscribe operation was triggered from the 
NetSrvMngr@SP installed on the SP virtual machines. In the 
negotiation were involved the NetSrvMngr@NP1 and 
NetSrvMngr@NP2. 
In Figure 4 there are presented the messages exchanged 
between the NetSrvMngr@SP and the NetSrvMngr@NPs for 
the 
inter-domain 
pSLS 
subscription 
case. 
For 
the 
NetSrvMngr@NP1, the messages exchanged between the 
main modules involved in pSLS management are also 
detailed: pSLS provisioning, pSLS split and pSLS admission 
control. For the second domain a similar suit of messages 
will be exchanged in order to fulfill the request. 
200
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
EIMS@SP 
pSLS prov 
NP1 
pSLS split 
pslsSubscribeReq (psls)  
pslsSubscribeResp (psls) 
pSLS adminision 
control 
Transit pSLS ?  
 transit pSLS(edge nodes)  
 pSLS intra/interdomain 
AC?  
 pSLS admitted  
 Install pSLS 
Update resources  
NetSrvMngr
@NP2 
pslsSubscribeReq (psls) 
pslsSubscribeResp (psls)  
 pSLS intra/interdomain 
AC?  
 pSLS admitted  
Local 
processin
 
Figure 4.  MSC for the inter-domain pSLS 
For the pSLS pipe subscribed it has also tested the 
invocation phase. Both the invocation for intra and inter-
domain case were considered. 
There were triggered invocation requests from the 
NetSrvMngr@SP. In the negotiation phase, the following 
entities were involved: the NetSrvMngr@NP1, Intra-
domainResMngr@NP1 modules for intra-domain and 
NetSrvMngr@NP1/NP2, Intra-domainResMngr@NP1/NP2 
for inter-domain pSLS invocation. As a result the pSLS pipe 
resources were reserved on the Linux routers along the path. 
The bandwidth resources were reserved in the Linux router 
using the Traffic Control application. The reservation was 
performed successfully. The system was able to prioritize the 
pSLS traffic against a noise traffic generated in order to test 
the invocation result. 
In Figure 10 one can see a screen capture with two 
movies, one whose stream is treated as best effort traffic, 
while the packets for the second one are transmitted through 
the pSLS pipe in the core network. One can see that the 
second movie’s quality is much better than for the first 
movie. The traffic classes created by Traffic Control 
application, for best effort and for the pSLS pipe, and the 
noise traffic generated with Iperf application are also shown.   
The operations for modifying and closing the Invocation 
and for closing the pSLS subscription were also performed 
successfully. 
2) cSLS management 
For the cSLS management it was performed both 
standalone tests, using a Customer Service Manager test 
module used to trigger cSLS subscription and invocation 
requests, and tests using the whole ENTHRONE end to end 
QoS management system. In this section we will present the 
whole ENTHRONE signaling mechanism with focus on the 
cSLS management. 
 
 
EIMS@SP 
EIMS@NP 
NP1 
Intradomain 
ResMngrNP1 
EIMS@NP 
NP2 
Intradomain 
ResMngrNP2 
pslsSubscribeReq (psls)  
pslsSubscribeReq (psls) 
pslsSubscribeResp (psls) 
pslsSubscribeResp (psls) 
pslsInvokeReq (psls)  
pslsInvokeReq (psls)  
pslsIntraInvokeReq  
pslsIntraInvokeResp  
pslsInvokeResp (psls)  
pslsIntraInvokeReq  
pslsIntraInvokeResp  
pslsInterInvokeReq  
pslsInterInvokeResp  
SUBSCRIPTION 
PHASE 
INVOCATION PHASE 
pslsInvokeResp (psls) 
 
 
Figure 5.   The MSC for pSLS subscription and invocation 
 
After the pSLS subscription and invocation phases, a 
pSLS pipe will be established in the UPB testbed. The pSLS 
pipe, which is crossing both the NP1 and NP2 domains, is 
built from the 192.168.202.200 server to the 10.242.103.0 
access network. The 192.168.202.200 server has the 
Adaptation TVM installed on it. In the 10.242.103.0 access 
network we have an ENTHRONE terminal with the 
ENTHRONE Player and Terminal Device Manager Client 
installed on it. After the pSLS pipe was built between the 
aTVM content server and the access network containing the 
ENTHRONE Terminal, the ENTHRONE end to end 
scenario can be run. The cSLS pipes requested by the users 
will be associated with the pSLS inter-domain pipe. In the 
10.242.103.0 access network we have a WiMAX based 
network, managed by an ENTHRONE Resource Manager at 
Access Network Provider (WimaxMngr@ANP), installed on 
border_an103 machine. We will be able to test the 
subscription and invocation phases, for the cSLS pipes, at the 
access network level.  
After the ENTHRONE end to end overall scenario will 
be run, the cSLS/pSLS pipes will be installed in the access 
network. At the WiMAX access network level the cSLS pipe 
is installed as a service flow on the BS-SS WiMAX link. 
The traffic streamed from the Adaptation Terminal 
towards the ENTHRONE Terminal will be inserted in the 
pSLS pipe, while crossing the NP1 and NP2 domains, and in 
the Service Flow associated with the cSLS pipe, while 
crossing the access network. In NP1 domain and in the 
access network the links crossed by the user’s traffic were 
flooded with some noise traffic from a traffic generator. As a 
result of the resource reservations performed during the 
invocation phases, the users are able to see the movie with a 
good quality (Figure 10). 
201
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
 
TDM Client 
TDM Server 
@SP 
CustSrvMngr
@SP 
ResMngr@ANP 
WiMAX Mngr 
NetSrvMngr
@SP 
CustSrvMngr
@TVM 
Play DI 
PlayDI 
Get DI 
Get DI 
getPslsState 
Available pSLS 
DI 
DI Response 
Select DI 
Select DI 
Subscribe cSLS 
Invoke cSLS 
Invoke cSLS accept 
Subscribe cSLS accept 
Play DI 
Invoke cSLS 
Subscribe cSLS 
Subscribe cSLS 
Invoke cSLS 
Start Play DI 
 sTVM 
 aTVM 
Media stream 
Player 
SUBSCRIPTION PHASE 
INVOCATION PHASE 
Install a new 
Service Flow 
 
Figure 6.   cSLS invocation and subscription phase in the overall end to 
end ENTHRONE scenario 
In Figure 6 the messages exchanged during the overall 
end to end QoS management scenario are shown. The cSLS 
subscription and invocation phases’ placement in the 
message sequence is also shown. 
In Figure 6, by DI we noted Digital Item which is defined 
in the MPEG 21 standard; by CustSrvMngr we refer the 
Customer Service Manager either Service Provider or at 
TVM and by TDM the Terminal Device Manager 
[3][5][6][7][16] [17]. 
B. Scalability tests 
Besides the functionality tests, which were used to 
validate the ENTHRONE functional architecture, the correct 
behavior of the ENTHRONE modules, we have tried to 
determine the scalability of the ENTHRONE Network 
Service Manager’s modules. Because the Service Provider 
has to deal with user’s requests, which are greater in number 
than the requests for pSLS pipe establishment triggered by 
the Service Provider before the service offering, we have 
considered that scalability problems could be generated by 
the Network Service Manager at the Service Provider 
module, when it should answer to the cSLS subscription and 
invocation requests. 
In order to test the scalability for the NetSrvMngr@SP 
module we have used a CustSrvMngr test module to generate 
cSLS subscription and invocation requests. The test module 
was used on a terminal situated outside the university 
campus. In order to connect to the testbed we have used a 
VPN connection. So, the requests have to travel initially 
through the Internet before reaching the UPB testbed, 
simulating in this way the real case where the users connects 
to the Service Provider via Internet. 
Several successive requests were generated and the time 
required to fulfill all the requests was measured. The 
following cases were considered: 
• 
Several cSLS subscription requests (Figure 7) 
• 
Several groups of cSLS subscription and invocation 
requests (Figure 8). In this case, because the number 
of the cSLS invocation is large, we have used a 
dummy WiMAX manager module which did not 
install the service flows on the WiMAX equipment, 
but just returned a positive answer. 
• 
Several groups of cSLS subscription, invocation and 
invocation close requests (Figure 8). In this case we 
have used the real WiMAX manager, because in this 
case, after the service flow is installed, it is also 
removed afterwards. 
From the picture one can see that the NetSrvMngr@SP 
could serve 200 requests suites cSLS subscription, cSLS 
invocation, cSLS invocation close in less than 20 seconds. 
Taking into account that the cSLS requests are for video on 
demand services, we believe that serving speed is 
satisfactory. We didn’t perform yet tests with the case when 
the requests are coming from different machines. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A testbed for an integrated E2E QoS management system 
validation, developed in the framework of the ENTHRONE 
Project, is briefly described. Several tests were presented, 
both functionality and scalability tests, aimed to validate the 
SLS management and the ENTHRONE overall system. 
Scalability tests are in progress. Some basic scalability 
tests for the pSLS/cSLS negotiation were done. Further tests 
have to be done for the scalability in the case of requests 
coming from different hosts. Also we should do tests in order 
to measure the scalability for the entire system, with all the 
ENTHRONE modules integrated. 
The tests have proved that ENTHRONE is a functional, 
flexible, feasible solution for E2E QoS management for 
multimedia streams delivery. While functionality test were 
successfully, a difficult part is to prove its scalability. Some 
tests in this direction were started, but there is still lot of 
work in this direction. We stressed the system with some 
automatically generated requests and the serving rate was 
acceptable. 
The ENTHRONE system is designed for multimedia 
delivery, but it has no support for VoIP services and for 
audio/video conferencing/chat. Because of the long term 
nature of the pSLS aggregated pipes they are not well suited 
for the dynamic and diversity of these interactive services. 
Future work will be done to enhance the ENTHRONE 
system and also to adapt it to some new services link 
requiring QoS, like VoIP and videoconferencing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the FP6 project 
ENTHRONE 
project 
IST 
507637 
(continued 
with 
ENTHRONE II, IST 038463). 
 
202
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
execution time [s]
number of requests
csls_subscribe
 
Figure 7.   The execution time for cSLS requests 
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 200
execution time [s]
number of requests
csls_subscribe+csls_invoke
csls_subscribe+csls_invoke+csls_invokeclose
 
Figure 8.  The execution time for cSLS subscribe, cSLS invocation suite 
and for cSLS subscribe, cSLS invocation, cSLS invocation close suite 
REFERENCES 
[1]  S. Obreja, E. Borcoci, R. Lupu, M. Stanciu and S. Ciochină: 
Functionality and scalability validation for an end to end QoS 
management system, The Fifth Advanced International Conference on 
Telecommunications , AICT 2009, pp.142-147, Venice/Mestre, Italy. 
[2] E. Borcoci, Ş. G. Obreja and R. Lupu: Overlay Management of 
Network Services for Multimedia Flows Transport over Multiple 
Domains - Testbed Validation, The Fifth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications, AICT 2009, pp.136-141, 
Venice/Mestre, Italy. 
[3] Brétillon, P. (ed) et al.: ENTHRONE II Deliverable D01, Overall 
System Architecture, February 2007. 
[4] P. Sommer (ed.) et al.: ENTHRONE II Deliverable D02, Pilot 
Architecture and Services Definition, February 2007. 
[5] P. Souto and M. Ransburg, (eds.) et al.: ENTHRONE II Deliverable 
D03, EIMS for ENTHRONE II, February 2008. 
[6] M. Sidibé and A. Mehaoua, (eds.) et al., ENTHRONE II Deliverable 
D06, Service management and monitoring, Febr. 2008. 
[7] E.Borcoci and S. Obreja (eds.) et al., ENTHRONE II Deliverable 
D18, Service management and QoS provisioning, June 2007. 
[8] M.Stier, (ed.) et al., End-to-End QoS Signalling Protocols and All-IP 
Approach, ENTHRONE II Deliverable D22F, March 2007, 
http://www.ist-ENTHRONE.org 
[9] T.Engel, et al, AQUILA: Adaptive Resource Control for QoS Using 
an IP-Based Layered Architecture, IEEE Communications Magazine, 
January 2003, pp. 46-53.  
[10] P. Morand, et. al., Final specification of protocols and algorithms, for 
inter-domain SLS management and traffic, engineering for QoS-
based IP service delivery, MESCAL IST Project Public Deliverable, 
D1.3, July 2005.  
[11] T. Damilatis, et.al., Final Architecture, Protocol and Algorithm 
Specification, TEQUILA IST Project Public Deliverable, D3.4 Part B,  
Oct. 2002. 
[12] ETSI RES 282 001: Telecommunications and Internet converged 
Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking (TISPAN), NGN 
Functional Architecture Release 2, March 2007 
[13] 3GPP TS 23.228: IP Multimedia (IM) Subsystem; Stage 2 (Release 
8), December 2007. 
[14] T.Ahmed, A.Asgari, A.Mehaoua, E.Borcoci, L.Berti-Équille and 
G..Kormentzas End-to-End QoS Provisioning through an Integrated 
Management System for Multimedia Content Delivery, Computer 
Communication Journal, May 2005. 
[15] E.Borcoci, 
A.Asgari, 
N.Butler, 
T.Ahmed, 
A.Mehaoua, 
G.Kourmentzas and S.Eccles Service Management for End-to-End 
QoS Multimedia Content Delivery in Heterogeneous Environment, 
AICT Conference, July 2005, Lisbon. 
[16] T. Ahmed, (ed.) et al., ENTHRONE II Deliverable D27 Pilot and 
services integration and tests, March 2008 
[17] ENTHRONE II Deliverable D28 Trials and evaluation, November 
2008 
[18] S.Obreja, E.Borcoci, R.Lupu and R.Iorga,  Web-service solution for 
inter-domain QoS negotiation, Int’l Conference on Communication 
Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service CTRQ July 2008, 
Bucharest, Romania.  
[19] S. Obreja, E. Borcoci, R. Lupu and M. Stanciu, Web-service based 
implementation of a Network Service Manager at Network Provider, 
IEEE Int’l Conference on Automation, Quality and Testing, Robotics 
AQTR 2008 - THETA 16th edition, May 22-25 2008, Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania. 
[20] E. Borcoci, A. Asgari, S. Ciochina and S. Obreja, The Methodology 
for Testbed Validation and Performance Assessment of Network/ 
Service Management Systems, IEEE Int’lConference on Automation, 
Quality and Testing, Robotics AQTR 2008 - THETA 16th edition - 
May 22-25, 2008, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. 
[21] S. Obreja, E. Borcoci, Finding inter-domain Qos enabled routes 
using an overlay topology approach, International Journal On 
Advances in Telecommunications, issn 1942-2601, vol. 2, no. 1, year 
2009, pp.16-26, http://www.iariajournals.org/ /telecommunications/. 
 
LEGEND FOR FIGURE 9: 
 
• 
TVM – Multimedia TV processor (source TVM and adaptation TVM),  
• 
EIMS@SP- ENTHRONE Integrated Management System at Service Provider,  
• 
NetSrvMngr@SP/NP – Network Service Manager at SP/NP,  
• 
IntraResMngr@NP – Intra-domain Resource Manager at NP,  
• 
WiMAXmngr – Resource Manager at AN for the WiMAX access network 
203
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

EIMS-NP1 
E1  
EIMS-NP2 
EIMS-NP 
E1   
10.
NP2 
 To GEANT 
NP1 
NetSrvMngr@NP 
Intra-NetResMngr@NP 
 
NetSrvMngr@NP 
Intra-NetResMngr@NP 
CP 
CP 
BSOFT sTVM 
 
 
CustSrvMngr 
SrvMonSP 
SearchMngr 
E2EQoSMngr 
DIDBrowser 
EIMS@ SP 
aTVM 
A1 
E1 
E3 
E6 
 
A326  
AN 
W1 
End Users 
BSOFT player 
10.242.103.100 
End Users 
BSOFT player 
10.242.105.100 
Border_an 
Border_elcom 
Border_as1as2 
Border_as1as3 
Border_as3as1 
NP3 
Border_as2as1 
Border_an103 
 
 
Invoked 
pSLS link 
 
TVM Media 
stream 
WiMAX mngr 
NetSrvMngr@NP 
Intra-NetResMngr@NP 
 
E4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8 
6 
7 
7’ 
7’ 
6’ 
subscribed 
pSLS link 
subscribed 
cSLS link 
Invoked 
cSLS link 
 
9 
10 
11 
12 
11’ 
NetSrvMngr@SP
 
Figure 9.  UPB testbed infrastructure: installation of pSLS link and cSLS link in NP1, NP2 and in WiMAX Access Network. 
 
 
Figure 10.  The result of the cSLS/pSLS invocation. 
204
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

