Wireless Cooperative Relaying Based on
Opportunistic Relay Selection
Tauseef Jamal1, Paulo Mendes1, André Zúquete2
1SITI, R&D Unit of Informatics Systems and Technologies, Universidade Lusofona de Humanidades e
Tecnologias (ULHT), COFAC, Campo Grande 376, Lisbon, Portugal
{tauseef.jamal,paulo.mendes}@ulusofona.pt
2Dep. Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics, IEETA, University of Aveiro Campus Universitário de
Santiago 3810–193 Aveiro, Portugal
andre.zuquete@ua.pt
Abstract—Advances in wireless technologies, including more
powerful devices and low cost radio technologies, have po-
tential to drive an ubiquitous utilization of Internet services.
Nevertheless wireless technologies face performance limitations
due to unstable wireless conditions and mobility of devices.
In face of multi-path propagation and low data rate stations,
cooperative relaying promises gains in performance and relia-
bility. However, cooperation procedures are unstable (rely on
current channel conditions) and introduce overhead that can
endanger performance especially when nodes are mobile. In this
article we describe a framework, called RelaySpot, to implement
cooperative wireless solutions in large mobile networks, based
upon opportunistic relay selection methods. RelaySpot based
solutions are expected to minimize signaling exchange, remove
estimation of channel conditions, and improve the utilization of
spatial diversity, minimizing outage and increasing reliability.
Index Terms—Cooperative Relay Scheduling, Opportunistic
Relay Selection, Wireless Resource Management, Space-Time
Diversity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, Internet access became essentially
wireless, with 802.11 technologies providing a low cost broad-
band support for a ﬂexible and easy deployment. However,
channel conditions in wireless networks are subjected to inter-
ference and multi-path propagation, creating fading channels
and decreasing the overall network performance. While fast
fading can be mitigated by having the source retransmitting
packets, slow fading, caused by obstruction of the main signal
path, makes retransmission useless, since periods of low signal
power lasts for the entire duration of the transmission.
Extensive research has been done to mitigate the impact
of shadowing in wireless networks, being mostly focused on
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems. Recently,
cooperative relaying techniques have been investigated to in-
crease the performance of wireless systems by using diversity
created by different single antenna devices, aiming to reach
the same level of performance of MIMO systems.
Cooperation occurs when overhearing relays assist the trans-
mission from source to destination, by transmitting different
copies of the same signal from different locations, allowing the
destination to get independently faded versions of the signal
that can be combined to obtain an error-free signal.
Figure 1.
Cooperative relaying
Figure 1 shows a pair of single antenna devices able to
act as relays of each other by forwarding some version of
“overheard” packets along with its own data. Since the fading
channels of two different devices are statistically indepen-
dent, this generates spatial diversity. The development of
cooperative relaying systems, of which Figure 1 illustrates a
simple scenario, raises several research issues including the
performance impact on the relay itself, and the interference on
the overall network, leading to a potential decrease in network
capacity and transmission fairness.
In this paper, we present our arguments in favor of a
new type of cooperative relaying scheme based upon local
decisions that do not rely on unstable information e.g., (Chan-
nel State Information) CSI collected over multiple links. We
describe an 802.11 backward compatible cooperative relay-
ing framework, called RelaySpot [1], which aims to ensure
accurate and fast relay selection, posing minimum overhead
and reducing the dependency upon CSI estimations, which
is essential to increase system performance in scenarios with
mobile nodes. The basic characteristic of any RelaySpot-based
solution is the capability to perform local relaying decisions
at potential relay nodes (can be more than one), based on a
combination of opportunistic relay selection and cooperative
relay scheduling. Intermediate nodes take the opportunity to
relay in the presence of local favorable conditions (e.g., no
concurrent trafﬁc). Cooperative scheduling is used to com-
pensate unsuccessful relay transmissions. To the best of our
knowledge RelaySpot is the ﬁrst framework that aims to create
the basic conditions to allow relay selection to be done without
relying on CSI estimation.
116
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The remaining of this paper is organized as: section II
describes the concept of cooperative relaying. Section III
describes the prior-art. In sections IV and V we describe
the proposed RelaySpot mechanism. Section VI provides
an operational comparison with an example of source-based
relaying approach (CoopMAC [2]) with RelaySpot. While
RelaySpot implementation is discussed in section VII. Section
VIII concludes the paper.
II. COOPERATIVE RELAYING
The basic problem of wireless communication systems
is the delivery of information from one network node to
another in a resource-efﬁcient manner. While, wireless links
always had orders of magnitude less bandwidth than their
wired counterparts, newer technologies, such as multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) systems, are starting to improve the
performance of wireless network. However such improvements
come at the cost of multiple Radio Frequency (RF). Further-
more, the size of mobile devices may limit the number of
antennas to be deployed.
In 802.11 networks, the low quality (throughput and relia-
bility) and short coverage of the direct link between a source
and a destination are mainly due to the shadowing and fading
effects of the wireless environment [3]. There are however
other constrains in wireless networks such as limited power,
size of devices, and distance. Due to the distance from the
Access Point (AP), a mobile node can observe a bad channel
as compared to other nodes that are closer to the AP. Figure
2 shows the transmission characteristics of some nodes, as
a result of the rate adaptation functionality of IEEE 802.11:
stations closer to the AP transmit at high data rates, while
stations far away from the AP decrease their data rate after
detecting missing frames.
Figure 2.
802.11 rate adaptation
The usage of rate adaptation schemes results in a degra-
dation of the overall network performance, since low data
rate stations grab the wireless medium for a longer time. This
occurs since each station has the same probability to access
the channel, which means that high data rate stations will not
be able to keep the desirable throughput.
As illustrated in Figure 2, the station at the cell edge adapts
its data rate to 1Mbps, yet its frames are overheard by the
high data rates stations. The latter ignores this overheard
information and drops the frames. Cooperative relaying is
a very simple, and yet effective solution, to mitigate the
problems raised by the presence of low data rate stations. With
cooperative relaying, high data rate stations help low data rate
stations to release the medium earlier, by relaying their data
over channels with higher data rates. This way high data rate
stations will be able to transmit earlier, increasing the overall
system performance. In cooperative communications, nodes
in a wireless network work together to form a virtual antenna
array.
The basic ideas behind cooperative communication can be
traced back to the relay channel model in information theory
extensively studied in the 1970s by Cover and El Gamal [4].
Recent research on cooperative communication [5], [6], [7]
demonstrates the beneﬁts of cooperative relaying in a wireless
environment by achieving spatial diversity. Moreover, most
of the research being done focuses on the physical layer
(cooperative communications), by exploiting spatial diversity
to increase system reliability of cellular networks. Recently,
the exploitation of link-layer diversity (cooperative relaying)
in cellular and multi-hop wireless networks has attracted
considerable research attention. Cooperative techniques utilize
the broadcast nature of wireless signals: the source node sends
data for a particular destination, and such data can be “over-
heard” at neighboring nodes; these neighboring nodes, called
relays, partners, or helpers, process the data they overhear and
transmit it towards the destination; the destination receives the
data from the relay or set of relays (on behalf of the source)
enabling higher transmission rate, or combines the signals
coming from the source and the relays enabling robustness
against channel variations. Such spatial diversity arising from
cooperation is not exploited in current cellular, wireless LAN,
or ad-hoc systems. Hence, cooperative relaying is different
from traditional multi-hop or infrastructure based methods.
Therefore, for cooperation to be implemented at the link layer,
link layer needs to be changed in order to allow indirect
transmission between source and destination.
At the link layer, IEEE 802.11 uses the CSMA/CA al-
gorithm to control medium access, being the Distributed
Coordination Function (DCF) the most common operation
mode. In scenarios with fading channels and low data rate
stations, high throughput, reliability, and coverage may be
possible to achieve with an efﬁcient cooperative Medium
Access Control (MAC) layer based on a modifying version
of the DCF signaling scheme. Like Ethernet, it ﬁrst checks to
see that the radio link is clear before transmitting. To avoid
collisions, stations use a random back-off after each frame,
with the ﬁrst transmitter (the one with shortest random time)
seizing the channel. Carrier sensing is used to determine if the
medium is available. Two types of carrier sensing functions in
802.11 manage this process: the physical carrier-sensing and
virtual carrier-sensing functions [8]. If either carrier-sensing
function indicates that the medium is busy, the MAC reports
this to higher layers. Virtual carrier-sensing is provided by
the Network Allocation Vector (NAV). Most 802.11 frames
117
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

carry a duration ﬁeld, which can be used to reserve the
medium for a ﬁxed time period. The NAV is a timer that
indicates the amount of time the medium will be reserved.
Stations set the NAV to the time for which they expect to use
the medium, including any frames necessary to complete the
current operation. Other stations count down from the NAV
to zero. When the NAV is not zero, the virtual carrier-sensing
function indicates that the medium is busy; when the NAV
reaches zero, the virtual carrier-sensing function indicates that
the medium is idle. Figure 3 shows the virtual carrier sensing
with usage of optional RTS/CTS signaling.
Figure 3.
NAV propagation mechanism [8]
Figure 4.
Simple relaying gain
Relaying involves transmission of two data frames separated
in time and space; therefore, it introduces overhead, which
increases due to additional control messages. However signiﬁ-
cant gain can be achieved by a careful selection of reservation
duration and back-off timings. Figure 4 shows the gain of
cooperative relaying in 802.11 (when there is no extra control
message). As seen in Figure 4 a regular data transmission with
acknowledgment takes longer to send data when compared to
the data transmission based on a relay protocol. With a relay
protocol the relatively slow stations would reserve the channel
for a duration of frame_size/(fast_data_rate=11Mbps) instead
of frame_size/(slow_data_rate=1Mbps) and the other stations
will beneﬁt from this with higher probability of accessing the
channel.
Cooperative relaying can be divided into two major parts:
i) relay transmission protocol (relaying protocol); ii) relay
selection. Cooperative relaying protocols can be classiﬁed into
proactive schemes and reactive schemes. In the former, the
cooperation from relay(s) is always provided either by a prear-
ranged or a random set of relay(s) before the acknowledgment
(ACK or NACK) from the receiver. In the latter, the help
from the relay(s) is initiated only when the direct transmission
fails (lack of ACK or overheard NACK). Irrespective of the
class of relaying protocol, the operation can be opportunistic
or cooperative. Cooperative relaying protocols are normally
initiated by source or destination, where relays are selected
prior to data transmission. Such protocols require additional
control/handshake messages which pose additional overhead.
In the case of opportunistic relaying protocols, the relay(s)
opportunistically forward the overheard data to destination,
and the destination acknowledges the reception of data by
sending ACK to the source. Source and destination may not
have prior knowledge of selected relay(s). Such mechanisms
are prone to collision as there is no coordination between
nodes.
The deﬁnition of MAC cooperative schemes poses several
challenges, specially in the presence of mobile nodes. A major
challenge is related to relay selection, which aims to identify
the most suitable relay(s) for assisting transmissions between
any pair of nodes. Research is ongoing to devise efﬁcient relay
selection at MAC layer, being the proposed approaches mostly
source or destination based. In the former case, the source
maintains a table with Channel State Information (CSI) of
neighboring devices to support relay selection. In destination-
based approaches, the destination decides whether to use
relaying or not, based on thresholds and CSI kept on the
destination and on potential relays. Both approaches incur in
some overhead (specially source-based) and are not efﬁcient
reacting to network changes, mainly in the presence of mobile
nodes.
III. STATE OF THE ART
This section provides an analysis of the most signiﬁcant
contributions aiming to devise efﬁcient cooperative relaying
mechanisms, able to take advantage of available relay nodes.
First of all, a study of backward compatible 802.11 cooperative
MAC proposals (relay transmission protocol) is presented:
such proposals can serve as a basic ground for further de-
velopments. Second, central aspects of cooperative relaying
(relay selection) are analyzed.
A. Cooperative MAC
Initial work in cooperative networking was mainly focused
on physical layer approaches aiming to achieve higher spatial
diversity. Although previous work shows the beneﬁt of coop-
eration in wireless networks, it does not deﬁne medium access
methods that would support new cooperative schemes. To take
full advantage of physical layer cooperative techniques, new
MAC schemes must change the transmitter-receiver communi-
cation model to include a transmitter-relay(s)-receiver model.
Common examples of MAC source-based cooperative relaying
schemes are the ones that use one relay [2], [9] or two relays
in parallel [10]. Source-based relaying approaches require the
sources to maintain a table of CSI that is updated by potential
relays based upon periodic broadcasts. As an example, with
118
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

CoopMAC [2], the source can use an intermediate node (called
helper) that experiences relatively good channel with the
source and the destination. Instead of sending frames directly
to the destination at a low transmission rate, the source makes
use of a two-hop high data rate path to the destination via a
helper. In case of CoopMAC, potential helpers overhear on-
going RTS/CTS transmissions for measuring the source-helper
and helper-destination CSI. Based on the CSI broadcasted by
potential helpers, sources update a local table (cooptable) used
to select the best relay for each transmission. Another example
of source based relaying is CODE[10], which uses multiple
relays based on network coding. In CODE all nodes overhear
RTS/CTS frames, and if they ﬁnd that they can transmit data
faster than the source, they add the identity of source and
destination to their willingness list. Once the source ﬁnds its
address in the willing list of relay(s), it adds those relay(s) into
its cooperative table. The major difference between CoopMAC
and CODE is that with the latter, a source selects two relays
with latest feedback time, forming a cooperative diamond.
The usage of RTS-CTS frames is also different. Source-based
approaches undergo two main problems: channel estimation
and periodic broadcasts, which introduce overhead that is
problematic in mobile scenarios.
While source-based proposals follow a proactive approach,
reactive cooperative methods [11], [12] rely on relays to re-
transmit on behalf of the source when the direct transmission
fails. An example is PRO [11], which selects relays among a
set of overhearing nodes in two phases: ﬁrst, a local qualiﬁca-
tion process takes place at potential relays, during which the
link quality is compared with some predeﬁned threshold, lead-
ing to the identiﬁcation of qualiﬁed relays. In a second phase,
qualiﬁcation information is broadcasted, allowing qualiﬁed
relays to set scheduling priorities. Reactive approaches face
the same challenges of source-based methods. CoRe-MAC
[13] is another reactive Cooperative MAC protocol. In CoRe-
MAC, when a NACK is overheard, candidate relays send an
AFR (Apply For Relay) message to the destination within a
ﬁxed number of slots. After receiving non colliding AFRs, the
destination elects the best relay in term of the highest received
SNR. However the destination does not know which is the
suitable number of AFR messages to wait for, in order to reach
a good decision. Moreover, the extra handshake messages
introduce signiﬁcant overhead in case of relay failure.
N. Marchenko et al. propose a mechanism [14] where all
overhearing nodes estimate the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)
for both source-relay and relay-destination channels, based on
which they can nominate themselves as potential relays. Po-
tential relays send a nomination message to the destination, by
selecting a slot in the contention window, and the destination
selects a most suitable relay among all the nominated nodes.
This proposal has several drawback: i) geographic position of
nodes is assumed to be known; ii) the size of the contention
window has great inﬂuence in selecting the best relay; iii)
the destination node is not aware of the number of nominated
relays.
In the case of multi-hop networks the performance gain
of cooperative relaying may be exploited by ﬁnding a node
that assists the transmission for every hop. Although the gain
achieved through cooperative diversity increases robustness,
it requires retransmissions reducing network capacity. Such a
hop base cooperation scheme neglects a crucial evidence: not
only the destination of a data might be in need of help but
also the next hop. An alternative approach may be to use two-
in-one cooperation [12], in which a single retransmission can
improve the success probability of two ordinary transmissions
(source to next-hop and next-hop to destination), leading
to a better usage of the network capacity. In two-in-one
cooperation all potential relays react after detecting a missing
Acknowledgment (ACK) from the destination. Although two-
in-one cooperation can achieve a diversity gain of three, the
most suitable relay selection scheme is not investigated.
B. Relay Selection
In what concerns relay selection mechanisms, the basic
mechanism deﬁnes an opportunistic behavior in which all
overhearing nodes estimate the CSI of sender-node and node-
destination links, based on which they set a timer such that
nodes with better channel conditions broadcast ﬁrst their
qualiﬁcation as relays, or even data to be relayed [15]. Such
mechanisms present a high probability of collision, as well as
low efﬁciency in mobile scenarios due to CSI measurements.
Nevertheless, opportunistic relaying has been modiﬁed aiming
to increase its efﬁciency level [16], [17]. Although most of
the related work considers opportunistic relaying, it may lead
to data collision if more than one relay is selected [18].
Collisions may be avoided by using a suitable resource allo-
cation scheme, or by using a relay only when needed, which
lead to the need to devise a relay on demand mechanism.
For instance, with relaying on demand [19], the basic relay
selection mechanism [15] is modiﬁed with the introduction of
a receiver threshold aiming to improve energy savings. With
on-demand approaches nodes with bad channel conditions do
not participate in relay selection. However, such approaches
still rely upon RTS/CTS for channel estimation, leading to
high overheads.
Other kind of relay selection mechanisms rely on geograph-
ical information [20]. Such approaches assume that users’
location is known, based for example on information from
GPS, and Packet Error Rate (PER) is used as metric for
selecting relays. It relies on constant/known channel statistics
in terms of fading Probability Density Function (PDF), fading
auto correlation function, and path loss exponent. In scenarios
where the users are moving fast such parameters cannot be
assumed to be known, which limits the potential of this type
of approaches.
A proposal to group and select set of relays for cooperative
networks is presented by A. Nosratinia et al. [21], in which
each node has data of its own to transmit, and cooperation may
be non-reciprocal. The study of non-reciprocal approaches to
relay allocation brings several beneﬁts, since with distributed
algorithms nodes make individual decisions about cooperation.
A. Nosratinia et al. [21] investigate the effect of allocation
policies on system performance, and how the cooperative gain
scales with the number of cooperating nodes, such that each
node can decode message with high probability. In terms of
119
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the outage probability, it assumes that each node may help
n other nodes, and the selection strategy guarantees diversity
n+1 for all transmissions. However, as n+1 nodes take part in
one transmission, the system complexity is considerably high.
Moreover, this work assumes that small scale fading is not
dominated by path loss, which points to networks of up to a
certain coverage area.
For better understanding of the different type of relay
selection schemes, T. Jamal and P. Mendes [22] devised a
comprehensive analysis and taxonomy.
IV. RELAYSPOT
Relay selection is a challenging task, since it greatly affects
the design and performance of a cooperative network. On
the one hand, cooperation is beneﬁcial for the network, but
on the other hand it introduces extra overhead (e.g., CSI
estimation). The major goal of RelaySpot is to minimize
overhead introduced by cooperation, with no performance
degradation.
Unlike previous work, RelaySpot does not require mainte-
nance of CSI tables, avoiding periodic updates and consequent
broadcasts. The reason to avoid CSI metrics is that accurate
CSI is even harder to estimate in dynamic networks, and
periodic broadcasts would need to be very fast to guarantee
accurate reaction to channel conditions. Moreover, relay se-
lection faces several optimization problems that are difﬁcult
to solve, which means that the best relay may be difﬁcult to
ﬁnd. Hence, for dynamic scenarios, the solution may be to
make use of the best possible relaying opportunity even if
not the optimal one (e.g., in terms of CSI). By achieving the
best performance over the faced conditions, RelaySpot aims
to target a fair balance between relay selection and additional
resource blockage.
In summary, RelaySpot aims to select relay(s) based only
on information local to potential relays, with minimum com-
putational effort and overhead. The remaining of this section
describes RelaySpot opportunistic relay selection, cooperative
relay scheduling, and chain relaying mechanisms.
A. Opportunistic Relay Selection
The relay selection process only takes into account nodes
that are able to successfully decode frames sent by a source.
This ensures that potential relays are closely bounded with
the source, with which they have good channel conditions.
The qualiﬁcation of a node as a relay depends upon local
information related to node degree, load, mobility and history
of transmissions to the speciﬁed destination, and not to CSI.
Node degree, estimated by overhearing the shared wireless
medium, gives an indication about the probability of having
successful relay transmissions: having information about the
number of neighbors allows the minimization of the collision
risk as well as blockage of resources. However, it is possible
that nodes with low degree are overloaded due to local
processing demands, leading to delay.
Equation 1 estimates the interference level that a potential
relay is subjected to as a function of node degree and load.
Let N be the number of neighbors of a potential relay, Td and
Ti the propagation time of direct and indirect transmissions
involving such potential relay, respectively, and Ni and Nd
the number of nodes involved in such indirect and direct
transmissions (indirect transmissions are the ones overheard
by the potential relay, and direct transmissions are the ones
ending and starting at the potential relay). Adding to this, Tp
is the time required for a potential relay to process the result
of a direct transmission. The interference factor (I) affecting
a potential relay has a minimum value of zero corresponding
to the absence of direct or indirect transmissions.
I =
Nd
X
j=1
(Tdj + Tpj) +
Ni
X
k=1
Tik, I ∈ [0, ∞[
(1)
The goal is to select as relay a node that has low interference
factor, which means few neighbors (ensuring low blockage
probability), short transmissions and few direct transmissions
(ensuring low delays).
Figure 5 shows a scenario where node R is selected as a
potential relay. Node N1 is the direct neighbor of node R,
while there are several other indirect neighbors (N2,N3,N4,
X). Apart from R, node X also seems to be a relay candidate
due to its low interference level. But it may be difﬁcult to select
R or X due to the similar interference levels: while R has a
short transmission from a neighbor and a long transmission
from the source, X is involved in an inverse situation. The
selection of R or X as a relay can be done based on two other
metrics of the RelaySpot framework: history of successful
transmissions towards destination; stability of potential relays.
Figure 5.
Opportunistic relay selection scenario
Although it is ensured that potential relays have good chan-
nel with the source, the quality of the relay-destination channel
is unknown. Without performing measurement of CSI for the
relay-destination channel, channel conditions are estimated
based on the successful ratio of previous transmissions towards
the destination (history factor) and the current stability of a
potential relay (mobility factor). The history factor (H), is
estimated as a ratio between an exponential moving average
of the duration of successful transmissions and the maximum
duration of any successful transmission (HM), variable that
is initiated to a time unit. The factor H aims to tell whether
the intended relay has probabilistically a good channel with
120
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the required destination, without the need to estimate and
broadcast channel information.
The mobility factor (M) is estimated as a ratio between an
exponential moving average of the pause time of the node and
the maximum detected pause time (MM), which is initiated
to a time unit. The factor M aims to select more stable nodes
as relays.
Based on the interference factor of a node, as well as its
history and mobility factors, the probability of selecting a node
as relay for a given destination is given by Equation 2, which
shows that the selection factor (S) is proportional to the history
of successful transmissions to the destination and the pause
time, and inversely proportional to the interference level of
the node.
S = H ∗ M
1 + I , S ∈ [0, 1[
(2)
Lets go back to Figure 5 to illustrate the usage of Equation
2. Lets assume that R is a node that moves frequently around
the destination with a good history of successful transmissions.
While X is a node with long pause times but that is new near
the destination. In this case, Equation 2 may give preference
to node R, although it presents a higher mobility factor than
X.
After overhearing data frames or RTS towards a destination,
a potential relay uses the estimated selection factor (S) to
compute the size of its contention window (CW), between
a predeﬁned minimum and maximum values of CWmin and
CWmax, as given by Equation 3.
CW = CWmin + (1 − S) (CWmax − CWmin)
(3)
From a group of nodes that present good channel conditions
with the source, the opportunistic relay selection mechanism
gives preference to nodes that have low degree, low load, good
history of previous communication with the destination, as
well as low mobility. In scenarios with highly mobile nodes,
we expect opportunistic relay selection to behave better than
source-based relay selection (e.g., CoopMAC), since with the
latter communications can be disrupted with a probability
proportional to the mobility of potential relays, and relays may
not be available anymore after being selected by the source.
As illustrated in Figure 6 the selection mechanism may lead
to the qualiﬁcation of more than one relay (R1, R2, R3), each
one with different values of S, leading to different sizes of
CW (e.g., R3 transmits ﬁrst). Selected relays will forward
data towards the destination based on a cooperative relay
scheduling mechanism.
Figure 6.
Opportunistic relay selection
B. Cooperative Relay Scheduling
This section describes the functionality proposed to allow
self-elected relays to avoid high interference and to guarantee
high data rates to a destination while preventing waste of
network resources.
The contention window (computed in Equation 3) plays an
important role in scheduling relay opportunities. The goal is
to increase the probability of successful transmissions from
relays to the destination by giving more priority to relays
that are more closely bounded to the destination, while not
neglecting the help that secondary relays may give. Increasing
diversity, by allowing the destination to receive multiple copies
of the same frame, aims to construct error free frames while
avoiding re-transmissions.
Based on the quality of the frames received from all self-
elected relays, the destination estimates which of the involved
relays are more suitable to help in further transmissions (to
get multiple copies the destination only process received
frames after a predeﬁned time window). By sending a list
of priority relays embedded in ACK messages, the destination
allows potential relays to improve the accuracy of the back-
off time computation in next transmissions (relay with highest
priority sends and the others back-off but keep overhearing
the transmission). This functionality leads to a space-time
diversity, which leverage the space diversity used by prior
art (e.g., CoopMAC). Space-time diversity is achieved by
allowing the usage of different relays over time, helping the
same source-destination communication.
Figure 7 illustrates the cooperative relay scheduling, in a
situation where R1, R2 and R3 are self-elected as relays,
with R3 having smaller CW than R1 and R2 (as illustrated
in Figure 6). If the destination receives good frames from
multiple relays during a predeﬁned time window, it decides
for priorities (primary and secondary relays) on basis of SNR
between well decoded frames. As an example, Figure 7, shows
a situation where the destination is only able to decode the data
by combining partial frames received from R1 and R2, in a
scenario in which no data is received in good shape.
In this situation the destination sends an ACK having R1 and
R2 as primary relays and R3 as secondary one i.e., ACK(R1,
R2; R3). This means that in the next transmission R1 and R2
will transmit (diversity 2) and R3 will back-off and overhear
the transmission.
Figure 7.
Cooperation relay scheduling
Cooperative scheduling allows to keep a source-destination
transmission in a good shape even when the primary relay is
121
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

not useful anymore. Cooperation between selected relays (pri-
mary and secondary), identiﬁed by the priority list embedded
in ACK message, aims to ensure a high probability of having
the best set of relays over time. This means that based on
current conditions, primary and secondary relays may switch
their priorities.
Figure 8 illustrates the relay switching operation between a
selected primary relay (R1) and secondary relay (R2): Destina-
tion chooses R1 as primary relay on basis of signal strength,
while R2 is a secondary relay; in the next transmission R1
will transmit (diversity 1) and R2 will back-off. Suppose that
after some time R1 move away and detects a deterioration of
the conditions of the Source-R1 channel. In this situation R1
notiﬁes the secondary relay (R2) with a Relay-Switch message.
This means that R2 will become a primary relay, starting to
transmit frames received from source.
Figure 8.
Cooperative relay switching
C. Chain relaying
The proposed opportunistic relay selection and cooperative
relay scheduling mechanisms aim to increase throughput and
reliability, as well as to reduce transmission delay by increas-
ing the diversity adjusting the relaying order. Nevertheless,
the presence of mobile nodes, as well as unstable wireless
conditions, may require higher levels of diversity achieved
based on nodes that are closed to the destination (higher
probability of successful transmissions). Hence, RelaySpot
includes the possibility of using recursive relay selection and
retransmissions in case of poor performance. This functionality
is called chain relaying (c.f. Figure 9). Nodes that are able
to successfully decode MAC data frames sent by a relay to
a destination may trigger the RelaySpot operation on that
relay-destination channel in case the channel conditions are
so bad that the node will overhear two consecutive NACK
(or the absence of ACK’s/ NACKs) during a predeﬁned time
window. This means that relays closer to the destination can
help the transmission when the destination does not get any
(acceptable) data frames from any relay in contact with the
source.
With chain relaying, the relaying process is repeated for
the relay-destination channel (R1-D and R2-D in Figure 9),
by having another relay (R4) or set of relays helping the
transmission from each of the previously selected relays to the
destination. R4 may not receive correct frames from source,
but it is closely bounded to R1 as well as to the destination. R4
can trigger chain relaying when both primary and secondary
relays fail. Chain relaying aims to minimize the outage and
to increase the overall throughput by complementing the
cooperative scheduling functionality.
Figure 9.
Chain relaying
V. RELAYSPOT ALGORITHM
RelaySpot is a hybrid relaying scheme, which means that it
allows relays to retransmit data when: i) NACKs are overheard
in the direct transmission; ii) relays detect that the performance
of a direct link can be improved by relaying. RelaySpot
operation, for a speciﬁc source-destination pair ends when
there are no more packets to be send or when the destination
informs the relays to stop relaying MAC data frames, after
detecting a decrease in the number of damaged frames received
through the direct channel below a predeﬁned threshold. This
action aims to increase network capacity by allowing relays
to help other endangered transmissions.
RelaySpot operation has two modes: RelaySpot on potential
relays and RelaySpot on destination (or gateway). Figure 10
shows the RelaySpot sequence of operations on potential relay
nodes, which including the computation of the selection factor
and relaying of MAC data frames.
Since the opportunistic relay selection process can lead to
several relays being selected, self-elected relays may adjust
their priority based on the information collected from the ACK
sent by the destination. The primary relay (the one with highest
priority) will continue sending frames, while other relays will
back-off. Figure 10 shows that before sending data frames,
the relay checks SNR for the signal received from source. If
the SNR is below certain threshold (i.e., data rate is degraded)
the relay stop participating as a relay by sending Relay-Switch
message; otherwise it continue sending data frames until last
frame. The primary relay then goes to back-off mode.
Figure 11 shows the RelaySpot operation at destination
node. The destination keeps receiving good frames via relays
until reception window expire. If the destination receives a
good frame from a single relay it ACK with relay identiﬁcation
and send the frame to application to avoid further delays.
However, if more than one good relay exists, the destination
computes the priority list by using received SNR, acknowl-
edging the priority list to self-elected relays. If there is not
any good relay during reception window, the destination tries
to combine the received partial frames. If the destination is
able to decode the data by combining the received frames,
it computes the priority list accordingly. However, if the
destination is unable to decode the data even with combining,
it sends NACK to indicate failure.
122
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 12.
Illustration of the RelaySpot algorithm with chain relaying
VI. RELAYSPOT VS COOPMAC OPERATIONAL
COMPARISON
Figure 12 illustrates the phases of the RelaySpot algorithm
in comparison to CoopMAC. Lets consider that we have three
potential relays (R1, R2, and R3), where R3 is the best (pri-
mary) relay. Figure 12 starts by showing that with CoopMAC
at time T0 potential relays do some CSI computation and then
broadcast it to source, while at that time RelaySpot potential
relays do local computations of I and M factors without any
transmission.
At time T1 CoopMAC relays undergo three way handshake
using “Helper ready To Send” (HTS) messages, while Re-
laySpot potential relays updates local factors I and M without
any transmission.
At time T2, CoopMAC sends data via the selected helper
i.e., R3. RelaySpot potential relays ﬁrst computes the selection
factor S and CW after the reception of data from source,
selecting R3 and R1 as relays, which then transmit data to the
destination, achieving higher diversity than CoopMAC. The
destination notiﬁes the relays (in ACK message), about the
priority order for future transmission i.e., ACK(R3; R1). After
receiving the ACK, R1 backs-off since R3 seems to be suitable
to provide reliable transmissions.
At time T3, R3, the primary relay, moves away. In such
case CoopMAC repeats the complete relay selection procedure
after a maximum number of retries. While in RelaySpot,
the secondary relay R1 (in this example) tries to help the
transmission and ends up sending data to destination on behalf
of source, after detecting the missing ACK for R3 transmission
(or detecting NACK). If this is successful, destination sends
ACK(R1).
At time T4 we suppose that R1 is unable to cooperate. In
this situation R4 overhears two consecutive NACKs during a
predeﬁned time frame. Thus chain relaying will occur as other
nodes (R1, R2, and R3) are not suitable anymore. In case
of CoopMAC, when there is no suitable relays, poor direct
transmission takes place leading to outage.
At time T5 the destination moves closer to source and the
direct link between source and destination becomes stronger.
In RelaySpot when the destination starts receiving the correct
frames from source, it notiﬁes the relays to stop cooperation
(i.e., ACK(s) ) and continues receiving the direct data, while
in CoopMAC the data will be still relayed over the selected
relay (R3 in this example).
From this comparison it is clear that CoopMAC always
uses additional control messages, such as periodic broadcast
and HTS for handshaking. While RelaySpot does not have an
overhead related to additional control messages. CoopMAC
uses one relay only, while in RelaySpot multiple relays can
be utilized in parallel or in sequence base on quality of re-
ceived frames. CoopMAC does the CSI computation for relay
selection, which incurs complexity; moreover the decision for
relay is based on historic information. RelaySpot on the other
hand, have fast reaction to network dynamics.
VII. IMPLEMENTATION AND ANALYSIS
In this section we start by describing the relaying pro-
tocol implementation in OMNET++, and then we discuss
the simulation results: ﬁrst we describe the initial analysis
of RelaySpot, which serve as a reference point for further
investigation; then we analyze the impact that interference has
on relay performance. We also describe the analysis of the
proposed cooperative relay switching.
123
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 10.
RelaySpot sequence of operations on potential relay nodes
A. RelaySpot implementation
In this section we describe the steps to implement the
RelaySpot protocol, which is serving as a prototype for further
implementation. We use OMNET++ 4.1 simulator and the
MiXim 2.1 framework. As discussed before, relaying protocol
is a MAC layer protocol. Therefore, most of the modiﬁcations
were done in MAC layer. In MiXim framework, whenever a
message arrives from physical layer (i.e., data is overheard),
the MAC layer invokes a function “handleLowerMsg()”. This
function analyzed the incoming message and passes the mes-
sage to either msgForMe() or msgNotForMe(); if the message
(overheard frame) is not for the node, it invokes msgNot-
ForMe(). Normally a node discards data frames that are not
intended for itself, but we modiﬁed this method to allow a node
to keep and send data frames (to behave as a relay). Similarly,
when a message arrives from upper layer (i.e., application
layer), “handleUpperMsg()” is invoked. This function analyze
the message and if it is a data frame to send, the node sends
channel sense request and schedule the Contention timer. If
the node wins contention it invokes sendDATAframe() to send
down the data to physical layer, after which it set the MAC
state to Wait For ACK (WFACK).
We have added an additional timer “RelayContention”,
Figure 11.
RelaySpot sequence of operations on destination nodes
which is used to schedule the contention period for the relay
and to send down the channel sense request. The modiﬁcations
to msgNotForMe() are as follows: when an overheard message
arrives, ﬁrst a node checks if it is a data frame or not. Then
it checks the reservation duration (NAV timer) with message
arrival time to be sure that it can relay the data frame. To
start relaying, ﬁrst a node adds its MAC address into address4
ﬁeld of the data frame; it cancels the NAV timer as the
node cannot send or receive data until NAV expires; then it
schedules RelayContention timer and sends down a channel
sense request. If there is no other ongoing transmission on
channel, it calls sendDATAframe() to send the received frame
to destination with necessary modiﬁcation.
B. Initial Analysis
We start by performing an analysis to test the general re-
laying framework, in order to setup the performance reference
points in what concerns throughput and latency in a scenario
124
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 13.
Throughput and latency gains of relaying
without interference, in which data frames can have different
sizes. We also run simulations for a ﬁrst evaluation of the
impact of interference on relaying.
In order to test RelaySpot we create a scenario where source
and destination is placed at a distance of more than 150
meter with a direct link of 1Mb. Figure 13 shows that when
one relay is used improvements can be achieved in term of
throughput and latency, reaching an average throughput near
2.1 Mbps and insigniﬁcant latency. In the same scenario the
direct transmission provides only an average throughput of
0.82 Mbps, which is close to the average capacity of the direct
link, and an average latency of 137.8 ms. The improvement
in throughput and latency, illustrated in Figure 13, refers to a
scenario that is free of interference. However the introduction
of interference (different direct and indirect trafﬁc) is expected
to lead to a degradation of performance (we analyze this later
on this article).
We also analyze the impact of frame size over gain in
throughput. Figure 14 shows that RelaySpot has a gain in
throughput for a frame of size of 1 Kbits or more in relation
to the direct transmission. The gain is negative when the size
of frame is less than 1 Kbit, however such frame size is rarely
used. The frame size strongly inﬂuences the throughput as for
smaller frame size the throughput drops due to the domination
of the transmission overhead.
In order to have a ﬁrst glimpse about the impact of inter-
ference over relayed data, we run a set of simulations with
25 nodes (other than relay) randomly generating between 1
and 10 Mbps of trafﬁc (inducing indirect interference). Figure
15 shows that the throughput of relayed data dropped to a
maximum of 1.8 Mbps instead of 2.1 Mbps as shown in Figure
13. In this situation the interfering node is in competition
with the relay node. Therefore the throughput gain depends
upon transmission opportunities. Figure 15 shows that at
interference (trafﬁc at interfering node) up to 2 Mbps the
relay throughput drop linearly while throughput at interfering
node reaches to its maximum. Further increase in interference
(application trafﬁc of interfering node) does not increase the
throughput of interfering node because the relay is blocking
this node. This beneﬁts the relay throughput.
A node, when operating as a relay also has an impact on the
system: on the relay node itself and on neighbor transmissions.
Hence we also analyzed the impact that relaying data has
on the data generated and consumed by the node acting as
relay. Figure 16 shows that due to interference the number
of frames dropped at the relay node increases signiﬁcantly.
Hence, by avoiding interference we can improve not only
the performance of the ﬂow being relayed, but also of the
overall network performance. This motivates a further analysis
about the impact that direct and indirect interference have on
relaying based on RelaySpot, which uses interference-aware
relay selection metrics.
Figure 14.
Frame size impact on throughput (with and without relaying)
C. Analysis of Impact of Interference
In this section we evaluate the performance of RelaySpot
in the presence of different levels of direct and indirect
interference. Several simulations are run based on the MiXim
framework of the OMNET++ 4.1 simulator. Each simulation
has a duration of 300 seconds and is run ten times, providing
a 95% conﬁdence interval for the results.
Simulations consider a scenario where all nodes are static
and have similar stochastic history of transmissions among
them, thus the mobility factor and history factors are assumed
to be 1. The source and destination are at a distance of more
than 150 meters from each other with a poor direct link, with
an average of 1 Mbps. Depending on the level of interference
needed in each simulation, potential relays may operate also
as sources sending data to the same destination at different
trafﬁc rates.
First we did simulations by selecting a relay based on node
degree and distance towards the destination in an interference
125
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 15.
Relay throughput with indirect interference
Figure 16.
Number of frames dropped at relay node
free scenario. Using node degree as metric lead to the selection
of isolated nodes, with high probability, being such nodes far
away from the source and destination which were reﬂected
in low throughput and big latency. Therefore, distance-based
relay selection achieved signiﬁcant improvement in term of
both throughput and latency when compared to degree-based.
Therefore, we consider distance-based as a reference point for
our further evaluation of RelaySpot as an interference-aware
relaying algorithm.
Figure 17 shows that by introducing interference, the perfor-
mance of degree-based solutions starts degrading. As the direct
interference increases, the relay starts blocking the source-
destination communication, since it has its own processing
delay. By using the proposed RelaySpot metric (Interference-
aware) for direct interference, we achieved improvements in
term of throughput and latency, as RelaySpot selects a relay
which has less load. However, the gain is not considerable,
Figure 17.
Throughput and latency analysis [23]
as the direct interference at other potential relay nodes is still
affecting the source-destination pair. Therefore, it is always
better to chose a dedicated relay (a relay without its own
trafﬁc). Figure 17 shows that the gain of the interference-
aware approach with direct interference is more visible in the
case of latency, since the interference-aware approach selects
a relay from a set of nodes that present higher availability
for retransmission (lower number of local generated trafﬁc),
even if placed further away from the destination, leading to
lower latency. This gain is clearer with high trafﬁc load, since
distance-based approach keep selecting overloaded nodes near
the destination.
In a scenario with indirect interference, the throughput
gain of RelaySpot is signiﬁcant (e.g., 33% with a load of
10 concurrent ﬂows) because the indirect trafﬁc does not
affect the source-destination pair: only the chosen relay is
affected. Nevertheless RelaySpot is able to choose a relay with
low probability of being blocked by additional transmissions,
leading to an improvement in performance. With an increase of
trafﬁc load this performance gain diminishes, because at some
level of indirect interference it is hard to avoid interference,
but it is always higher than the distance-based approach. The
126
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 18.
Analysis with different data rates
advantage of our interference-aware approach is also visible in
terms of latency, since selecting a relay with low interference
(lower number of concurrent neighbor ﬂows) leads to higher
transmission opportunities. The gain in latency decreases with
a load of 20 concurrent ﬂows, mainly due to increasing number
of concurrent ﬂows placed far away from the destination,
which beneﬁts distance-based approaches. Nevertheless, re-
sults show that even with a random placement of concurrent
ﬂows, the interference-aware solution keeps a lower latency
with high trafﬁc loads. By including the history factor we can
achieve further improvement in both throughput and latency
[24].
D. Cooperative Switch Analysis
In what concern the switching between relays as discussed
in section IV-B, a relay can give up relaying if it does not
ensure acceptable conditions anymore. To analyze this idea we
run simulations with different source-destination pairs, relayed
by relays in different location, and with different combination
of data rates in the source-relay and relay-destination links. It
is observed from Figure 18 that relaying is not always useful.
In order to achieve performance improvement the direct link
must be replaced by relays with both source-relay and relay-
destination links that present a data rate higher than the direct
link, and one of the links must have a data rate at least twice
higher than the direct link. For instance, 1 Mbps direct links
can be replaced by relays with 11 Mbps and 5.5 Mbps, or even
with 5.5 Mbps and 2 Mbps, but not with 2 Mbps and 2 Mbps.
For example if a direct link of 5.5 Mbps is replaced by relays
with 11-11 Mbps links, the gain will be negative.
Hence, to ensure performance gain the cooperative relay
switching operation of RelaySpot provides the following op-
eration, as illustrated in Figure 10: in MiXim the data rates
are decided on bases of received SNRs. Therefore, the primary
relay collects SNRs of different links by overhearing to decide
if switching is required or not. If a primary relay observe
that its signal strength (SNR value) is below certain threshold
(which means it does not support fast bit rate anymore), it
notiﬁes the secondary relay for help with a Relay-Switch
message. The secondary relay starts relaying data while the
primary relay goes to back-off mode.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Most of the current cooperative relaying approaches use
only one relay, selected based on CSI estimations, without
exploiting different relays in parallel or in sequence. The
proposed RelaySpot framework provides a set of functional
building blocks aiming to opportunistically exploit the usage
of several relays to ensure accurate and fast relay selection,
posing minimum overhead and reducing the dependency upon
CSI estimations in scenarios with mobile nodes. The proposed
building blocks are related to opportunistic relay selection,
cooperative relay scheduling, and chain relaying. Moreover,
RelaySpot does not have any additional control overhead and
its functional blocks allow fast reactions to network conditions.
We also observed that interference have great impact over
relay network. After analyzing the behavior of RelaySpot in
a scenario with interference our ﬁndings show that selecting
a relay with low interference (lower number of concurrent
neighbor ﬂows) leads to higher transmission opportunities. The
impact of direct and indirect interference is different in relation
to throughput and latency: indirect interference has higher
impact over latency, while direct interference leads to lower
throughput. Interference-aware solution as RelaySpot ensures
also low resource blockage.
As a future work, we will analyze the performance of a
version of RelaySpot that would be aware of the type of trafﬁc
in order to further investigate the behavior of the cooperative
relay switching and relay scheduling functionalities. We will
also further evaluate how RelaySpot can contribute to increase
the overall network capability in the presence of mobile nodes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Thanks
are
due
to
FCT
for
PhD
grant
number
SFRH/BD/60436/2009. The research leading to these results
127
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

has received funding from the European Commission’s Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7) under grant agreement n°
257418, project ULOOP (User-centric Wireless Local Loop).
REFERENCES
[1] T. Jamal, P. Mendes, and A. Zúquete, “RelaySpot: A framework for
Opportunistic Cooperative Relaying,” in Proc. of IARIA ACCESS, Lux-
embourg, June 2011.
[2] P. Liu, Z. Tao, S. Narayanan, T. Korakis, and S. Panwar, “CoopMAC: A
Cooperative MAC for Wireless LANs,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 340–354, Feb. 2007.
[3] W. Elmenreich, N. Marchenko, H. Adam, C. Hofbauer, G. Brandner,
C. Bettstetter, and M. Huemer, “Building Blocks of Cooperative Re-
laying in Wireless Systems,” Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Springer, vol. 125, no. 10, pp. 353–359, Oct. 2008.
[4] T. M. Cover and A. E. Gamal, “Capacity Theorems for the Relay
Channel,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. IT-25, p. 57284, Sep. 1979.
[5] A. Sendonari, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User Cooperation Diversity-
Part II: Implementation Aspects and Performance Analysis,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1939–
1948, Nov. 2003.
[6] J. N. Laneman, D. N. C. Tse, and G. W. Wornell, “Cooperative Diversity
in Wireless Networks: Efﬁcient Protocols and Outage Behavior,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 3062–3080, Dec. 2004.
[7] E. Erkip, A. Sendonaris, A. Stefanov, and B. Aazhang, “Cooperative
Communication in Wireless Systems,” Advances in Network Information
Theory, vol. DIMACS Series, 2004.
[8] M. Gast, “802.11: Wireless Networks: The Deﬁnitive Guide,” O’Reilly,
Apr. 2002.
[9] Z. Hao and C. Guohong, “rDCF: A Relay-Enabled Medium Access
Control Protocol for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 5, Mar. 2006.
[10] K. Tan, Z. Wan, H. Zhu, and J. Andrian, “CODE: Cooperative Medium
Access for Multirate Wireless Ad Hoc Network,” in Proc. of IEEE
SECON, California, USA, Jun. 2007.
[11] L. Mei-Hsuan, S. Peter, and C. Tsuhan, “Design, Implementation and
Evaluation of an Efﬁcient Opportunistic Retransmission Protocol,” in
Proc. Of IEEE MobiCom, Beijing, China, Apr. 2009.
[12] H. S. Lichte, S. Valentin, H. Karl, I. Aad, L. Loyola, and J. Widmer,
“Design and Evaluation of a Routing-Informed Cooperative MAC Pro-
tocol for Ad Hoc Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM, Phoenix,
USA, Apr. 2008.
[13] H. Adam, W. Elmenreich, C. Bettstetter, and S. M. Senouci, “CoRe-
MAC: A MAC-Protocol for Cooperative Relaying in Wireless Net-
works,” in Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM, Honolulu, Hawaii, Dec. 2009.
[14] N. Marchenko, E. Yanmaz, H. Adam, and C. Bettstetter, “Selecting a
Spatially Efﬁcient Cooperative Relay,” in Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM,
Honolulu, USA, Dec 2009.
[15] A. Bletsas, A. Khisti, D. Reed, and A. Lippman, “A simple Cooperative
Diversity Method Based on Network Path Selection,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 659–672, Mar.
2006.
[16] K.-S. Hwang and Y.-C. Ko, “An Efﬁcient Relay Selection Algorithm for
Cooperative Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE VTC, Baltimore, USA, Oct.
2007.
[17] Y. Chen, G. Yu, P. Qiu, and Z. Zhang, “Power-Aware Cooperative Relay
Selection Strategies in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE
PIMRC, Helsinki, Finland, Sep. 2006.
[18] Y. Zhao, R. Adve, and T. J. Lim, “Improving amplifying-and-forward
relay networks: Optimal power allocation versus selection,” in Proc. of
IEEE ISIT, Seattle, USA, Jul 2006.
[19] H. Adam, C. Bettstetter, and S. M. Senouci, “Adaptive Relay Selection
in Cooperative Wireless Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE PIMRC, Cannes,
France, Sep. 2008.
[20] Z. Lin, E. Erkip, and A. Stefanov, “Cooperative Regions and Partner
Choice in Coded Cooperative Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Commu-
nications, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1323–1334, Jul. 2006.
[21] A. Nosratinia and T. E. Hunter, “Grouping and Partner Selection in
Cooperative Wireless Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 25, no. 2, Feb. 2007.
[22] T. Jamal and P. Mendes, “Relay Selection Approaches for Wireless
Cooperative Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE WiMob, Niagara Falls, Canada,
Oct. 2010.
[23] T. Jamal, P. Mendes, and A. Zúquete, “Interference-Aware Opportunistic
Relay Selection,” in Proc. of ACM CoNEXT student workshop, Tokyo,
Japan, Dec 2011.
[24] T. Jamal, P. Mendes, and A. Zúquete, “Opportunistic Relay Selection for
Wireless Cooperative Network,” in Proc. of IEEE IFIP NTMS, Istanbul,
Turkey, May 2012.
128
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

