A Ludic/Narrative Interpretation of the Willingness to Repeatedly Play Mobile 
Serious Games 
 
Alfredo Imbellone, Brunella Botte, Giada Marinensi, Carlo Maria Medaglia 
Digital Administration and Social Innovation Center – DASIC, Link Campus University 
Rome, Italy 
a.imbellone@unilink.it, b.botte@unilink.it, g.marinensi@unilink.it, c.medaglia@unilink.it 
 
 
Abstract — Mobile game-based learning is a very promising 
sector for corporate training, but it still lacks of a robust 
scientific research investigating the underlying causal models 
to explain its working principles. The paper presents the 
results of an empirical study conducted on two different kits of 
mobile serious games, composed respectively by 30 and 20 
games, both developed in the framework of an European 
project on mobile game-based learning for corporate training, 
titled “InTouch”. The study analyzes the causal relationships 
that influence the players’ willingness to play again the serious 
games and interprets those findings according to the 
distinction between ludic and narrative components of the 
games. The results emerging from the testing of the games on 
two separate samples of 54 and 118 people can be interpreted 
as an empirical evidence of the simultaneous, and yet 
independent, significant role of both the ludic and narrative 
component of a serious game in determining the willingness to 
play again. On the whole, for the considered games the ludic 
factor showed to have a stronger influence than the narrative 
one. This different weight of ludic and narrative components, 
however, can be interpreted as a consequence of the specific 
mobile serious games that were analyzed, and cannot be 
generalized to other game-based solutions. Furthermore, when 
analyzing different groups within the considered sample, males 
and younger people showed to be more influenced by the ludic 
component, while the narrative component resulted to be 
stronger than the ludic one for females and older people. The 
conclusion of the study suggests an implementation of the 
proposed research concept with other serious games to find if 
the 
ludic/narrative 
interpretative 
key 
can 
improve 
understanding the structure of the games.  
Keywords - Mobile  Game-Based Learning; Corporate 
Training; Serious Games; Ludology; Narratology 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the frame of two editions of an European project 
about mobile Game-Based Learning (mGBL) in the period 
2010-2015 two different kits of serious games were 
developed and tested for a total of 50 games [1].  
The analysis of the kit of serious games for mobile 
devices is here referred to a subject of debate about games, 
concerning the relationship between narrative and game 
design, namely between ludology and narratology [2]. 
Mobile game-based learning is an educational trend that 
is gaining more and more in popularity. Its main advantages 
are 
considered 
mobility 
and 
portability, 
flexibility, 
accessibility, and informality [3].  
Thanks to mGBL, didactic contents are made available 
anytime and anywhere, and learning is linked to activities in 
the outside world environment [4][5]. Serious games for 
mobile devices can teach soft skills that support self-
efficacy, self-directed learning, and reflection upon 
performance [6][7]. 
Research on game-base learning and serious games is 
rapidly growing in the last years [8], but there are still few 
specific validated instruments of analysis [9][10][11] and 
there is a scarcity of studies strongly based on causal 
relationships [12][13]. 
The debate between narratology and ludology can be 
dated approximately around the second half of the 1990s, 
reaching its climax in the 2000s, to definitively find a 
reconciliation in these very last years.  
The narratological position considers games as novel 
forms of narrative that must therefore be studied using 
theories of narrative.  
Ludologists, on the other hand, state that games are 
essentially formal, contrary to narratives that are basically 
interpretative [14]. 
Games according to narratologists are closely related to 
narrative and stories: even thought basically made of rules, 
they mainly tell stories, contain narrative elements, and 
show narrative structural sequences [15].  
Ludologists think that the study of games should 
concern the analysis of the abstract and formal systems they 
describe, that is game structure, rules, interactivity and 
gameplay. These are the elements that give immersion and 
the feel of real experience of a game and are more important 
than optional narrative elements [16].  
Other hybrid approaches emerged trying to conciliate 
and comprehend both points of view.  
Ryan proposed to incorporate narratology inside 
ludology, since it deals with the construction of stories that 
is similar to the game mechanics [17].  
Aarseth, although considered a radical ludologist, stated 
that games and narrative significantly overlap [18].  
Lindley unified in a heuristic triangular space ludology, 
narratology, and simulation, describing the relationships 
between gameplay and narrative as a competition 
determining ludic interaction on one side, and narrative 
patterns perception on the other side [19].  
Jenkins proposed a middle-ground position, talking 
about games as “spaces” with narrative possibility enriching 
gameplay [20]. 
149
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The present study aims at giving an empirical 
contribution to the debate 
among ludologists and 
narratologists, referring to it as an interpreting key for the 
results obtained from the study of some causal models 
derived from the analysis of two sets of serious games.  
Points of interest of the present study can be considered: 
(1) the fact that it adds empirical data and analysis to a field 
that has been mainly developed on theoretical basis, (2) the 
study of causal relationships in the field of serious games 
with the use of Structural Equation Models (SEM), (3) the 
focus on serious games for mobile devices that represent an 
expanding sector [21].  
In particular, the considered mobile serious games are 
very short in duration (few minutes to complete each game) 
and are playable through a touch-screen interface using only 
one finger. That is to say, they are games the users can play 
in short casual bursts of time, anywhere and at any time, at 
work or at home, or even on the way to/from work/home 
[22]. It has been considered relevant to transfer the 
ludology/narratology debate, usually referred to more 
structured games, to this kind of games. 
This paper will give a description of the project, whose 
main objectives were the development and testing of the 
serious games kits (Section II). Scope and hypothesis of the 
present study will then be illustrated (Section III). Methods 
and results of the empirical analysis will be reported, 
illustrating the statistical work that has been done and what 
it produced (Sections IV and V). The paper will end with a 
conclusion and future work section (VI), explaining how the 
results of the present study can be interpreted in the light of 
the ludology/narratology debate, the limits of the present 
study, and how a further deepening of these issues can be 
addressed. 
II. 
THE INTOUCH PROJECT 
In November 2010 a consortium of European partners 
from eight countries (Sweden, Lithuania, United Kingdom, 
Italy, France, Austria, Bulgaria, and Switzerland) started 
working on “Labour Market InTouch: new non-routine 
skills via mobile game-based learning” project, funded by 
Leonardo da Vinci Multilateral Projects for Development of 
Innovation Program.  
At the beginning of the project a field research was 
conducted in order to define the top 10 crucial transversal 
competences for non-routine tasks. 62 managers and 
employers of business service SMEs were interviewed in 
order to detect which were the most requested non-routine 
skills in labour market, and, for each skill, a list of 
associated situational cases. 
A structured questionnaire formed by 51 items 
describing tasks/behaviors related to skill management was 
used to identify the most relevant non routine skills. The 
factorial analysis of gathered data highlighted ten factors, 
interpreted 
as 
the 
crucial 
non-routine 
skills: 
Communication, Planning, Conflict Management, Openness 
to change, Decision Making, Teamwork, Flexibility, 
Strategic thinking, Initiative, Learning and improvement. 
Thus, the InTouch project designed and developed 30 games 
for mobile devices (3 for each non routine skill) to enable 
adult workers to improve their ability to deal with non 
routine situations at work. 
In the light of the good results achieved with this first kit 
of 30 serious games, in November 2013 the InTouch project 
was refunded by Leonardo da Vinci Transfer of Innovation 
Program, with the aim of addressing the specific learning 
needs of ICT SMEs employees. The second edition of the 
InTouch project, named InTouch-ICT for its focus on ICT 
SMEs, conducted a new field research through surveying 
238 respondents in four countries: Turkey, Hungary, Italy, 
and Sweden. In this case, people were directly faced with a 
list of 15 skills, asking to express the degree of importance 
for each one of them. According with the results of the 
survey, the 10 most important non routine skills for ICT 
SMEs managers and employees were: Communication, 
Team building, Planning, Learning and improvement, 
Openness to change, Creativity, Intelligibility, Decision 
Making, Innovativeness, Flexibility. 
The consortium of the InTouch-ICT project developed 
20 new games for mobile devices (2 for each non routine 
skill). The games were developed using the same 
methodology and the same technology of the previous ones, 
but new learning contents were created in order to match the 
specific learning needs of ICT SMEs. 
III. 
THE SERIOUS GAMES 
The games developed within the project take place in 
situations and contexts that are characteristic of day-to-day 
activities, namely within a small company titled “InTouch”. 
The “InTouch” company is composed by several characters 
that were described giving their company role (Chief, PM-
Design, 
PM-Development, 
PM-Assistance, 
Account, 
Account 
assistant, 
Supplier, 
Practitioner), 
personal 
information (name, surname, age, sex, star sign, hobbies), 
and a short bio (see Fig. 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshots of the games. Clockwise from top left: the “InTouch” 
company team; a single character description (Chief); an interactive map 
example. 
 
Games scenarios were obtained adapting situational 
cases found with the starting field research to the “InTouch” 
company and its characters. 
150
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The “InTouch” company elements that connect humor, 
sense and meaning, are characters’ dossier and stories that 
were shortly given at the beginning of the games, and more 
extensively published on the “InTouch” Facebook page. 
Each dossier reported elements of the characters’ lives, 
funny events from their past, additional information about 
their relationships, hobbies and funny photographs showing 
something weird about them. InTouch games, although 
short and simple, have thus a solid narrative structure, 
reinforced by the social media storytelling, in order to 
engage players, make them recognize narrative patterns 
referred to their work activities, and give them the right 
balance between fantasy and real working context 
situations. 
In the development of the InTouch games attention was 
also paid to the ludic aspects. Even though challenges are 
not that complex, InTouch game design tried to respect 
requirements for the games to be relevant, explorative, 
emotive and engaging. Attention was paid to speed, level of 
difficulty, timing and range of feedback. Challenges of 
mastery and comprehension were inserted into games, 
together with strategy, and a perceived risk of failure to 
prevent boredom. Game mechanics were also made pleasant 
to create a positive climate, which is ideal when it comes to 
increase retention and recall. An entertaining gameplay was 
achieved through the use of funny graphics, novelty of the 
interactions, surprise, and humour in dialogues and 
scenarios. 
All serious games were designed according to the same 
scheme, made of an opening scenario and a problem-based 
situation presenting the aim of the game (first frames), a 
bulk of interactivities (central frames) where players are 
asked to choose among different options, and the last frames 
showing the closing scenario, the score, and giving feedback 
to the player.  
The narrative within the games is developed giving a 
short background story in the opening scenario, then it is 
influenced by user’s action in the central frames, and ends 
up with the closing scenario.  
The central frames are developed according to the 
following types of interaction: 
 
Branching story: the user reads the story and has to 
take different decisions. The story develops in 
different ways according to the choices made by 
users, and the final feedback and evaluation are the 
result of the combination of the choices. 
 
Interactive map: at the beginning of the game a 
problem-based 
situation 
is 
described 
in 
the 
“InTouch” company. To solve the problem, the user 
can choose three members of the company to talk to, 
but he/she needs to pick the right people to get the 
useful information. Once the user has read the three 
clues, he/she can choose one of the three available 
alternatives. Evaluation is based on the final decision 
and on the choice of the members of the “InTouch” 
company made by the player. 
 
Multiple choice: at the beginning of the game there 
is a description of a scenario and the aim of the 
game. The user has to help the main character with 
three different decisions in a limited time frame. The 
difficulty increases: in the first decision point only 
three out of the five listed options are correct, in the 
second one only two and in the third one only one. 
The final score and the feedback depend on how 
many correct answers the user chooses.  
 
Quiz: the game begins presenting a brief introduction 
of the main topic, then the player has to try to 
correctly answer three related questions. The player 
gets immediate feedback on the answer to each 
question and a summary at the end of game. The key 
objective is to gain points for fast and correct 
answers. Evaluation is based on a combination of the 
number of correct answers with the time taken to 
answer.  
 
Task simulation: during the game the user has to 
achieve a goal which foresees three different tasks. 
He/she has to make sure to do the right tasks in the 
right order, and then he/she has to answer to a 
question focused on the selected task. The score is 
determined from the number of correct answers and 
from the correctness of the order the user chose to 
prioritize the tasks.  
IV. 
SCOPE AND HYPOTESES 
This section illustrates what are the scopes of the 
research that was done on the developed serious games, and 
what are the hypothesis guiding it through the study.  
The research can be divided in two steps, according to 
the different editions of the InTouch project. 
In the first edition of the project (2010-2012) a kit of 30 
serious games was tested, launching the study of the ludic 
and narrative components role within the games [1]. 
In the second edition (2013-2015) the structure of both 
ludic and narrative components was further analyzed 
studying a kit of 20 newly developed serious games. 
On the first kit of 30 serious games a summative 
evaluation was conducted measuring a set of game variables 
on a sample of players. The four game variables of interest 
are: the players’ willingness to play again, the interest of the 
goal, the fun of the gameplay, and the realism of the game 
narration. 
Even if ludology and narratology are complex and 
multidimensional concepts, the fun of the gameplay and the 
realism of the game narration can be considered, at least 
partially, two components of these constructs, and their 
causal role within a serious game can shed light on the 
juxtaposition between ludology and narratology. 
The interest of the goal is considered a primary element. 
It can be found starting from the beginning of the game, 
when the player faces the game scenario and mission.  
It is then interesting to observe how the development of 
the game in terms of fun and narration can influence the 
causal relationship between the interest of the goal and the 
willingness to play again. 
For this reason, the causal relationship among the 
interest for the goal and the willingness to play again is 
hypothesized to be mediated by the fun of the gameplay, 
and by the realism of the game narration. 
151
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The present study explores the degree to which the data 
fit different nested causal models. In the “complete” model 
(with less degrees of freedom), indicated as Model A (Fig. 
2), the relationship between the interest of the goal and the 
willingness to play again is partially mediated both by the 
fun of the gameplay and by the realism of the game 
narration. 
 
 
Figure 2. Graphical scheme of the causal Model A (first kit of serious 
games). 
 
The fun of the gameplay and the realism of the game 
narration are hypothesized to positively influence the 
willingness to play again (paths 4 and 5). These hypotheses 
are based on the consideration that both the fun of the 
gameplay and the realism of the game narration are 
significant elements in determining the degree of 
satisfaction. It is also hypothesized that the interest of the 
goal positively influences the willingness to play again (path 
3), since the engagement for the game mission can be 
considered as a natural predictor of the degree of 
satisfaction. 
Some constraints of the complete model are then 
released, suppressing one or more causal paths, to obtain all 
the other nested models. In this way, the partial mediation of 
the fun of the gameplay and of the realism of the game 
narration will be substituted by their full mediation or by the 
lack of mediation. The complete Model A will thus be 
confronted with the following alternative models: 
 
Model B, where there is not mediation of the fun of 
the gameplay, path 1 is suppressed; 
 
Model C, where there is not mediation of the realism 
of the game narration, path 2 is suppressed; 
 
Model D, where there is not mediation either of the 
fun of the gameplay or of the realism of the game 
narration, paths 1 and 2 are suppressed; 
 
Model E, where there is full mediation both of the 
fun of the gameplay and of the realism of the game 
narration, path 3 is suppressed; 
 
Model F, where there is full mediation of the fun of 
the gameplay and there is not mediation of the 
realism of the game narration, paths 2 and 3 are 
suppressed; 
 
Model G, where there is not mediation of the fun of 
the gameplay and there is full mediation of the 
realism of the game narration, paths 1 and 3 are 
suppressed. 
Table I summarizes which causal paths, indicated with 
numbers in Fig. 2, are present for each model. 
 
TABLE I.  CAUSAL PATHS OF TESTED MODELS 
 
Path 1 
Path 2 
Path 3 
Path 4 
Path 5 
Model A 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Model B 
-- 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Model C 
✓ 
-- 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Model D 
-- 
-- 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Model E 
✓ 
✓ 
-- 
✓ 
✓ 
Model F 
✓ 
-- 
-- 
✓ 
✓ 
Model G 
-- 
✓ 
-- 
✓ 
✓ 
 
The comparison of nested models wants to establish if 
the hypothesized influence of the interest of the goal on the 
willingness to play again is better explained by partial 
mediation, full mediation, or no mediation at all of the fun 
of the gameplay and of the realism of the game narration. 
Through the study on the second kit of 20 serious games 
the main scope of the research was to clarify if the ludic and 
the narrative components could be used to interpreter the 
causal structure of the games. For this reason, the set of 
considered variables was extended beyond those already 
analyzed during the first edition. The seven game variables 
of interest are in this case: the players’ willingness to play 
again, the fun of the gameplay, the set of rules of the 
gameplay, the ways of interaction with the gameplay, the 
realism of the game narration, the narrative of the starting 
scenarios of the games, and the development of the narrative 
during the games. 
The fun of the gameplay, the set of rules of the 
gameplay, and the ways of interaction with the gameplay 
are hypothesized to be indicators of the ludic factor of the 
games; while the realism of the game narration, the 
narrative of the starting scenarios of the games, and the 
development of the narrative during the games are 
considered as narrative indicators. This structure must be 
verified through a Confirmative Factor Analysis according 
to the scheme represented in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Graphical scheme of the factorial structure of the measured 
variables (second kit of serious games). 
 
152
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The willingness to play again is hypothesized to be 
positively influenced by all the other considered variables. 
As a consequence, the Structural Equation Model that will 
be tested can be represented with the ludic and narrative 
factorization, thus giving rise to the graphical scheme in Fig. 
4, where paths are numbered starting from 6 to avoid 
confusion with the causal scheme referred to the first kit of 
serious games. 
 
 
Figure 4. Graphical scheme of the Structural Equation Model (second kit of 
serious games). 
 
V. 
METHODS 
This section contains an illustration of the methods that 
were adopted in the present study: a description of the 
samples, the research procedure, the instruments, and the 
statistical analyses that were performed. 
A. Participants 
For the test of the first kit of 30 serious games the target 
sample consisted of 54 workers of 9 different SMEs from 
the eight countries participating in the first edition of the 
project and operating in different business sectors (ICT, 
business support, education/training, etc.). The SMEs were 
selected on the basis of their willingness to participate in the 
study. Work positions were: 28 managers and 26 
employees. In total 30 were males (56%) and 24 were 
females (44%). The mean age was 41.94 years (SD = 9.70). 
For the test of the second kit of 20 serious games the 
target sample consisted of 118 workers of 31 different 
SMEs from the five countries participating in the second 
edition of the project and operating mainly in the ICT 
sector. The SMEs were selected on the basis of their 
willingness to participate in the study. Work positions were: 
23 managers and 95 employees. In total 61 were males 
(52%) and 57 were females (48%). The mean age was 36.64 
years (SD = 7.35). 
B. Procedure 
To test the developed kits of mobile serious games the 
project partners held dedicated events, called “Learning 
Labs”, in each country participating in the project for both 
the editions of the project. During each Learning Lab a 
structured questionnaire, with only slight differences in the 
two editions, was proposed to participants after the 
completion of the games. Participation to the Learning Labs 
and questionnaire compilation were obtained through an 
informed consent procedure asking for active consent from 
participants. Questionnaires took approximately 30 minutes 
to complete. Project staff members introduced the 
questionnaires, giving instructions about their compilation, 
explaining that they were voluntary and responses were 
anonymous and confidential. Project staff members were at 
the 
workers’ 
disposal 
during 
the 
questionnaires’ 
administration to answer questions and give explanations. 
C. Measures 
An Identifying Information Form was used to collect 
demographic information: age, gender, working role. 
An articulated grading grid was proposed to participants, 
after the completion of the games, asking them to express on 
a 10 point Likert scale their like about several game 
variables.  
The present study is taking in consideration the 
following variables: the willingness to play again (“Would 
you like to play again?”), the fun of the gameplay (“How 
fun was your interaction with the game mechanics?”), the 
interest of the goal (“How interesting was the goal proposed 
by the game?”), the realism of the game narration (“If 
compared to your experience, how realistic was the 
narrative of the game about the ‘InTouch’ company?”), the 
set of rules of the games (“How did you like the rules of the 
games?”), the ways of interaction with the gameplay (“Rate 
your satisfaction for the interactions within the games”), the 
narrative of the starting scenarios of the games (“How did 
you like the narrative of the scenarios that are proposed at 
the beginning of the games?”), and the development of the 
narrative during the games (“How did you like the evolution 
of the narrative during the games?”). 
D. Data Analysis 
Preliminary Analysis 
As a preliminary analysis, skewness and kurtosis of all 
game variables were checked. Overall, all variables showed 
to conform to the normal distribution. 
Correlation 
As a first step, the correlation matrix of both the set of 
variables measured by the questionnaires was calculated. 
1) First kit of 30 serious games 
For the first kit of 30 serious games a path analysis was 
done to test the casual models represented in Fig. 2 and to 
establish which model was to be preferred. All path models 
involving the aforementioned variables were analyzed with 
LISREL, using maximum likelihood estimation procedures 
[23]. For each tested model χ2 is reported, as an absolute fit 
index (good fit between zero value and two times the 
degrees of freedom). Three more fit indexes were also 
reported: the non-normed fit index (NNFI); the comparative 
fit index (CFI); and the root mean square error of 
approximation (RMSEA). Higher CFI and NNFI values (in 
the range from 0.97 to 1.00 for a good fit) and lower 
153
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

RMSEA values (in the range from 0.00 to 0.05 for a good 
fit) are assumed to evaluate model fit [24]. The Coefficient 
of determination (R-square) is reported, giving the 
percentage of variance of the willingness to play again 
explained by each model, to estimate the completeness of 
the considered set of predictors. 
To establish which type of mediation (partial, full, or 
non-significant) was exercised by the fun of the gameplay 
and by the realism of the game narration, the comparison of 
the fit of alternative nested models was conducted analyzing 
for each pair of models the differences of the χ2 values 
(indicated with Δ χ2) between the less parsimonious model 
(i.e., the one with less degrees of freedom, in our case the 
complete Model A) and the more parsimonious one (i.e., in 
turn: Models B, C, D, E, F, and G). The significance of Δ χ2 
has successively been established looking at the p-value 
corresponding to the χ2 distribution for a number of degrees 
of freedom given by the difference of degrees of freedom of 
the more parsimonious models and the complete one. 
Choosing a cut-off of p = 0.01, if the Δ χ2 between two 
nested models is significant (p < 0.01), this implies that the 
complete model explains the data better; if there is no 
significant difference between two nested models (p > 0.01), 
this implies that the more parsimonious model explains the 
data equally well compared to the complete model, and 
must be preferred for its simplicity. 
2) Second kit of 20 serious games 
For the second kit of 20 serious games a preliminary 
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was done to verify the 
correctness of the factorization with the ludic and the 
narrative factors, as represented in Fig. 3. After that, a 
complete Structural Equation Model, made of both 
measured and latent variables, as represented in Fig. 4, was 
analyzed with LISREL [23], reporting the same fit indexes 
already used with the first kit of games. 
Thanks to the large enough sample size for the testing of 
the second kit of 20 serious games, it was possible to 
estimate the numerical values of the causal paths for 
different groups of respondents. For the reliability and 
validity of results it was chosen to differentiate males (61) 
from females (57), and the younger than 35 years (58) from 
the older than 35 years (60) people. For these categories of 
respondents, in fact, each group was enough large. On the 
contrary, the scarcity of managers (23) in the considered 
sample prevented to confront them with employees (95), 
since the results were at risk to be neither reliable or valid. 
The multi-group analysis was conducted through a 
hierarchical increasingly restrictive set of steps [25]. It 
started with the determination of a well-fitting multi-group 
baseline model with the same pattern of parameters across 
groups (called “Configural model”). The subsequent tests 
involved 
the 
specification 
of 
cross-groups 
equality 
constraints for measurement equivalence, followed by 
structural equivalence. The comparison of the baseline 
model with the measurement invariant model, and of this 
latter with the structural invariant model, was done in the 
same way as for the nested models already exposed for the 
first kit of serious games. For each step (baseline - 
measurement invariance - structural invariance) the number 
of degrees of freedom grows, as an effect of the added 
invariance constraints, and the value of χ2 for the fit is likely 
to grow. If the growth of χ2 is not significant (p > 0.01) 
when considering a nested model, this latter must be 
preferred, and the invariance is demonstrated. 
For the comparison of two groups, at least measurement 
invariance must be demonstrated, meaning that the form of 
the causal model is the same for both groups. After that, the 
similarity of parameters’ values within the common form is 
studied trough the analysis of structural invariance across 
groups.  
For the considered sample it was tested if the same form 
was valid for males and females, and for younger and older 
respondents. If so, the comparison of structural parameters 
was done, establishing if differences in causal paths’ values 
were significant. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
This section contains the numerical results obtained for 
the previously illustrated data analysis: correlation, path 
analysis, comparison of nested causal models, Confirmatory 
Factor Analysis, Structural Equation Model, and multi-
group analysis. 
1) First kit of 30 serious games 
Table II reports the correlation coefficients of the 
willingness to play again, the fun of the gameplay, the 
interest of the goal, and the realism of the game narration 
calculated with the first kit of 30 serious games. The level of 
significance (p-value) is indicated in the table footnote. 
TABLE II.  CORRELATION MATRIX OF THE FIRST KIT OF 30 SERIOUS 
GAMES (SUB-DIAGONAL COEFFICIENTS). 
Variable 
Willingness  
to play 
again 
Level of 
fun 
Interest  
of the 
goal 
Level of fun 
0.89* 
 
 
Interest of the goal 
0.60* 
0.35* 
 
Realism of the game 
narration 
0.21 
-0.12 
0.19 
b. 
*p < 0.01. 
Table III reports the results of the path analysis for the 
seven tested models with the levels of significance of the 
causal paths (p-values) indicated in the table footnote. Path 
numbers are those indicated in Fig. 2. 
TABLE III. PATH ANALYSIS COEFFICIENTS FOR THE TESTED MODELS 
 
Path 1 
Path 2 
Path 3 
Path 4 
Path 5 
Model A 
0.35* 
0.19 
0.26** 
0.83* 
0.26** 
Model B 
-- 
0.26** 
0.26** 
0.83* 
0.26** 
Model C 
0.39* 
-- 
0.26** 
0.83* 
0.26** 
Model D 
-- 
-- 
0.26** 
0.83* 
0.26** 
Model E 
0.35* 
0.19 
-- 
0.93* 
0.32** 
Model F 
0.39* 
-- 
-- 
0.93* 
0.32** 
Model G 
-- 
0.26** 
-- 
0.93* 
0.32** 
c. 
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05. 
154
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table IV reports the results of the comparison of the fit 
of the seven tested models, whose degrees of freedom (df) 
are indicated in the table, and with the level of significance 
of the difference between the complete and the nested 
models indicated in the table footnote. 
TABLE IV. COMPARISON OF THE  FIT OF ALTERNATIVE NESTED MODELS 
Model 
χ2 
NNFI 
CFI 
RMSEA 
R2 
df 
 
A 
0.00 
1.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.95 
1 
 
Alternative nested models 
 
Δχ2 
B 
6.49 
0.91 
0.97 
0.21 
0.94 
2 
6.49 
C 
1.91 
1.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.95 
2 
1.91* 
D 
9.39 
0.91 
0.96 
0.20 
0.94 
3 
9.39 
E 
27.79 
0.31 
0.77 
0.50 
0.89 
2 
27.79 
F 
28.85 
0.53 
0.77 
0.41 
0.89 
3 
28.85 
G 
31.09 
0.47 
0.73 
0.42 
0.89 
3 
31.09 
d. 
*p > 0.01; R2 = explained variance of the willingness to play again. 
Looking at the results of the comparison of the nested 
models, Model C explains the data equally well compared to 
the complete Model A (p > 0.01) and must be preferred, 
being more parsimonious. 
For the selected Model C the effects of the three 
predicting variables (Interest for the goal, Fun of the 
gameplay, Realism of the game narration) on the 
Willingness to play again (outcome variable) were 
calculated and are reported in Table V. 
TABLE V. EFFECTS ON THE WILLINGNESS TO PLAY AGAIN (MODEL C) 
Variable 
Total 
effect 
Direct 
effect 
Indirect 
effect 
Level of fun 
0.83* 
0.83* 
-- 
Interest of the goal 
0.58* 
0.26** 
0.32** 
Degree of realism of the 
game narration 
0.26** 
0.26** 
-- 
e. 
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05 
Both the fun of the gameplay and the realism of the 
game narration have significant direct effects on the 
willingness to play again (path 4 = 0.83; path 5 = 0.26). 
The interest of the goal has a significant total effect on 
the willingness to play again, obtained as the sum of a direct 
effect (path 3 = 0.26) and an indirect effect (path 1 × path 4 
= 0.32) through the mediation of the fun of the gameplay. 
The study on the first kit of 30 serious games 
demonstrated that, as hypothesized, both the fun of the 
gameplay and the realism of the game narration 
significantly influence the willingness to play again. Causal 
paths 4 and 5, in fact, are significant across all tested 
models.  
In particular, the influence of the fun of the gameplay 
resulted to be more robust, with values of path 4 above 0.80, 
while the influence of the realism of the game narration, 
even though significant, was less pronounced, with values 
of path 5 around 0.30. 
Furthermore, the fun of the gameplay resulted to 
significantly mediate the relationship between the interest of 
the goal and the willingness to play again. On the contrary, 
no significant mediation emerged for the realism of the 
game narration, insomuch as the causal Model C, where 
path 2 is suppressed, was preferred.  
As a whole, the relationship between the interest of the 
goal and the willingness to play again is partially mediated 
by the fun of the gameplay, and non-significantly mediated 
by the realism of the game narration. 
2) Second kit of 20 serious games 
Table VI reports the correlation coefficients of (a) the 
willingness to play again, (b) the fun of the gameplay, (c) 
the set of rules of the games, (d) the ways of interaction with 
the gameplay, (e) the realism of the game narration (f), the 
narrative of the starting scenarios of the games, and (g) the 
development of the narrative during the games calculated 
with the second kit of 20 serious games.  
TABLE VI.  CORRELATION MATRIX OF THE SECOND KIT OF 20 SERIOUS 
GAMES (SUB-DIAGONAL COEFFICIENTS) 
Variable 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
f 
b 
0.58* 
 
 
 
 
 
c 
0.68* 
0.76* 
 
 
 
 
d 
0.51* 
0.79* 
0.70* 
 
 
 
e 
0.32* 
0.14 
0.11 
0.17 
 
 
f 
0.33* 
0.18 
0.02 
0.11 
0.69* 
 
g 
0.30* 
0.20** 
0.11 
0.18 
0.59* 
0.79* 
f. 
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05 
Table VII reports the result of the Confirmatory Factor 
Analysis with the introduction of the ludic and narrative 
factors, as represented in Fig. 3. 
TABLE VII.  CONFIRMATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS LOADINGS 
Variable/Factor 
Ludic factor 
Narrative 
factor 
Level of fun 
0.93* 
-- 
Rules 
0.81* 
-- 
Interaction 
0.85* 
-- 
Degree of realism of the 
game narration 
-- 
0.72* 
Narrative of the starting 
scenarios 
-- 
0.95* 
Development of narrative 
-- 
0.83* 
χ2 
NNFI 
CFI 
RMSEA 
df 
14.92 
0.97 
0.98 
0.09 
8 
g. 
* p < 0.01 
The introduction of the ludic and narrative latent factors 
shows a good fit with the data, and the loading factors are 
high for all the considered variables.  
This result encourages to further continue in the use of 
the ludic and narrative latent factors to study the Structural 
Equation Model for the prediction of the willingness to play 
again. 
Table VIII reports the results of the Structural Equation 
Model with paths numbered as in Fig. 4. 
155
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VIII.  STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL COEFFICIENTS 
Path 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Coeff. 0.89* 0.86* 0.84* 0.72* 0.96* 
0.82* 
0.65* 0.26** 
Fit index 
χ2 
NNFI CFI RMSEA 
df 
 
40.91 
0.91 
0.95 
0.13 
13 
h. 
*p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05 
The Structural Equation Model shows an overall good fit 
with the data. As a consequence, the casual model for the 
prediction of the willingness to play again can be adequately 
realized with the use of the two latent factors referred to the 
ludic and narrative components of the games. With such a 
schematization, both the ludic and the narrative contribute to 
the willingness to play again resulted to be significant, even 
if the ludic component (path 12) showed to be stronger than 
the narrative one (path 13).  
The introduction of latent factors representing ludic and 
narrative components did not significantly worsen the fit 
with data if compared with the path analysis conducted with 
the first kit of serious games, where only measured variables 
were used. This is an important result that confirms the 
legitimacy of the interpretation of the casual relationships in 
terms of ludic/narrative contributes. Furthermore, the 
second study substantially confirms the same distribution of 
weight between ludic and narrative contribution to the 
willingness to play again that was found with the first study. 
Also, this result is encouraging, since it confirms that 
similar findings were obtained with different samples of 
users, thus cross-validating the ludic/narrative key of lecture 
that was adopted for both studies. 
The results of the multi-group analysis, referred to males 
vs. females, and to younger than 35 years vs. older than 35 
years, are reported in Table IX, where the baseline model 
(same patterns) is compared through the χ2 distribution to the 
measurement invariant model, and this latter is compared to 
the structural invariant model. 
TABLE IX.  MULTI-GROUP ANALYSIS RESULTS 
Groups 
Configural 
Model 
df = 26 
Measurement 
Invariant 
Model 
df = 40 
Structural 
Invariant 
Model 
df = 42 
Males  
(61) 
vs. 
Females  
(57) 
χ2 = 35.14 
χ2 = 40.94 
p (Δχ2)14 = 0.97 
χ2 = 50.88 
p (Δχ2)2 < 0.01 
Younger  
(58) 
vs. 
Older  
(60) 
χ2 = 43.60 
χ2 = 48.08 
p (Δχ2)14 = 0.99 
χ2 = 58.72 
p (Δχ2)2 < 0.01 
 
For both the pairs of groups the measurement invariance 
is verified, while there is a significant structural difference. 
In practice, measurement invariance corresponds to the 
similarity for each separated group of the factorialization 
with the Ludic and the Narrative factors that was done in the 
analyzed models. That is, independently from which group 
is being considered (males or females, younger or older 
people), the fun of the gameplay, the set of rules of the 
games, and the ways of interaction with the gameplay 
contribute similarly to the ludic factor; while the realism of 
the game narration, the narrative of the starting scenarios of 
the games, and the development of the narrative during the 
games contribute similarly to the narrative factor. In terms 
of Structural Equation Model, it is expected that coefficients 
of paths 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, as numbered in Fig. 4, are 
similar across groups. 
On the contrary, each pair of groups has significant 
structural differences across groups, meaning that causal 
paths coefficients of the structural part of the models (paths 
numbered 12 and 13) are significantly different for males 
and females, and for younger and older respondents. In 
practice, the ludic and the narrative contribution to the 
willingness to play again strictly depends on what group is 
being considered. 
Table X reports the results of the Structural Equation 
Model for separated groups of males and females with paths 
numbered as in Fig. 4.  
TABLE X.  STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL COEFFICIENTS 
(MALES VS. FEMALES) 
Path 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Males 
(61) 
0.88* 0.84* 0.83* 0.70* 0.94* 0.81* 0.59* 0.26** 
Females 
(57) 
0.88* 0.83* 0.85* 0.82* 0.85* 0.77* 0.32* 0.76* 
i. 
*p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05 
As anticipated by the multi-group analysis, there is a 
strong similarity among those coefficients (numbered from 
6 to 11) that refer to the ludic and narrative factorialization; 
while significant differences are present for coefficients 12 
and 13, which correspond to the ludic and narrative 
contribution to the willingness to play again. Both for males 
and females the willingness to play again is significantly 
influenced by ludic and narrative components, but their 
order of importance is inverted. Males are mainly influenced 
by the ludic factor, while females are mainly influenced by 
the narrative factor 
Table XI reports the results of the Structural Equation 
Model for separated groups of younger than 35 years and 
older than 35 years, with paths numbered as in Fig. 4.  
TABLE XI.  STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL COEFFICIENTS 
(YOUNGER THAN 35 YEARS VS. OLDER THAN 35 YEARS) 
Path 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Younger 0.90* 0.85* 0.85* 0.72* 0.96* 0.82* 0.61* 0.25** 
Older 
0.91* 0.83* 0.86* 0.81* 0.89* 0.81* 0.34* 0.72* 
j. 
*p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05 
As anticipated by the multi-group analysis, and already 
seen in the case of males vs. females, also, for the 
differentiation between younger and older people of the 
sample, there is a strong similarity among coefficients 
numbered from 6 to 11; while significant differences are 
present for coefficients 12 and 13. Even if both the ludic and 
156
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the narrative factor contribute significantly to the 
willingness to play again, younger people of the sample are 
mainly influenced by the ludic factor, while older ones are 
mainly influenced by the narrative factor. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Contribution to the ludology/narratology debate 
Interpreting the fun of the gameplay as a ludic indicator, 
and the realism of the game narration as a narrative 
indicator, the results of the study conducted on the first set 
of 
30 
serious 
games 
can 
be 
referred 
to 
the 
ludology/narratology debate.  
The results seem to corroborate a point of view that 
takes in consideration both positions. This sort of 
reconciliation of the two different positions, however, is not 
gained through an assimilation of the realism of the game 
narration to the fun of the gameplay. As reported in Table II, 
in fact, their correlation coefficient is non-significant (and 
slightly negative), indicating their substantial independence 
(or even slight juxtaposition). The fun of the gameplay and 
the realism of the game narration must therefore be 
considered as separately, and differently, contributing to 
determine the success of a learning game. 
The results of the study on the first kit of 30 serious 
games seem to mostly corroborate Jenkins’ proposal of 
“game 
space”, 
whose 
structure 
facilitates 
narrative 
experience [20]. In this sense, the interest of the goal can be 
interpreted as a feature of the “game space” that can 
enhance the degree of satisfaction of the players, 
determining their retention in a direct way, and indirectly, 
thanks to its contribution to the fun of the gameplay. 
B. Limits and specificity of the study 
If limited to the study on the first kit of 30 serious 
games, the association of the fun of the gameplay and of the 
realism of the game narration with the ludic and the 
narrative components of a serious games is exposed to 
criticism of being both partial and spurious. While the 
significance of the results is robustly consistent with the 
measured variables, it must be recognized that different 
types of narrative can be developed within a serious game, 
not limited to realistic ones. Having considered the realism 
of the narration is certainly only a partial representation of 
the narrative of a serious game. At the same time, fun in a 
serious narrative game can derive not only from the act of 
playing, but also from other components, like the fact to 
learn something interesting, or to take part in an engaging 
story. The fun of the gameplay can thus be referred not only, 
or at least not exclusively, to the ludic aspects of a serious 
game.  
To have a more comprehensive insight of the ludic and 
narrative dynamics within a serious game, a larger number 
of indicators should be analyzed and validated, as referred 
to the ludic and to the narrative constructs. One more limit 
of the study conducted on the first kit of 30 serious games is 
the small size of the sample (n = 54) that prevented, for 
instance, to study differences between groups of participants 
for the scarcity of people in each group.  
Some of the limits of the first study were addressed with 
the testing of the second kit of 20 serious games. The size of 
the sample was doubled (n=118), and the measured 
variables were explicitly treated as indicators of the ludic 
and narrative factors. 
The prevalence of the ludic contribute to the willingness 
to play again was found in both the studies that were 
presented in this paper. This result, however, must be 
considered as strictly linked to the specific serious games 
that were analyzed and cannot be generalized to every 
game-based solution. Furthermore, it was found that when 
differentiating groups within the sample, for instance 
according to gender and age, the prevalence of the ludic 
and/or of the narrative factor can change. In the analyzed 
sample, males and younger people showed to be more 
influenced by the ludic component, while females and older 
people resulted to be more influenced by the narrative 
component. 
The tested games were very basic as a consequence of 
their design for mobile devices. The serious games were 
conceived to be played anywhere and at any time, taking 
few minutes to be completed. Games’ interface was 
designed in such a way that a simple touch, or click, was 
enough to interact, thus enabling one-hand playing. This 
simplicity can be the origin of the ludic predominance over 
the narrative. It can be hypothesized that game-based 
solutions with a predominant ludic component exhibit a 
behavior like the one found in this case. In different 
situations, for those game-based solutions that are more 
focused on the narrative component, or where both the ludic 
and the narrative components are equally juxtaposed, 
different solutions can be found.  
C. Perspectives of implementation 
The differences across groups (males vs. females, and 
younger vs. older people) that were found on the considered 
sample deserve to be more deeply studied and related to the 
existing literature in the field of game studies. Beside 
gender and age, it is worth analyzing the role of the ludic 
and of the narrative components according to the work 
position (employers vs. employees). This kind of analysis 
was not possible in the present study because the sample 
was not adequate for the scope (there were too few 
managers in the considered sample). In general, multi-group 
analysis was not among the initial objectives of the present 
studies, while gender differences and other issues that can 
be referred to game studies must be part of the experimental 
design from the beginning of the study to be adequately 
treated. All these suggestions must be verified and 
constitutes an indication for future work in view of an 
implementation of the proposed research concept with other 
serious games.  
An interesting perspective of implementation comes 
from the substantial independence that was found between 
the ludic and the narrative contributes within the games. In 
both the presented studies, in fact, the correlation between 
the ludic and the narrative components resulted to be non-
157
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

significant. This suggests that, when designing a serious 
game, ludic and narrative components must be considered as 
separately, and differently, contributing to determine its 
overall success. Under an operational point of view, it 
would be a significant added value the creation of a 
validated instrument 
measuring ludic and narrative 
components within a serious game through the use of 
exploratory factorial analysis with multiple items, instead of 
a self-developed questionnaire, with one item for each 
variable, like the one that was used for the present study 
with the weak validation of the confirmatory factor analysis 
that was shown above. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The InTouch Project was funded by the European 
Commission within the Lifelong Learning “Leonardo da 
Vinci” Multilateral projects Programme. The first edition 
(2010-2012) was a Development of Innovation project, the 
second edition, namely InTouch-ICT (2013-2015), was a 
Transfer of Innovation project. InTouch success was due to 
the support and commitment of all partners: Centre for 
Flexible Learning - CFL, municipality of Soderhamn 
(Sweden); Enocta (Turkey); Faculty of Economics and 
Management, 
Kaunas 
University 
of 
Technology 
(Lithuania); Exemplas Holdings Limited (United Kingdom); 
Centro per le Applicazioni della Televisione e delle 
Tecniche di Istruzione a Distanza - CATTID, University of 
Rome "La Sapienza" (Italy); CIBC Artois Ternois (France); 
Evolaris next level GmbH (Austria); Centro Italiano per 
l'Apprendimento Permanente – CIAPE (Italy); Bulgarian 
Development Agency (Bulgaria); The Swiss Federation for 
Adult 
Learning 
- 
SVEB 
(Switzerland); 
Sapienza 
Innovazione (Italy); Okan University (Turkey); Refile 
(Italy); Trebag (Hungary); TBV (Turkey). 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Imbellone, B. Botte, and C.M. Medaglia, “An Empirical 
Study on the Ludic and Narrative Components in Mobile 
Game-Based Learning,” Proc. The Seventh International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLmL 
2015), IARIA, Lisbon, 22-27 February 2015, pp. 8-13, ISSN: 
2308-4367, ISBN: 978-1-61208-385-8. 
[2] 
A. Amory, “Game object model version II: a theoretical 
framework for educational game development,” Education 
Tech Research Dev, vol. 55, Issue 1, pp. 51–77, February 
2007. 
[3] 
M. Sharples, “Mobile learning: research, practice and 
challenges,” Distance Education in China, vol. 3, Issue 5, pp. 
5-11, March 2013. 
[4] 
D. Charsky, “From edutainment to serious games: A change 
in the use of game characteristics,” Games and Culture: A 
Journal of Interactive Media, vol. 5, Issue 2, pp. 177-198, 
April 2010. 
[5] 
C. Girard, J. Ecalle, and A. Magnan, “Serious games as new 
educational tools: How effective are they? A meta-analysis 
of recent studies,” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 
vol. 29, Issue 3, pp. 207-219, June 2013. 
[6] 
S. de Freitas and H. Routledge, “Designing leadership and 
soft skills in educational games: The e-leadership and soft 
skills educational games design model (ELESS),” British 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 44, Issue 6, pp. 951-
968, November 2013. 
[7] 
P. Wouters, C.van Nimwegen, H. van Oostendorp, and E.D. 
van der Spek, “A meta-analysis of the cognitive and 
motivational effects of serious games,” Journal of 
Educational Psychology, vol. 105, Issue 2, pp. 249-265, May 
2013. 
[8] 
I. Mayer et al., “The research and evaluation of serious 
games: Toward a comprehensive methodology,” British 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 45, Issue 3, pp. 502-
527, May 2014. 
[9] 
E.A. Boyle, T.M. Connolly, and T. Hainey, “The role of 
psychology in understanding the impact of computer games,” 
Entertainment Computing, vol. 2, Issue 2, pp. 69–74, January 
2011. 
[10] J.H. Brockmyer et al., “The development of the Game 
Engagement Questionnaire: a measure of engagement in 
video game-playing,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, vol. 45, Issue 4, pp. 624–634, March 2009. 
[11] D.K. Mayes and J.E. Cotton, “Measuring engagement in 
video games: A questionnaire,” Proc. Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, SAGE Publications, 
vol. 45, Issue 7, pp. 692-696, Minneapolis, 8-12 October 
2001. 
[12] T.M. Connolly, M. Stansfield, and L. Boyle (Eds.), “Games-
Based Learning Advancements for Multi-Sensory Human 
Computer Interfaces: Techniques and Effective Practices,” 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, 2009. 
[13] T. Hainey and T.M. Connolly, “Evaluating games-based 
learning,” International Journal of Virtual and Personal 
Learning Environments, vol. 1, Issue 1, pp. 57–71, March 
2010. 
[14] J. Juul, “Games telling stories? A brief note on games and 
narratives,” Game studies: The International Journal of 
Computer Game research, vol. 1, Issue 1, July 2001. 
[15] G. Frasca, “Simulation versus Narrative: introduction to 
ludology,” in The video game theory reader, M. J. P. Wolf 
and B. Perron, (Eds.) New York: Routledge, pp. 221-236, 
2003. 
[16] A. McManus and A.H. Feinstein, “Narratology and 
ludology: competing paradigms or complementary theories 
in simulation,” Developments in Business Simulation and 
Experiential Learning, vol. 33, pp. 363-372, March 2006. 
[17] M.L. Ryan, “Beyond Myth and Metaphor: The Case of 
Narrative in Digital Media,” Game studies: The International 
Journal of Computer Game research, vol. 1, Issue 1, July 
2001. 
[18] E.J. 
Aarseth, 
“Cybertext. 
Perspectives 
on 
Ergodic 
Literature,” Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1997. 
[19] C.A. Lindley, “Ludic Engagement and Immersion as a 
Generic Paradigm for Human-Computer Interaction Design,” 
Proc. The Third International Conference on Entertainment 
Computing (ICEC 2004), September 2004, pp. 3-13, ISBN: 
978-3-540-22947-6. 
[20] H. Jenkins, “Game design as narrative architecture,” in First 
person: New media as story, performance, and game, N. 
Wardrip-Fruin and P. Harrigan (Eds.), Cambridge, MA: 
MIT, pp. 118-130, 2004. 
158
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[21] T.M. Connolly, E.A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey, and J. 
M. Boyle, “A systematic literature review of the empirical 
evidence on computer games and serious games,” Computers 
& Education, vol. 59, Issue 2, pp. 661–686, September 2012. 
[22] J. Froschauer, J. Zweng, D. Merkl, M. Arends, D. Goldfarb, 
and M. Weingartner, “ARTournament: A Mobile Casual 
Game to Explore Art History,” Proc. 12th IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 
2012), IEEE Press, pp. 80-84, July 2012, ISBN: 978-1-4673-
1642-2. 
[23] K.G. Joreskog and D. Sorbom, LISREL 8.8 for Windows 
[Computer software]. Skokie, IL: Scientific Software 
International, Inc., 2006. 
[24] K. Schermelleh-Engel, H. Moosbrugger, and H. Muller, 
“Evaluating the Fit of Structural Equation Models: Tests of 
Significance and Descriptive Goodness-of-Fit Measures,” 
Methods of Psychological Research-Online, vol. 8, Issue 2, 
pp. 23-74, 2003. 
[25] K. A. Bollen, “Structural equations with latent variables,” 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
159
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

