Fairness for Growth in the Internet Value Chain
Alessandro Bogliolo1,2 and Erika Pigliapoco1
1STI-DiSBeF - University of Urbino, Urbino, Italy 61029
2NeuNet Cultural Association, Urbino, Italy 61029
Email: {alessandro.bogliolo, erika.pigliapoco}@uniurb.it
Abstract—Empyrical data show an exponential growth of IP
trafﬁc and a corresponding growth of the overall capitalization
of the Internet market. However, the revenues generated by
the Internet are not fairly distributed among all the players
involved in the value chain. In spite of the increasing returns for
over-the-top service providers, application developers, device
producers, network operators, and content right owners are
not taking advantage of Internet evolution. Analysts forecast
that in a few years this imbalance will cause the congestion of
the network without any motivation for new investments on it,
thus ultimately bringing the Internet to collapse. On the other
hand, if properly distributed, the value generated by Internet
trafﬁc would be sufﬁcient to sustain innovation and growth.
This paper demonstrates with mathematical arguments that
a fair distribution of the operating incomes across the value
chain would maximize the development rate. Furthermore, it
analyses the bottlenecks in the value chain induced by the
access-based business models currently adopted by operators
and often enforced by regulatory authorities. Net neutrality
and market law are the pillars of an alternative service-based
model which could be adopted to grant to the network the
degrees of freedom necessary to overcome its own bottlenecks
while reducing the need for policy enforcement.
Keywords-Internet value chain; Growth; Fairness; Sustain-
ability; Neutral Access Networks
I. INTRODUCTION
The exponential growth of IP trafﬁc is not occasional.
Rather, it is the result of many concomitant causes: the
ever increasing pervasiveness of the Internet, users’ addic-
tion to network connectivity, the progressive shift of usage
patterns towards bandwidth intensive services, the signiﬁcant
improvements in the usability of interfaces, the ubiquitous
availability of connected devices, the increasing share of
consumer trafﬁc, and the convergence of popular services
(voice, TV, video on demand) over IP networks [5]. Global
mobile data trafﬁc is expected to increase 26 times in 5
years, reaching 6.3 exabytes per month in 2015 [6], while
in 2014 the annual growth of ﬁxed Internet trafﬁc is expected
to become greater than the overall volume in 2009 [7].
The beneﬁcial effect of Moore’s law, which keeps improv-
ing the performance and the cost effectiveness of network
equipment, is not sufﬁcient to sustain this exponential trend,
so that continuous investments are required to boost network
capacity. The question is: Does the network generate enough
value to sustain its own development? According to aggre-
gate ﬁnancial data the answer seems to be positive, since the
overall capitalization of the Internet follows the same expo-
nential trend of IP trafﬁc. A closer look at the Internet supply
chain, however, points out a signiﬁcant imbalance between
segments which beneﬁt from trafﬁc growth (including user-
interface producers and over-the-top service providers) and
segments which suffer from the lack of incremental revenues
(including content right owners and connectivity providers)
[8]. Such an imbalance risks to impair network development.
Analysts observe that the capital expenditures (CapEx)
required to fund incremental capacity both in ﬁxed and in
mobile networks are much higher than those obtained from
the projections based on historical data. CapEx is the amount
of money spent by a company to acquire or upgrade its assets
in order to increase its capacity or efﬁciency for more than
one accounting period. For a network operator the assets
include network infrastructure, equipment, software, sites,
and civil assets [9]. The ongoing costs incurred for running
the business are called operating expenditures (OpEx). Al-
though the revenues of network operators are still sufﬁcient
to pay for OpEx, in order for network development to keep
pace with the estimated trafﬁc growth, in the next 5 years
mobile and ﬁxed infrastructures will ask for a CapEx which
is 50% and 30% higher, respectively, than currently planned
for the same years [7]. Such additional investments cannot
be made as long as operators do not take advantage from
evolution. Hence, the imbalance between costs and revenues
and the unfair capitalization of Internet value induced by
current business models will end up impairing evolution and
bringing the network to a congestion which will affect the
whole value chain.
Although governmental measures (such as public funding,
antitrust rules, and neutrality enforcement) have been often
adopted to mitigate this phenomenon [4], they cannot be
considered as ultimate solutions to guarantee a sustainable
growth and the Internet prompts for new models [7], [2],
[10], [11].
This paper starts from the observed and forecast trends of
IP trafﬁc and Internet capitalization to investigate how the
value should be ideally distributed along the Internet supply
chain in order to sustain the maximum rate of development.
Extending the analysis recently conducted by the same
authors [1] this paper proposes the adoption of a service-
based network model (as opposed to the traditional access-
based one) which could grant to the Internet the capability of
69
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

overcoming its own bottlenecks without giving up network
neutrality and without requiring external enforcement.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
demonstrates, with simple mathematical arguments, that a
fair distribution of the revenues along the entire value chain
is the key to the development of the Internet. Moreover, it
shows that, in the medium period, all the players involved
can gain a higher beneﬁt from a fair participation in Internet
growth rather than from grabbing a higher share in the short
term, so that collective welfare matches individual interests.
Section III investigates whether and to what extent the results
of Section II can be impaired by bit devaluation caused
by the increase in network capacity. Section IV provides
a detailed description of the Internet value chain, points
out the bottlenecks induced by traditional business models,
and introduces a service-based value chain as opposed to
the current one, which is access-based. Section V proposes
a service-based network model and shows how it could
be exploited to achieve the conditions to maximize the
development by following market law while also preserving
network neutrality. Section VI analyses market signs which
prompt for the adoption of a service-based model, while
Section VII draws conclusions.
II. FAIRNESS FOR GROWTH
The value of a good or service can be deﬁned as its
worth determined by the market. The value chain (VC)
describes the full range of activities which are required to
bring the good/service from conception to delivery [12].
To our purposes, we call value per bit, denoted by V , the
overall worth generated by the processing of 1 bit on the
network across the entire VC. We call operating proﬁt per
bit, denoted by OpProﬁt, the difference between the value
per bit and the operational costs OpEx incurred at all the N
steps in the value chain to manage that bit. In symbols:
OpProfit = V −
N
X
k=1
OpExk
(1)
The opearting proﬁt at stage n is deﬁned accordingly as:
OpProfitn = Vn − OpExn
(2)
where Vn is the revenue per bit at stage n.
Assuming that there is a positive overall operating proﬁt,
the value has to be distributed over the VC in such a way
that the following condition is met at each stage
Vn ≥ OpExn
∀n ∈ [1, N]
(3)
or otherwise the entire chain would not be sustainable.
Then, operating proﬁt can be used to sustain development
according to the business models adopted by the players
involved. For our purposes, we represent the business model
adopted at the n-th stage by the reinvested earning per bit,
denoted by REn, that is the percentage of the operating
proﬁt generated by a bit at stage n which will be re-invested.
In symbols:
REn =
CapExn
OpProfitn
(4)
The development rate that can be achieved at a given stage
(say, n) of the VC can be computed as the ratio between
the actual CapExn and the marginal CapEx required to
increase of 1 bit the throughput of that stage (MCapExn).
Since the overall capacity of the VC (in terms of number of
bits it can process in a time unit) is equal to the minimum
of the capacities of its N stages, the maximum development
is achieved when all the stages evolve at the same rate.
It can be easily demonstrated that this condition is met
when the operating proﬁt is distributed in such a way that
each stage receives a share proportional to the investment
per bit required at that stage (MCapExn) divided by the
reinvestment model adopted (REn). In symbols:
Vn = OpExn + OpProfit
MCapExn
REn
PN
k=1
MCapExk
REk
(5)
In this case, in fact, the development rate will be the same
at all stages, avoiding bottlenecks which will cause disec-
onomies and impair evolution. The common development
rate is given by:
DevRate =
OpProfit
PN
k=1
MCapExk
REk
(6)
As long as the rate is maintained, the development follows
an exponential trend which induces an exponential growth
in time (t) of the overall capacity of the network (C) and
of the proﬁt generated at each stage, that can be expressed,
respectively, as:
C(t) = DevRatet
(7)
Profitn(t) = (Vn − OpExn − CapExn)DevRatet
(8)
Both the capacity and the proﬁt at time t are expressed
referring to a single bit processed at time 0. This means that,
in order to obtain the actual capacity and the actual proﬁt
at the time t, Equations 7 and 8 should be multiplied by
the values taken by the corresponding ﬁgures at time 0. For
our purposes, in the following we keep using normalized
quantities.
Now assume that one of the players in the VC has the
power to capture more value (Vi) than expected according
to Equation 5. The consequence will be a higher proﬁt per bit
at that stage, but a lower development rate for the entire VC.
Referring to equation 8, this means that the player can decide
to increase the multiplicative constant of his proﬁt curve, at
70
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the cost of decreasing the base of the exponential. Needless
to say, this behavior will become counterproductive in a very
short time, since the new short-sighted trend cannot compete
with the optimal one, which has a stronger exponential.
This simple reasoning demonstrates that the splitting
provided by Equation 5 is an equilibrium point that could be
autonomously reached in a competitive market where all the
stages in the VC are managed by rational agents. In other
terms, it represents a win-win solution where the maximiza-
tion of collective welfare is achieved by the decisions taken
by individual agents in the attempt of maximizing their own
proﬁt.
III. DEALING WITH BIT DEVALUATION
The previous section has shown that the growth of the
Internet market, if properly managed, is not an issue per se,
in that it provides the economic motivation to induce all the
players to fairly participate in the development required to
satisfy the growing demand.
However, the mathematical model has been derived from
three main parameters (namely, V , MCapEx, and OpEx)
which have been treated as constants over time. Since, by
deﬁnition, they are referred to each single bit, they are likely
to depend on the amount of bits that can be processed
by the network. In particular, both the operating costs per
bit (OpEx) and the capital expenditures required for each
additional bit (MCapEx) are expected to beneﬁt from
Moore’s law and scale economies, which act as negative
exponentials.
OpEx(t) = OpEx(t=0)α−t
(9)
MCapEx(t) = MCapEx(t=0)β−t
(10)
A similar effect can be observed on the worth of each bit,
because of the increasing amount of bits traveling across the
network:
V (t) = V (t=0)γ−t
(11)
This phenomenon, hereafter called bit devaluation, is due
to the reduction of the value of a unit of product (i.e., the
bit) caused by the increase in the amount of supplied product
units (i.e., the overall trafﬁc). This section investigates
whether, and to what extent, bit devaluation might impact
the results of Section II.
For the sake of simplicity, and without loss of generality,
let’s assume that in Equations 9 and 10 α = β. As for γ
(which apperas in Equation 11) there are two main reasons,
conﬁrmed by empyrical observations, to assess that it has
to be lower than α and β: ﬁrst, because the devaluation of
the bits is one of the effects of network development, and it
is unlikely that the effect goes faster than its cause; second,
because the whole capitalization of the Internet market is
growing, while it would decrease if the worth of each bit
(V ) reduced faster than the costs incurred to generate it.
On the basis of the above arguments, the case in which
γ = α = β can be regarded as the worst-case scenario
to be used to evaluate the effects on the development rate
expressed by Equation 6. Since the negative exponentials
appear both at numerator and denominator of a fraction,
their effects cancel out, so that DevRate remains constant
over time. On the other hand, if γ was lower than α and β,
then DevRate would grow over time.
To better highlight the possible effects of devaluation on
proﬁts, Equation 8 is rewritten as the product of three terms:
Profitn(t)
=
(OpProfitn − CapExn)DevRatet
=
OpProfitn(1 −
CapExn
OpProfitn
)DevRatet
=
OpProfitn(1 − REn)DevRatet
(12)
where DevRate has already been studied, while the second
term does not contain time-dependent parameters. Hence, the
only term which needs to be discussed is the ﬁrst one, which
represents the operational proﬁt per bit, the time dependence
of which can be expressed as
OpProfitn(t)
=
V (t=0)
n
γ−t − OpEx(t=0)
n
α−t
=
γ−t(V (t=0)
n
− OpEx(t=0)
n
α
γ
−t
)
Replacing the expression of OpProfitn(t) in Equation
12, in the worst case of γ = α the proﬁt at stage n can be
expressed by the following function of time:
Profitn(t) = γ−t(V (t=0)
n
−OpEx(t=0)
n
)(1−REn)DevRatet
(13)
Recognizing that two of the four terms of the product do
not depend on time, we can deﬁne a constant
Kn = (V (t=0)
n
− OpEx(t=0)
n
)(1 − REn)
and rewrite Equation 13 pointing out its dependence over
time.
Profiti(t) = Ki
DevRate
γ
t
(14)
Equation 14 clearly shows that the proﬁt keeps growing
exponentially as long as γ is lower than the development
rate, which is a reasonable assumption (compliant with
empirical data) since γ represents the devaluation driven
by development. This trend is conﬁrmed by empyrical
observations.
71
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. THE INTERNET VALUE CHAIN
Among the different ways to represent Internet value chain
(VC), one of the most detailed and recent representations
is provided by A.T. Kearney [8], which splits the Internet
market into 5 segments, namely: content rights, online
services, enabling technology services, connectivity, and
user interface. In order to point out the differences between
access-based and service-based business models, we adopt a
7-stage VC obtained by separating the Internet core from the
access network (both of them included into the Connectivity
segment in A.T. Kearney’s report) and by distinguishing the
services provided over the top (OTT) from those provided
within operators’ managed networks (the latter not explicitly
mentioned in the above report).
Figure 1.
The Internet value chain.
The resulting VC, shown in Figure 1, is composed of the
following stages: contents and applications (stage 1), that
could be either copy righted or generated by end-users; OTT
online services (stage 2), made globally available on the In-
ternet; support technologies (stage 3), which include content
delivery overlay networks and hosting services; Internet core
(stage 4), made of interchange points and core networks
of incumbent operators; online services provided within
managed networks (stage 5), which include IPTV services;
access networks (stage 6), which include both backhauling
and retail access up to the network termination points made
available to end-users; user devices (stage 7), which include
HW/SW user interfaces and customer premises equipment
(CPE) used to connect to network termination points.
It is worth noticing that stage 4 includes both operators’
backbones and interchange points, so that Figure 1 does not
point out the re-distribution of value within the Internet core,
which is governed by peering agreements and managed by
international organizations.
According to historical data of market capitalization [7],
VC segments have followed very different trends in the
recent past: while stages 2, 3, and 7 have known a signiﬁcant
growth from 2004 to 2010 (4x, 2x, and 5x respectively),
stages 1, 4, and 6 have not taken any advantage of the
fast increase in Internet trafﬁc and their capitalization has
slightly decreased in the same period. As for segment 5,
mainly represented by IPTV market, the compound annual
growth rate is expected to be around 25% until 2014 [13].
The
imbalance
of
Internet
market
capitalization
is
schematically represented in Figure 2 in order to provide a
qualitative perception of the bottlenecks which risk to impair
network development.
Figure 2.
Schematic representation of the unbalanced capitalization of the
Internet value chain.
A. Access-Based Value Chain
The current functioning of the network is dominated by
two main features. The ﬁrst one is vertical integration, which
is the absorption into a single organization (namely, the so-
called operator) of all the aspects required to go from the
Internet core to end-users, often including even the provision
of customer equipment (vertical integration is represented as
a dashed macro-stage in Figure 2). The second one is the
all-or-nothing offer of Internet access, which gives to end-
users only the categorical choice between subscribing to full
access to the network, or being completely cut off. Internet
access is typically sold at a monthly ﬂat fee depending only
on the nominal (i.e., maximum) bandwidth at user’s disposal.
From operators’ stand point this business model was orig-
inally motivated by the perspective of: attracting costumers
with a simple offer, avoiding the operating costs of complex
accounting policies, taking advantage from average individ-
ual use well below the nominal bandwidth, and exploiting
statistical sharing to over-book the bandwidth available.
From end-users’ stand point, the model has induced the
misleading perception that: Internet bandwidth is the only
good customers pay for (while they also pay for access
infrastructures and CPE), the nominal bandwidth is the
actual one they are entitled to use all the time (while it
represents only a peak value they are not allowed to pass),
and the more they use the network the more convenient their
contracts become (while the monthly rate was determined
assuming they would not have used the Internet all the time).
From OTT service providers’ stand point, the access-
based business model has created a global market where to
offer their services without caring about transport, allowing
them to deliver most services for free and to get money from
commercial sponsors.
It is a matter of fact that the Internet has become a two-
sided market where the apparent gratuitousness of trafﬁc
72
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

has created a short-circuit between the two sides (namely,
service providers and end-users), cutting off from revenues
network operators, which lay in the middle.
The ultimate effect of this phenomenon is the so-called
cloud computing: users feel Internet services to be so close
to them and reachable at no additional costs, that they keep
on the cloud even their personal ﬁles that could ﬁt at no cost
in the storage devices embedded in their smart phones.
Although such a short circuit has signiﬁcantly contributed
to the diffusion of the Internet and to the development
of advanced online services, the model suffers from many
weaknesses which make it unsuitable to sustain the expo-
nential development.
First, the advent of a huge variety of services with
different bandwidth requirements has created a signiﬁcant
spread of usage patterns with a consequent inequality among
users who pay the same fee in spite of heterogeneous needs
(for instance, 1% of mobile data subscribers generate over
20% of mobile data trafﬁc [6]). If such a monthly fee is
higher than the perceived value of the Internet, individuals
may be not motivated enough to subscribe.
Second, there are some stages in the VC of Figure 2
(such as stage 6) which signiﬁcantly contribute to the costs
incurred by operators without generating any direct value,
since they are hidden to end-users. This misalignment be-
tween costs and revenues impairs innovation because opera-
tors are neither motivated to invest in access infrastructures
nor interested in boosting the development of bandwidth-
intensive services.
Third, as the average individual use gets close to the nom-
inal bandwidth included in the monthly fee, over-booking
causes the congestion of access networks with consequent
loss of quality of service (QoS).
To contrast these effects, operators have tried to reach
scope economies by adopting the so-called triple-play mar-
ket strategy, which consists in providing additional services
(namely, IPTV and VoIP) within the walled gardens of their
own networks. Moreover, they have been induced to apply
trafﬁc shaping and access tiering techniques in order to
delay the congestion of their networks and to mitigate its
effects on QoS.
Governments, on the other hand, have come on stage in
many ways in order to bridge digital divide, foster competi-
tion, and defend end-users’ interests. In particular, public
funds have been allocated in many countries to ﬁnance
the development of next generation networks (NGNs) and
the deployment of access infrastructures in market failure
regions, regulations have been enacted to impose incumbent
operators to make their infrastructures available to new
entrants at controlled wholesale/unbundling conditions, and
network neutrality has been enforced by preventing operators
from adopting access tiering policies and from establishing
commercial relationships with OTT service providers.
If state interventions can play a signiﬁcant role in trigger-
ing development, they cannot guarantee sustainability (if not
complemented by private investments and not supported by
suitable business models) and they often produce side effects
that may even end up thwarting their own original purposes.
This is the case of neutrality enforcement and local loop
unbundling, which discourage private investments in NGNs
by reducing business opportunities, by avoiding bandwidth
optimizations, and by making the break-even point unreach-
able in many scenarios. Moreover, state ﬁnancial aids, even
if targeted only to access networks (stage 6 in the VC),
create signiﬁcant distortions in many other markets (stages
4, 5, and 7 in the VC) because of vertical integration and
triple-play market strategies currently adopted by incumbent
operators.
B. Service-Based Value Chain
Figure 3.
Service-based Internet value chain.
The VC proposed in this section is based on two main
features: vertical separation, as opposed to vertical in-
tegration, and service orientation, as opposed to access
orientation typical of the current Internet model discussed
in the previous subsection.
Technically speaking, separation is an inherent property of
the Internet induced by the layered structure of its protocol
stack. Network neutrality, which has been one of the main
driving forces behind Internet development and innovation,
was naturally induced by the layered architecture before
becoming a controversial principle. In this context, vertical
separation is particularly intended as market segmentation,
which enables each segment in the VC to be possibly
managed by different actors who interact with all other
segments by means of transparent and proﬁtable commercial
relationships. Separation also enables each market segment
to make business with other industry sectors and public
organizations, not represented in the VC, or to be targeted by
state ﬁnancial aids and welfare policies. Vertical separation
has been identiﬁed by ITU as one of the four technology
implications on market structure which prompt for new
business models, the other three implications being service
innovation, network innovation, and horizontal integration
(i.e., network convergence) [14].
Service orientation, which is the second distinguishing
feature of the proposed VC, means the opportunity for end-
users to directly focus on the services they need, even if they
73
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

have not yet established commercial relationships with any
operator. There are many motivations for focusing on ser-
vices (delivered both OTT and within managed networks):
services/applications are at the top of the TCP/IP stack, they
are much more attractive than their enabling technologies
(i.e., connection and transport), they provide great opportu-
nities of diversiﬁcation and innovation, and they have proved
capable of taking advantage of trafﬁc growth. Although
market capitalization data clearly demonstrate that services
are the main driving force of the Internet, current business
models do not provide adequate instruments to distribute the
revenues along the VC in order to support the development
required at all its stages.
An ideal representation of a service-based VC is provided
in Figure 3. End-users establish direct relationships with ser-
vice providers (SPs), who operate both at stage 2 (OTT) and
at stage 5 (within managed networks). These interactions,
which may or may not involve payments, are represented by
black arrows with label (a) in Figure 3, where thick arrows
with label (b) represent revenues coming from sponsorships,
advertisements, and any other form of business made with
stakeholders who take advantage of the Internet without
being directly involved in the VC. Both type-a and type-
b incomes are collected at stages 2 and 5, even if all stages
contribute to the VC. Transparent relations among the actors
operating at different stages are then needed to enable a fair
redistribution of revenues along the service-based VC. Inter-
stage redistributions are represented by horizontal arrows in
Figure 3. Finally, dashed arrows with label (c) represent
ﬁnancial aids possibly targeting backbones (stage 4) and
access infrastructures (stage 6).
Stage 7 (i.e., CPE) is shadowed in Figure 3 and it is not
involved in any inter-stage commercial transaction because
it is a thriving market by itself, which is expected to be able
to keep following and supporting Internet growth without the
need for signiﬁcant changes in its business model. In other
terms, end-users’ devices (such as smart phones, net books,
PCs, set-top-boxes, ...) can be considered to be already at
users’ disposal, since customers are highly motivated to pay
for them. Hence, they can be neglected in our analysis since
they are neither a bottleneck to be overcome, nor a source
of revenues suitable to be redistributed along the VC. Notice
however that the lack of interactions between stage 7 and the
rest of the VC does not mean that CPE cannot be provided
by operators (as they are usually in current business models).
Rather, it simply means that this kind of scope economies
are not considered to be relevant for network development.
Internet bandwidth is nothing but a special kind of service
provided at stage 5 by Internet service providers (ISPs) who
manage gateways placed between access networks (stage
6) and Internet core (stage 4). Access infrastructures are
assumed to be open to end-users, whose CPE associates
for free in order to allow them to gain access to online
services (including Internet bandwidth). SPs and ISPs pay a
fee to the operators managing the access network in order to
be allowed to expose their services to connected end-users.
As long as SPs share their revenues with access network
operators, the latter are motivated to open their networks to
end-users, in that they add to the value of the network by
making it more attractive for SPs. This allows operators to
take advantage of the development of the two-sided market
they enable, and provides the motivation required to invest
in access infrastructures.
OTT SPs may keep exposing their services on the Internet
without establishing direct relationships with network opera-
tors. In this case, they can be reached by end-users who sub-
scribed with some ISP to gain access to the Internet, while
they will not be reached by end-users who have connected
only to the access infrastructure without buying Internet
bandwidth. On the other hand, OTT SPs can decide to enter
into a contract with an operator to make their services also
reachable, within managed access networks, to end-users
who associated for free with the access infrastructure. In
the ﬁrst case the trafﬁc generated within the acces network
is paid by end-users (as a share of the fee they pay to ISPs),
while in the second case it is paid by SPs. Finally, depending
on the nature of the services, OTT SPs may or may not share
their revenues with content providers (stage 1) and enabling
technology providers (stage 3).
Although many different business models can be con-
ceived and adopted, commercial relationships should be
mainly based on IP trafﬁc in order to provide the so-called
price-signal which acts as a positive feedback in triggering
and sustaining development.
In summary, the service-based VC provides a suitable
support for development and growth, in that it lowers access
barriers for end-users, it reduces information asymmetry by
avoiding end-users to be billed unawarely for the trafﬁc
generated by the services they use, and it allows operators
to establish transparent commercial relationships with SPs
without violating network neutrality. In fact, neutrality is
preserved as long as the same conditions are applied at each
stage to all the actors playing the same role in the VC.
V. A SERVICE-BASED MODEL
Moving from an access-based to a service-based model
implies a paradigm shift in the Internet VC. While at some
stages such change can emerge from the natural evolution
of current business models, at some others it prompts for
innovative architectural and commercial models. The most
challenging issue in this context is the re-design of the
relationships among end-users, operators, and SPs across
access infrastructures. To this purpose, a suitable support can
be provided by the so-called neutral access network (NAN)
model [15].
NANs are a special category of open access networks
[16] conceived to make the access infrastructures econom-
ically sustainable in market-failure regions by triggering
74
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4. Interactions between end-users and SPs in a service-based neutral
access network.
positive externalities and enhancing penetration [17]. A
NAN exhibits the features of a full-ﬂedged network by
itself, containing a sizeable set of services made available
to the users before they register with any ISP. End-users
are allowed to associate with the NAN for free without
prehemptive registration. Once the users have entered the
NAN, they are exposed to all the services made available
within the network, including Internet surﬁng through the
gateways managed by ISPs. Registration and authentication
are required only to gain access to the Internet or to
those internal services which require user identiﬁcation for
accounting, personalization, privacy, or security needs. The
entry of a new user into the NAN has a beneﬁcial effect
for all other users since it helps reaching the critical mass
of users required to incentivize the provisioning of new
services. Similarly, the entry of a new SP has a spillover
beneﬁt for all other providers since it induces new users to
enter the shared marketplace and it contributes to cover the
costs of the infrastructure. Service orientation is natural in
a NAN. End users have commercial relationships only with
SPs (including ISPs), who pay a share of their revenues to
the NAN organization. The share is then possibly distributed
among multiple stakeholders: real estate owners, investors,
and local operators.
Figure 4 represents the possible relations that can be
established in a NAN. Vertical solid arrows stay for IP
trafﬁc, dotted arrows stay for direct transactions between
end-users and SPs, horizontal solid arrows stay for revenues
coming from markets outside the VC (including sponsorhips
and advertisment), while dashed arrows stay for commer-
cial relationships between SPs and NAN operators. Three
paradigmatic cases are depicted, referring to three end-users
who are assumed to be connected for free to the NAN by
means of their own CPE.
Case 1. End-user u1 wants to gain full access to the Inter-
net. To this purpose, he/she registers with one of the virtual
operators (namely, ISP1) offering Internet bandwidth in the
NAN. The conditions at which Internet bandwidth is sold by
ISP1 include the share he has to pay to the NAN operator
for transporting u1’s trafﬁc across the NAN. Once on the
Internet, u1 takes advantage of the service delivered by an
OTT SP (namely, SP1) without taking care of transport.
This case reproduces the same user experience of current
access-based models, while retaining the beneﬁts of service
orientation. Commercial agreements between ISP1 and NAN
operators can assume the form of a wholesale contract, but
the key novelty is that u1 connected to the NAN before
registering with ISP1 and was allowed to choose the ISP as
a service.
Case 2. End-user u2 associates to the NAN without buy-
ing Internet bandwidth since it is only interested in a speciﬁc
service (like tourist information, e-government, IPTV, ...)
which is supplied by SP2 within the access network. The
only relation he/she has to establish is with SP2, who is
supposed to pay a fee to the NAN operator for web hosting
and transport. Revenues for SP2 can come either from end-
users (if they pay for the service), or from sponsors/subsidies
(if the service is delivered for free), or from both (if a mixed
model is adopted, such as the one of IPTVs providing both
free channels and pay-per-view contents).
Case 3. End-user u3 behaves exactly as u2, even if the
service he/she wants to use is provided by an OTT SP
(namely, SP3). This is made possible by the agreement
between SP3 and the NAN operator, signed to expose the
online service of SP3 within the NAN. From a technical
point of view, this could be done in many different ways,
including mirroring, proximity caching, and white listing.
The trafﬁc generated across the NAN is then paid by
SP3, while the service he/she provides makes the access
infrastructure more attractive.
The trade-off between network neutrality, bandwidth opti-
mization, and capitalization is reached thanks to the nature of
the commercial relations established at all stages, which are
not discriminatory, not exclusive, and inherently regulated
by market law.
VI. MARKET SIGNS
The urgent need for a paradigm shift in the Internet VC
can be viewed in many recent events and market signs.
Amazon’s Kindle 2 has conquered the market of e-book
readers by freeing end-users from the burden of connectivity.
It integrates a hidden SIM card which allows end-users to be
always connected (seemlessly) to the online store. The cost
of download is included into the price of e-books thanks to
an agreement between Amazon and AT&T, which in its turn
has roaming agreements with mobile operators all around the
world [18]. This is a neat example of a vertical application
75
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

built on top of a vertically-separated architecture to provide
a service-oriented user experience.
Groupon (www.groupon.com) is a deal-of-the-day website
which operates in hundreds of localized markets worldwide.
The business model is fairly simple: it offers a deal per
market per day. If users who sign up for the offer reach a
given threshold, then the deal becomes available to all of
them and the retailer shares his/her revenues with Groupon.
For retailers, Groupon works as an assurance contract which
guarantees a critical mass which makes the deal like a
quantity discount [19]. In 2010, Groupon Inc. refused a
6 billion Dollar offer from Google, clearly demonstrating
the value of localized on-line business. It is apparent that
Groupon could provide its services within a NAN, making
it available to local end-users even if they have not signed
with any ISP.
In January 2011, Google Inc. accepted to allow publishers
to quit Google News without affecting the results returned
by its main search engine, and to disclose revenue-sharing
arrangements for its AdSense partners. This agreement ended
an antitrust investigation of the Italian Competition Authority
(AGCM) triggered by the Italian Federation of Newspaper
Publishers (FIEG) because most people were content with
aggregated summaries found on Google News and bothered
to click on the links that led to their newspaper websites,
costing the publishers advertising and page views. This story
shows that services (e.g., online aggregators and search
engines) are much closer to end-users than contents (e.g.,
news), so that it is much easier for SPs than for content right
owners to be paid by end-users and sponsors. The agreement
found in Italy also demonstrates that it is worth for both cat-
egories to ﬁnd a suitable revenue sharing mechanism which
reduces the imbalance and makes the business sustainable.
Google Inc. has provided free Wi-Fi access in Mountain
View (CA) for several years and it has contributed to the
development of many other municipal networks. In February
2011 the City Council approved a 5-year extension of the
Google WiFi deal, with an escape clause for Google. There
are two signs that can be found in this piece of news: the
ﬁrst one is that OTT SPs are interested in widening their
market by lowering access barriers, the second one is that
they do not want to take the place of network operators (the
escape clause was wanted by Google).
In December 2010 some of the major European mobile
operators, including Orange, Telecom Italia, Telefonica and
the Vodafone Group, have demanded that popular OTT
services, such as those from Google, Facebook, Skype and
Apple, contribute to pay for the trafﬁc they generate on
their networks. This request, motivated by the lack of return
for operators from the exponential growth of IP trafﬁc, has
raised network neutrality issues due to the unsuitability of
the business models adopted, which do not allow operators
to establish commercial relationships with SPs without im-
pairing the neutrality of the connection they provide.
In 2010 the European Commission launched a public
consultation on ”The open Internet and net neutrality in
Europe” and received answers from 318 stakeholders [20],
demonstrating the need for a thorough conciliation of the
different interests involved in order to guarantee the develop-
ment and the openness of the Internet. Similar consultations
were launched in 2011 in many European countries. The
pragmatic positions expressed by the European Parliament
and by the national authorities based on the results of the
public consultations clearly show the intent of policy makers
to create the conditions for a fair competition in the Internet
market with minimum interference from regulators [3], [4],
[21].
In the second quarter of 2011 KPN, the incumbent opera-
tor in the Netherlands, decided to apply a surcharge on com-
peting Internet-based services (including voice and instant
messaging) to compensate the reduced earnings registered in
the ﬁrst quarter. In June 2011 the Dutch parliament approved
the world’s strongest net neutrality bill, banning operators
from hindering or delaying OTT services and from applying
surcharges. At the end of July 2011, KPN announced much
higher data tariffs in response to the net neutrality act [22],
demonstrating that regulatory intervention, if dispropotionate
or precipitate, can turn out to be counter-productive. In Octo-
ber 2011, the digital agenda European commissioner Kroes
attacked the unilateral decision of the Dutch Parliament,
recommending more careful and coordinated interventions
[23].
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In spite of the exponential growth of Internet trafﬁc,
the unequal distribution of revenues along the Internet VC,
together with the imbalance between costs and revenues
caused by the business models currently adopted by network
operators, risk to impair evolution towards broadband next
generation networks.
The Internet supply chain is like a pipeline the capacity
of which is limited by the thinnest pipe, so that a fair
distribution of revenues along the VC is essential to trigger
and sustain network development. This has been shown in
Sections II and III with simple mathematical arguments that
demonstrate that fairness is the key for keeping pace with
the exponential growth of Internet trafﬁc.
The Internet VC has been analysed in Section IV in
order to point out the limitations of current access-based
models and to propose a paradigm shift towards a new
service-based approach. Service orientation, complemented
by suitable business models, allows all stages of the VC to
take advantage of the attractiveness and diversity of online
services and to beneﬁt from the revenues they can generate
in terms of sponsorships and advertisement.
76
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Furthermore, it has been shown in Section V that neutral
access networks provide a suitable support to the adoption
of a service-based model, allowing end-users to connect for
free to the access infrastructure and then focus only on
the services they need, including Internet bandwidth. The
systematic application of not exclusive agreements among
the actors involved (service providers, content providers, and
network operators) provides the basis for a fair redistribution
of revenues along the VC, driven by market law rather than
by policy enforcement.
Finally, market signs have been analysed in Section VI
to give evidence of the urgency of the paradigm shift
envisioned in this paper.
In conclusions, service orientation has been proposed
in this paper as the key for granting to the Internet the
degrees of freedom required to autonomously ﬁnd the best
balance among the segments in the VC, thus overcoming the
bottlenecks and creating the preconditions for development.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research leading to these results has received fund-
ing from the EU IST Seventh Framework Programme
([FP7/2007-2013]) under grant agreement n. 25741, project
ULOOP (User-centric Wireless Local Loop).
REFERENCES
[1] E. Pigliapoco and A. Bogliolo, “A Service-Based Model for
the Internet Value Chain,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Access Networks (ACCESS-11), 2011, pp. 13–
18.
[2] H. W. Friederiszick, J. Kaluzny, S. Kohnz, M. Grajek, and
L.-H. Roller, “Assessment of a Sustainable Internet Model
for the Near Future,” ESMT White Paper, 2011.
[3] M. Cave and P. Crocioni, “Net Neutrality in Europe,” com-
munications & Convergence Review, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 57–70,
2011.
[4] J. S. Marcus, P. Nooren, J. Cave, and K. R. Carter, “Network
Neutrality: Challenges and responses in the EU and in the
U.S.” European Parliament - Policy Department A, 2011.
[5] Akamai, “Q2 2011 - The State of the Internet,” Akamai report,
2011.
[6] Cisco, “Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Trafﬁc
Forecast Update, 2010-2015,” Cisco White Paper, 2011.
[7] A. T. Kearney, “A Viable Future Model for the Internet,” A.T.
Kearney report, 2010.
[8] ——, “Internet Value Chain Economics,” The Economics of
the Internet, Vodafone Policy Paper Series, 2010.
[9] S. Verbrugge et al., “Methodology and input availability
parameters for calculating OpEx and CapEx costs for realistic
network scenarios,” OSA Journal of Optical Networking,
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 509–520, 2006.
[10] E. Altman, P. Bernhard, S. Caron, G. Kesidis, J. Rojas-Mora,
and S. Wong, “A model of network neutrality with usage-
based prices,” Telecommunication Systems, pp. 1–9, 2011.
[11] F. Maier-Rigaud, “Network Neutrality: A competition angle,”
Competition Policy International, vol.2, pp. 1–10, 2011.
[12] M. Porter, Competitive Advantage: creating and sustaining
superior Performance.
Free Press, 1985.
[13] Multimedia Research Group Inc., IPTV Global Forecast 2010
to 2014 - Semiannual IPTV Global Forecast Report.
MRG,
Inc., June 2010.
[14] International
Telecommunication
Union,
ICT
regulation
toolkit.
http://www.ictregulationtoolkit.org/, last visited in
January 2012.
[15] A. Bogliolo, “Introducing Neutral Access Networks,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 5th IEEE Conference on Next Generation
Internet Networks, 2009, pp. 243–248.
[16] J. Barcel´o, A. Sfairopoulou, and B. Bellalta, “Wireless open
metropolitan area networks,” SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput.
Commun. Rev., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 34–44, 2008.
[17] E. Pigliapoco and A. Bogliolo, “Enhancing broadband pene-
tration in a competitive market,” in Proc. of the International
Conference on Evolving Internet.
IEEE Computer Society,
2010, pp. 159–163.
[18] C. Loebbecke, A. Soehnel, S. Weniger, and T. Weiss, “In-
novating for the mobile end-user market: Amazon’s kindle 2
strategy as emerging business model,” in Proc. of the Inter-
national Conference on Mobile Business.
IEEE Computer
Society, 2010, pp. 51–57.
[19] A. Mason, System and Methods for Discount Retailing.
US
Patent 2010/0287103 A1 (assigned to Groupon Inc.), 2010.
[20] EC Information Society and Media Directorate-General, “Re-
port on the Public Consultation on the open Internet and net
neutrality in Europe,” European Commission, 2010.
[21] Ofcom, “Ofcom’s approach to net neutrality,” Statement pub-
lished on November 24, 2011.
[22] Associated Press, “Dutch telecom hikes rates after net neu-
trality law,” AP report, July 19, 2011.
[23] N. Kroes, “Investing in digital networks: a bridge to Eu-
rope’s future,” ETNO Financial Times 2011 CEO SUMMIT -
SPEECH/11/623, October 3, 2011.
77
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

