A Comparative Study of 4G and 5G Network Simulators 
 
Christos Bouras 
Computer Technology Institute and Press "Diophantus", 
Patras, Greece 
Computer Engineering and Informatics Dept., University of 
Patras, Greece 
email: bouras@cti.gr 
Apostolos Gkamas 
University Ecclesiastical Academy of Vella,  
Ioannina, Greece 
e-mail: gkamas@aeavellas.gr 
Georgios Diles 
Computer Engineering and Informatics Dept., University of 
Patras, Greece  
email: diles@ceid.upatras.gr  
 
Andreas Zacharopoulos 
Computer Engineering and Informatics Dept., University of 
Patras, Greece  
email: st1003768@ceid.upatras.gr 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Network simulation is a technique of utmost 
importance to evaluate new network performance, verify new 
algorithms and analyze various network topologies. It is used 
to find results to be expected from a hardware setup without 
the need for actual implementation. For this reason, there is a 
plethora of network simulation software applied to different 
scenarios to evaluate theories and hypotheses. A cellular 
network is an example of an extremely complex system in 
which different components impact the overall performance in 
different ways. The aim of this paper is to study the most 
common simulators regarding the deployment of 4G and 5G 
networks. In addition, this paper provides a detailed 
comparison of 4G and 5G simulators in order to support the 
academic community choose the most appropriate simulator 
for each project.  
Keywords- Simulator; Comparison; 4G Networks; 5G 
Networks; Cellular Network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The exponential increase in mobile data traffic has driven 
current wireless networks towards their limits and as a result, 
researchers should be highly motivated to create powerful 
next-generation mobile networks, based on the current 
networks trends and needs of that era. It is indicative that due 
to popularization of smart devices and development of 
Internet services, the mobile data traffic flow is expected to 
increase a thousand percent by the end of this decade. 4G is 
the fourth generation of mobile phone technology. It follows 
on from the existing 3G (third generation) and 2G (second 
generation) mobile technology. 5G will elevate the mobile 
network to not only interconnect people, but also 
interconnect and control machines, objects, and devices. The 
current research on 5G networks is actively moving with a 
high pace, meaning vendors and operators are already 
involved in 5G testing and trials, which is soon expected to 
lead to a finalized standard.  
Network 
technology 
is 
advancing 
rapidly 
and, 
accompanied by expansion of network scale, have made it 
extremely hard to analyze network. It goes without saying 
that testing algorithms and protocols is extremely important 
since their launching in large scale is prohibitive because of 
uncertainty of its outcome. Network schemes can be tested 
either by analytical modelling or with the help of simulation 
tools. Although analytical modelling can indeed have very 
realistic results, it does not come without drawbacks, most 
notably the lack of precision regarding energy and memory 
needs and can be proven to be very expensive.  
On the other hand, network simulation is used to imitate 
over time the operation of a real-world system enabling the 
observation of services and applications the network could 
support. It allows the researchers to model a network’s 
behavior given the proposed changes, either with the use of 
mathematical formulas to calculate the interaction between 
the various entities of the network, or actually recording and 
recapping information that emerge from it. It provides the 
capability to manipulate most of the environment attributes 
to 
evaluate 
the 
system 
behavior 
under 
different 
circumstances 
and 
allows 
the 
comparison 
between 
alternatives to optimize network performance.  
These developments render network simulators an urgent 
need for scientific researchers around the globe. It comes 
with relatively low cost and small to no risk, enabling 
researchers to decide and predict on network behavior with 
greater convenience, compared to practical networks. 
Therefore, there have been attempts to create diverse 
software for network simulation to test new algorithms and 
simulate network behavior. But choosing the most suitable 
simulator for each occasion is not always an easy decision.  
In this paper, we analyze both commercial and open 
source state-of-the-art simulators presenting performance 
comparison regarding 4G and 5G networks in an attempt to 
provide reference to the scientific community when there is a 
need to choose the right software for simulation. Currently, 
the majority of the state-of-the-art simulation tools follow 
11
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

discrete event simulation methodology. This is the reason 
why we will only focus on this technique [1]. In [2] 
researchers discussed current simulators with different 
characteristics in different aspects. Here we study some of 
the most popular simulation tools that follow discrete event 
simulation like NS-3, OMNeT++, Riverbed and NetSim. 
The 
motivation 
behind 
this 
paper 
is 
to 
provide 
comprehensive review of various simulators, available for 
scientists allowing advanced research on 4G and 5G 
networks.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents related work and Section III provides and 
introduction to 4G and 5G networks. Section IV manifests 
importance and difficulties of simulation and Section V 
describes the special requirements of cellular network 
simulation. In Section VI the simulation tools are presented 
while the cumulative comparison follows in Section VII 
where the simulators’ features and advantages are discussed. 
Finally, in Section VII we draw up our conclusions and we 
present our future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Picking the right simulation tool is a subject that has been 
troubling scientists for many years. Actually, it is not the first 
attempt to compare simulation software, as there have been a 
couple published in recent years. Challenges of system-level 
simulation and performance evaluation and the importance 
of creating a stable and reliable tool for 4G and 5G in 
consideration of the new needs and technologies that emerge 
are discussed in [3]. One example is the work presented in 
[4] and [5], where the comparison of popular network 
simulators is shown.  
A performance analysis, which includes open source 
platforms simulating a MANET routing protocol is presented 
in [6]. There are researches testing different routing 
protocols [7] in different simulators with different network 
parameters to evaluate the performance of network 
protocols. A more detailed comparison, in which in addition 
to open simulators, commercial platforms are also included, 
is presented in [8].  
The issue of 4G and 5G network simulators has engaged 
researchers all over the world. Authors in [9] present the 
analysis of traffic measurements collected from commercial 
cellular networks in China, and demonstrate that the spatial 
distribution of the traffic density (the traffic load per unit 
area) can be approximated by the log-normal or Weibull 
distribution depending on time and space. After that, the 
authors propose a spatial traffic model, which generates 
large-scale spatial traffic variations by a sum of sinusoids 
that captures the characteristics of log-normally distributed 
and spatially correlated cellular traffic. The proposed model 
can be directly used to generate realistic spatial traffic 
patterns 
for 
cellular 
network 
simulations, 
such 
as 
performance evaluations of network planning and load 
balancing. 
Paper [10] studies the performance trade-offs between 
conventional cellular and multi-hop ad-hoc wireless 
networks. The authors compare through simulations the 
performance of the two network models in terms of raw 
network capacity, end-to-end throughput, end-to-end delay, 
power consumption, per-node fairness (for throughput, 
delay, and power), and impact of mobility on the network 
performance. The simulation results show that while adhoc 
networks perform better in terms of throughput, delay, and 
power, they suffer from unfairness and poor network 
performance in the event of mobility. In addition, the authors 
present a simple hybrid wireless network model that has the 
combined advantages of cellular and ad-hoc wireless 
networks but does not suffer from the disadvantages of 
either. 
Authors in [11] describe SimuLTE, a framework within 
the OMNeT++ ecosystem for simulating Long Term 
Evolution (LTE) networks. The main focus of SimuLTE lies 
on developing and testing of communication protocols and 
resource-allocation algorithms, with an emphasis on the 
impact at the system level. The paper presents two tutorials 
on the modeling and performance evaluation of two LTE-
related research problems are presented, namely, one 
concerning interference coordination and one on direct-
communication 
management. 
Each 
tutorial 
provides 
guidelines for network definition, for configuring the 
scenario, and their parameters. The tutorials also describe 
how to modify the code of the available functions. 
Exemplary result analysis is presented along with each 
tutorial, to demonstrate the evaluation capabilities of the 
framework. 
Several simulation frameworks and tools exist to deal 
with these constraints of scalability and time. However, all of 
them require profound background knowledge for building 
such a custom scenario. This crucial and necessary procedure 
is often time consuming and error-prone. Paper [12] presents 
the RACE framework which aims to solves these problems 
for the simulation of cellular LTE networks. RACE is 
intuitive and based upon real life cellular network 
infrastructure data as well as a realistic vehicular traffic 
simulation. 
Paper [13] presents the Vienna 5G system level 
simulator, which allows to perform numerical performance 
evaluation of large-scale multi-tier networks, with numerous 
types of network nodes. The simulator is based on MATLAB 
and is implemented in a modular fashion, to conveniently 
investigate arbitrary network and parameter constellations, 
which can be enhanced effortlessly. 
One of the main strengths of Network Simulator 3 (NS-
3) is the availability of modules to simulate cellular 
networks, including LTE and mmWave/NR deployments. 
These implementations model the protocol stack with a high 
level of detail, and, thanks to the integration with the whole 
NS-3 code base, make it possible to study end-to-end 
scenarios and identify complex interactions between the 
different components of a network. Authors in [14] discuss 
the current limitations of this platform and suggest directions 
for future work that could improve the accuracy of the 
simulations. 
Carrier aggregation (CA) technology was introduced in 
3GPP specification in Release 10, in 2011, as part of Long-
Term Evolution Advanced (LTE-A) standardization. Authors 
in [15] describe the CA extension of the LTE module of NS-
12
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3 network simulator. This paper provides description of 
example scenarios and the validation of the carrier 
aggregation feature providing a performance comparison of 
the LTE system with and without CA capability. 
LTE/Wi-Fi Link Aggregation (LWA) and LTE WLAN 
Radio Level Integration with IPSec Tunnel (LWIP) are two 
approaches put forward by the 3rd Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) to enable flexible, general, and scalable LTE-
WLAN interworking in the context of 5G. These techniques 
enable operator-controlled access of licensed and unlicensed 
spectrum and allow transparent access of operator's evolved 
core. Paper [16] describes the design details of LWA and 
LWIP protocols and presents the first NS-3 LWA and LWIP 
implementations in NS-3.  
III. 
4G NETWORKS AND 5G NETWORKS 
4G is the fourth generation of mobile phone technology. 
It follows on from the existing 3G (third generation) and 2G 
(second generation) mobile technology. 2G technology 
launched in the 1990s and was capable of making digital 
phone calls and sending texts. Then 3G came along in 2003 
and made it possible to browse web pages, make video calls 
and download music and video on the move. 4G technology 
builds upon what 3G offers but does everything at a much 
faster speed. 
The benefits of 4G fall firmly into three categories. These 
are: 
• 
Improved download/upload speeds. 
• 
Reduced latency. 
• 
Crystal clear voice calls. 
Standard 4G (or 4G LTE) is around five to seven times 
faster than 3G, offering theoretical speeds of up to around 
150Mbps. That equates to maximum potential speeds of 
around 80Mbps in the real world. With standard 4G someone 
can download a 2GB HD film in 3 minutes 20 seconds on a 
standard 4G mobile network, while it would take over 25 
minutes on a standard 3G network. 
Meanwhile, researchers and vendors expressed a growing 
interest in 4G wireless networks that support global roaming 
across multiple wireless and mobile networks—for example, 
from a cellular network to a satellite-based network to a 
high-bandwidth wireless LAN. With this feature, users have 
access to different services, increased coverage, the 
convenience of a single device, one bill with reduced total 
access cost, and more reliable wireless access even with the 
failure or loss of one or more networks. 4G networks also 
feature IP interoperability for seamless mobile Internet 
access and bit rates of 50 Mbps or more. 
5G will elevate the mobile network to not only 
interconnect people, but also interconnect and control 
machines, objects, and devices. It will deliver new levels of 
performance and efficiency that will empower new user 
experiences and connect new industries. 5G will deliver 
multi-Gbps peak rates, ultra-low latency, massive capacity, 
and more uniform user experience. 
5G is a new kind of network: a platform for innovations 
that will not only enhances today’s mobile broadband 
services but will also expand mobile networks to support a 
vast diversity of devices and services and connect new 
industries with improved performance, efficiency, and cost. 
5G will redefine a broad range of industries with connected 
services from retail to education, transportation to 
entertainment, and everything in between. We see 5G as 
technology as transformative as the automobile and 
electricity. 
In general, 5G use cases can be broadly categorized into 
three main types of connected services: 
• 
Enhanced Mobile Broadband: 5G will usher in new 
immersive experiences, such as VR and AR, with 
faster, more uniform data rates, lower latency, and 
cost-per-bit. 
• 
Mission-Critical communications: 5G will enable 
new services that can transform industries with ultra-
reliable/available, low latency links—such as remote 
control of critical infrastructure, vehicles, and 
medical procedures. 
• 
Massive Internet of Things: 5G will seamlessly 
connect a massive number of embedded sensors in 
virtually everything through the ability to scale down 
in data rates, power and mobility to provide 
extremely lean/low-cost solutions. 
• 
A defining capability of 5G is also the design for 
forward compatibility—the ability to flexibly 
support future services that are unknown today. 
IV. 
ΝETWORK SIMULATION 
Creating the desirable network in a real time scenario is 
challenging as researchers’ needs and requirements may vary 
depending on the situation. For that reason, there is a great 
number of software that can be used in every case. In any 
case, one feature is certain and non-negotiable, all of the 
simulation software has to enable a user to represent a 
network topology, specify the nodes on the network, and of 
course the links and the traffic between them. Of course, 
there may be simulators of much higher complexity that 
permit specification of every detail regarding the protocols 
they wish to use for handling traffic in a network laying quite 
solid foundations for future real time implementation. 
Simulators may come with text-based applications that can 
provide a not very intuitive interface, which could 
nevertheless allow evolved tools for customizing or with 
graphical applications capable of granting users an easy and 
fast way to visualization of the workings of the environment 
they wish to examine.  
The simulation of wireless networks is even more 
complicated due to the nature of wireless networks. The 
basic concept of network simulation can be found in Fig. 1.  
Differentiating simulators is most commonly based in 
terms of speed, accuracy, cost and convenience of use. The 
majority of the simulators provide a multi-protocol and 
modularity framework. There are some network simulators 
in companies that are developed exclusively for business, 
while others are developed by research institutes and/or 
universities to be used for researching purposes. In general, 
commercial software is not open, more expensive but can 
13
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

provide more protocol and model support while the other 
simulators are free but may not be as applicable.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Network simulation 
 
The criteria based on which the different types of 
simulators will be judged regard system performance, ease of 
learning and ease of use, the presence of Graphical Interface 
support, availability of the tool etc. There is general 
information as well as properties of the software. They can 
be found gathered in Table I in Section VII. 
V. 
CELLULAR NETWORK SIMULATION 
A cellular network is an example of an extremely 
complex system in which different components impact the 
overall performance in different ways. For example, user 
mobility, data traffic, and the propagation model can affect 
the network behavior.  
According to [12] cellular network simulator provides 
multiple simulation modules, each focusing on the modeling 
of a different modules, which can be interfaced together to 
obtain a thorough description of the overall system. The 
simulation of cellular networks involves both the modules 
implementing the cellular technology, the core network, and 
other modules, which take into account and influence the 
system behavior. More specifically these modules include 
the following: 
• 
Channel Model: General speaking channel model 
describes the propagation of the signal through the 
surrounding environment, taking into account 
different parameters like carrier frequency, the 
presence of blocking objects, etc. Given that the 
performance of cellular networks strongly depends 
on the nature of the wireless channel, proper 
modeling of its behavior is of primary importance to 
obtain accurate simulation results. 
• 
Application Model: The application model is utilized 
to simulate the client traffic. The use of unrealistic 
traffic models may prompt assessing the simulation 
under conditions that are not representative of those 
encountered in real-world scenarios, something that 
may lead to wrong results.  
• 
Mobility Model: The mobility model characterizes 
the movements of mobile users in the environment. 
The usage of proper mobility models is an important 
aspect to consider in order to obtain accurate results.  
VI. 
SIMULATORS AND THEIR FEATURES 
The following section presents the main simulators 
studied, their main properties, the major strengths and most 
important weaknesses. As mentioned above, the software in 
question follow discrete-event simulation. This methodology 
means that the operation of the system is modeled as a 
discrete sequence of events in time and its behavior can be 
simulated by modeling the events in the system where user 
has to set the scenarios in the right order. Also, they are 
chosen due to their popularity and widespread use. 
A. NS-3 
The NS-3 is a discrete-event network simulator 
developed mainly to be used for research and educational 
purposes. Based on the development on NS-2, the NS-3 
project was launched in 2006 and is licensed under the GNU 
GPLv2 license and is applicable for development and 
research for free. It should be noted that although NS-3 was 
based on NS-2, it is to not be mistaken as an updated version 
of it, rather than as an attempt to replace it, meaning that NS-
3 does not provide backward compatibility with NS-2. It 
defines a model of working procedure of packet data 
networks and provides an engine for simulation. Without 
deviating from its predecessor and base, NS-3 uses two key 
languages in C++ and Python. While the simulator is 
developed exclusively in C++ with optional python bindings, 
this allows the users the freedom to choose between C++ and 
Python for the scripts of simulation they write. It should be 
noted that in any case, both languages work very effectively 
on NS-3. The specified software also provides Graphical 
Interface for the results’ visual presentation, with the use of 
animators. Finally, NS-3 comes with a powerful library 
enabling the users to do have the desired outcome, allowing 
them to edit NS-3 itself.  
The main features of Network Simulator 3, which also 
differentiate it from NS-2 include:  
1. 
Different software core: NS-3 has its core written 
entirely in C++ and with Python scripting interface 
[17].  
2. 
Virtualization support: Implements the use of 
lightweight Virtual Machines.  
3. 
Software integration: allow the inclusion of more 
open-source networking software, which means that 
the simulation models do not have to be rewritten.  
4. 
Attention to realism: real computers are emulated in 
more detail by protocol entities.  
Due to its features, NS-3 displays several strengths, such 
as:  
• 
High modularity.  
• 
A lot more flexibility in comparison to most 
simulation software.  
14
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Easier and more credible model validation via ported 
code support.  
• 
Enable simulation for a plethora of protocols.  
• 
Wide range of use for expanding or enhancing 
existing networks.  
• 
Allows Software integration.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Architecture of NS-3 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  An example of NetAnim 
 
However, it also has some weaknesses:  
• 
NS-3 still suffers from lack of credibility.  
• 
NS-3 attempts to replicate the successful approach of 
NS-2 but the latter was used by many organizations 
that 
contributed 
by 
adding 
to 
models 
and 
components [8].  
• 
There is an imperative need of active maintainers 
who will respond to the user questions, write 
adequate documentation, fix reported bugs, and 
ensure the correct service of the system.  
• 
The aforementioned maintainers are also needed in 
order to have financial advantage of NS-3 like other 
commercially released simulators.  
The basic structure of NS-3 can be found in Fig. 2. In 
Fig. 3, an example of NetAnim is shown, a software 
executable that allows display of topology and animation of 
packet flow [17].  
NS-3 provides support for 4G networks through the LTE 
module, which consist of two main components: 
• 
The LTE Model. This model includes the LTE 
Radio Protocol stack. 
• 
The EPC Model. This model includes core network 
interfaces, protocols and entities.  
NS-3 supports 5G networks simulations through 
"mmWave Cellular Network Simulator module" [18]. This 
module includes a number of detailed statistical channel 
models as well as the ability to incorporate real 
measurements or raytracing data. 
B. OMNeT++ 
Publicly available since 1997, OMNeT++ [19] is an 
extensible, modular, discrete event simulation software [20]. 
Although it can successfully model complex IT systems, 
multiprocessors, distributed hardware architectures, it is 
more often used for computer networks simulation, both 
wireless and wired. It is written thoroughly in C++. Using 
the software under the Academic Public License makes it 
free for non-benefit or academic use. Its free disposal 
combined with the tool’s extensibility and the amount of 
available online documentations have made it very popular 
in the academic community. The motivation behind the 
development of OMNeT++ is to bridge the gap between 
research-oriented, free simulators like NS-3 and commercial 
alternatives like Riverbed that are much more high-priced. It 
is a component-based architecture and components (called 
modules) are programmed entirely in C++. They are then 
assembled into larger components and models with the use 
of NED, a language of higher level. Its modular architecture 
allows the simulation kernel to be easily embedded into 
almost every application.  
The software has great GUI support and the simulation 
environment also offers a compiler for the NED topology 
description language (NEDC), graphical network editor for 
NED files (GNED), GUI for simulation execution (Tkenv), 
command-line user interface for simulation execution 
(Cmdenv) [19] [21].  
The most important feature of the simulator is that the 
modules are assembled by reusable components to be 
combined in different ways. Another important feature is that 
OMNet++ is basically a framework approach, providing the 
groundwork to develop various simulations models to meet 
different application areas requirements, which subsequently 
follow their release cycles. Currently, it is on version 5.4.1.  
The simulator’s strengths can be summarized as follows:  
• 
Makes it easier to trace and debug.  
• 
Can be used to model most hardware with accuracy.  
• 
It offers wide GUI support via a complete, robust 
environment.  
• 
Provides Reusable modules that can be combined in 
different ways.  
While its weaknesses include:  
15
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
User still have to do a pretty important amount of 
background work due to the lack of variety of 
protocols offered and implemented.  
• 
The mobility extension can be found somewhat 
incomplete.  
• 
It offers poor analysis and management of typical 
performance.  
The structure of OMNeT++ simulation system can be 
found in Fig. 4 and an example of simulation in Fig. 5.  
 
 
Figure 4.   Structure of OMNeT++ simulator 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of simulation on OMNeT++ 
 
OMNet++ provides support for 4G network simulation 
through SimuLTE module [22]. SimuLTE is an innovative 
simulation tool enabling complex system level performance-
evaluation of LTE and LTE Advanced networks (3GPP 
Release 8 and beyond) for the OMNeT++ framework. 
SimuLTE is written in C++ and is fully customizable with a 
simple pluggable interface. One can also develop new 
modules implementing new algorithms and protocols. 
SimuLTE is an open source project building on top of 
OMNeT++ and INET Framework [23]. 
C. Riverbed Modeler 
OPNET 
(Optimized 
Network 
Engineering 
Tools) 
Modeler is the development environment of OPNET 
simulator and is targeted for both research purposes and 
development. It was one of the most popular commercial 
simulation software by the end of 2008 and being in the 
market for such a long period, it managed to occupy a large 
share of it. Nowadays it is part of Riverbed Modeler. Its 
flexibility allows it to be highly useful in studying 
communication applications, protocols and networks. It 
offers the users vast and impressive visual interface, due to 
its commercial nature. Using the graphical editor interface, 
the users are able to build whole network topology and 
entities from the application layer all the way to the physical 
layer and the mapping from the graphical design to the 
implementation of the real systems is created using Object-
Oriented programming. All topologies’ configuration and 
simulation results can be presented very intuitively and 
visually. The users also have the freedom to adjust the 
parameters and quickly repeat experiments using the 
graphical interface, performing tests for various scenarios 
[21]. Riverbed is based on a mechanism called discrete event 
system.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Simulation Workflow of Riverbed Modeler 
 
According to the authors of [2] OPNET can be used to 
carry through with three functions:  
1. 
modeling: it provides a vary intuitive and visually 
rich GUI, allowing users to develop a great variety 
of models.  
2. 
simulating: It uses three different technologies.  
3. 
analysis: the results originating from the simulation 
process can be presented and analyzed using the 
simulators tools, such as user-friendly charts, 
animations or statistics.  
Important features of the Riverbed system are that the 
organization of the networks is accomplished via hierarchical 
structure plus the fact that graphical interface and 
programming tools are available to users to define protocols 
or packet format.  
Some strengths of the system include:  
• 
Fast discrete event analytical simulation engine [8].  
• 
Reduces simulation runtime by utilizing parallel and 
distributed capabilities [24].  
• 
Allows quick correlation of graphical result with 
network behavior and easy interpretation.  
16
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

While some weaknesses could be:  
• 
It only supports a small number of nodes within a 
single device.  
• 
Simulation is inadequate in case there are long 
periods where nothing happens.  
• 
Provided GUI might be powerful but its use it rather 
complicated.  
• 
Sampling resolution sets the limit for the result 
accuracy.  
The simulation workflow of Riverbed modeler can be 
found in Fig. 6 and the Graphical Interface in Fig. 7.  
 
 
Figure 7.  GUI of Riverbed Modeler 
 
OPNET provides native support of LTE network 
simulation. Authors of [25] introduce modelling, simulation 
and Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) analysis methods 
based on OPNET for IMT-2020(5G) systems. The models 
presented on this paper can be used for network planning, 
design and performance analysis in the following research. 
This paper shows the new method of EMC analysis and new 
application of network simulation technology. 
D. NetSim 
NetSim is a stochastic discrete event simulator targeted 
for experimentation and research on networks. It is a leading 
network simulation software for protocol modelling and 
simulation, allowing us to analyze computer networks with 
unmatched depth, power and flexibility [26]. It is developed 
in 1997 by Tetcos. Its native development environment acts 
as the interface between User’s code and NetSim’s protocol 
libraries and simulation kernel [27]. NetSim is available as 
Pro, Standard or Academic versions and is built on a 
common design framework of high-level architecture and 
code. Every version has of course different features, supports 
different options and has a different price. NetSim is more 
versatile than most of the other software and robust with an 
excellent and easy to use graphical interface. It should be 
noted that it is capable to provide performance metrics at 
abstraction levels from network to node and creates a packet 
trace with all of the necessary details. Its main limitation is 
that it is follows a single process discrete event simulation 
methodology. This means that it uses a single event queue 
for the needs of the simulation and at any given time, it 
contains one entry for each station on the network. Currently 
it is on Version 10.  
The major benefits are (a) programmability, (b) 
architectural accuracy, and (c) flexibility.  
NetSim’s strengths include:  
• 
It offers a powerful, user friendly GUI that makes its 
use rather simple.  
• 
Allows data packet flow visualization using its built-
in animator.  
• 
Users can extract performance analysis metrics in 
various levels.  
• 
Its analysis framework offers various graphical 
options and enables intra and inter-protocol 
performance comparison.  
• 
Some weaknesses could be identified:  
• 
All of the versions are commercial, meaning there is 
no free way of usage.  
• 
It is a single process discrete event simulator.  
The graphical interface of Netsim can be found in Fig. 8. 
NetSim provides support for 4G network simulation 
through LTE / LTE – Advanced module [28]. NetSim Long-
Term Evolution (LTE) Model Library provides high fidelity 
simulation of 4G / 4.5G cellular networks based on the 3GPP 
TS 36.xxx standards. It includes models of nodes called 
MME (Mobility Management Entity), eNodeB (Base 
Station), Relay and UE (Mobile Station) and each has 
detailed MAC and PHY models.  
 
 
Figure 8.   GUI of Netsim 
 
During 2019, NetSim starts to provide support of 5G 
Network (beta software) through 5G NR mmWave module 
[29]. This module is in beta stage and provides the following 
features: 
• 
Edge-to-edge and Edge-to-core simulation covering. 
• 
GUI based with Drag and Drop, Packet Animator 
and Results Dashboard. 
• 
5G library interfaces with NetSim's proprietary 
TCP/IP stack providing simulation capability across 
all layers of the network stack. 
• 
Discrete Event Simulation (DES) with event level 
debugging to inspect and control the simulation. 
• 
Application Models - FTP, HTTP, Voice, Video, 
Email, DB, Custom. 
• 
Packet level simulation with detailed packet trace.  
17
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VII. CUMULATIVE COMPARISON 
The simulation comparison is shown in Table I, where 
the criteria are presented and whether they are fulfilled. The 
comparison was an overall comparison and it is based on 
both general information as well as properties of the 
software. 
The general information that can be found on the upper 
section of the table, e.g., supported language & OS, license 
type, GUI support and technical properties of the software 
are compiled under the middle rule, e.g., simulation event 
type, scalability and network visualization tool.  
All the simulators studied in this paper support tools that 
help the visualization of the network. They also allow 
scenarios redesign and modification through parameters 
change and can create trace files. They offer complete 
documentation and are user friendly, easy to use with NS-3 
proving to be the most challenging to learn. The modularity 
of OMNeT++ is a big advantage, although it leaves the user 
with quite a big amount of work to done because of the lack 
of protocols offered.  
When it comes to communication with other simulators, 
Riverbed Modeler supports this feature while Omnet++, NS-
3 and NetSim do not. Because of its proprietary nature, it is 
only natural that Riverbed can afford to simulate networks of 
much larger scale.  
On the other hand, NS-3 is open source, OMNeT++ may 
not entirely be free but offers academic version for 
noncommercial use and NetSim offers a cheaper, alternative 
version for students. This means that for these versions, the 
simulation scale ability is more limited. Of course, the 
commercial versions of the latter two software, can support 
large scale simulations. NS-3 and OMNeT++ can be 
deployed in all widely used Operating Systems, contrary to 
Riverbed and NetSim.  
As far as GUI support is compared, the graphical 
environment offered by all of them are found more than 
adequate. Of course, OMNeT++ and NetSim offer vast and 
powerful GUI support with many more features and abilities 
like analysis framework and graphical options. On the other 
hand, Riverbed does provide an excellent GUI but it can be 
judged quite complicated and not so user-friendly.  
It should be noted that all the simulators are supported by 
a great community but, NS-3 being open source means that 
there are less maintainers to respond to questions or fix 
reported bugs and abnormalities. However, it is extremely 
widespread and used by many students, scientists and 
academics that the online community can help and offer 
great support. More specifically, according to [30] a Google 
Scholar search of the ‘NS-3 simulator’ results since 2017 
(excluding patents and citations) yields over 2000 links (with 
some false positives). In addition, the IEEE digital library 
lists 145 NS-3 publications for 2017, and the ACM digital 
library lists 2579 publications matching the search term ‘NS-
3’ in 2017. In addition, there are organized Workshops on 
NS-3 and the related proceedings are published in the ACM 
digital library [31]. The above facts ensure the important 
acceptance of NS-3 simulator as network research tool. In 
addition to NS-3, also OMNeT++ has an active community, 
which have organized 5 OMNeT++ Community Summits 
until 2018 [32]. As result, if we compare the above 
simulators in terms of research community support seems 
that NS-3 and OMNeT++ have the most active research 
community, which organize relative workshops about the 
evolution of the simulation software. This seems logical 
based on the fact that both NS-3 and OMNet++ can be 
obtained at no cost.  
If we discuss about 4G networks simulations native 
support all the simulators in investigation provides support 
for 4G – LTE network simulation. 
If we discuss about 5G networks simulations native 
support, only NS-3 and NetSim simulators supports 5G 
networks simulations and OMNET++, Riverbed, do not 
provide native support for 5G networks simulations.  
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF SIMULATORS. 
 
NS-3 
OMNeT
++  
Riverbed  
NetSim 
License Type 
Open 
Source 
Open 
Source 
(study & 
research) 
Commercial 
Proprietary 
Language 
Supported 
C++ 
& 
Python  
C++ 
C & C++ 
C++ & Java 
Supported OS 
Linux, 
Mac OS 
Windows 
Linux, 
Mac OS 
Windows 
Linux, 
Windows 
Windows 
GUI Support 
Good 
Good 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Document 
Available 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Ease of Use 
Hard  
Easy 
Easy 
Easy 
Simulation 
Event Type 
Discrete 
event  
Discrete 
event 
Discrete 
event 
Stochastic 
Discrete 
event 
Available 
Module 
Wired, 
Wireless 
Adhoc,W
SN 
Wired, 
Wireless 
Adhoc,W
SN 
Wired, 
Wireless 
Adhoc,WSN 
Wired, 
Wireless, 
SN 
Scalability 
Limited  
Enough 
Large 
Enough 
Availability of 
analysis tool 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Communication 
with other 
modules 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
Network 
visualization tool 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Possibility to 
design and 
modify scenarios 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4G native 
support 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
5G native 
support 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
 
NS-3 supports 5G networks simulations through 
"mmWave Cellular Network Simulator module" [33]. This 
module includes a number of detailed statistical channel 
models as well as the ability to incorporate real 
measurements or raytracing data. The physical and medium 
access control layers are modular and highly customizable. 
The module is interfaced with the core network of the NS-3 
Long Term Evolution (LTE) module for full-stack 
18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

simulations of end-to-end connectivity, and advanced 
architectural features, such as dual-connectivity, are also 
available.  
During 2019, NetSim starts to provide support of 5G 
network (beta software) through 5G NR mmWave module 
[29]. This module is in beta stage and provides the following 
features: 
• 
Edge-to-edge and Edge-to-core simulation covering.  
• 
GUI based with Drag and Drop, Packet Animator 
and Results Dashboard. 
• 
5G library interfaces with NetSim's proprietary 
TCP/IP stack providing simulation capability across 
all layers of the network stack. 
• 
Discrete Event Simulation (DES) with event level 
debugging to inspect and control the simulation. 
• 
Application Models - FTP, HTTP, Voice, Video, 
Email, DB, Custom. 
• 
Packet level simulation with detailed packet trace.  
Especially for 5G networks simulations there are 
specialized simulators like NYUSIM [33]. NYUSIM is a 
novel channel simulation software, which can be used to 
generate realistic temporal and spatial channel responses to 
support realistic physical- and link-layer simulations and 
design for fifth-generation (5G) cellular communications. 
NYUSIM is built upon the statistical spatial channel model 
for 
broadband 
millimeter-wave 
(mmWave) 
wireless 
communication systems.  
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Network simulation is an effective, low cost and small 
risk method. However, it is necessary and this why it is 
extensively performed by scientists in all kinds of fields to 
validate the research carried out. Network simulation can 
prove to be an essential mechanism on the hands of 
researchers for the analysis on network behavior and 
evaluation on possible network design and will remain 
increasingly important following the networks’ growing 
complexity and scale. This paper contains a general 
overview of a number of tools used for standard network 
simulation, along with a comparison between them with 
respect to various parameters. The study confirms that 
picking a suitable, required and efficient simulator for the 
specific job of a research work can be quite demanding but 
bears the according results. Each simulator comes with its 
advantages and disadvantages and can be useful or even 
necessary in different cases and the choice of a fitting 
software should be done based on the study motive. 
If we discuss about 4G networks simulations native 
support all the simulators in investigation provides support 
for 4G – LTE network simulation. If we discuss about 5G 
networks simulations native support, only NS-3 and NetSim 
simulators 
supports 
5G 
networks 
simulations 
and 
OMNET++, Riverbed, do not provide native support for 5G 
networks simulations.  
Our future work includes the evaluation of the 
investigated simulators based on the simulation of the same 
cellular network scenarios. The above will allows us to 
compare the performance of investigated simulators with 
parameters like time to complete simulation, accuracy of the 
simulation results etc. 
In addition, our future work includes the comparison of 
the investigated simulators during the simulation of Low 
Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) like LoRA (Long 
Range) and NB-IoT (Narrow Band – Internet of Things). 
LPWAN are very important for the implementation of the 
Internet of Things (IoT) applications something very 
important because IoT is the extension of Internet 
connectivity into physical devices and everyday objects. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Bouras, G. Diles, A. Gkamas, and A. Zacharopoulos, "Comparison 
of 4G and 5G Network Simulators", Fifteenth International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC 
2019), 2019, pp. 13-18. 
[2] J. Pan and R. Jain, "A survey of network simulation tools: Current 
status and future developments", Washington University in St. Louis, 
Tech. Rep, 2008. 
[3] Y. Wang, J. Xu, and L. Jiang, "Challenges of system-level 
simulations and performance evaluation for 5G wireless networks", 
IEEE Access, vol. 2, 2014, pp. 1553–1561. 
[4] V. Mishra and S. Jangale, "Analysis and comparison of different 
network simulators", Special Issue for International Technological 
Conference- 2014. 
[5] X. Zhou and H. Tian, "Comparison on network simulation 
techniques", 17th International Conference on Parallel and 
Distributed Computing, Applications and Technologies (PDCAT), 
Dec. 2016, pp. 313–316. 
[6] A. R. Khan, S. M. Bilal, and M. Othman, "A performance comparison 
of open source network simulators for wireless networks", IEEE 
International Conference on Control System, Computing and 
Engineering, Nov. 2012, pp. 34–38. 
[7] C. E. Perkins, E. M. Royer, S. R. Das, and M. K. Marina, 
"Performance comparison of two on-demand routing protocols for ad 
hoc networks", IEEE Personal Communications, vol. 8, no. 1, Feb. 
2001, pp. 16–28. 
[8] M. Kabir, S. Islam, M. Hossain, and S. Hossain, "Detail comparison 
of network simulators", International Journal of Scientific and 
Engineering Research, vol. 5, no. 10, Oct. 2014, pp. 16–28. 
[9] D. Lee, et al., "Spatial modeling of the traffic density in cellular 
networks", IEEE Wireless Communications 21.1, 2014, pp. 80-88. 
[10] H. Hsieh,and S. Raghupathy, "Performance comparison of cellular 
and multi-hop wireless networks: A quantitative study", ACM 
Sigmetrics Performance Evaluation Review. Vol. 29. No. 1, 2001. 
[11] A. Virdis, N. Giovanni and S. Giovanni, "Cellular-Networks 
Simulation Using SimuLTE", Recent Advances in Network 
Simulation. Springer, Cham, 2019. 183-214. 
[12] F. Jomrich et al., "Demo: rapid cellular network simulation 
framework 
for 
automotive 
scenarios 
(RACE 
framework)", 
International Conference on Networked Systems (NetSys). IEEE, 
2017. 
[13] M. K. Müller et al., "Flexible multi-node simulation of cellular 
mobile communications: the Vienna 5G System Level Simulator", 
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 
2018.1. 
[14] T. Zugno et al., "Simulation of Next-generation Cellular Networks 
with NS-3: Open Challenges and New Directions", Workshop on 
Next-Generation Wireless with NS-3. ACM, 2019. 
[15] B. Bojovic et al., "Towards LTE-Advanced and LTE-A Pro Network 
Simulations: Implementing Carrier Aggregation in LTE Module of 
ns-3", Workshop on NS-3. ACM, 2017. 
[16] S. Afaqui et al., "Implementation of the 3GPP LTE-WLAN Inter-
working Protocols in ns-3", Workshop on NS-3. ACM, 2019. 
19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[17] https://www.nsnam.org/, 
"NS-3 
network 
simulator", 
[Online; 
accessed 27-July-2018]. 
[18] M. Mezzavilla, M. Zhang, M. Polese, R. Ford, S. Dutta, S. Rangan, 
and M. Zorzi, "End-to-end simulation of 5g mmwave networks", 
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, thirdquarter 
2018, pp. 2237–2263. 
[19] https://www.omnetpp.org/, "Omnet++ official site", [Online; accessed 
27-July-2018]. 
[20] A. Varga and R. Hornig, "An overview of the omnet++ simulation 
environment", 1st international conference on Simulation tools and 
techniques for communications, networks and systems & workshops, 
page 60. ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics 
and Telecommunications Engineering, 2008. 
[21] G. Borboruah and G. Nandi, "A study on large scale network 
simulators", International Journal of Computer Science and 
Information Technologies, vol. 5, no. 6, 2014, pp. 7318–7322. 
[22] https://simulte.com/, "LTE User Plane Simulation Model for INET & 
OMNeT++", [Online: accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[23] https://inet.omnetpp.org/, 
"INET 
Framework 
An 
open-source 
OMNeT++ model suite for wired, wireless and mobile networks", 
[Online: accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[24] https://www.riverbed.com/gb/products/steelcentral/steelcentral-
riverbed-modeler.html, "Riverbed modeler" [Online; accessed 9-May-
2020]. 
[25] J. Chenet et al., "Modeling and simulation of IMT-2020 (5G) systems 
and satellite communication systems based on OPNET network 
simulation technology", 3rd IEEE International Conference on 
Computer and Communications (ICCC). IEEE, 2017. 
[26] https://www.tetcos.com/, 
"Netsim 
official developer" 
[Online; 
accessed 9-August-2018]. 
[27] S. Siraj, A. Gupta, and R. Badgujar, "Network simulation tools 
survey", International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering, vol. 1, no. 4, 2012, pp. 199–206. 
[28] https://www.tetcos.com/lte.html, "LTE / LTE – Advanced", [Online: 
accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[29] https://www.tetcos.com/5g.html, "5G NR mmWave", [Online: 
accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[30] https://www.nsnam.org/about/statistics/, "Statistics 2018", [Online: 
accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[31] https://www.nsnam.org/research/wns3/, 
"Workshop 
on 
ns-3", 
[Online: accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[32] https://summit.omnetpp.org/archive/2018, 
"Omnet++ 
community 
summit 2018", [Online: accessed 24-December-2019]. 
[33] S. Sun, G. Maccartney, and T. Rappaport, "A novel millimeter-wave 
channel simulator and applications for 5G wireless communications", 
IEEE International Conference on Communications, ICC 2017. 
20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

