Durable Solar Energy Harvesting from Limited Ambient Energy Income
Sebastian Bader, Bengt Oelmann
Department of Information Technology and Media
Mid Sweden University
Sundsvall, Sweden
{sebastian.bader, bengt.oelmann}@miun.se
Abstract—Typical wireless sensor network applications in
the domain of environmental monitoring require or proﬁt
from extended system lifetime. However, restrictions in sensor
node resources, especially due to the usage of capacity limited
batteries, forbid these desired lifetimes to be reached. As
opposed to batteries, energy harvesting from ambient energy
sources enables for near-perpetual supply of sensor nodes, as
the utilized energy source is inexhaustible. Nevertheless, the
supply from ambient energy sources is rate-limited, wherein
this supply-rate is mainly deﬁned by the system deployment
location. On the other hand, the attached sensor node has
a consumption-rate, which has to be supplied to guarantee
continuous node operation. In this paper, we address the
matching of supply-rate and consumption-rate in solar energy
harvesting systems at locations with limited insolation. The
focus lies on the reduction of harvester energy overhead, which
in low-duty cycled system easily reaches similar or higher
consumption levels than the load it supplies. We suggest and
present two harvester architectures [1], that have their main
design consideration on simplicity. The individual modules
of the architectures are tested and veriﬁed in laboratory
measurements and we evaluate the fully implemented systems
in an outdoor deployment. Based on the laboratory results,
implementation choices for the architecture modules have been
made. Whereas both harvesting architectures continuously
supplied the attached load during the deployment period, we
were able to compare their behavior with each other and
present individual advantages and drawbacks.
Keywords-energy
harvesting;
environmental
monitoring;
wireless sensor networks; energy sources; node lifetime
I. INTRODUCTION
According to general believe, Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSN) have the possibility to revolutionize the way we per-
ceive and interact with our environment [2]–[4]. Combining
sensing, control, processing and communication capabilities
in relative small and inexpensive measurement systems,
allows sampling at large-scale with high temporal and spatial
resolution. This in turn offers advantages in a plethora
of different application domains, increasing efﬁciency of
existing applications and enabling a set of completely new
functions.
In Environmental Monitoring, as one of these application
domains, WSNs offer distributed and autonomous measure-
ments with automatic data acquisition possibilities. Large
areas of interest can be observed with a scalable number of
sensing stations and ﬂexibility in their positioning, while not
Table I
TYPICAL ENERGY HARVESTING SOURCES AND POWER LEVELS
AVAILABLE IN OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS [8], [9]
Energy source
Power density
Condition
Solar
100 mW cm−2
direct sunlight, outdoors
Wind
100 mW cm−2
9 m s−1, 10 m altitude
Ambient RF
< 1 µW cm−2
unless close to emission source
Thermo-Electric
60 µW cm−2
at 5 ◦C temperature difference
demanding increased human interaction. Furthermore, con-
nectivity through the network infrastructure allows sample
transfer from all sensor nodes to a desired gathering point
and remote access and control of these nodes.
Nevertheless, application setup and deployment can re-
quire considerable amount of time and money [5]–[7], espe-
cially when numerous sensor nodes are involved. Therefore,
lifetime and maintenance demands become an important
issue, deﬁning economical feasibility of this technology. Ide-
ally, system operation should be indeﬁnitely, uninterrupted
and without requiring human involvement.
As an active electronic system, one primal requirement for
system autonomy is the constant supply of power. Due to the
typical inaccessibility of a ﬁxed power infrastructure, energy
storage devices - usually in form of batteries - are used as
power sources. Though, as energy storage capacity of these
devices is limited, autonomous lifetime of the systems these
devices power, is inevitably limited as well.
As a result, energy harvesting attracts increasing attention
in research involving Wireless Sensor Networks. Harnessing
available ambient energy, such as from wind, sun, vibra-
tions or temperature gradients, energy reservoirs in storage
devices of limited capacity can be recharged on a regular
basis. Because these ambient energy sources are not limited
in their energy capacity (i.e., they are inexhaustible), but only
in their supply rate, matching their supply rate with the load
consumption demand enables perpetual energy supply.
Table I provides an overview of expectable power densi-
ties for different ambient energy sources, typically available
to outdoor environmental sensor networks. While power
densities can be quite high, it is strongly depending on
deployment location and environment.
66
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Solar energy harvesting is the most frequently used form
of energy harvesting in outdoor Wireless Sensor Networks,
which might ﬁnd explanation in several of its properties.
(i) Its conversion technology is rather mature and low-cost,
because of the use in macro-scale energy production. (ii)
Power densities are often sufﬁciently high. (iii) Available
energy spreads over a wide area and conversion rate is easily
scalable, and (iv) conversion does not require mechanical
parts, leading to higher maintenance requirements.
Nonetheless, also for solar energy harvesting, achievable
conversion rates are highly location speciﬁc. This means
while there are locations providing good harvesting possi-
bilities, there are also those where solar radiation is limited
and insolation unequally distributed over the year. Research
targeting micro-solar energy harvesting systems for the
former case is documented plentiful in literature. Opposed
to that, systems addressing low solar radiation environments
are strictly limited.
In this paper, we address the issue of limited irradiation
conditions for solar energy harvesting based outdoor sensor
networks. The general architecture of solar energy harvesting
power supplies is presented and analyzed towards limitations
for use in low irradiance situations. Design considerations
are made to allow the sufﬁcient conversion of light into elec-
tricity for powering sensor sample-and-send sensor nodes in
Environmental Wireless Sensor Networks, while at the same
time avoiding lifetime limitations due to battery storage
devices. Herein, the focus of the system lies on providing
sufﬁcient energy levels, guaranteeing uninterrupted opera-
tion at all times, opposed to optimization towards efﬁcient
energy conversion at times of strong irradiation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The
next section summarizes a subset of existing related work
in the area of solar energy harvesting systems. After that,
Section III provides theory on general solar energy harvest-
ing system architecture, location inﬂuence and application
requirements, leading to the design considerations of solar
power supplies for the intended scenario. Section IV will
present measurement and evaluation setups, followed by
measurement results, resulting system architecture and its
evaluation in Section V. Finally, Section VI will conclude
the results obtained.
II. RELATED WORK
Plenty of work has been done in Wireless Sensor Net-
works for Environmental Monitoring, as typical applications
in this domain gain from measurement capabilities this
technology can provide. To mention only a small subset
of the work presented in this area, applications include
monitoring of bird nesting behavior [2], observations of
glacier movement [10], monitoring of volcano activity [5]
and analysis of rainforest environments [11].
Nonetheless, while usually large-scale deployments with
numerous sensor nodes are expected, most deployments
are at a proof-of-concept stage with limited coverage and
amount of sensing stations. Likely reasons for this are high
cost for system setup and maintenance. In turn, a major
part in maintenance is the replacement of depleting energy
storage devices, limiting the period of unattended sensor
operation.
Energy harvesting has gained more attention, as it can
replenish energy reservoirs from ambient energy sources.
Types of energy sources cover a broad area, including solar,
wind, water ﬂow, vibration, temperature difference and even
pH differences in trees [12]–[15]. While the availability
of the energy source is highly application dependent, in
outdoor environments (i.e., the typical deployment location
for environmental monitoring applications) solar energy is
almost ubiquitous.
Existing solar energy harvesting systems are presented
amongst others in [16]–[19]. Distinction exists between
implemented storage devices, charge circuitry and system
management (i.e., mainly hardware vs. software control).
Typical energy storage devices include Nickel-Metal Hy-
dride (NiMH) batteries, Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion) batteries and
Electrochemical Double Layer Capacitors (EDLC), coming
each with their advantages and disadvantages.
Systems embedding NiMH batteries include the ones
introduced in [17], [20], [21], while Li-Ion based systems
are presented in [19], [22]. Due to the limitation of charge
cycles, several solutions resulted, combining rechargeable
batteries with EDLCs (also known as supercapacitors or ul-
tracapacitors), leading to extended system lifetime [16], [23].
A set of systems, purely relying on Electrochemical Double
Layer Capacitors as their storage type, is demonstrated in
[1], [18].
Relating to energy extraction, a topic of discussion is
Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) for the solar panel.
Reference [24] provides a broad overview of different MPPT
techniques, whereas not all of them are applicable in micro-
solar energy harvesting systems due to energy overhead
concerns. Most often used are methods such as perturb-
and-observe, hill-climbing, as well as fractional open-circuit
voltage and fractional short-circuit current.
Micro-solar energy harvesting systems comprehending
MPPT techniques are those in [18], [21], [25]. However,
some of the methods used yield only limited performance.
Arguments against the use of Maximum Power Point Track-
ers, especially in applications with low power output, are
raised in [26].
Work concerning low irradiation conditions is very lim-
ited. Reference [11] mentions problems regarding restricted
solar availability due to shading in their deployment. More-
over, in [26] limited power income is a major design
consideration, but the application addressed is indoors and
therefore energy availability is more predictable and con-
stant.
67
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Energy 
Source
Energy 
Converter
Energy 
Storage
Load System
Input 
Regulation
Output 
Regulation
Location
Application
Energy harvesting circuitry
Figure 1.
Modular structure of a general energy harvesting system
III. THEORY
The underlying architecture of micro solar energy harvest-
ing systems contains modules for energy conversion, energy
storage, as well as energy management. While the existence
of these modules is conventional, the way of implementation
and necessity of additional circuitry varies between systems.
Typical differentiation is made between storage types, charge
circuitry, energy conditioning, as well as general system
complexity. These different design considerations are mainly
based on application and location constraints, i.e., expected
conversion and consumption rates.
In this section, we will analyze the general architecture
of micro solar energy harvesting systems and introduce
application and location limitations in our system scenario.
Based on these design constraints, we will suggest two
harvester architectures.
A. Solar Energy Harvesting
Solar energy harvesting is one of the most common ways
of employing ambient energy sources, supporting or replac-
ing battery power supplies in distributed sensor networks.
Figure 1 depicts the typical modular structure of an energy
harvesting system. While the ambient energy source itself
and the load system can be considered as external modules,
both have a strong inﬂuence on system operation. In turn,
energy source availability is depending highly on the system
location, as well as load system demands are based on the
application. As these factors have considerable impact on the
system performance, a more detailed analysis will follow.
The energy harvesting circuitry itself acts as an interme-
diate module between energy source and load. It contains
a conversion module, an energy buffer, as well as typically
some sort of input and output regulation.
1) Solar Energy Conversion: Solar cells are used to
convert sunlight into direct electrical current, using the
photovoltaic effect. In micro solar energy harvesting for
distributed sensor systems, size and cost are typical con-
straining factors. Depending on load system consumption,
number of nodes and deployment location, typical solar
panels in use rate between hundreds of milliwatt and a few
watt.
The output current of a photovoltaic cell is mainly depen-
dent on its terminal voltage and the light intensity, irradiating
the cell. This relation is typically described with a solar
panel’s IV-curve, such as depicted in Figure 2a. The higher
the quality of the solar panel, the more its IV-curve will
match a rectangle. This is described in the ﬁll-factor of a
solar panel, describing its maximum performance in relation
to its theoretical maximum performance. The ﬁll-factor is
deﬁned as
FF =
Pmpp
Voc · Isc
,
(1)
with Pmpp being the maximum extractable power, Voc the
solar panel’s open-circuit voltage and Isc its short-circuit
current. The operating point of maximum extracted power is
the solar panel’s maximum power point (MPP). However, the
maximum power point will change with varying irradiance
levels, thus being an irradiance dependent maximum power
point function. The maximum power points of the solar
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Voltage [V]
Current [A]
 
 
25 W/m²
100 W/m²
250 W/m²
500 W/m²
1000 W/m²
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Voltage [V]
Power [W]
 
 
25 W/m²
100 W/m²
250 W/m²
500 W/m²
1000 W/m²
(b)
Figure 2.
Typical relationships of (a) – current and voltage (IV-curve)
and (b) – power and voltage (PV-curve) of a small scale solar panel under
different irradiance levels
68
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table II
OVERVIEW OF MAIN CHARACTERISTICS FOR DIFFERENT STORAGE
TYPES; BASED ON [28]
Type
Voltage
Energy Density
Self-discharge
Cycles
Toxicity
[V]
[W h kg−1]
[%/month]
[#]
Lead-Acid
2
30-50
5
200-300
high
NiCd
1.2
40-80
20
1500
high
NiMH
1.2
60-120
30
500
low
Li-Ion
3.6
100-150
< 10
1000
low
DLC1
2.5-5.5
1-5
several/day
>500000
low
panel underlying Figure 2a are marked in its PV-curves in
Figure 2b.
2) Energy Storage: In systems, where the load should be
supplied continuously, an energy buffer is necessary. This is,
to supply the load from a reservoir at times of insufﬁcient
energy income from the ambient energy source. For solar
energy harvesting, this typically occurs in a daily cycle.
However, impact of the daily cycle itself can be depending
on an additional seasonal cycle. The desire is, what in [27]
is called energy-neutral operation. At any moment in time,
available energy should be greater or equal to the required
energy for supplying the load. That is,
Psolar(t) + Pstore(t) ≥ Pload(t) + Ploss(t) ,
(2)
where Psolar is the power extracted from the solar panel,
Pstore the extractable power from the energy storage, Pload
the load power consumption and Ploss represents storage
and conversion losses.
Different types of storage elements have been imple-
mented, with the most common choice being rechargeable
batteries. However, alternatively also electrochemical double
layer capacitors are used. An overview of properties of
typically used technologies is provided in Table II. While
rechargeable batteries offer higher energy densities and
lower self-discharge rates, leading to be more suitable for
long-term storage applications, their overall lifetime and
number of recharge cycles is strictly limited. On the other
hand, DLCs have long lifetimes and can be charged easily
and fast, though their low energy density and high leakage
circumvent long-term storage.
3) Input Regulation: The input regulation module usually
fulﬁlls two tasks in solar energy harvesting. On the one hand,
it adjusts the energy input to meet requirements for further
use. On the other hand, it allows to alter the operating point
of the solar panel, to extract maximum power.
While input adjustment mainly depends on output levels
of the solar panel and the respective storage technology
in use, it can be found to some extend in almost all
system architectures. Typically implemented functions in-
clude reverse-current protection, charge management for
the storage device, as well as voltage level adjustments.
Opposed to this, Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT)
is an optional function and its effectiveness in micro solar
energy harvesters is not always clear. This is, due to the
rather high energy consumption of the tracking solution
itself compared to the efﬁciency gain it will lead to. As the
energy consumption of the tracker does not scale down well,
systems with low energy harvesting might reduce efﬁciency
when using MPPT [25].
4) Output Regulation: As opposed to the input regulation,
the output regulation usually only provides one function
which is the adjustment of the harvester’s output voltage
to an appropriate level for the attached load system. The
necessity and the form of implementation purely depends
on the energy storage device used in the harvesting system.
While systems based on Li-Ion batteries typically do not
require voltage adjustments, most of the other storage im-
plementations do. In the majority of cases a step-up regulator
which boosts the voltage of the energy buffer is involved.
In some cases, implementation of these regulators can be
avoided by raising the storage voltage due to the series
connection of several storage cells. However, this, in turn,
will lead to an increase in both cost and size of the harvester.
The boost operation of the step-up regulator can be
formulated as
Vout = Vbat · Ibat
Iout
· η ,
(3)
where Vout, Vbat, Iout and Ibat are the voltages and currents
of the battery and the regulator respectively, and η is the
conversion efﬁciency which typically is a function of the
previous parameters. Important dimensioning factors for the
use in these applications are, on the one hand, the power
consumption of the regulator itself and, on the other, the
conversion efﬁciency. As the latter can vary signiﬁcantly, a
regulator with high efﬁciencies for the expected input and
output parameters should be selected.
B. Application Considerations
As mentioned previously, the application parameters have
a considerable inﬂuence on the energy harvester design. This
is, because energy supply from the ambient source which
is rate-limited and the consumption of the load have to
match to guarantee continuous operation. As the application
determines the sensor nodes tasks and thus their energy
demands, the application has to be considered in the design
of the harvesting system.
The typical applications that are in focus of this work in-
volve Environmental Monitoring Wireless Sensor Networks.
In particular, we consider applications which gather data
from a large-scale area in a time-driven manner. As a result
of this, the sensor nodes in the network follow a periodical
work scheme which is determined by the desired sampling
rate of the gathering application. Therefore, the workload of
the sensor nodes is predictable which allows for relatively
accurate estimation of their power consumption.
69
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3 depicts a typical network organization in these
types of applications. The architecture is organized hierarchi-
cally in a cluster-star topology. This leads to a great number
of simple sensor nodes, while only a smaller subset of
sensor nodes is involved in a multi-hop backbone network.
These clusterheads, in turn, are usually equipped with more
resources to balance their increased workload. In addition,
the backbone network is connected via a gateway node to a
server which stores the collected data and allows for remote
access to the network. As there is usually a distance between
the deployment site and operator, the communication link
between the gateway and server involves remote communi-
cation technology (i.e., typically long-range RF, satellite or
GSM/GPRS).
Because of the large number of sensor nodes that are
expected in these types of applications, maintenance of each
individual sensor node in the network is not feasible. The
sensor node lifetime should thus be as long as possible to
allow for extended data collection periods. Based on the
periodical workload of the sensor nodes, duty-cycling is an
efﬁcient way to reduce their overall power consumption.
The sensor nodes thus follow a deﬁned schedule of active
and inactive periods which enables for estimation of their
average power consumption according to
Pavg = δ · Pactive + (1 − δ) · Pinactive ,
(4)
0 < δ < 1 .
(5)
In this case δ is the duty-cycle rate and Pavg, Pactive and
Pinactive are the respective power levels in average, in active
state and in inactive state.
Additionally, equation 4 can be broken down to power
levels and time intervals which are typically involved, so
that
Pavg = Pp · tp + Pc · tc + Ps · ts + Pi · ti
Tsample
,
(6)
where Pp, Pc, Ps, Pi, tp, tc, ts and ti are power levels
and time intervals for processing, communicating, sensing
Figure 3.
Possible network architecture of data gathering applications in
environmental wireless sensor networks under scope
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct
Nov Dec
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time
Average Solar Irradiance [W/m²]
 
 
0° N
25° N
50° N
75° N
Figure 4.
Overview on estimated solar irradiation on top of earth
atmosphere at different latitudes (data obtained from [29])
and when inactive respectively, and Tsample is the sample
interval of the sensor nodes.
Based on the, usually in environmental monitoring found,
low sampling rate and the low power consumption in the idle
state of the system, the resulting average power consumption
is also low.
C. Location Dependency
The second external parameter which inﬂuences the har-
vester operation is the location the ﬁnal system is deployed
in. This is mainly because of varying availability constraints
of incoming solar irradiation with changing deployment lo-
cation. Figure 4 shows changes in estimated solar irradiation
over the year at different latitudes in the northern hemi-
sphere. Moving north from the equator, two observations can
be made which have to be considered in the usage of ambient
energy sources at different locations. These observations are
1) With increasing latitude, one typically has to deal with
a decrease in solar intensity (e.g., a decrease in average
yearly solar radiation).
2) With increasing latitude, variation of solar irradiation
during the year increases which leads to periods of
high and low solar radiation.
While the ﬁrst constraint alone does not pose such a big
problem, the combination with the latter constraint is what
requires an additional design consideration. Certainly, a
reduced average solar radiation leads to a lower supply rate
from the ambient energy source, which limits the permitted
energy demands of the load system. However, for low power
systems, such as Wireless Sensor Nodes, this often is not an
issue. Furthermore, the reduction in the supply rate could
easily be compensated with an increased solar panel.
As opposed to that, the variable solar irradiation over
the year forms some limitations the harvesting system has
to deal with. As there are time intervals with high solar
radiation, as well as intervals with low solar radiation,
ideally an energy balancing is desired. Because of the rather
long timescales involved, this balancing requires long-term
70
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

DC/DC 
Regulator
Boost
Solar
Panel
DLC
+
Load
(a)
DC/DC 
Regulator
Boost
Solar
Panel
DLC
+
Load
LDO
(b)
Figure 5.
Simpliﬁed circuit diagrams of the suggested solar energy harvesting architectures - (a) direct input coupling and (b) LDO input regulation
storage of energy and requires, thus, typically battery storage
technology. In contrary, if energy balancing is not an option,
the system design is determined by the period of lowest
energy income. This means, the harvesting unit is designed
for the worst case scenario of the deployment location.
In addition to this global location dependency, a local
location dependency can inﬂuence the harvesting behavior
and outcome. Typical inﬂuences are due to obstacles which
change the intensity and direction of incoming solar irradia-
tion. The amount of inﬂuence in these situations is difﬁcult
to predict, but the inﬂuence might be classiﬁed into generally
open or generally shaded locations. Nonetheless, the effect
of these obstacles usually is an overall reduction of solar
income or short-term variations, as opposed to long-term
variations of global location dependency.
D. Suggested Architectures
In this work, we mainly target systems that should be
capable of operating from solar energy even at locations with
limited solar radiation, as described previously. Furthermore,
the one main design goal is the durable and continuous
energy supply to the load system. Thus, the two solar energy
harvesting architectures presented, are built upon a Double
Layer Capacitor (DLC) energy buffer which allows long
system lifetime, but provides only short-term energy storage
in the order of days.
The two suggested architectures are presented in sim-
pliﬁed form in Figure 5. While the basic structure of
the two systems is the same, there is a difference in the
implementation of the input regulation. Because of the usage
of DLCs as the harvesters’ energy buffer and the resulting
low energy storage capacity, these harvesting systems are
vulnerable to short-term variations in irradiation conditions.
This means that the systems have reduced capability of
balancing changes in available ambient energy, compared
to systems using battery buffer technologies. Thus, these
architectures must work sufﬁciently with the available en-
ergy income at any time, except of short bridging periods
covering e.g. nights.
Based on this, the system is designed for the worst-
case scenario of solar irradiance during the year. As the
available energy at these irradiance levels is very limited,
harvester simplicity is the key to the successful operation of
the system. The smaller the amount of available energy is,
the more important becomes the own power consumption of
the harvesting module (further referred to as the harvester’s
energy overhead). For continuous operation, the available
energy Ein has to be large enough to supply the load system
at any moment in time, such as
Ein ≥ Eoh + Eload ,
(7)
where Eoh is the energy overhead of the harvester and Eload
the energy demand of the load. Keeping Eoh low allows
to supply the load with less Ein. It should be noted, that
while the load consumption in this application typically is an
average consumption resulting from duty-cycled sensor node
operation, the overhead consumption occurs continuously.
In addition to the common storage technology, the two
presented systems use the same output regulation module.
This module consists of a DC-DC regulator of boost topol-
ogy. As DLCs typically have a rather low nominal voltage
and this voltage further decreases tremendously with the
discharge of the capacitor, for most sensor nodes a voltage
level adjustment is required. For implementation a Texas
Instruments TPS61070 was chosen, because it has a low
power consumption and offers high conversion efﬁciencies.
The difference between the two architectures lies in their
input regulation. Figure 5a depicts an architecture with direct
coupling of solar panel and energy buffer, while in the
architecture shown in Figure 5b a Linear Dropout Regulator
(LDO) is integrated for input regulation.
Direct coupling of solar panel and storage element means
that, on the one hand, the solar panel operating point is
determined by the charge state of the DLC, on the other,
the charge voltage of the energy buffer is only limited by
the open-circuit voltage of the solar panel at any time. In
71
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

result, the power output of the solar panel depends on the
current charge state of the storage element. With a double
layer capacitor of the type implemented [30], these operating
points will typically be between 1 V and 2.5 V according to
Figure 2b. Additionally, due to risk of performance reduction
or damage, the DLC has to be protected from over-charging.
Over-charge occurs when the capacitor voltage exceeds its
nominal voltage which can result in reduced lifetime and
eventual destruction [31]. A typical way of over-voltage
protection is the introduction of a Zener diode. However,
as Zener diodes do not have ideal behavior, losses around
the breakdown voltage are immense. The typical behavior
of a Zener diode is depicted against the ideal behavior in
Figure 6. As it can be seen, with this choice, harvesting
losses of tens of milliampere close to the breakdown voltage
have to be accepted. As this is an intolerable level in most
situations, the over-voltage protection in the suggested archi-
tecture consists of a combination of hysteresis comparator
and MOSFET. This combination replaces the Zener diode
by implementing an almost ideal Zener diode behavior.
The comparator observes the DLC voltage and triggers the
MOSFET to disconnect the solar panel from the energy
storage device once the nominal voltage is reached. In this
way losses below the breakdown voltage are limited to the
operating consumption of the comparator, while all energy
is diverted from the DLC as soon as the breakdown voltage
is reached. Implementing this protection circuit with a low-
power hysteresis comparator, such as a Maxim MAX9017,
these losses are limited to a few microampere.
In the second architecture, an input regulation based on
an LDO regulator is implemented. As opposed to direct
coupling, this means that solar panel and double layer
capacitor are only indirectly connected with each other. The
implementation of this regulator comes with mainly two
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Reverse Voltage [V]
Leakage Current [mA]
 
 
Real
Ideal
Figure 6.
Comparison of ideal and measured current-voltage characteristic
of a Zener Diode in reverse connection
advantages for the harvester. Firstly, the regulator makes an
over-voltage protection mechanism obsolete, and secondly,
ambient energy availability periods are used more efﬁciently.
The former originates in the regulated output of the LDO
regulator which, as long as its input is high enough, provides
a constant, predeﬁned voltage at the output. In this case,
this constant voltage should be chosen in accordance to the
nominal voltage of the double layer capacitor. This means
that, the DLC will be charged to its nominal voltage only,
but never higher. Additionally, the regulator will hold the
capacitor at its nominal voltage as long as the input to the
LDO allows this. This results in the second advantage of this
architecture, because the DLC just begins discharging when
ambient energy availability decreases to an insufﬁcient level.
As opposed to that, the directly coupled architecture involves
a second charge/discharge condition, which is caused by
the hysteresis band of the comparator. However, the im-
plementation choice of regulators in this architecture are
limited, based on the internal structure of LDO regulators.
The challenge is, that most LDO regulators do not permit
the voltage level at the output to be considerably higher
than at the input. Because of the energy storage element at
the output and the intermittent energy source at the input,
however, this is a common situation in energy harvesting
applications. This restriction limits the choice of appropriate
regulators tremendously, especially when it comes to power
consumption constraints. We decided on a parallel structure
of two Texas Instruments TPS71525.
In
both
systems
maximum-power-point-tracking
is
avoided, as the implied additional energy overhead is too
high for the relatively low amounts of additionally gained
energy extraction in low-irradiance conditions, such as
presented in [26].
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The evaluation of the architectures is divided into two
parts. Firstly, single components and modules of the archi-
tectures are analyzed and evaluated in a laboratory environ-
ment which describes their behavior and supports the im-
plementation process. Additionally to these measurements,
an outdoor deployment of the ﬁnal architecture implemen-
tations is conducted to verify the system behavior in its real
application environment.
A. Laboratory Measurements
In the laboratory measurements, the single components
and also combinations of modules are analyzed to determine
the behavior of these modules in the ﬁnal system. Most of
the measurements have been performed on the double layer
capacitor (i.e., the storage module), as this is the module
with most implementation ﬂexibility. The experiments cover
analysis of the capacitor’s energy storage capability, the
inﬂuence of its ESR, and the behavior in serial connection
of two DLCs.
72
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

DLC
+
1
DC/DC 
Regulator
Boost
Load
2
(a)
DLC
+
(b)
DLC
+
DLC
+
(c)
Figure 7.
Measurement setups of double layer capacitor experiments - (a) Energy storage time analysis; (b) Charge cycle measurement; (c) Evaluation
of series connection
DLC
+
(a)
DLC
+
LDO
(b)
Figure 8.
Measurement setups for charge mechanisms - (a) Over-voltage protection measurement; (b) Charge behavior of LDO-based architecture
Additionally to these double layer capacitor tests, eval-
uation of the charging mechanisms for both architectures
have been conducted. This means, for the directly coupled
architecture, the over-voltage protection mechanism has been
validated, whereas for the LDO-based architecture the whole
charging process is evaluated.
The measurement setups are depicted for the capacitor
and charge management experiments in Figures 7 and 8
respectively. As DC source in all setups a Hameg HM8143
Programmable Power Supply is used. Furthermore, for
voltage measurements in setups 7a and 7b we used an
Agilent 34410A Digital Multimeter, whereas a National
Instruments NI USB-6008 data acquisition tool is integrated
for measurements in 7c, 8a and 8b.
In order to compare the energy storage capabilities of
the double layer capacitors, we use a setup according to
Figure 7a. The boost-regulator in this setup is a Texas Instru-
ments TPS61070 and DLCs with different capacities from
Cooper-Bussmann [30] are implemented as storage device.
As system load we employ a typical bi-modal consumer,
which is programmed on a Sentio-e2 node [32]. Changes
in the consumers duty-cycle allows for analysis of different
load consumptions. In the beginning of this experiment, the
switch number one is closed to charge the capacitor to its
nominal voltage, while the load is disconnected. Once the
DLC is fully charged, the source is disconnected, whereas
the load is connected. The voltage level during discharge
and the discharge time is logged.
With the measurement setup depicted in Figure 7b, the
charging cycle of the double layer capacitor is analyzed.
In particular we evaluate the impact of different equivalent
series resistances (ESR) in this experiment. Thus, we im-
plement two DLCs of same capacity, but different voltage
and ESR ratings. The Hameg HM8143 is used for charging
at constant rate and its integrated electronic dummy load
(EDL) allows for controlled discharge.
The last DLC experiment conducted, evaluates the be-
havior of double layer capacitors in serial connection and its
setup is shown in Figure 7c. For the measurement two double
layer capacitors of same type and capacity are connected
in series and collectively charged to the double nominal
voltage. Once charged, they are discharged over the EDL
of the Hameg HM8143. This procedure is repeated several
times, while the individual voltages of the capacitors are
logged.
Figure 8a illustrates the experimental setup of verifying
the over-voltage protection mechanism. The protection cir-
cuit consists of a MAX9017 hysteresis comparator with
internal voltage reference and a ON Semiconductor N-
channel MOSFET [33]. In the measurement, the double layer
73
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a)
(b)
Figure 9.
Implementation of the deployment system - (a) Direct coupling harvester circuit board; (b) Complete system integration
capacitor is charged with a DC source of higher voltage
than the capacitors nominal voltage, while source voltage
and DLC voltage are monitored.
The LDO-based charge mechanism is analyzed with the
setup depicted in Figure 8b. The LDO used in this setup
is a Texas Instruments TPS71525. Furthermore we use a
Fairshild Semiconductor Shottky Diode [34], which protects
the source from reverse currents. During charging in this
experiment voltages at the input and output are logged.
B. Deployment Evaluation
After the evaluation of single modules, the full architec-
tures have been implemented and deployed in an outdoor
Figure 10.
Picture of the deployment setup of a solar harvesting sensor
node at the Mid Sweden University campus in Sundsvall, Sweden
environment. The architecture implementation occurred ac-
cording to Figure 5. For the solar panels a commercially
available 4.5 V-100 mA type was chosen, because this panel
will provide voltages, high enough to fully charge a 2.5 V
DLC, even under low irradiation conditions. The physical
size of this panel is 94 × 61 mm2, thus comparable to
dimensions chosen in other systems. As storage element
DLCs with capacities of 10 F and 22 F have been chosen.
The load system is implemented with a Sentio-e2 node
platform [32]. This node is designed especially for environ-
mental monitoring applications in mind. It is based on a
Texas Instruments MSP430 microcontroller and a CC1101
low-power radio transceiver operating in the 433 MHz ISM-
band. The platform consumes less than 7 µA (19.6 µW)
in low-power mode with operating timers, which makes
it highly suitable for low duty-cycling operations, such
as in environmental monitoring. The node operates on a
synchronous TDMA communication protocol, which efﬁ-
ciently reduces active time to a minimum, thus, further
reducing energy consumption. The load is set to a bi-modal
consumption with an average current draw of 20 µA, which
approximately equals one packet transmission per minute.
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
 
Daytime
Month
 
Solar irradiance [W/m²]
Figure 11.
A typical annual insolation proﬁle in Sundsvall, Sweden
74
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time [hours]
Capacitor Voltage [V]
 
 
1F DLC
10F DLC
22F DLC
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time [hours]
Capacitor Voltage [V]
 
 
1F DLC
10F DLC
22F DLC
(b)
Figure 12.
Maximal supply time of fully charged double layer capacitor under bi-modal load - (a) for 20uA average load current; (b) for 100uA average
load current
During the deployment, the node system has the function
of monitoring the implemented architectures, and addition-
ally measures environmental parameters. While the voltage
measurement of the double layer capacitor is performed by
the microcontroller’s internal ADC, the platform is further
equipped with temperature, humidity and solar radiation
sensors. For temperature and humidity a Sensirion SHT15 is
chosen, whereas a Davis 7821 carries out the solar radiation
measurements. The sampling rate of the sensors are 5 min
and a Li-Ion battery is provided to allow data collection
during times of harvester malfunction.
Figure 9 shows a picture of the implemented system. In
9a the harvesting circuit of the directly coupled architecture
is shown, while 9b depicts the complete, deployable system.
The systems have been deployed at the Mid Sweden Uni-
versity campus in Sundsvall, Sweden (62◦24′N, 17◦19′E).
A picture of the deployment setup of one of the deployed
sensor nodes is given in Figure 10. The deployment location
was chosen to be on a building’s roof, to avoid obstacles
blocking the insolation to the solar panels. The biggest chal-
lenge at this location is the great distance from the equator,
0
1
2
3
1.7605
1.761
1.7615
1.762
1.7625
1.763
1.7635
1.764
Time [minutes]
Capacitor Voltage [V]
 
 
Figure 13.
Close-up of the discharge behavior in Figure 12
which leads to a lower solar radiation and large variations in
insolation over the year. A typical solar insolation proﬁle of
this location is given in Figure 11, which clearly indicates
the short daylight period and low irradiance levels in the
winter month. These worst case energy levels will deﬁne the
maximal load, the harvester can supply at this location. To
investigate the system operation under these conditions, the
deployment period lasted from November 2009 to January
2010.
V. RESULTS
Figure 12 shows the results for the ﬁrst laboratory mea-
surement, depicted in Figure 7a. The graphs show the
discharge from fully charged double layer capacitors of
various capacities. The load for this discharge is bi-modal
and in Figure 12a the average load current is 20 µA, while
the average load current in Figure 12b is 100 µA. The
discharge has been continued until the voltage was too low
to keep the output regulator operating. The discharge time
is a good indicator for how long a dark-period is allowed
to be, without the system failing. It is noticeable that the
1 F double layer capacitor lets the output regulator stop at a
higher input voltage than the 10 F or 22 F capacitor. This is
due to the limited energy stored in the capacitor and the bi-
modal load. While in Figure 12 the discharge curves appear
constant, the inﬂuence of the bi-modal load can be observed
in a close-up, shown in Figure 13. The high current peaks,
occurring periodically every minute, result in a voltage drop
depending on the ESR of the respective DLC. This voltage
breakdown relaxes after the current pulse is over. However,
the low voltage level for a short moment in time, might stop
the output regulator. As the capacitor with smaller capacity
has a higher ESR, also the voltage drops are higher.
The ESR of the double layer capacitors also inﬂuence the
charge-discharge behavior of the device. The measurement
of two double layer capacitors of same capacity (i.e., in
75
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time [min.]
Terminal Voltage [V]
 
 
High ESR (30 )
Low ESR (400 m)
Figure 14.
Effect of the ESR on the charge-discharge behavior of DLCs
this case 1 F), but different nominal voltages and ESRs, is
depicted in Figure 14.
Figure 15 shows the results of using two double layer
capacitors in a serial connection. In the graph it can be
observed that charging and discharging does not occur at
the exact same rate, even for capacitors of same type. This
results into unequal distribution of voltage for the two DLCs.
As there is no balancing between the two double layer
capacitors, the resulting voltage difference will increase over
time. In turn, this means that although the charging voltage
might not exceed twice the nominal capacitor voltage, a
single capacitor can be charged higher than expected and
thus be damaged. Therefore, even with a series connection
of capacitors, over-voltage protection is needed.
The results of evaluating the presented over-voltage pro-
tection mechanism, presented previously, is depicted in
Figure 16. As it can be seen in the graph, the power supply is
disconnected from the storage capacitor when the capacitor
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
1
2
3
4
5
Time [min]
Terminal Voltage [V]
 
 
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
0.1
0.2
0.3
Time [min]
Voltage Difference [V]
Combined
DLC 1
DLC 2
Figure 15.
Measurement of charge-discharge behavior of double layer
capacitors in a serial connection
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Time [minutes]
Terminal Voltage [V]
 
 
Supply Voltage
DLC Voltage
Figure 16.
Evaluation of the over-voltage protection mechanism in the
directly-coupled harvesting architecture
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time [min.]
Voltage [V]
 
 
Input Voltage
Capacitor Voltage
Figure 17. Charge behavior with the LDO regulated harvesting architecture
voltage reaches its nominal voltage. While the power supply
is then shorted, the double layer capacitor is discharged until
its voltage will cross the lower hysteresis level, connecting
the power supply back to the DLC.
In Figure 17, the analysis of the charge behavior in
the LDO-based harvesting architecture is shown. It can be
observed, that the input voltage is linked to the output
voltage of the regulator. While charging the capacitor the
input voltage is pulled down to a voltage close to the
regulator’s output voltage. Only when the DLC is fully
charged and does not draw a current from the source any
longer, this relation releases and the input voltage raises to
its deﬁned level. This behavior is expected to be based on the
internal architecture of the used linear dropout regulator. For
the solar energy harvesting architecture this means, that the
operating point of the solar panel will be between 2.5 V and
3 V, which provides higher power output then the coupled
operating point in the directly-coupled architecture.
Finally, results from the fully implemented architectures,
obtained in the outdoor deployment, are given in Figure 18.
The graphs show one week of data in the deployment period
76
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
2
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
Time
Cap. voltage [V]
 
 
22F
10F
(a)
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
Time
Cap. voltage [V]
 
 
22F
10F
(b)
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
20
40
60
80
Time
Solar Irradiance [W/m²]
(c)
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
20
40
60
80
Time
Solar Irradiance [W/m²]
(d)
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Time
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
75
80
85
90
Humidity [%]
(e)
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Time
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
75
80
85
90
Humidity [%]
(f)
Figure 18.
System behavior of two solar energy harvesting architectures during one week of deployment – (a),(b) capacitor voltage levels for directly-
coupled architecture (left column) and LDO-based architecture (right column); (c),(d) irradiance conditions during the week; (e),(f) temperature and humidity
during the week
and include the DLC voltages for both architectures with
two different capacity sizes respectively. Additionally, the
temperature, humidity and the solar irradiance during the
period are provided as reference. As visible in Figures 18a
and 18b, the voltage levels in the double layer capacitors
follow the daily insolation variations. An exception to this
is the directly-coupled architecture, which uses a 22 F DLC.
The reason for this is the hysteresis of the over-voltage
protection mechanism in this architecture.
While the LDO-based architecture only has one charging
condition (i.e., the current insolation), the hysteresis band
of the comparator in the directly-coupled architecture adds
a second charging condition. This means, the DLC in the
directly-coupled architecture does only charge when two
conditions are fulﬁlled. (i) the solar irradiance level is high
enough to lead to charge the capacitor and (ii) the lower
hysteresis level has been crossed at least once since the last
crossing of the higher hysteresis level.
Furthermore, the over-voltage protection leads to a dis-
charge of the double layer capacitor as soon as the com-
parator voltage (i.e., ideally the nominal voltage) has been
crossed. This is independent of external parameters, which
means that even when enough solar energy is available, the
stored energy will reduce. As opposed to this, the LDO-
77
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

based architecture charges the storage and holds the DLC at
full charge level as long as there is sufﬁcient ambient energy.
In addition, one can observe external inﬂuences on the
analog over-voltage protection in Figure 18a. Although
hysteresis levels have been set to ﬁxed levels, these levels
vary depending on the device and external conditions. It is
for example clearly visible, that the higher hysteresis level
(i.e., the over-voltage trigger level) differs from its preset
value. For the 10 F DLC a trigger voltage of 2.45 V was
measured and for the 22 F DLC a voltage of 2.55 V, whereas
both voltages were set to 2.5 V. Due to a measurement range
limitation of the internal ADC of 2.5 V, this is not visible
for the 22 F DLC in the graph.
In Figure 18b the ﬂat tips of the graph do not result
from the same measurement range limitation, but occur,
because current insolation holds the storage at full charge
level. Comparing the discharge rates in Figures 18a and
18b, a higher discharge rate can be observed in the LDO-
based harvesting architecture, which results from the higher
consumption overhead of this architecture.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Wireless sensor networks offer a number of advantages
in the domain of environmental monitoring applications,
including the autonomous observation of physical, chem-
ical and biological values at large scale. In addition to
area coverage, wireless sensor networks can provide great
resolution within this area and deliver their samples to
a designated collection point. Additional strength of this
technology include the possibility to operate them remotely,
which reduces the amount of human invasiveness to the
monitored site.
On the other hand, environmental monitoring applications
require wireless sensor networks to operate over a long
period of time. This results from the typically slow processes
being observed and the rather high effort of deploying the
network in the environment. In contrast to this requirement,
wireless sensor nodes are traditionally powered by batteries
and thus have a limited energy resource. Reducing the en-
ergy consumption leads to more efﬁcient use of the resource,
but cannot alter the fact that the energy capacity is ﬁnite.
Energy harvesting provides an alternative supply method,
which has the capability to power sensor nodes indeﬁnitely.
Solar energy harvesting, as one of these supply methods,
offers high availability coverage and generally high energy
levels. Furthermore, the conversion technology used in solar
energy harvesting is low cost and can easily be scaled to
different power level requirements.
However, a problem in solar energy harvesting is the
dependency on external factors, particularly the location the
ﬁnal system is deployed in. In this paper we addressed the
use of solar energy harvesting at locations with long distance
to the equator. These systems have to deal with two main
inﬂuences. (i) Annual solar radiation decreases with distance
to the equator, and (ii) the variation of insolation levels
increases.
We suggested two architectures for solar energy har-
vesting, which address these challenges by their system
simplicity. This reduces the energy overhead spent by har-
vesting, which can easily reach similar magnitudes as the
average load consumption of low-duty cycle sensor nodes.
We further analyzed the behavior of these architectures in
laboratory measurements, which resulted in our implementa-
tion choices. After that, the fully implemented architectures
have been evaluated in an outdoor deployment in Sundsvall,
Sweden (62◦24′N, 17◦19′E) during winter 2009/2010.
The laboratory experiments allowed us to get a feeling
of the energy storage capability of double layer capacitors
and thus to choose appropriate devices. We could further
determine that a serial connection of double layer capacitors
can not eliminate the need for an over-voltage protection
circuit, even though the input supply voltage is lower than
the combined nominal voltages of the used double layer
capacitors. Finally, the laboratory measurements also en-
abled for the veriﬁcation of the charge mechanisms in both
architectures.
Comparing the two architectures, the system deployment
showed that both architecture were capable of supplying
sufﬁcient power to the load during the whole deployment
period. Nevertheless, there are some differences in their
operation. While the directly-coupled architecture provides
lower energy overhead, and therefore has a slower discharge
period, it is affected by the additional charge/discharge
condition, introduced by the hysteresis of the over-voltage
protection. In addition, the low-power components used in
the over-voltage protection module are easily inﬂuenced by
external factors and thus show strong variations. While it
will increase the stress on the double layer capacitor, in
future deployments a lower hysteresis band is recommended,
which should reduce the impact of these restrictions.
In contrast to this, the LDO-based architecture does
not have this additional charge condition, which means
charge/discharge behavior is only dependent on available
ambient energy at any moment in time. While this utilizes
the available energy more effectively, the stress on the
double layer capacitor is larger and the overall energy
overhead of the architecture is increased. Furthermore, the
dimensioning decision for the input regulator, such as the
maximum allowed current, limit ﬂexibility of this archi-
tecture. This means that one implementation might not be
usable for various application conditions (e.g., different solar
panel power requirements).
Whereas both architectures come with their individual
advantages and disadvantages and proven themselves in the
outdoor deployment, once a decision has to be made, we see
more advantages in the directly-coupled architecture. While
this harvesting architecture shows some limitations due to
its second charge condition, the inﬂuences of this limitations
78
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

can be reduced by reducing the hysteresis of its over-voltage
protection. Moreover, the system is more ﬂexible to changes
in application and location constraints and thus enables for a
greater variety of application cases. Finally, its overall lower
energy overhead allows for operation during longer dark-
periods.
In future work, balancing of annual variations in the
ambient energy income is a topic of interest. This can be
addressed both, on the hardware and the software level.
Furthermore, we will look in more detail into the issue
of maximum-power-point-tracking for harvesting from low
ambient energy sources.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Financial support of the project “Sensible Things that
Communicate” by KK-foundation is gratefully acknowl-
edged. Furthermore we would like to thank Torsten Sch¨olzel
from Solarwatt AG, Germany, for contributions supporting
the work in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Bader and B. Oelmann, “Enabling battery-less wireless
sensor operation using solar energy harvesting at locations
with limited solar radiation,” in Fourth International Con-
ference on Sensor Technologies and Applications, SENSOR-
COMM ’10, 2010.
[2] A. Mainwaring, D. Culler, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and
J. Anderson, “Wireless sensor networks for habitat monitor-
ing,” Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on
Wireless sensor networks and applications, pp. 88–97, 2002.
[3] J. Porter, P. Arzberger, H.-W. Braun, P. Bryant, S. Gage,
T. Hansen, P. Hanson, C.-C. Lin, F.-P. Lin, T. Kratz, W. Mich-
ener, S. Shapiro, and T. Williams, “Wireless Sensor Networks
for Ecology,” BioScience, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 561–572, 2005.
[4] J. Hart and K. Martinez, “Environmental Sensor Networks:
A revolution in the earth system science?” Earth-Science
Reviews, vol. 78, no. 3-4, pp. 177–191, Oct. 2006.
[5] G. Werner-Allen, J. Johnson, M. Ruiz, J. Lees, and M. Welsh,
“Monitoring volcanic eruptions with a wireless sensor net-
work,” in Proceeedings of the Second European Workshop
on Wireless Sensor Networks, 2005, pp. 108–120.
[6] K. Martinez, P. Padhy, A. Elsaify, G. Zou, A. Riddoch, and
JK, “Deploying a sensor network in an extreme environment,”
Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous and Trustworthy Computing,
June, 2006.
[7] T. Le Dinh, W. Hu, P. Sikka, P. Corke, L. Overs, and
S. Brosnan, “Design and deployment of a remote robust
sensor network: Experiences from an outdoor water quality
monitoring network,” in 32nd IEEE Conference on Local
Computer Networks, 2007. LCN 2007, 2007, pp. 799–806.
[8] J. Paradiso and T. Starner, “Energy Scavenging for Mobile
and Wireless Electronics,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 18–27, Jan. 2005.
[9] “U.s. energy information administration – website,” http:
//www.eia.doe.gov, (accessed 02-08-2010).
[10] K. Martinez, R. Ong, and J. Hart, “Glacsweb: a sensor
network for hostile environments,” 2004 First Annual IEEE
Communications Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc
Communications and Networks, 2004. IEEE SECON 2004.,
pp. 81–87, 2004.
[11] T. Wark, W. Hu, P. Corke, J. Hodge, A. Keto, B. Mackey,
G. Foley, P. Sikka, and M. Brunig, “Springbrook: Challenges
in developing a long-term, rainforest wireless sensor net-
work,” 2008 International Conference on Intelligent Sensors,
Sensor Networks and Information Processing, pp. 599–604,
2008.
[12] R. Morais, S. Matos, M. Fernandes, A. Valente, S. Soares,
P. Ferreira, and M. Reis, “Sun, wind and water ﬂow as
energy supply for small stationary data acquisition platforms,”
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 64, no. 2, pp.
120–132, Dec. 2008.
[13] R. Torah, P. Glynne-Jones, J. Tudor, T. O’Donnell, S. Roy, and
S. Beeby, “Self-powered autonomous wireless sensor node
using vibration energy harvesting,” Measurement Science and
Technology, vol. 19, no. 12, October 2008.
[14] C. J. Love, S. Zhang, and A. Mershin, “Source of sustained
voltage difference between the xylem of a potted ¡italic¿ﬁcus
benjamina¡/italic¿ tree and its soil,” PLoS ONE, vol. 3, no. 8,
p. e2963, 08 2008.
[15] C. Knight and M. Collins, “Results of a water based ther-
moelectric energy harvesting device for powering wireless
sensor nodes,” in Proc. SPIE 7288 – Active and Passive Smart
Structures and Integrated Systems, 2009.
[16] X. Jiang, J. Polastre, and D. Culler, “Perpetual environmen-
tally powered sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the 4th
international symposium on Information processing in sensor
networks, 2005, pp. 463–468.
[17] V. Raghunathan, A. Kansal, J. Hsu, J. Friedman, and M. Sri-
vastava, “Design considerations for solar energy harvesting
wireless embedded systems,” in Proceedings of the 4th in-
ternational symposium on Information processing in sensor
networks, 2005, pp. 457 – 462.
[18] F. Simjee and P. Chou, “Everlast: long-life, supercapacitor-
operated wireless sensor node,” in Proceedings of the 2006
international symposium on Low power electronics and de-
sign, 2006, pp. 197 – 202.
[19] C. Park and P. Chou, “Ambimax: Autonomous energy har-
vesting platform for multi-supply wireless sensor nodes,” in
3rd Annual IEEE Communications Society on Sensor and Ad
Hoc Communications and Networks, 2006, pp. 168–177.
[20] P. Corke, P. Valencia, P. Sikka, T. Wark, and L. Overs,
“Long-duration solar-powered wireless sensor networks,” in
EmNets ’07: Proceedings of the 4th workshop on Embedded
networked sensors.
ACM, 2007, pp. 33–37.
[21] C. Alippi and C. Galperti, “An adaptive system for optimal
solar energy harvesting in wireless sensor network nodes,”
Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1742 –1750, jul. 2008.
79
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[22] D. Kr¨uger, C. Buschmann, and S. Fischer, “Solar powered
sensor network design and experimentation,” in ISWCS’09:
Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Sympo-
sium on Wireless Communication Systems. IEEE Press, 2009,
pp. 11–15.
[23] J. Alberola, J. Pelegri, R. Lajara, and J. Perez, “Solar
inexhaustible power source for wireless sensor node,” in
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference
Proceedings, 2008. IMTC 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 657 –662.
[24] T. Esram and P. L. Chapman, “Comparison of Photovoltaic
Array Maximum Power Point Tracking Techniques,” IEEE
Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 439–
449, Jun. 2007.
[25] J. Taneja, J. Jeong, and D. Culler, “Design, modeling, and
capacity planning for micro-solar power sensor networks,” in
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Informa-
tion processing in sensor networks, 2008, pp. 407–418.
[26] W. S. Wang, T. O’Donnell, L. Ribetto, B. O’Flynn, M. Hayes,
and S. C. O’Mathuna, “Energy harvesting embedded wire-
less sensor system for building environment applications,”
in 1st International Conference on Wireless Communication,
Vehicular Technology, Information Theory and Aerospace &
Electronic Systems Technology 2009,.
IEEE, 2009.
[27] A. Kansal, J. Hsu, S. Zahedi, and M. B. Srivastava, “Power
management in energy harvesting sensor networks,” ACM
Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst., vol. 6, no. 4, p. 32, 2007.
[28] D. Linden and T. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries.
McGraw-
Hill Professional, 2001.
[29] “Nasa/giss atmosphere-ocean model – website,” http://aom.
giss.nasa.gov/srlocat.htm, (accessed 17-12-2010).
[30] PowerStor B-Series (Datasheet 4307), Cooper Bussmann,
2008.
[31] PowerStor Application Guidelines (PS-5006), Cooper Buss-
mann, 2007.
[32] “Sentio series of sensor nodes – website,” http://www.miun.
se/stc/Sentio, (accessed 14-01-2011).
[33] MGSF1N02ELT1 N-channel Mosfet, ON Semiconductor,
2000.
[34] MBR0520L Shottky Rectiﬁer, Fairchild Semiconductor, 2001.
80
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

