375
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Performance Analysis and Strategic Interactions in Service Networks   
 
 
Marina Bitsaki 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: bitsaki@tsl.gr 
 
Christos Nikolaou 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: : nikolau@tsl.gr
 
Manolis Voskakis 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: voskakis@tsl.gr 
 
 
Konstantinos Tsikrikas 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: cotsik@tsl.gr 
 
 
Willem-Jan van den Heuvel 
European Research Institute in Service Science 
Tilburg University  
The Netherlands 
e-mail: wjheuvel@uvt.nl 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Service 
businesses 
are 
currently 
viewed 
as 
interdependent entities that achieve competitive advantage by 
fostering partnerships and co-evolving with competitors. 
Service networks are formed to describe these relationships 
and reveal value created and shared among them. In this 
paper, we analyze network participants’ behavior aiming to 
optimize their own value. We describe ecosystems in which 
more than one competing networks co-exist and interact with 
one another to their own benefit. We perform simulations to 
measure the performance of service networks and investigate 
optimal strategies for competing systems. We describe various 
scenarios defining dynamic strategies for competing players 
and show experimentally that after a small number of time 
slots these strategies reach an equilibrium in which no one is 
willing to diverge from its decision to his own benefit. 
Keywords-service networks; value optimization; performance 
analysis; strategic behavior; competing networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, economic globalization combined 
with rapid technological progress has led most service 
companies to coordinate their corporate operations in a 
world of interactions and partnerships. Companies 
organize their fundamental structure into service 
networks capitalizing on the advantage of collaboration. 
This paper is an extension of [1] and studies the 
behavior of competing service networks in terms of 
customer satisfaction and value. 
 Service networks consist of interdependent companies 
that use social and technical resources and cooperate with 
each other to create value [2], [3], [4] and improve their 
competitive position. The concept of service networks 
includes a network of relationships between companies 
where 
flexibility, 
quality, 
cost 
effectiveness 
and 
competitiveness are better achieved than in a single 
company. The interaction between two participants of a 
network does not depend solely on their direct connection, 
but on the impact other relationships within the network 
have on them. In addition, the network can strengthen 
business innovation as different parts contribute services to 
an overall value proposition combining their know-how and 
core capabilities.    
The emergence of service networks forces companies to 
use alliances in order to achieve a competitive advantage. 
Man [5] describes various tactics followed by companies to 
advance their position and analyzes the types of competition 
that emerge in the network economy. He identifies three 
forms 
of 
competition: 
competition 
in 
networks 
(collaborating 
partners 
compete 
with 
each 
other), 
competition between networks and competition with 
organizational forms (smaller companies joining forces to 
compete with a network).  
While various approaches have been proposed to measure 
the performance of service networks [6], [7], [8], [1], little 
experimental testing or theoretical investigation on 
competing networks has been done [9], [10]. Most of the 
research has focused on describing models that represent 
inter-organization exchanges. In [6], a quantifiable approach 
of value calculation is proposed that connects value with 
expected revenues. In contrast, Biem and Caswell [7] 
describe building block elements of a value network model 
and design a network-based strategy for a prescriptive 
analysis of the value network. Allee [8] provides a 
systematic way for approaching the dynamics of intangible 

376
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
value realization, inter-convertibility, and creation. Biem 
and Caswell [7] and Allee [8] use qualitative methods to 
describe value in a service network in contrast to Caswell et 
al. [6] that calculates value in a quantifiable manner. The 
above approaches do not study strategic behavior of 
network participants that would result in value optimization.   
In [9], strategic behavior of service providers within 
service value networks is studied. An auction-based 
mechanism is proposed in order to efficiently match service 
offers and service requests and determine prices. It is shown 
that incentive compatibility holds under certain conditions.  
In [10], industry structure is analyzed in the presence of 
value networks. A model was developed that deals with a 
number of design aspects such as the number of suppliers 
and the importance of partner investments. It is shown that 
industry structure is more likely to shift to competition 
between value networks with IT playing an important role 
on that. Systems that encounter competition between service 
networks and are analyzed with respect to their evolution 
through well defined strategies have received little attention 
in literature. 
In this paper, we study the impact of strategic changes on 
the performance both at the level of the network as well as 
its participants compared to that of a competing network. In 
particular, we describe a framework to analyze competing 
networks based on the model introduced in [1]. In [1], we 
measured the performance of one service network solving 
value optimization problems with respect to service prices. 
Comparing to previous work that has been done, we 
improved the estimation techniques and we used a powerful 
simulation tool to perform our experiments and analyze 
dynamic “what-if” questions such as: what is the impact of 
setting optimal – for one participant - prices on the 
performance of the other participants as well as the entire 
network? What is the impact on the performance if a new 
participant suddenly enters the service network? Are there 
any equilibrium strategies among the participants that 
eliminate their conflicts of interests?  
We observed that participants’ value depends on their 
expected profits. Expected profits express the additional 
value that will be accrued by the relationship levels a 
participant develops when it sells goods and services to 
other participants or to the end customers. This value is 
related to the degree of satisfaction it obtains from its 
customers. There are many approaches that have been 
proposed to measure customer satisfaction. We used the 
methodology proposed by Fornell et al., known as American 
Customer Satisfaction Index [11].  
In this paper, we extend the initial model to account for 
competitors of the existing service network. We define the 
conditions under which two competing networks co-exist, 
the types of information the networks share and various 
strategies chosen by the competing participants. We 
simulate those strategies and observe the behavior of our 
system over time in terms of profits and market share.   
We use the System Dynamics approach [12], [13] to 
analyze the behavior of a complex system (competing car 
repair service networks) over time. System dynamics tools 
allow modelers to succinctly depict complex (service) 
networks, visualizing processes as behavior-over-time 
graphs, stock/flow maps, and causal loop diagrams. These 
models can be tested and explored with computer simulation 
providing for example better understanding of the impact of 
policy changes (e.g., through animation of (service) 
systems) and facilities for sensitivity analysis. Examples of 
such tools include iThink [13], Vensim [14] and PowerSim 
[15]. 
In this paper, we have adopted the iThink tool to 
investigate existence of equilibrium prices chosen by the 
keystone member of each network. The results of these 
simulations provide predictions about the future of the 
service networks in order to increase its adaptability to the 
changes of the environment and enable network participants 
to determine the most profitable co-operations and attract 
new ones. We show that the interactions among the 
participants of the competing networks force them to reach 
equilibrium otherwise the network will collapse. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the car repair service system. Section III 
presents the methodology proposed in [1] to estimate value 
in service systems. In Section IV, we describe the model of 
two competing networks and identify the objectives of our 
analysis. In Section V, we run experiments to measure the 
performance of a single service network as presented in [1]. 
The results of the simulations are presented in Section VI. In 
Section VII, we run experiments to derive equilibrium 
strategies of companies of competing networks. In Section 
VIII, we show the results. Finally, in Section IX, we provide 
some concluding remarks. 
II. 
CASE STUDY 
The motivating scenario revolves around a service 
network that links four types of participants: an Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (e.g., Volvo), Car Dealers (with 
repair facilities), Suppliers and Customers.  
The scenario that we will use during the remainder of 
this article is an extension to [6] and basically looks as 
follows. OEM-franchised dealers may service and repair 
cars for their clients. Both activities require a car parts 
catalogue to ensure that repairs can be performed efficiently 
either in the replacement of parts or repairing after 
accidents. 
The 
part 
catalogue 
facilitates 
efficient 
installation, operation and lifecycle maintenance of intricate 
products describing detailed part information that can be 
fully integrated with other service applications supporting 
customer support processes, human resource management, 
and other service provisions. 
The quality of the OEM parts, catalogues, and OEM 
support services influences how many OEM parts will be 
ordered and used for a car repair and how many parts will 
be used from Third Party Suppliers (TPS), and how many 

377
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
customers will go to OEM dealers or to TPS dealers. OEM 
obtains parts from certified supply-chain suppliers (SCS). 
The technicians report the car service requirements that 
may include replacing teardowns, warranty replacements and 
collision repairs. On the basis of the car diagnosis, a cost 
estimate will be computed and communicated to the client 
for authorization. Once authorized the automotive technician 
will scrutinize failure symptoms, detect faulty parts, order 
parts and perform the repair. Ordering parts is a complex 
process that involves asking advice from expert technicians 
from the OEM, including acquiring information about parts 
under warranty, and getting approval from the dealer’s part 
manager. The part manager then checks local inventory for 
the required part, and if necessary checks the stock at the 
OEM or supplier stocks, and eventually places an order. The 
part manager may either use third-party suppliers or 
suppliers from certified supply-chain suppliers.  
III. 
THE MODEL 
In this section, we introduce our service performance 
analytics model in support of strategic analysis of service 
network changes and improvements as presented in [1]. 
Theorizing 
on 
service 
networks, 
and 
particularly 
performance analysis, can be addressed from multiple and 
often complementary perspectives. In our work, we propose 
a methodology to calculate value in service systems. We 
focus on the dynamic environment in which service 
networks emerge, and especially on connectivity and 
profitable cooperation that play an important role in value 
creation. We use our model to investigate network 
profitability and give answers to the following: 
 
Determine the conditions under which it is 
profitable for a firm to participate in the network 
and identify the factors that influence its value.  
 
Identify keystone participants (participants that 
create the most value for the network).  
 
Determine participants’ optimal strategic decisions 
(cooperating with someone or not, joining the 
network or not, etc.). 
We consider the service network as a set ܤ of 
participants connected through transfer of offerings that 
delivers value to them. All offerings are treated as services 
that are composed by participants’ interactions and co-
operations to provide a final service to a set ܥ of end 
customers. Let pij denote the price participant i charges 
participant j for offering its services and rij denote the 
service time of the interaction between participants i and j. 
Price and time are the main parameters that affect customer 
satisfaction which is in turn the corner-stone for calculating 
value as we will see below. 
A. Customer Satisfaction 
Customer satisfaction measures the willingness of end 
customers to buy the services offered by the network and 
influences the increase or decrease of new entries. The 
calculation of satisfaction SATij(TN) of participant j for 
consuming services from participant i at the end of the time 
interval [TN-1, TN] for our model is a variation of the 
American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) [12] and is 
basically described as follows. ACSI is operationalized 
through three measures: q1 is an overall rating of satisfaction, 
q2 is the degree to which performance falls short of or 
exceeds expectations, and q3 is a rating of performance 
relative to the customer’s ideal good or service in the 
category. Without loss of generality, we quantify the above 
measures using the following formula:  
 

qk = [(k/pij)0.6 + (k/rij)0.4], k=1,2,3,

 
where [x] denotes the integer part of x and ks, ks are the 
parameters that determine the effect of price pij and time tij 
respectively on qk. In our analysis, we use the following 
function (see [11] for further details) to calculate the 
satisfaction:  


SATij(TN)=(w1q1+w2q2+w3q3-w1-w2-w3)/(9w1+9w2+9w3),
 
where wk are weights that indicate the importance of each 
measure qk.  
B. Participants’ Value 
We consider that an economic entity within a service 
network has value when it satisfies the entity’s needs and its 
acquisition has positive tradeoff between the benefits and the 
sacrifices required. We emphasize on the gains or losses 
captured by the relationships between participants in order to 
compute value. We define the expected profits Epij(TN) of 
participant i due to its interaction with participant j to be the 
expected value of participant i in the next time interval [TN, 
TN+1] increased (or decreased) by the percentage change of 
the expected satisfaction ESATij(TN) in the next time interval 
and is given by: 


Epij(TN)=(ESATij(TN)/ESATij(TN-1))(ERij(TN)-ECij(TN,
 
where ERij(TN) and ECij(TN) are the expected revenues and 
costs respectively for the next time interval. Thus, the value 
Vi(TN) of participant i at the end of time interval [TN-1,TN] is 
the sum of its realized profits (revenues minus costs) and the 
expected profits that come from its relationships with all 
other participants. The total value of the network is the sum 
of the value of each participant. 
C. The Mechanism  for Value Calculation  
In this subsection we present our value-based model that 
provides a mechanism to calculate value divided in various 

378
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
hierarchical levels. Fig. 1 (generated by iThink) shows the 
upper level of the hierarchy and visualizes the basic elements 
of our framework. We use the example of Section II to 
simplify our description. Each node represents a module that 
calculates the value of a participant. Arrows represent 
dependencies between modules. Each module encloses a 
sub-system that calculates the value of the module (second 
hierarchical level). Complex variables inside the module are 
presented as modules too. Fig. 2 shows the dealer’s value 
calculation process. The green arrows show the impact a 
module has on another module (e.g., dealer’s expected 
profits increase as dealer’s revenues increase). The module 
dealer’s cost in the third hierarchical level is depicted in Fig. 
3. 
 
 
Figure 1.  First hierarchical level of value mechanism. 
 
Figure 2.  Second hierarchical level – dealer’s value.  
 
Figure 3.  Third hierarchical level – dealer’s cost. 
 
IV. 
COMPETING SERVICE NETWORKS 
We consider a complex system comprising two 
competing service networks A and B that provide the same 
service k. Our formalization captures the networks 
characteristics combining service-oriented economy with 
game theoretic tools.  
We are interested in the case where network B is a new 
entry in the market of service k so that network A has 
already its own customers. Existing customers may move 
from network A to network B and vice-versa according to 
their satisfaction for their provider. New customers may 
choose a provider based on service price, service time and 
provider’s reputation. We also assume that the two networks 
might share a common participant (e.g. they might have the 
same supplier).  
Our model studies a two-player game where service 
providers make choices for prices and service times, have 
only one type of customers and compete for market share. 
We define a pure strategy si for provider i (i = A, B), the 
pair si = (pi, ti), where pi is the price for the service k and ti is 
the service time needed to provide service k. Let S be the set 
of all pure strategies for each provider. 
This game is different from the traditional economic 
models where providers are considered to be autonomous 
entities whose set of actions do not include interactions with 
others. The providers in our analysis are part of more 
complex systems whose actions affect other participants’ 
actions that in turn affect them and so on.  
In the absence of competition, a provider seeks to 
maximize its individual profits rather than the overall social 
welfare of the system it belongs to. In this case, the social 
END CUSTOMER'S 
VALUE
SUPPLIERS' VALUE
DEALER'S VALUE
TOTAL VALUE OF 
SERVICE NETWORK
OEM's VALUE
DEALERS' REVENUES
DEALERS' EXPECTED
PROFITS
DEALERS' COSTS
DEALERS' VALUE
DEALERS' COSTS.COSTS OF THE 
DEALER
DEALERS' EXPECTED 
PROFITS.EXPECTED
PROFITS OF THE DEALER
DEALERS' REVENUES.REVENUES OF THE
DEALER
-
+
Ordering
 Logic
ordering
Repairing Materials 
Inventory
supplier 
lead time
repair materials
on order
receiving materials
selling materials
Consumer 
Demand 
Logic
DEALERS' COST
MEAN REPAIR TIME
numbers of parts 
ordered per month
average OEM price 
per part Po
TOTAL COST OF 
PURCHASES.COST total purchases Pd
mean price per repair
DEALERS' 
FIXED COST.DEALERS' FIXED COST
average number of parts 
per repair
TOTAL COST OF 
PURCHASES
DEALERS' 
FIXED COST
rate of service
requests
CUSTOMER 
SATISFACTION
poisson s

379
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
welfare achieved by the provider’s actions is less than the 
maximum social welfare achievable if a social planner were 
to select the provider strategies. In the model of competing 
providers (this is the case of oligopoly market and not 
perfect competition), the equilibrium strategies do not 
necessarily maximize social welfare as well.   
Our objective is twofold. First, we seek to derive 
equilibrium strategies for the providers, given that all other 
participants of their own networks have revealed their 
actions. A Nash equilibrium is a pair of strategies, one for 
each provider, in which each provider is assumed to know 
the equilibrium strategies of his opponent, and no one 
benefits by changing only his own strategy unilaterally [16], 
[17]. In our game, s* = (s1
*, s2
*) is a Nash equilibrium in 
pure strategies if for each s1, s2 ε S, value satisfies the 
inequalities:    
 

VA(s1
*, s2
*) ≥ VA(s1, s2
*),

 
 
VB(s1
*, s2
*) ≥ VB(s1
*, s2),
             
 
where V denotes the value at a fixed time interval as given 
in Section III. 
Second, we investigate the evolution of the two networks 
over time in terms of survivability and dominance in the 
market. 
V. 
SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS FOR THE CAR REPAIR 
SERVICE NETWORK 
In this section, we describe in short, simulation 
experiments (as performed in [1]) to measure the 
performance of a single service system. In Section VII, we 
design experiments involving two competing networks, in 
order to derive equilibrium strategies and observe the 
system’s evolution over time. 
We make use of 4 scenarios. First, we apply our approach 
to the car repair service system (Section II) to examine the 
network’s evolution over time. We represent technicians, 
the parts manager, and the help desk experts as economic 
entities, each of which is offering its labor as a service to the 
service system. We measure rates of offerings and payment 
flows per month over a period of about 30 months. End 
customer service requests denoted by s are strongly affected 
by end customer satisfaction, since satisfied customers 
attract new customers to enter the network. Without loss of 
generality, we consider that the service requests are 
produced by the Poisson distribution with mean es being the 
output of the function: 
 

es = -a1SAT2 + a2SAT,

where a2>2a1>0 so that es is an increasing function of SAT 
in the range [0,1]. (We have chosen (6) because the rate of 
increase of es decreases with respect to SAT.) We also 
consider that the number of technicians is a function of the 
number of service requests; we take that the number of 
technicians increases linearly with the number of service 
requests. We calculate the value of each participant as a 
function of price and time and determine its optimal level 
with respect to price.  
Second, we use the transformation of the basic model, as 
in [6], in order to cut costs and increase value. Specifically, 
a solution provider achieves interoperability between 
participants’ information systems through application 
software operated by the OEM. The application allows 
everyone to have access to up-to-date information about 
parts at any time, as soon as this information becomes 
available to the data base of the application. The gain from 
the new IT infrastructure is twofold: repair time is reduced 
resulting in customer satisfaction increase and OEM’s 
mailing costs are eliminated. We apply our methodology to 
the transformed network to show that the continuous 
changes of the environment push the network to restructure 
itself in order to remain competitive. We determine the time 
interval in which we observe positive effects in profitability 
in the transformed network compared to the initial one. We 
also determine which of the participants benefit from the 
transformation and which not. 
Third, we consider a model in which the group of 
dealers is replaced by a new one that offers more 
complementarities to the end customers without increasing 
the mean repair price. This action seems to be profitable due 
to the increase of the satisfaction of the end customers of the 
service network. However new dealers have higher costs 
that may affect service network’s value. We examine the 
value of these dealers and the value of the entire service 
network provided that OEM chooses to cooperate with 
them.  
Fourth, we investigate Nash equilibrium strategies [16], 
[17] between OEM and the dealer. We define as a strategy 
for OEM and the dealers the mean profit rates a and b of 
selling parts and repair services respectively. Let ps, p0, pd 
be the mean prices set by the suppliers, OEM and dealers 
respectively for offering their services. Then it holds that: 
 

p0 = ps + aps = (1+a)ps,



pd = p0 + bp0 = (1+b)p0.

 
We examine the existence of equilibrium strategies 
considering that the rest of the network participants (apart 
from OEM and the dealer) do not affect their decisions. We 
assume that OEM buys parts from certified suppliers at a 
given price ps. 

380
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. 
RESULTS FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NETWORK 
In this section, we present the simulation results from our 
analysis. First, we compare the basic model with the 
transformed one. 
A .Value Optimization in Basic and Transformed Network 
We show the mean repair price p* that maximizes the 
dealers’ and OEM’s value in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN 
THE BASIC 
AND 
THE 
TRANSFOMED NEWORK 
Value 
Model 
Basic Network 
Transformed Network 
p* 
111 
(dealer) 
225 (OEM) 
116 
(dealer) 
218 (OEM) 
Dealer 
51.469.012 
34.700.000 
46.874.332 
34.985.000 
OEM 
8500*106 
26793*106 
9100*106 
29990*106 
 
We observe that: 
 
The dealers’ optimal mean repair price in the basic 
service network is lower than in the transformed 
service network, since the mean repair time (that 
affects value) decreases, so the dealer charges his 
customers less. Consequently, the dealer is forced 
to increase the mean repair price in order to increase 
its revenues. Nevertheless, at the optimal mean 
repair price, dealers’ value is less in the transformed 
network since the customer satisfaction has 
decreased as well (higher charges).  
 
OEM’s value is much higher in the transformed 
network than in the basic one. This is explained by 
the fact that the mean repair time decreases and the 
customers are more satisfied (at OEM’s optimal 
mean repair price). In addition, OEM in the 
transformed network has much lower mailing and 
labor costs.  
 
In both networks OEM’s value at dealer’s optimal 
mean repair price (111 and 116 respectively) is very 
low compared to OEM’s value at his optimal mean 
repair price. This means that OEM will never be 
satisfied to offer its services at prices that reach 
dealer’s optimal level. 
 
Dealers’ value at OEM’s optimal mean repair price 
is higher in the transformed network, since OEM’s 
optimal price is lower (218).  
Furthermore, the simulation results show that, OEM’s 
value in the transformed network is not higher than that of 
the basic network from the first month. It dominates after 10-
12 months, when both networks offer their final services at 
their optimal mean repair price (Fig. 4). When both networks 
offer their services at common prices in the range of 80 to 
350, the transformed network dominates the basic network at 
month 8 to 17.  
Finally, the total value of the transformed network 
(32.190.040.300) is maximized at mean repair price 216 and 
is higher than that of the basic network (28.593.400.000) 
which is maximized at mean repair price 223.  This is 
explained by the fact that end customers are more satisfied 
and OEM (the keystone participant) has managed to cut costs 
at a great extend in the transformed network. Moreover, we 
see that the optimal mean repair price for both service 
networks is very close to the optimal mean repair price of 
OEM, since OEM contributes the largest part of the total 
value of the network.  
B. Sensitivity Analysis of  the Mean Repair Price 
In this section, we investigate the impact of mean repair 
price changes to the dealers’ value. As the mean repair price 
increases, the difference between the dealers’ value in the 
basic network and that in the transformed network is 
smaller. This is justified by the fact that although the service 
requests decrease the mean repair price increases resulting 
in a decrease of the total value as shown in Fig. 5. 
C. The Impact of New Entries 
We call the network with the new group of dealers, the 
competitive network. We calculate values in the new 
scenario at mean repair price 216 which is the optimal price 
for the transformed network. We investigate the impact of 
the change of dealers letting the price unchanged so that the 
end customers are motivated to remain in the network. We 
show that dealers’ value (31.527.812) is lower in the 
competitive network compared to the transformed one 
(35.481.031), since the new dealers’ cost is higher due to the 
complementarities they offer. In addition, OEM’s value 
increases (from 29.793.000.000 to 31.713.504.020) due to 
the increase of the service requests. The total value of the 
network increases from 32.190.040.300 to 32.792.529.000. 
 
 
Figure 4.  OEM’s value in basic (1) and transformed (2) network at 
common mean repair prices. 

381
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.  Dealers’ difference of  value in basic and transformed networks. 
 
From the above we observe that a change in the network 
that improves its performance may affect positively some 
participants and negatively others. Naturally, dissatisfied 
participants abandon the network causing side effects to the 
others. 
D. Participants’ Equilibrium Strategies 
We perform two experiments in order to investigate 
strategic interactions and determine equilibrium strategies of 
OEM and dealers. In the first experiment we calculate 
OEM’s optimal profit rate at a given profit rate for the 
dealer. Simulations show that when the dealer increases its 
profit rate (e.g., from 6% to 10%), OEM’s optimal choice is 
to decrease its optimal profit rate (from 24% to 21%). 
Conversely, if OEM increases its profit rates (e.g., from 14% 
to 21%), the dealer optimally decreases its profit rate (from 
15% to 10%).  
The second experiment calculates a set of equilibrium 
strategies for OEM and the dealer: at dealer’s profit rate of 
10% the optimal OEM’s profit rate equals 21%. Conversely, 
at OEM’s profit rate of 21% the optimal dealer’s profit rate 
equals 10%. 
VII. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS FOR THE MODEL OF TWO 
COMPETING SERVICE NETWORKS 
In Section V, we defined strategies involving two 
participants within the same repair service network (OEM 
and dealer). We figured out that their decisions were aligned 
so that value was increased for both of them.   
In this section, we use the same model for value 
calculation to design experiments on a complex system of 
two competing networks; A and B as shown in Fig. 6. We 
consider that service network B has lately entered the 
market and serves a smaller portion of customers than 
service network A. 
New customers are free to choose any of the two service 
networks to have their car repaired. More interestingly, 
customers may choose to abandon one network for the other 
when they are not satisfied from the services of their 
dealers. Even though OEMs are not directly connected to 
customers, their actions affect dealers’ decisions which in 
turn 
affect 
customer 
satisfaction 
resulting 
in 
the 
restructuring of market share (Fig. 6). 
We are interested in strategic behavior of the two OEMs 
provided that the other participants’ and competitors’ 
actions   are kept fixed. Both OEMs seek to maximize their 
own value and achieve this by participating in a sequential 
game rather than solving the problem defined in Section IV 
in a one-shot game. At each time period, each OEM exploits 
information revealed by his opponent and makes decisions 
on which prices to charge dealers and which delivery times 
to complete dealers’ orders for parts for the next time 
period.  
We describe 4 scenarios defining dynamic strategies for 
the OEMs and show that after a small number of time slots 
these strategies reach an equilibrium in which no one is 
willing to diverge from its decision to his own benefit. 
Let vi(t) be the value at time slot t, ni(t) be the number of 
ordered parts at time slot t, pi(t) the mean price per part at 
time slot t and di(t) the mean delivery time at time slot t for 
OEM i.   
In the first scenario, information revealed for each OEM 
in each time slot is the number of ordered parts of its 
opponent for the previous time slot. We consider symmetric 
strategies (same rule for both OEMs), where delivery time 
di(t) is left fixed for the whole duration of the experiment 
and price pi(t) is changed according to the algorithm 1 
shown in Fig. 7 (where i, j = A, B, i≠j and ε>0). 
As can be seen in Fig. 7, we use two criteria to determine 
the price for OEM i; we compare its value in two 
consecutive time slots and the number of orders with that of 
its competitor. At this point, we should mention that if we 
observe a loss in the value and a higher market share than 
our opponent, then we decide to increase price by a small 
increment since we can afford a small reduction in the  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  The competing networks interacting through their customers. 
 
11500000
12000000
12500000
13000000
13500000
14000000
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
Price
D iffe re n c e  o f v a lu e  in  tw o  n e tw o rk s

382
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
number of customers but we will gain more revenues aiming 
at a total increase of value.  
In the second scenario, information revealed for each 
OEM in each time slot is the number of ordered parts of its 
opponent for the previous time slot and additionally for 
OEM of network B, the price of the previous time slot set 
by OEM of network A. 
 The strategy for each OEM is not symmetric (the two 
OEMs follow a different strategy), taking delivery time to 
be fixed for the whole duration of the experiment and price 
to be changed as shown in Fig. 8.  
In this case, we change the order of the criteria placing 
the comparison of the number of orders first. Additionally, 
player B uses its opponent’s former prices to gain 
competitive advantage when the performance of the network 
it participates is observed to be decreased.  
In the third scenario, information revealed for each OEM 
in each time slot is the number of ordered parts of its 
opponent for the previous time slot. The strategy for OEM 
of network A is the same as in scenario 2 but OEM of 
network B follows a different strategy that is considered to 
be more risky since it takes into account the variability of 
mean delivery time (see Fig. 9). 
In the fourth scenario, we study the behavior of the 
weaker competitor (network B) given that he first observes 
the behavior of his opponent. Again, the number of ordered 
parts in the two networks is common knowledge to both of 
them. OEM of network A (price leader) determines its own 
price following the same strategy as in scenario 1 (see Fig. 
7). According to this price, OEM of network B (price 
follower) sets its price for the next time slot according to the 
rule given in Fig. 10.  
We conduct simulations for the above scenarios and 
examine whether the strategies defined in each of them 
reach an equilibrium in the sequential game. In addition, we 
compare the values of the competitors and draw conclusions 
for their evolution over time in terms of dominance and 
survivability.  
The time slot in all experiments is measured in months. 
We run simulations for 60 months and set the initial price  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Algorithm 1: strategy for OEM i in the first scenario. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Algorithm 2: strategy for OEMsA and B  in the second scenario. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Algorithm 3: strategy for OEM B  in the third scenario. 
 
 
for OEM A to be higher (pA(1) = 200) than that of OEM B 
(pB(1) = 190) since the new competitor needs to provide 
incentives to the forthcoming customers. 
VIII. RESULTS FOR THE STARTEGIC BEHAVIOR OF 
COMPETING SERVICE NETWORKS  
The main results for the strategic behavior of the 
competing OEMs are presented in this section. In the first 
scenario, the value of OEM A decreases and the value of 
OEM B increases up to month 4, where equilibrium is 
reached as shown in Fig. 11. That is, neither OEM A nor 
OEM B are willing to change the derived prices followed by 
their strategies after month 4. 
The intuition behind this result is that higher prices for 
OEM A imply higher service prices for dealers, thus, 
decreasing customer satisfaction. As a consequence, a 
if  vi(t) < vi(t-1) 
 
if   ni(t-1) < nj(t-1) 
 
 
pi(t) = pi(t-1) – ε 
 
else 
 
 
pi(t) = pi(t-1) + ε 
else 
 
pi(t) = pi(t-1) 
 
 
STRATEGY FOR A 
 
if  nA(t-1) < nB(t-1) 
 
if   vA(t) < vA(t-1) 
 
 
pA(t) = pA(t-1) – ε 
 
else 
 
 
pA(t) = pA(t-1)  
else 
 
pA(t) = pA(t-1) 
 
 
STRATEGY FOR B 
 
if  nB(t-1) < nA(t-1) 
 
if   vB(t) < vB(t-1) 
 
 
pB(t) = pA(t-1) – ε 
 
else 
 
 
pB(t) = pB(t-1)  
else 
if  nB(t-1) < nA(t-1) 
 
if   vB(t) > vB(t-1) 
 
 
pB(t) = pB(t-1) + ε 
 
 
dB(t) = dB(t-1) – ε 
 
else 
 
 
pB(t) = pB(t-1) – ε 
 
 
dB(t) = dB(t-1) + ε 
else 
 
pB(t) = pB(t-1) 
 
dB(t) = dB(t-1) 

383
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
considerable portion of market share has moved from OEM 
A to OEM B so that symmetric strategies have created 
networks of comparable size. 
The second scenario in which the most recently set up 
network imitates its opponent’s decisions in case of unstable 
situations, has similar results as the first one. Customers of 
network A join network B in presence of lower prices up to 
month 4 at which an equilibrium is reached (see Fig. 12). 
Despite the same shapes of value curves between the two 
networks under the two scenarios, the actual value level for 
each network is increased in the second scenario. This is due 
to the fact that the prices change more aggressively in the 
second scenario without implying losses in value. 
In the third scenario, OEM B changes his strategy to 
encounter delivery time in addition to price. This has as a 
result an aggressive increase in customer satisfaction, since 
customers are given the opportunity to choose a relatively 
small increase in price at a shorter service time. This entails 
an increase in value for OEM B up to month 8 after which 
an equilibrium is reached. On the contrary, OEM A faces a 
loss in its value in the absence of time reductions (see Fig. 
13). At month 4, the value of OEM B becomes higher 
compared to the value of OEM A showing that at this time 
slot the number of customers of the second network gets 
larger than that of the first one. The flexibility practiced by 
OEM B gave him the opportunity to change the balance of 
the market to its own benefit.   
The simulations of the forth scenario verify our intuition 
that the leader (network A) faces the smaller loss in value 
(and consequently in the number of customers) compared to 
the other scenarios. This is explained by the fact that it is the 
first to choose a price and predict its opponent’s choice that 
will be based on this price. As can be seen in Fig. 14, 
equilibrium is reached at month 6 with OEM A having a 
significantly larger value than that of OEM B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Algorithm 4: strategy for OEM B  in the forth scenario. 
 
Figure 11.  Value comparison in the first scenario. 
 
Figure 12.   Value comparison in the second scenario. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if  vB(t) < vB(t-1) 
 
if   nB(t-1) < nA(t-1) 
 
 
pB(t) = pA(t) – ε 
 
else 
 
 
pB(t) = pA(t) + ε 
else 
 
pA(t) = pA(t-1) 
 
 

384
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 13.  Value comparison in the third scenario. 
 
Figure 14.  Value comparison in the forth scenario. 
 
 
 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a methodology that evaluates 
the performance of service systems and  analyzes strategic 
interactions between competing service networks. We 
applied this methodology to a car repair service network. 
We run simulation experiments to maximize the value of 
each participant and the total value of the network. In 
addition, we defined suitable scenarios to study the internal 
relationships that are developed inside the service network. 
We examined the interactions between the participants 
inside the service network in order to determine their 
optimal choices. We further designed simulations to 
investigate equilibrium strategies followed by leading 
participants of competing car repair service networks. We 
showed that in order to gain competitive advantage, a 
company has to align its objectives with those of the 
network it belongs to. 
Directions for future work include the study of 
competitive service networks in which all participants take 
into account their rivals’ and partners’ strategies in order to 
calculate their optimal choice. Furthermore, additional work 
is needed on the estimation of value of intangible assets 
such as knowledge, sense of community, etc.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Voskakis, C. Nikolaou, Willem-Jan den Heuvel, and M. 
Bitsaki: “Servive network modelling and performance 
analysis”. Proc. International Conference on Internet and Web 
Applications and Services (ICIW 2011), St, maarten, The 
Netherlands Antilles, 2011. 
[2] J. Spohrer, P. Maglio, J. Bailey, and D. Gruhl, “ Steps 
towards a science of service systems”, Computer 40(1), pp. 
71–77, 2007. 
[3] V. Allee, “The future of knowledge: increasing prosperity 
through value networks”, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 
2002. 
[4] J. Gordijn and H. Akkermans, ‘‘Designing and evaluating e-
business models,’’ IEEE Intelligent Systems 16, No. 4, 11–
17, 2001. 
[5] Ard-Pieter de Man: “The network economy: strategy, 
structure and management”, Edward Elgar, USA,  2004. 
[6] N.S. Caswell, C. Nikolaou, J. Sairamesh, M. Bitsaki, G.D. 
Koutras, and G. Iacovidis, “Estimating value in service 
systems”, IBM System Journal, vol. 47, nr. 1, pp. 87-100, 
2008. 
[7] A. Biem and N. Caswell, “A value network model for 
strategic 
analysis”, 
Proc. 
41st 
Hawaii 
International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2008. 
[8] V. Allee “Value network analysis and value conversion of 
tangible and intangible assets”. Journal of Intellectual Capital 
, Volume 9, No. 1, 5-24, 2008. 
[9] Clemens Van Dinther ,  Benjamin Blau , and  Tobias Conte : 
“Strategic behavior in service networks under price and 
service level competition”. Proc. International Conference on 
Business Informatics, 2009. 
[10] Evangelos 
Katsamakas: 
“Competing 
value 
networks, 
incomplete contracts and IT”. Proc. International Conference 
on System Sciences, 2005.   
[11] C. Fornell, M.D. Johnson, E.W. Anderson, J. Cha, and Bryant 
B.E., “The American customer satisfaction index: nature, 
purpose, and findings”,  Journal of Marketing 60, 7–18, 1996. 

385
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[12] Jay 
W. 
Forrester, 
“Industrial 
Dynamics”, 
Pegasus 
Communications, 1961. 
[13] “http://www.iseesystems.com/softwares/Business/IthinkSoftw
are.aspx”, January 2012. 
[14] “http://www.vensim.com”, January 2012.  
[15] “http://www.powersim.com”, January 2012.  
[16] J.D. Sterman, “Business dynamics: systems thinking and 
modeling for a complex world”, McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
[17] D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, “Game theory”. MIT Press, 1991. 
 

