100
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
How to Achieve and Measure the Benefits of Fault Tolerant Production 
Infrastructures 
 
Emmanouil Serrelis, Nikos Alexandris 
Department of Informatics, 
University of Piraeus, 
80 Karaoli & Dimitriou, 
18534, Piraeus, Greece 
serrelis@unipi.gr, alexandr@unipi.gr 
 
Abstract 
 
Disaster Recovery Infrastructures, which have 
become 
a 
common 
aspect 
of 
all 
major 
IT 
infrastructures, could transform to Fault Tolerant 
Infrastructures in order to increase productivity, 
effectiveness and availability. This paper suggests a 
methodology 
for 
the 
transformation 
of 
High 
Availability Systems on which Disaster Recovery 
Infrastructures 
are 
based, 
to 
Fault 
Tolerant 
Production Infrastructures and establishes some Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) as a means to measure 
the effectiveness of the approach, adopting the 
principles 
of 
the 
Information 
Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework to a cost 
cutting, ecological and security-aware environment.  
 
Keywords: Fault Tolerance, Disaster Recovery, 
Availability, Change Management, Key Performance 
Indicators, ITIL 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Events, such as the recent global economic crisis, 
have stressed the need to reduce the expenses in every 
aspect of the effected organizations, including IT 
expenses. Additionally, Green IT has become equally 
important being nowadays a major strategic objective. 
As stated in “Gartner's 10 Strategic Trends for 2009” 
“For IT, green is everything, and that includes 
anything that can help cut the energy bill and reduce 
fuel use.” [1]. 
Towards this direction, IT should consider, among 
others, the change of its existing infrastructures and 
services. Some of the most eminent expenses of IT-
related infrastructures are the costs related to Disaster 
Recovery 
Infrastructures. 
How 
could 
these 
infrastructures be optimized in both operational and 
financial terms? What could be the effect of 
transforming a disaster recovery infrastructure to a 
more cost-effective infrastructure? These are the basic 
questions this paper addresses. 
In a “disaster avoidance” rather than a “disaster 
recovery” approach, the high availability solutions aim 
to 
proactively 
protect 
business 
continuity 
by 
monitoring the key business functions and mission 
critical applications that are predetermined as business 
priorities. In a situation where an IT component fails, it 
can be dealt (manually or automatically) well before its 
failure impacts the business. Designing IT system 
components with the ability to remain operational in 
the event of a failure has an additional benefit; that is 
to 
increase 
IT 
efficiency 
through 
continuous 
architecture. Moreover, such "preserve and protect" 
measures can facilitate maintenance projects when 
malfunctioning or low performing components can be 
upgraded or repaired during a planned downtime. 
The current paper, based on [2], suggests the 
transformation of the existing “cold-standby” Disaster 
Recovery Infrastructures, based on High Availability 
Systems, to Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures, 
presenting the various differences of the two 
approaches. Using the theory of change management 
adding the necessary technical aspects, a specialized 
transformation strategy is proposed. The results of both 
the transformation methodology and the the adoption 
of Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures are 
examined 
using 
the 
concepts 
of 
Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework 
and especially through the use of Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs). 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 gives an overview of the technical and terms 
related to availability. Section 3 highlights the benefits 
of migrating to a Fault Tolerant Infrastructure, whereas 
Section 4 introduces some basic principles of transition 
strategies. The proposed transformation strategy is 
presented in Section 5 and the measurement 
methodology of the related benefits is addressed in 

101
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
Section 6. This approach is critically evaluated in 
Section 7 and the paper concludes in Section 8. 
 
2. Availability terms 
 
Currently, 
there are 
several approaches for 
developing Disaster Recovery Infrastructures. All of 
them aim to protect organizations’ most valuable 
assets: Data and Services. In order to be able to 
understand the differences between them, it is essential 
to define several terms related to availability. 
Production infrastructures should be distinguished 
from Backup (or Disaster Recovery) infrastructures. 
The Production infrastructures aim to serve all daily 
services of the organization, whereas Backup 
infrastructures operate only if a disaster occurs. This 
fact would classify Backup infrastructures as a rather 
luxury solution which would justify their existence 
only in the case of an extreme, disastrous event. 
Availability is the proportion of time that an 
application can be used for productive work, measured 
against the time that it must be functional. The time 
that the application must be functional or available to 
users is called "mission time," which may be quite 
different than 7 days per week - 24 hours per day 
(24x7) or 5 days per week - 8 hours per day (usual 
working hours) [3]. 
There are two factors that determine application 
availability. The first is the reliability of the 
components that comprise the application: namely, 
how often any of the consisting components fail. The 
second is how long it takes for the application to be 
restored once a failure has occurred. The components 
that comprise an application minimally include the 
server hardware, operating system and the application 
itself. The application may also be dependent on data 
storage devices, network access devices, databases, file 
systems, and other hardware and software components. 
The amount of time it takes to bring up an application 
after a failure depends on what it was that caused the 
application to fail. This time period is called Recovery 
Time Objective (RTO). If the application itself failed, 
recovery may be as simple as restarting the application 
on the same system. If, on the other hand, the 
application has failed due to a hardware failure, 
recovery can take a significantly longer time since it 
could involve [3]: 
 
Notifying the service provider of the failure 
 
Waiting for the arrival of the service technician 
 
Determining what component failed 
 
Replacing the failed component 
 
Rebooting the operating system 
 
Recovering the file system 
 
Recovering the database 
 
Restarting the networking software 
 
Restarting the application 
 
Fault tolerance differs from high availability by 
providing 
additional 
resources 
that 
allow 
an 
application to "ride through" a failure without 
interruption [3]. Many of the high-availability solutions 
on the market today actually provide fault tolerance for 
a particular application component. Disk mirroring, 
where there are two disk drives with identical copies of 
the data, is an example of a fault-tolerant component. If 
one of the disk drives fails, there is another copy of the 
data that is instantly available so that the application 
can continue execution. However, once such a failure 
occurs, the system becomes vulnerable to the failure of 
the single remaining disk drive, which now has the 
only copy of the data and represents a single point of 
failure. Action should be taken as soon as possible to 
create a mirror of the remaining disk drive. However, 
this process may have a negative impact on system 
performance, depending on where the processing to re-
mirror the drive takes place. 
A fully fault-tolerant solution requires that all the 
resources that the application is dependent on are 
replicated, including the application process itself. This 
requires an independent processor (not part of the same 
– probably – symmetrical multiprocessing system) and 
a copy of the memory that the application uses. In the 
worst-case failure scenario, one in which the processor 
or memory fails, the replicated version of the 
application continues to execute. Other failures simply 
require the application to use alternate resources (disk 
drives, disk adapters, communications devices). As a 
result of this complete hardware and process 
replication, fault-tolerant systems are significantly 
more expensive than highly available systems. A fault-
tolerant system would be used in a situation where no 
downtime can be tolerated at all, such as an air-traffic-
control system, an emergency-response system or 
financial trading systems (during trade hours).  
In evaluating a fault-tolerant system, particular 
attention should be paid to the repair process. While 
the system may be capable of proper operation through 
a failure, to ensure that a subsequent failure will not 
bring the system down, the failed component must be 
immediately repaired. 
Load balancing is a technique (usually performed 
by special software or hardware mechanisms called 
load balancers) to distribute work between many 
computers, processes, hard disks or other resources in 
order to get optimal resource utilization and decrease 
computing time. It is also the ability to make several 
servers participate in the same service, performing the 
same tasks or supporting the same service [4]. Load 

102
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
balancing can also be used to increase the capacity of a 
server farm beyond that of a single server.  
This technique is seen as complementary of fault 
tolerant services since it frequently provides the ability 
to maintain unaffected services during a certain 
predefined number of simultaneous failures [5]. Also, 
traditional implementations of fault-tolerant platforms 
often involve duplicate proprietary hardware and 
software with complex binding and mechanisms. This 
causes higher implementation costs and longer periods 
of inactivity, which could not make such solutions 
attractive to short term investment and productivity 
management. The challenge is to provide fault tolerant 
infrastructures that would contribute to the daily 
business operations as well as to the failure or disaster 
situations. 
 
3. The benefits of fault tolerant approach 
 
Having examined the background information of 
availability, fault tolerance as well as the load 
balancing techniques, it is necessary to present the 
benefits of migrating to a Fault Tolerant Infrastructure 
that could be used for production purposes as well. 
One of the fundamental advantages of High 
Availability Systems that are based on load balancing 
techniques is the protection of systems operation. In 
addition to that their presence can vastly improve the 
overall performance. "Capacity on demand, load 
balancing, offline maintenance capacity and zero-point 
backup windows are all examples of the added value 
[that] a continuous architecture can produce". [6] 
And where there is added value, there could be 
Return On Investment (ROI). Still, the quantification 
of ROI in that situation is not straightforward. 
Increases in efficiency - unless they result tangible 
savings like staff reductions or other avoided bottom 
line expenses - are often elusive to measurement. 
Nevertheless, they should be examined for any 
possible ROI contribution. 
As the frequency of planned downtime is rapidly 
escalating due to the increasing number of applications 
development and the corresponding increase in 
upgrades and patches, the need to compress the 
downtime as much as possible has become even more 
pressing. For some companies, downtimes or even 
slow downs of 5-10 minutes can have a substantial 
affect on revenues. [7] 
Other sources, such as [8], have shown that there 
can be a parallel use of a segment of a disaster 
recovery infrastructure in order to tackle extreme 
attacks. Expanding this idea, the benefits described 
above are multiplied when segments of the primary site 
work together their equivalent ones in the disaster 
recovery infrastructure, in load balancing mode. 
It is, therefore, evident that organizations have more 
that 
one 
reasons 
to 
transform 
their 
existing 
implementations 
and 
select 
the 
fault 
tolerant 
production infrastructure solution. The very same tools 
that are used for high availability such as clustering, 
volume management and load balancing, can automate 
key procedures that would decrease the length of the 
downtime window as well as the cost of downtime 
administration. Savings from these types of value-
adding features are very real and can help reduce or 
eliminate costs associated with planned downtime. In 
Table 1 – Comparison of Availability Solutions 
High Availability
Fault Tolerance
Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures 
Purpose / 
Impact
To enable faster recovery 
of lost data and stalled 
business operations in the 
event of a disaster.
To proactively avoid some types of disasters 
before they occur.
Proactively avoid most types of disasters before 
they occur.
Increase the productivity of the organisation's IT 
infrastructures.
Cost
Tangible IT investment.
Tangible IT investment. ROI can be measured 
in most of the cases.
Tangible IT investment with measurable ROI.
Benefits
Faster time to recovery, 
lower lost 
revenues/productivity, 
reduced recovery costs.
Reduced probability of disaster occurrence, 
improved operational efficiencies, reduced 
planned downtime windows and costs.
Minimal probability of disaster occurrence, 
improved operational efficiencies, reduced 
planned downtime windows and costs.
Return On 
Investment 
(ROI)
Soft since the benefits are 
only realized in the event 
of a disaster.
- Reduction of disaster probability is soft.
- Reduced planned downtime generates real 
savings in IT costs through automation of 
procedures that can reduce the need for IT 
resources, eliminate human error and save in 
lost business from shorter downtime.
- Reduction of disaster probability is soft.
- Improved operational productivity can have 
direct impact on revenues and expenses and 
could contribute tangible cash through sales 
and savings.
- Reduced planned downtime generates real 
savings in IT costs through automation of 
procedures that can reduce the need for IT 
resources, eliminate human error and save in 
lost business from shorter downtime. These are 
hard, tangible benefits driven by avoided 
revenue loss and reduced operational 
expenses.

103
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
addition, the outage window is compressed so that 
business functions can continue with little or no 
interruption. Table 1 concentrates the above points. 
As far as the environmental requirements and 
international directives are concerned, Fault Tolerant 
Production Infrastructures could greatly contribute to 
Green IT by reducing the power demands needed for 
operation to one site distributing power (as well as the 
related CO2 emissions) to multiple geographically 
dispersed IT sites which were consuming power 
anyway. 
 
 4. Transition strategies principles 
 
Before presenting any transition strategies, some 
basic transition questions should be asked: 
- 
How the transition should be planned and 
implemented? 
- 
Which parts of the organization should be 
integrated into the fault tolerant production 
infrastructure solution? 
- 
Who should be involved in the transition 
project? 
- 
What this transition will cost in terms of 
money? Will the final outcome worth the 
transition costs? 
- 
When is the right time to perform such a 
transition? 
 
4.1 The change management theory 
 
“The concept of change management describes a 
structured approach to transitions in individuals, 
teams, organizations and societies that moves the 
target from a current state to a desired state” [9]. This 
is exactly the situation one deals when transforming 
one IT Infrastructure to another, so it is considered 
very useful to see which points are suitable and 
applicable the situations presented in previous 
paragraphs. There are several theories regarding 
change management. The most popular ones are 
presented in [10] and [11]. However, as [12] points out 
the first question of someone diagnosing a problem is 
“what changed?” With a change management process 
in place, that question is far easier to answer. Change 
management is a process made up of people, software, 
and procedures. When properly followed the process 
results in many benefits including increased staff 
efficiency, reduced server and network device 
downtime and reduced Mean Time To Recover 
(MTTR). Change management can also bring about 
positive impacts on security, providing trusted audit 
data and increased control over ad-hoc changes, all of 
which lead to reduced IT costs.  
Change management is critical for maintaining 
highly reliable systems that meet the defined service 
levels of the organization. To this end, best practice 
organizations are pushing all changes back into the 
build and test phases such that only rare emergency 
changes are actually performed on production systems. 
The whole network device change process must 
become formalized and incorporate security, testing, 
and documentation. The organization must ensure that 
appropriate preventive, detective and corrective 
controls exist in order to meet the challenges of 
regulatory frameworks, such as SOX, as well as to 
improve operational efficiencies. 
Forrester’s “Best Practices For Infrastructure 
Change Management: Regain Control of Runaway IT 
Infrastructures,”[13] boldly states “In IT, change is an 
engine of progress, as well as a source of doom... 
While application software change control is a 
relatively 
mature 
process, 
many 
organizations 
implement infrastructure change manually, relying 
primarily on the IT staff's knowledge and expertise. 
This ad hoc process is nearing its limits in today's 
complex environment, where the risks inherent to 
changes multiply”. 
Automating the change management process means 
addressing the six steps in an effective change 
management process: 
1. A change is requested 
2. Requested changes are reviewed, the 
impact assessed, and resources estimated 
and assigned 
3. Changes are either approved or rejected 
4. If approved, changes are developed and 
tested in a preproduction environment 
5. Changes are implemented into production 
6. Changes are verified and reconciled by 
someone else in the organization 
 
The last step is the critical missing piece in most 
organizations. In order to effectively manage change, it 
is needed to complete the change process circle. This 
can be done by conducting a final verification that the 
requested change was implemented properly, verifying 
that change was implemented on all target systems and 
finally to have the ability to see if the change control 
process was bypassed. Without this step, the change 
management loop remains open ended, and it 
impossible to tell the difference between authorized, 
successful changes and unauthorized (or unsuccessful) 
changes. 
The results are in and the experts agree that 
reducing service outages from human error through 
automated processes provide IT savings and a more 
efficient business. Eighty percent of IT budgets is used 
to maintain the status quo. By implementing 

104
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
enforceable change management process, IT gains 
control of the infrastructure. By gaining visibility in 
what changed, IT closes the loop on change 
management and improves availability, improves audit 
performance, and lowers IT operational costs. 
 
4.2 The technical experience 
 
This section includes industrial experience as 
referenced 
in 
[14] 
and 
[15]. 
In 
today’s 
IT 
infrastructures, applications are interrelated and 
integrated with others more than ever. At the same 
time, shared infrastructure elements are more common, 
while managing a maintenance window for each 
application can be exceedingly complex. However, a 
common maintenance window for infrastructure 
activity can be beneficial. 
The technical experience of the current status, as 
highlighted above, has taught some basic lessons. The 
first one is that an organization should always aim to 
reduce unplanned downtime, since it costs on money 
and reputation. 
The second lesson comes from [13] which states 
that “80% or more of unplanned downtime is the result 
of People and Processes, not hardware or O/S 
failures”. This means that this percentage is caused 
things like data corruption, application failures, 
software failures, errors in configurations, scheduling 
errors, operator errors, delayed batch jobs etc. So, in 
order to deal with these causes of downtime, an 
organization should provide funds and time in people 
(Proper stuffing and training), problem management, 
event management, job scheduling, test and time 
recovery scenarios (in the form of production readiness 
reviews), Application and capacity planning and last, 
change management which is the area that is discussed 
in this paper. 
The third lesson is more technology-related and  
mentions that an organization should minimize single 
points of failure, take care of  environmental, facilities 
and network threats, make use of load balancers, 
redundant dispatchers, replication, cloning, RAID 
technologies, such as mirroring, striping and hot swap 
availability. Additionally an organization should plan 
to operate using High Availability, or even better Fault 
Tolerant solutions with clustering and auto fail over 
capabilities. 
In order to implement infrastructures that could deal 
with the issues above and make use of the technologies 
mentioned, the organization should understand the 
application architecture and constraints as well as to 
understand 
all 
application 
dependencies 
and 
interrelationships to needed components, whereas they 
should reduce any batch interference (delays, lockups 
etc.).  
Furthermore, they should manage other planned 
changes, by developing suitable infrastructure and 
facility work and performing appropriate hardware, 
operating system, database, application changes and 
upgrades. Another need that should be covered is the 
need for proper infrastructure test environments. 
Within this framework the organization should aim to 
common maintenance windows, expecting increased 
coordination as well as staff overhead. 
Taking 
all 
these 
lessons 
into 
account 
an 
organization should try to follow the following rules 
within the plans for implementing Fault Tolerant 
Production Infrastructures. Firstly, they must integrate 
application availability in their design, since this can be 
hardly be improved in later phases. Secondly, there 
should be a well planned transaction queuing as well as 
a highly optimized batch processing. The third rule is 
to set the requirements for scheduling and availability 
early in the design phase. Fourthly, an organization 
should choose to serve only business-critical functions 
with high-cost Fault Tolerant infrastructures, having in 
mind that these kind of infrastructures cost about 3.5 
times as much as a standard infrastructure. [16]  
 
5. The proposed transformation strategy 
 
Taking into account all above sources, the 
proposed transition strategy combines the change 
management theory and the technical experience. 
There are seven phases to complete the transformation 
from the High Availability Standby Systems to the 
Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures. These are: 
Phase 1: Definition of the transformation scope 
Phase 2: Categorization of System groups 
Phase 3: Application Analysis 
Phase 4: Process Analysis 
Phase 5: Cost Analysis 
Phase 6: Business Decision 
Phase 7: Execution of Transformation 
 
5.1 Definition of the transformation scope 
 
As can it be easily understood, a problem well defined 
is a problem that can be solved more easily. During the 
first phase of the transformation, the organization 
should decide which systems are candidates to 
transform. Thus, for each application area, it should be 
determined what the transformation scope is, with the 
correct user representative(s). At the same time, the 
schedule goal and the availability goal should also be 
agreed. Since it is more costly to re-change any 
infrastructures, it is important to determine and design 

105
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
schedule and availability up front, just like any other 
application functional requirement. 
 
5.2 Categorization of System groups 
 
The second phase aims to categorize the system 
groups. For example an organization could distinguish 
between Business Support Systems, Operational 
Support Systems, Self Service / e-Commerce, 
Management Support Systems. This categorization will 
give the organization a rough idea on how these 
systems 
should 
be 
implemented 
in 
terms 
of 
availability, enriching the decisions taken in the first 
phase.  
 
5.3 Application Analysis 
 
During the third phase, the organization should 
understand each application’s architecture, special 
constraints, “release tolerance” and flexibility to 
change. Additionally, the applications dependencies on 
other applications and components should be gathered, 
along with architecture diagrams and data flows. 
Finally, decisions on the whether the applications’ 
modification for Fault Tolerance should be in-house or 
outsourced should be made. 
 
5.4 Process Analysis 
 
In this phase questions such what is the current 
Standing Operating and Testing Procedure should be 
answered with respect to technology. The current 
availability of each function/application should also be 
identified. Furthermore, what can the organization 
expect with existing budget. In order to answer these 
questions more easily, metrics related to availability, 
efficiency and performance have to be established. The 
Final of this phase is to identify root causes of 
unplanned downtime. 
 
5.5 Cost Analysis 
 
The most important phases are phases 5 and 6. This 
is 
where is actual decision on 
whether the 
transformation should be executed or not is taken. In 
the cost analysis phase, the basic question that the 
executive level will pose is what improvements can the 
organization make from existing budget. In order to 
answer this properly, the organization has to consider 
to invest in the right areas to expand schedule and 
availability. Additionally, the organization has to know 
costs to expand schedule beyond baseline to meet goals 
as well as the costs to increase availability beyond 
baseline to meet goals. At this phase involvement from 
all areas of the organization should be encouraged. 
 
5.6 Business Decision 
 
This is the last phase before the actual execution of 
the transformation. During this phase, the organization 
should develop a consistent approach to weigh the 
business benefits against the cost, while maintaining 
focus on the business problem, which is to increase the 
availability and the usability of its systems. Towards 
that decision, a Steering Committee or the business 
owners of the applications need to determine the 
business need. Since it is difficult to cost and plan for 
applications individually an accurate categorization 
would be very useful. At all times, the decision 
committee should be aware of the transformation 
sponsor capabilities and wills that would also be 
effected by any potential future expenses that a Fault 
Tolerant Production Infrastructure may imply. 
 
5.7 Transformation Execution 
 
The final phase of the suggested transformation 
strategy is actual execution of the transformation. In 
order to achieve this, the organization, and especially 
the people involved and affected, should be committed 
to the project. A detailed and realistic definition of the 
resources in terms of people and budget is necessary. 
Another very important issue is to define the owner of 
the new infrastructure in order to establish a common 
communication point that could manage, adjust, 
develop, document the transformation plan, with goals, 
activities, responsibilities, dates, etc. Finally, the 
organization should measure the actual benefits against 
the initial goal, for use in future or parallel 
transformation projects. 
 
6. Measuring the benefits 
 
The application of the approach, as described above, 
has been demonstrated in past [17], resulting a rather 
successful outcome. However, as pointed out in that 
attempt, in order to provide more concrete evidence of 
the applicability of the methodology, some formal 
metrics of the methodology should be established. 
These metrics should enable consistent measurement 
of resources, time and cost. 
Towards that direction, the Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework has been 
examined for suitability. ITIL is a globally accepted set 
of best practices used for the management of IT 
environments. In order to improve the level of IT 
services provided in an organization, the ITIL 

106
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
framework suggests the adoption and combination of 
methodologies, tools, metrics and roles. 
As it can be understood, the adaption of ITILs 
metrics to serve the needs of the transformation 
methodology described above, would strongly support 
the applicability of the methodology. Additionally, 
such an adaptation could also provide a known 
interface for people who are familiar with the ITIL 
framework as well as ITIL’s measuring tools. 
The following paragraph presents the foundations 
for the application of ITIL-based metrics to the 
transformation approach. 
 
6.1 Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
 
In ITIL terminology, KPIs are “financial and non-
financial metrics which help organizations to define 
and measure progress toward organizational goals” 
[18]. KPIs main goal is to review the current state of an 
organization and provide the basis for the prescription 
of a course of improving actions. In order to obtain a 
more solid view of the organization’s state, KPIs 
should be monitored in real-time, a process otherwise 
known as Business Activity Monitoring (BAM). 
Common uses of KPIs include the measurement of 
intangible benefits or values such as leadership 
development, engagement level, service delivery, and 
satisfaction rates. Being able to grasp such aspects, 
managers typically tie KPIs to organization's strategic 
management. 
The selected KPIs may differ depending on the 
nature of the organization and the organization's 
objectives. In any case, their proper usage could assist 
an organization to measure progress towards their 
organizational goals, especially goals which include 
difficult to quantify knowledge-based processes.  
Any KPI is a part of a “measurable objective” 
which is made up of a direction, KPI, benchmark, 
target and time frame. For example: "Increase Average 
Storage Utilization per Server from 20% to 60% by the 
end of the year 2010". In this case, “Average Storage 
Utilization per Server” is the KPI. 
KPIs should not be confused with Marketing-related 
Critical Success Factors. For the example above, a 
critical success factor would be something that needs 
to be in place to achieve that objective; for the previous 
example, a file archiving software tool. 
Performance indicators should also differ from 
business drivers & aims (or goals). A financial 
institution may consider the “increase rate of deposits” 
as a Key Performance Indicator which might help the 
institution understand its position in the market, 
whereas 
a 
telecommunications 
company 
could 
consider the “percentage of successful call attempts 
from its customers” as a potential Market-related KPI. 
Nevertheless it is necessary for an organization to at 
least identify its KPIs. The basic rules for identifying 
KPIs are: 
• 
To have pre-defined business processes. 
• 
To have clear requirements for the aims and the 
performance for the business processes. 
• 
To have a measurement that could quantify and 
qualify its results and compare these with the 
previously set goals. 
• 
To examine the variances and adjust any 
processes or resources needed to achieve short-
term goals. 
 
The definition of any KPI should apply all of the 
following characteristics: 
• 
Specific, so that it should not be confusing with 
other KPIs 
• 
Measurable, so that it should be feasible to 
measure it or calculate using a specific 
measurement unit  
• 
Achievable, so that it should be easy to obtain 
the necessary information  
• 
Relevant, so that it should directly connect to 
the business objective 
• 
Time-bound, so that it should take into account 
time constrains, in order to be able to tackle any 
issues related to time depended results and 
filter them. 
 
Key Performance Indicators in practical and 
strategic development terms are objectives to be 
targeted that will add value to the business. 
Having seen how KPIs are defined and used within 
a generic organization, it is now possible to use these 
principles within an IT infrastructure environment, 
where some more specific KPIs could be defined. [19] 
These KPIs will be used to represent the benefits from 
the 
adoption 
of 
Fault 
Tolerant 
Production 
Infrastructures as well as the benefits from the usage of 
the suggested transformation approach. 
 
6.2 Generic KPIs for the adoption of Fault 
Tolerant Production Infrastructures  
 
Although the transformation approach is quite 
specific as far as the transformation steps are 
concerned, each IT infrastructure involves different 
modules, processes and systems. Thus, the KPIs 
chosen to be presented in this paper could only be 
considered as a first, generic, set of KPIs. Additional 
KPIs can and should be considered in order to match 
the specific needs of an organization. However, the 
total number of the KPIs used to measure the success 
of the adoption of Fault Tolerant Production 

107
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
Infrastructures should not be too large since this may 
affect the performance levels of the infrastructure. 
The generic set of KPIs for measuring the success 
of the adoption of Fault Tolerant Production 
Infrastructures could be divided into the technical and 
business related KPIs. These two KPI categories are 
not are not directly related to each other. They are aim 
to point up different aspects of the Fault Tolerant 
Production Infrastructures and measure the technical 
and business benefits of its adoption. It should be made 
clear that there is no need for conciliation, combination 
or synchronization between the results of these two 
categories.  
Nevertheless, the measurement of the following 
KPIs should take place before and after the 
transformation, so that the comparison can confirm the 
benefits 
of 
the 
Fault 
Tolerant 
Production 
Infrastructures. 
 
Technical KPIs 
 
1. Usable Storage in IT Site(s): This KPI is the 
storage that can be used to store data in an IT site after 
any technical overhead, such as RAID configurations 
of storage boxes. The IT site can be Primary, 
Secondary, Other, Disaster Recovery or any IT Site. 
The measuring unit is in MBs or GBs. 
2. Average utilization of total Processing Power 
capacity Average in IT Site(s): This KPI is the 
average percentage of utilization of processing power 
of all systems in a specific (or all) IT Site(s) during the 
measurement period. The IT site can be Primary, 
Secondary, Other, Disaster Recovery or any IT Site. 
The measuring unit of utilization is a percentage. The 
measuring unit of processing power is Million 
Instructions per Second. 
3. Average network throughput between servers 
and clients: The term “Throughput” refers to the 
performance of data transmission, and is measured by 
characters actually transmitted or received during a 
certain period of time. Throughput is usually measured 
in bps (bits per second). A better (higher) throughput to 
the clients could signify the existence of a better 
infrastructure. 
4. Average Disks I/O in central storage in IT Site(s): 
This particular KPI reveals the average percentage of 
storage disks utilization of all systems in a specific (or 
all) IT Site(s) during the measurement period. The IT 
site can be Primary, Secondary, Other, Disaster 
Recovery or any IT Site. The measuring unit is bps 
(bits per second). 
5. Average Memory utilization in in IT Site(s): The 
memory utilization expose the average percentage of 
memory utilization of all systems in a specific (or all) 
IT Site(s) during the measurement period. The IT site 
can be Primary, Secondary, Other, Disaster Recovery 
or any IT Site. The measuring unit is a percentage. 
6. IT Site power usage effectiveness: This KPI is 
calculated by dividing the total power usage of an IT 
Site by the power usage of IT equipment (computer, 
storage, and network equipment as well as switches, 
monitors, and workstations to control the IT Site). The 
IT site can be Primary, Secondary, Other, Disaster 
Recovery or any IT Site. 
7. Systems Footprint in IT Site(s): The footprint 
represents the physical area that the systems occupy 
and is measured in square meters or square feet. A 
change in the measurement of this KPI would support 
the benefits earned by the adoption of the Fault 
Tolerant Production Infrastructures. Similarly to other 
KPIs the IT site can be Primary, Secondary, Other, 
Disaster Recovery or any IT Site. 
8. % of production servers located in Primary / 
Secondary IT Site(s): This is one of the most 
profound benefits of Fault Tolerant Production 
Infrastructures. It appears as a percentage of 
production servers located in a particular IT Site 
(Primary or Secondary) over the total number of 
servers in all IT Sites. 
 
Business KPIs 
 
1. Planned Downtime of offered business services: 
Planned downtime is downtime of any business service 
caused by scheduled for system or application 
maintenance. It is measured in minutes or hours per 
year. 
2. Unplanned Downtime of offered business 
services: This is the amount of downtime of any 
business service arising from reasons other than 
maintenance. It is measured in minutes or hours per 
year. 
3. Recovery time of business critical services: This 
KPI presumes that there has been decided which are 
the business critical services. The recovery time is the 
duration of time within which the business critical 
services can be restored after a disaster in order to 
avoid unacceptable business consequences. It is 
measured in minutes, hours or days. 
4. Operational Expenses of IT Division: The 
Operational Expenses, measured in any currency, are 
the yearly running costs of any organization, or in parts 
of the organization, such as IT Division. A decrease in 
these could signify a better usage or management of 
the existing resources. 
5. Capital Expenses of IT Division: Opposite to the 
previous KPI, Capital Expenses are the one-off costs of 
products and non-consumable parts. It is measured in 
any currency and could relate to the financial benefits 

108
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
of the adoption of Fault Tolerant Production 
Infrastructures. 
6. Cost of Recovery of new business services:  This is 
a very important KPI since it could depict the low cost 
expansion capabilities of Fault Tolerant Production 
Infrastructures. The measuring unit is any currency. 
7. Satisfaction rate by IT staff (System owners): 
This is a qualitative measurement of the satisfaction of 
the IT staff. The staff’s satisfaction rate could be based 
on periodic surveys of employees after a reasonable 
period of infrastructure maturity time such as 6 
months. The maturity time could minimize non in type 
negative reactions, caused by staff’s natural resistance 
to change [20]. This KPI is measured as a percentage 
of positive reactions. 
8. Percentage of satisfaction by Business staff 
(Business owners): In the same way as in the previous 
KPI, this measurement is related to the satisfaction of 
the Business Staff which may (or may not) have a 
different opinion on the benefits of the implemented 
infrastructure. This KPI is measured as a percentage of 
positive reactions. 
9. Average frequency of updates of disaster 
recovery plans: This KPI should portray staff 
awareness on the updating the Disaster Recovery 
plans. 
Since 
the 
Fault 
Tolerant 
Production 
Infrastructures amplify the role of Disaster Recovery 
IT Sites, it should be expected that this update 
frequency should be increased. It is measured in days. 
10. % of growth of IT budget: An unusual growth of 
the IT budget may entail some form of relation to the 
new Infrastructure architecture. 
11. New Systems Procurement rate (as % of existing 
systems): 
This 
KPI 
should 
confirm 
that 
the 
procurement of new systems should be less frequent 
since extra resources and capacities would be freed up 
(mainly in the Primary IT Site) after such a 
transformation.  
12. Average time to provision new systems: This is 
the average time needed to provide a new system to an 
application or system owner. The time starts counting 
when the request is send and ends when the system is 
handed over. The measurement time is in minutes, 
hours or days. A more dynamic infrastructure, as Fault 
Tolerant Production Infrastructures aim to be, should 
decrease that time. 
13. Average time to provision new business services:  
This KPI differs from the previous one for the reason 
that it also includes processes and people needed to 
provide the new business services. It is measured in 
minutes, hours or days. 
 
 
 
 
6.3 KPIs for the usage of the suggested 
transformation methodology 
 
The KPIs that could be used for measuring the 
benefits from using the suggested approach are less 
dependent on the IT infrastructure and business 
services of the organization that has chosen to use this 
approach, than the KPIs described in the previous 
paragraph. Again, the number of the selected KPIs 
should be limited to a level that would not effect the 
actual progress and effectiveness of the methodology. 
Since the core of the transformation approach is a 
change management set of processes, the consequent 
KPIs for measuring the success of the suggested 
transformation methodology are solely related to 
project management metrics. The measurement of the 
following KPIs should take place during the 
transformation, and be compared to similar projects 
that have been (or will use) different transformation 
methodologies. These projects may also originate from 
outside the implementing organization. 
 
Project Management KPIs 
 
1. 
Return 
on 
the 
transformation 
process 
Investment: This KPI illustrates the main idea behind 
this paper. It is a predominantly hard KPI to measure 
since the actual Return cannot be directly calculated. 
However all other KPIs mentioned in this paragraph 
could be used as input to its calculation. It could be 
measured in any currency or in time units such as days, 
weeks or months. When measured in time units the 
Return represents the time gained by using the 
proposed transformation methodology. 
2. Total Time of transformation process: This is the 
time period the transformation project runs and 
includes all seven phases of the proposed transition 
strategy described in paragraph 5. It is measured in 
days, weeks or months. 
3. Utilization rate of human resource for project 
purposes: This is the percentage of the time that a 
worker will dedicate to the transformation project in 
relation to its total time. It is similar to Full-time 
equivalent (FTE) which is a way to measure a worker's 
involvement in a project and is used by many 
organizations worldwide.   
4. 
Downtime 
of 
Business 
Services 
due 
to 
transformation project: Some of the transformation 
phases described before could effect the operation of 
some Business Services and thus their availability. 
Less production outage time for each Business Service 
means less lost income of the organization and more 
value for the transformation methodology. It is 
measured in minutes, hours or days. 

109
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
5. Total cost of transformation project: This is very 
important since the transformation project should be 
significantly less expensive than the expected earnings. 
It is measured in any currency. 
6. Number of people involved in transformation 
project: This is also important in order to be able to 
appreciate the staffing needs of the project. 
7. Percentage of administrative activities related to 
the transformation project: This is a project 
management quality KPI. It presents the number of 
administrative activities for the transformation project 
in relation to the total activities of the project which 
also include implementation activities. It is measured 
as a percentage. 
8. Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled: This is the 
sum of the budgets of the activities that were planned 
or scheduled to be completed, otherwise known as 
“planned value”. It is measured in any currency. 
9. Budgeted Cost of Work Performed: This KPI, 
measured in any currency, is the planned or scheduled 
cost of activities that were completed, also known as 
“earned value”. It is measured in any currency. 
10. Actual Cost of Work Performed: It is the sum of 
actual costs of activities that are completed. It is 
measured in any currency. 
11. Schedule Performance Index: This is calculated 
by the use of the previous KPIs. It is the division of 
“Budgeted Cost of Work Performed” by the “Budgeted 
Cost of Work Scheduled”. 
12. Cost Performance Index: This is calculated by 
combining two of the previous KPIs. It is the 
“Budgeted Cost of Work Performed” divided by the 
“Actual cost of Work Performed”. 
12. Cost Schedule Index: This is the “Cost 
Performance Index” multiplied by the “Schedule 
Performance Index”. The Cost Schedule Index 
measures the likelihood of recovery for any project that 
is late and/or over budget. The closer the index is to 1, 
the more likely the project’s can be recovered from it’s 
deviation to the original baseline. This can be useful 
for any organization that would decide to apply the 
proposed transformation methodology. 
13. % of time coordinating project: This is an 
efficiency related KPI for the methodology and is 
represented as a percentage of time (in man hours) 
used to coordinate project relative to over the total time 
used to implement (and coordinate) the project. 
14. % of milestones missed: Percentage of milestones 
recorded in all processes and phases as missed. 
15. Number of incidents due to transformation 
project: In theory the transformation like any other 
planned change should not cause any incidents. 
However, a more practical evaluation of the 
methodology should also measure also the number of 
incidents caused by the methodology in relation to the 
total number of incidents. In any case the changes 
should not cause more than a upper percentage of all 
the incidents. 
16. Average rework per phase after implementation 
of each phase: This is a significant measurement of the 
quality of the Analysis and Design processes that is 
methodology involves. If the rework per phase is low 
then this could be an indication that the methodology is 
providing a solid foundation for the transformation to 
Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures. It is 
measured in man-days, man-weeks or man-months. 
 
7. Evaluation and Future Improvements 
 
The suggested transformation is not a new idea. 
However the actual application of the change 
management theory to the specific transformation tasks 
which are based more on practical Management 
experience than Information Technology theory is a 
new addition to the arsenal of an IT manager.  
The presented benefits range from low-level 
technical benefits to high level financial benefits as 
well as the contribution to Green IT Infrastructures. 
The theory has been supported by establishing some 
ITIL-based metrics (KPIs) in order to challenge and 
prove its applicability. These metrics aim to measure, 
test and evaluate practically the proposal in a formal, 
accurate and consistent manner.  
Using KPIs, such as the ones proposed, the IT 
managers are able to evaluate the outcomes of the 
transformation of High Availability Systems to Fault 
Tolerant Production Infrastructures. Furthermore, the 
transformation methodology itself can also be 
evaluated in terms of technical and business benefits. 
As a more general remark, it should be pointed out 
that the transformation methodology can also be seen 
as part of ITIL’s set of concepts and policies for 
managing change in infrastructures and services. 
Following that way of thinking, future research 
should include a more thorough analysis of the 
relationship with ITIL’s change management process, 
aligning the transformation of High Availability 
Systems to Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures 
with the related ITIL’s core components, namely the 
Service 
Strategy, 
Service 
Design 
and 
Service 
Transition.  
A more detailed analysis of the selected KPIs and 
their usage can also offer more information on the 
prospective users of the methodology. Usage-related 
factors could include supplementary information on the 
measuring time, measuring frequency as well as 
number of measuring repetitions. 
There are also other extensions to the proposed 
methodology, which can enforce the relationship with 

110
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
ITIL’s practices. These extensions might engage the 
use of Balanced Scorecard as well as the adjustment of 
IT organization Service Catalog. The Balanced 
Scorecard suggests that an organization should be 
viewed from four different perspectives (the Learning 
& 
Growth 
Perspective, 
the 
Business 
Process 
Perspective, the Customer Perspective and the 
Financial Perspective). Additionally, the Balanced 
Scorecard suggests the development of some other 
metrics, the collection of related data and the proper 
analysis of the perspectives’ relations. The Service 
Catalog is a list of services that an organization 
provides to its employees or customers. Each service 
within the catalog may well include: 
 
A description of the service 
 
Timeframes or service level agreement for 
fulfilling the service 
 
Who is entitled to request/view the service 
 
Costs (if any) 
 
How to fulfill the service 
 
Yet, this paper is to be perceived as a packaged 
proposal that includes a proposition for the target 
infrastructure, the transformation methodology as well 
as the metrics for the efficiency of both the 
infrastructure and the methodology. 
 
8. Conclusion 
 
This paper has suggested the transformation of the 
existing 
“cold-standby” 
Disaster 
Recovery 
Infrastructures, based on High Availability Systems, to 
Fault Tolerant Production Infrastructures. The various 
differences of the two approaches have been presented 
and there are clear indications that organizations can 
benefit 
from 
transforming 
their 
existing 
implementations and selecting the Fault Tolerant 
Production Infrastructure solution.  
The 
business 
and 
technical 
results 
of 
the 
transformation as well as the effectiveness of the 
methodology are measured through the use of relevant 
KPIs using the ITIL framework. Savings from these 
types of value-adding features vary from case to case 
but the use of this methodology makes possible the 
reduction or elimination of costs associated with 
planned (and most unplanned) downtime. In addition, 
the outage window is compressed so that business 
functions can continue with little or no interruption. 
The suggested transformation strategy has used the 
theory of change management adding several technical 
aspects. This transformation strategy can be considered 
as a strong support tool in order to make the 
transformation less costly, less time consuming as well 
as to effectively integrate people, systems and 
procedures. 
 
9. References 
 
[1] P. Thibodeau, “Virtualization Tops Gartner's 10 Strategic 
Technologies 
for 
2009”, 
Computerworld, 
http://www.cio.com/article/print/454906 
[2] Em. Serrelis, N. Alexandris, “From High Availability 
Systems to Fault Tolerant Infrastructures”, IEEE Computer 
Society Press, ICNS, Athens, 2007 
[3] “High Availability: A perspective”, Gartner Research, ID 
Number: DPRO-90193 
[4] W. Tarreau, “Making applications scalable with Load 
Balancing”, http://1wt.eu/articles/2006_lb/index.html 
[5] “Highly Available Embedded Computer Platforms 
Become Reality”, International Engineering Consortium, 
http://www.iec.org/online/tutorials/ha_embed/topic01.html  
[6] K. Miller, “Don't Recover-Failover”, DM Direct, Oct 
2004 
[7] S. Atwood, “Planned Downtime”, DM Direct, Veritas 
Software, October 2004 
[8] Em. Serrelis, N. Alexandris, "Disaster Recovery Sites as a 
Tool of Managing Extreme Attacks”, IEEE Computer Society 
Press, ICISP, Cap Esterel, 2006. 
[9] 
“Change 
Management”, 
Wikipedia, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Change_management 
[10] J. Martin, “Organisational Behaviour”, Thomson 
Business Press, 1998, ISBN 1-86152-180-4, pages 575-600 
[11] L. J. Mullins, “Management and Organisational 
Behaviour”, 5th Edition, Pitman Publishing, 1999, ISBN 0-
273-63552-2, pages 821-830 
[12] “Five basic principles of Change Management”, 
http://www.teamtechnology.co.uk/changemanagement.html 
[13] J. P. Garbani, “Best Practices For Infrastructure Change 
Management: 
Regain 
Control 
Of 
Runaway 
IT 
Infrastructures”, 
Forrester 
Research, 
25-3-2004,  
http://www.forrester.com/Research/Document/ 
Excerpt/0,7211,34048,00.html 
[14] 
“Microsoft 
Operations 
Framework 
4.0”, 
http://www.microsoft.com/technet/solutionaccelerators/ 
cits/mo/smf/smfchgmg.mspx 
[15] “Change Management (ITSM)”, Wikipedia,  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Change_Management_%28ITSM%29 
[16] D. Scott, Y. Natis, “Building Continuous Availability 
Into E-Applications”, GartnerGroup, COM-12-1325, 29/9/ 
2000 
[17] Em. Serrelis, N. Alexandris, “Fault Tolerant Production 
Infrastructures in Practice”, IEEE Computer Society Press, 
PIMRC, Athens, 2007 
[18] F. John Reh, “Key Performance Indicators – What are 
Key 
Performance 
Indicators 
or 
KPI”, 
About.com, 
http://management.about.com/cs/generalmanagement/a/keyp
erfindic.htm 
[19] “KPI Library”, http://kpilibrary.com/ 
[20] A. J. Schuler, “Overcoming Resistance to Change: Top 
Ten 
Reasons 
for 
Change 
Resistance”, 
http://www.schulersolutions.com/resistance_to_change.html 

