Robustness in Sensor Networks: Difference Between
Self-Organized Control and Centralized Control
Yuichi Kiri
Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology
Osaka University
1-5, Yamadaoka, Suita-shi
565-0871 Osaka, Japan
y-kiri@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Masashi Sugano
School of Comprehensive
Rehabilitation
Osaka Prefecture Univ.
3-7-30, Habikino, Habikino-shi
583-8555 Osaka, Japan
sugano@rehab.osakafu-u.ac.jp
Masayuki Murata
Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology
Osaka University
1-5, Yamadaoka, Suita-shi
565-0871 Osaka, Japan
murata@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Self-organized control has received signiﬁcant atten-
tion in the area of networking, and one of the main factors for
this attention is its robustness. However, it should be stressed that
deciding whether self-organized control is robust or not is not a
trivial task. Even if it is in fact robust, the factors underlying
its robustness have not yet been explored in sufﬁcient detail.
In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst quantitative demonstration
of the superior robustness of self-organized control through
comparison with centralized control in a sensor network scenario.
Through simulation experiments, we show that self-organized
control maintains the functionality of its data collection even
in a variety of perturbations. In addition, we point out that
the difference in the robustness of the abovementioned control
schemes stems from the degree to which the comprehension of a
given node about the state of the network depends on information
obtained from other nodes.
Keywords—sensor network; self-organized control; centralized
control; robustness; simulation
I. INTRODUCTION
As networks are becoming increasingly larger and more
complex, a critical issue in today’s dynamically changing
and uncertain environments is to maintain the functionality
of networks in a manner which allows them to adapt to
environmental changes. A control scheme which maintains
the performance even when the network state changes dra-
matically or unforeseeable circumstances occur is preferable
for present and future networks, even if the basic network
performance in such cases is inferior to that of networks
operating with other control schemes. The property which
allows a system to maintain its functionality despite external
and internal perturbations is called “robustness” [15]. In this
age when networks play an essential role in our everyday lives,
the robustness of networks is becoming increasingly important.
Distributed control has been said to be superior to central-
ized control with respect to robustness. Currently, a type of
distributed control scheme which is beginning to attract con-
siderable attention is one of self-organized control [10][20].
The communication networks based on such a self-organized
control are considered to be suitable as a network which
consists of movable nodes like many persons or cars, and a
network used in the situation where environmental variation
is remarkable, like disaster sites. In this control scheme, each
component autonomously decides the following action on
the basis of local information, and the simple microscopic
actions of the components collectively provide structure and
functionality at macroscopic level without any centralized co-
ordination [19]. Such behavior is distinct from plain distributed
control, where individual components act autonomously but
depend on global information. Although scalability, adaptabil-
ity, and fault tolerance, which are included in the concept of
robustness in a broad sense, are “known” as properties inherent
to self-organized control, we stress that this knowledge is cer-
tainly not trivial. Even assuming that the notion of robustness
is true, to the best of our knowledge the reasons why self-
organized control is robust and the factors which determine
the superiority of its robustness as compared to other control
schemes have not been examined with sufﬁcient rigor.
In our previous work [13][14], we provided quantitative
evidence of the robustness of self-organized control with
respect to transmission errors and node failures, and concluded
that the robustness of the self-organized control scheme is
superior to that of other control schemes. However, since
sensor networks face a wider range of perturbations, the
purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the advantages of self-
organized control against perturbations different from those in
our previous work. Furthermore, based on the results of the
evaluation, we also pose interesting questions such as why and
how self-organized control is robust. In [21], from the results
of the comparison, we pointed out that the difference in the
robustness is derived from the degree to which the comprehen-
sion of a given node about the state of the network depends on
information from other nodes. This is the key to differentiating
the degrees of robustness of those two control schemes. In
this paper, we describe the details of each method which were
not able to be described in [21]. Furthermore, we show the
characteristic of self-organized control by distribution of the
number of hop of routes, and present the difference in the
robustness of each control method against bit error.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, earlier approaches to self-organized control are
reviewed. Sections III describes the mechanisms of centralized
42
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

control and self-organized control, respectively. Section IV
presents the simulation results so as to compare the robustness
of both control approaches. In Section V, we discusses what
brings robustness to self-organized control on the basis of these
results. The paper is concluded in Section VI and discusses
the generalization of our conclusions.
II. RELATED WORK
The principle of self-organization is developed in nature [8],
and we can ﬁnd it everywhere. Each component autonomously
decides its next action on the basis of local information, and
the microscopic simple actions of the components collectively
provide structure and functionality at the macroscopic level
without any centralized coordination [19]. Such self-organized
behavior is disparate from the distributed paradigm where
individual components act autonomously while sharing global
information, and many researchers have tried to derive the
advantageous properties of the self-organizing system in ef-
forts to solve scalability, reliability, availability, and robustness
problems. For example, Directed Diffusion [12] is a well-
known self-organization paradigm for certain novel features,
including reinforcement-based adaptation of the gradient to the
empirically best path. It is also known to be robust against
node failures. [9] is proposed to achieve good adaptability
and scalability by endowing mobile agents with simple intelli-
gence. Some researchers further this approach and incorporate
the behavior of social insects into the agents. BiSNET [4],
which was shown to have strong self-healing capability for
false positive data in data gathering, are examples that were
inspired by the foraging principles of honey bees, while
[16][5][25] are inspired by the Ant colony metaheuristic and
said to be robust against node mobility. ACE [6] is an emergent
algorithm that forms clusters through three rounds of feedback
between nodes. Using local information alone, it efﬁciently
covers the network with only a small amount of overhead.
Ant-based clustering [11][24][22] is also a clustering method,
drawing its inspiration from the behavior of ant colonies, but
it is applied for data analysis. In addition, the task allocation
method proposed in [17] uses the concepts of the “division of
labor” of ants to achieve higher coverage in sensor network.
III. CENTRALIZED AND SELF-ORGANIZED CONTROL
SCHEMES IN SENSOR NETWORKS
We provide detailed explanation of our centralized and
self-organized control schemes, which are the subjects of
robustness evaluation in the present study. The operations of
both control schemes are based on the premise that multiple
sinks are deployed in their respective monitoring regions.
Using this multi-sink conﬁguration, both control schemes take
a cluster-based approach, in which the same number of node
clusters and sinks is formed, and individual sensor nodes
transmit their sensed data to the sink located in their cluster
(Figure 1).
A. Centralized control
Younis et al.
[23] proposed a data-gathering scheme
for sensor networks that assumes the existence of multiple
Internet / P2P network /
Other network
Data server
Monitoring region
Sink node
Sensor nodes
Sink node
Sink node
Fig. 1.
Network model.
sinks (for consistency with the terminology used in our self-
organized control [13], we use “sinks” here instead of the
“gateway nodes” used in [23]). Sinks are signiﬁcantly less
energy-constrained than sensor nodes and the sensed data is
gathered ﬁrst in them. Sensor nodes are divided into the cluster
which each sink manages, and the sinks calculate the route
from each sensor node to themselves based on the residual
power, state, etc. of a sensor node. They then tell their cluster
members their previous- and next-hop nodes and the state they
should stay in next (e.g., active or sleep state). In this data-
gathering scheme the role of the clusters is almost same as
that of the clusters in the scheme described in [13] — in both
the cluster determines the eventual destination to which data
packets are sent — so these two schemes are well-suited to
be compared. Younis et al. [23], however, describe only the
routing and node-state management and do not specify how the
sensor nodes should be apportioned into clusters. In addition,
some of its assumptions, for example, that each sink is located
within the one-hop of all the sensor nodes in its cluster, are
not appropriate for large-scale sensor networks. So we made
some modiﬁcations to the proposed mechanism in order to
make a convincing comparison.
We assume the existence of a control station, which is wired
to all sinks. The station knows the initial power and locations
of all nodes and sinks, and manages the overall network. Up-
to-date residual power is reported periodically from sensor
nodes, but the reporting packet is forwarded to the sink in a
multi-hop fashion instead of direct communication. The station
ﬁrst divides the sensor nodes into as many clusters as there
are sinks. The role of a cluster is to determine the destination
sink for each sensor node, and we say that “sensor node

In other words, the central station splits the sensor nodes into
clusters in such a way that each sensor node transmits packets
to the nearest sink.
After clusters are determined, the station constructs routes
for packets. As described in [23], the routes are determined
by using Dijkstra’s algorithm to minimize the total link cost.
Link cost is assigned by the station beforehand to all the links
between all node-and-node, node-and-sink pairs. Calculation
of link cost is modiﬁed from [23] due to difference of
assumptions, and the cost


pheromone value, they are selected as next-hop nodes with
almost the same frequency, and the number of packets that
must be relayed is distributed among them.
An important problem of applying ACO to routing is how to
determine which route should have higher routing-pheromone
value, in other words, how to deﬁne what are the “preferable
routes” in a given network. We deﬁne good routes in sensor
networks as follows:

where blng





 represents a set of neighboring nodes of

 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
Relative frequency
Hop counts
centralized
self-organized
Fig. 2.
Efﬁciency of routes generated by centralized control and of routes
generated by self-organized control.
mission interval. If this interval is too long, sensor nodes will
only slowly ﬁnd out what it should do next, especially when
the command packets are frequently lost. And if the interval is
too short, command packets coming one after another result in
severe interference problems. We conducted simulation experi-
ments to ﬁnd out whether 1 s, 10 s, 100 s, or 500 s would be the
best interval and chose 10 s as the one yielding the best balance
between data-collection rate and power consumption. Not only
in centralized control, transmission interval of backward ants
in our self-organized control also has great inﬂuence. Too
short an interval causes repeated interference and too long an
interval does not construct pheromone distribution enough for
data gathering. We simulated transmission intervals of 10 s,
100 s, and 500 s and selected 100 s.
In the simulation experiments, each sink transmits command
packets or backward ants until at least 100 s pass over. So we
consider the network is in the transient state for 100 s from
the start, and do not plot a graph in the time window.
B. Instability of Generated Routes
We ﬁrst compared the efﬁciency, in terms of hop counts,
of the routes generated using centralized control and self-
organized control. The hop counts reported here are mean
values of all routes between each sensor node and its sink.
The distribution of hop count is shown in Figure 2 with 95%
conﬁdence intervals. This graph is for the idealized scenario in
which no node failures occur, and bit error rate is set to

.
Changing BER did not generate signiﬁcant inﬂuence. Actually,
there is only a little difference in their distribution as shown
in Figure 2, and the same is true for their mean values as
shown in Table. III, where statistics values of the routes are
listed. However, variance of both control approaches differs
substantially. These interesting results suggest that quality of
generated routes can ﬂuctuate widely, i.e., low predictability
and controllability, in self-organized control. A sensor node
in self-organized control decides its own action on the basis
of limited, local information. Their lack of global viewpoint
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
Data-collection rate
Time [s]
centralized: BER=1e-5
self-organized  BER=1e-5
centralized: BER=1e-4
self-organized  BER=1e-4
centralized: BER=5e-4
self-organized  BER=5e-4
Fig. 3.
Inﬂuence of BER on data-collection rate.
leads to difﬁculty in ﬁnding global optimum, and results in
wide ﬂuctuation.
C. Measures against Transmission Error
We conducted simulation experiments to study the robust-
ness of both control approaches against transmission error
under the assumption that no node failures occur. In Figure 3,
both kinds of control show about the same data-collection rate
with BER

TABLE III
STATISTICS OF ROUTES GENERATED IN CENTRALIZED CONTROL AND SELF-ORGANIZED CONTROL. 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALS ARE ALSO SHOWN.
Centralized control
Self-organized control
Average hop count

 0
 0.002
 0.004
 0.006
 0.008
 0.01
 0.012
 0.014
 0.016
 0.018
 0.02
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800  1000  1200  1400  1600  1800  2000
Variance of data-collection rate between trials
Time [s]
centralized: pfail=0.0005
centralized: pfail=0.0010
self-organizing: pfail=0.0005
self-organizing: pfail=0.0010
Fig. 6.
Variances of the data collection rates among trials.
monitoring region containing 300 nodes, the difference in the
robustness of the self-organized and the centralized control
schemes was not clear due to the connectivity degradation
caused by the continual node failures. Therefore, here we
temporarily used a narrower monitoring region of 50 m

50 m while keeping the number of nodes and sinks, and
deﬁned
fail as the failure rate per second for each sensor node.
The variances of the data collection rates of both control
schemes among trials are shown in Figure 6. The variance in
the self-organized control scheme is small and not as sensitive
to the failure rates. However, in the centralized control scheme,
the data collection rates in some trials experience sudden
drops, which lead to the higher variance of the data collection
rates, as shown in Figure 6. The high variance in the case
of centralized control indicates the difﬁculty of predicting the
data gathering capability in harsh environments, although all
of the plots are prepared using the same parameters.
F. Measures against link disconnection
As links can become disconnected intermittently in wireless
networks, in the case where the link between nodes

 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
 900
 1000
Data-collection rate
Time [s]
injection of incorrect information
(a) False-positive failure detection.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
 900
 1000
Data-collection rate
Time [s]
injection of incorrect information
node failure
(b) False-recovery indication.
Fig. 8.
Results of injecting incorrect information.
A. Factors inﬂuencing the difference in robustness
In the evaluation presented in Section IV and in previous
works, there was a signiﬁcant difference between the robust-
ness of self-organized control and centralized control. We are
inclined to explain this trend in terms of “dependence on
control information”. In this case, “dependence” has almost
the same meaning as that used in fault management. The
dependence is a relation in which an error or failure in
an object may cause an error or failure in another object.
We deﬁne control information as the information exchanged
between entities of a given network which coordinates their
joint operation.
In Sections IV-E and IV-F, even the control station itself did
not comprehend the correct state of the network. This is caused
by the fact that the control station also depends on control
information received from the nodes in the network. The
0
1
(a) From

 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
 900
 1000
Data-collection rate
Time [s]
sprious sink-failure
indication
Fig. 10.
Inﬂuence of erroneous sink failure indication.
In this way, information which does not reﬂect the correct state
of the network brings vulnerability to the centralized control
scheme. However, since optimization of the whole network
cannot be performed if the dependency on the control infor-
mation is reduced, general network performance like delay or
a throughput degrades. For example, as shown in Figure 2,
in self-organization control, distribution of the number of hop
from a node to the sink is large, and there are nodes to whom
delay becomes large very much.
Of course, at the node level, self-organized control is
identical to centralized control, meaning that individual nodes
potentially have an erroneous understanding about the state
of the network. However, individual nodes affect only their
surrounding environment or neighboring nodes since all nodes
have only partial view of the network, and do not transmit or
receive explicit control information. Due to this behavior, the
inﬂuence of individual nodes on the global state of the network
is much smaller than in the centralized control scheme. In
this regard, since we have not yet clariﬁed the inﬂuence
of erroneous information received from individual nodes, in
the next section we verify our idea by deliberately injecting
incorrect information into the network.
B. Inﬂuence of incorrect information
The purpose of this demonstration is to determine how
strong the inﬂuence of information received from individual
nodes is, as well as how potentially unreliable nodes affect
the behavior of the whole network. Therefore, in this section,
we deliberately inject spurious information in order to show
unambiguously the inﬂuence of information received from
individual nodes on the functionality of the network. At ﬁrst, in
the centralized control scheme, we considered two scenarios:
1) we injected false-positive failure detection packets, which
convey the misinformation that a properly working node is
detected as failed, and 2) false-recovery packets, which inform
the surrounding nodes that a node which has failed is detected
as recovered.
Although we deliberately injected incorrect information at
=200 s that the node nearest to the coordinate

 had
failed, there was no ﬂuctuation or drop in the data collection
rate due to the injection, as seen from the results shown in
Figure 8(a). In fact, the node which was wrongly detected
as failed was not able to send its packets to the sink as the
control station did not consider the failed node as a member
of the data collection cluster. However, routing information
was supplied to the other sensor nodes correctly, and thus the
inﬂuence of the erroneous information was limited.
Next, we tested the scenario where incorrect information
about the recovery of a node is injected into the network.
At ﬁrst, we made the node nearest to the coordinate


fail at
=160 s, followed by the injection of information that
the node has recovered at
=200 s. Figure 8(b) shows the
results of ﬁve trials, and it is clear that the behavior of the
data collection rates are different among them, i.e., they are
different depending on the node deployment. There is a clear
drop in two of the plotted lines just after the injection of
erroneous information at
=200 s. Given this factor, focusing
on one of those lines, in Figure 9 we visualized the data
collection rate of the individual nodes from the time when
node fails (=160 s) until the injection of misinformation
(=200 s), and from the injection (=200 s) to the end of the
simulation (=1000 s), respectively. As shown in Figure 9(a),
the inﬂuence of the node failure can be limited. However, after
the injection, data collection in the larger part of the respective
cluster becomes impossible.
Self-organized control does not have any means for explicit
indication of failure or failure recovery. Therefore, it was
impossible to compare it directly with the centralized control
in terms of the inﬂuence of erroneous information. Instead, we
used the indication of sink failure, which is a message which
explicitly conveys information about the failure of a sink to
the neighboring nodes by using a hello message. Furthermore,
we made the sensor node nearest to the coordinate


transmit the information about the sink failure. This indication
is spread over the respective cluster through forwarding by
nodes which receive the indication.
As a result, although spurious sink failure indication was
injected into the network at


control against a wide range of perturbations by compar-
ing it with centralized control, and we attempted to answer
some important questions. One such question is whether self-
organized control is in fact robust, and we quantitatively
demonstrated the afﬁrmative answer by examining various
scenarios. Although this result is not surprising, it was found
that self-organized control has the obvious beneﬁt of superior
robustness, especially if applied to systems in dynamically
changing environments, although at the cost of reduced system
predictability. Furthermore, the questions about why self-
organized control is robust and what factors determine the
robustness of self-organized control were also addressed, and
based on the results obtained from the simulation experiments,
we arrived at the conclusion that the dependence on the control
information in the system plays a critical role in determining
whether or not the robustness is sufﬁcient. In a network which
is composed of potentially unreliable nodes and is located in a
harsh environment, decreasing the dependence on the control
information received from the nodes is critical to yielding
sufﬁcient robustness, and self-organized control inherently
possesses such properties.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was partially supported by the “Global COE
(Center of Excellence) Program” and the Grant-in Aid for Sci-
entiﬁc Research (C) 19500060 of the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] ns-2
–
the
network
simulator.
online
available
at
http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns.
[2] B. Bar´n and R. Sosa.
AntNet: Routing algorithm for data networks
based on mobile agents. Inteligencia Artiﬁcial, Revista Iberoamericana
de Inteligencia Artiﬁcial, 12:75–84, 2001.
[3] E. Bonabeau, G. Theraulaz, and M. Dorigo. Swarm Intelligence: From
Natural to Artiﬁcial Systems (Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences
of Complexity Proceedings). Oxford Univ Pr, Oct. 1999.
[4] P. Boonma, P. Champrasert, and J. Suzuki. BiSNET: A biologically-
inspired architecture for wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of The
Second IARIA International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous
Systems, Published by the IEEE Computer Press, July 2006.
[5] G. D. Caro, F. Ducatelle, and L. M. Gambardella. AntHocNet: An ant-
based hybrid routing algorithm for mobile ad hoc networks. European
Transactions on Telecommunications, 16:443–455, Oct. 2005.
[6] H. Chan and A. Perrig. ACE: An emergent algorithm for highly uniform
cluster formation. In Proceedings of the First European Workshop on
Wireless Sensor Networks, pages 154–171, Jan. 2004.
[7] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni. The ant system: Optimization
by a colony of cooperating agents.
IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, 26(2):29–41, 1996.
[8] F. Dressler.
Self-organization in ad hoc networks: Overview and
classiﬁcation. Technical report, University of Erlangen, Department of
Computer Science 7, Mar. 2006.
[9] L. Gan, J. Liu, and X. Jin. Agent-based, energy efﬁcient routing in sensor
networks. In Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pages 472–479, Aug.
2004.
[10] C. Gershenson and F. Heylighen.
When can we call a system self-
organizing? In Proc. 7th European Conference on Advances in Artiﬁcial
Life, pages 604–614, Sept. 2003.
[11] J. Handl, J. Knowles, and M. Dorigo.
Strategies for the increased
robustness of ant-based clustering.
Engineering Self-Organising Sys-
tems: Nature-Inspired Approaches to Software Engineering, 2977:90–
104, 2004.
[12] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin. Directed diffusion: A
scalable and robust communication paradigm for sensor networks. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networks, pages 56–67, Aug. 2000.
[13] Y. Kiri, M. Sugano, and M. Murata.
Self-organized data-gathering
scheme for multi-sink sensor networks inspired by swarm intelligence.
In Proc. 1st IEEE Intl. Conf. on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing
Systems, July 2007.
[14] Y. Kiri, M. Sugano, and M. Murata. Robustness differences between
bio-inspired control and centralized control.
In Proc. of Biological
Approaches for Engineering Conference, Mar. 2008.
[15] H. Kitano. Biological robustness. Nature Review Genetics, 5(11):826–
837, Nov. 2004.
[16] Z. Liu, M. Z. Kwiatkowska, and C. Constantinou.
A biologically
inspired optimization to AODV routing protocol.
In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on the Internet, Telecommunications and Signal
Processing, pages 106–111, Dec. 2004.
[17] K. H. Low, W. K. Leow, and J. Marcelo H. Ang. Task allocation via
self-organizing swarm coalitions in distributed mobile sensor network.
In Proceedings of 19th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 28–33, July 2004.
[18] Moteiv Corporation.
Telos (Rev B): PRELIMINARY Datasheet, May
2004.
[19] C. Prehofer and C. Bettstetter.
Self-organization in communication
networks: Principles and design paradigms.
IEEE Communications
Magazine, Feature Topic on Advances in Self-Organizing Networks,
43(7):78–85, July 2005.
[20] T. D. Seeley.
When is self-organization used in biological systems?
Biological Bulletin, 202:314–318, June 2002.
[21] M. Sugano, Y. Kiri, and M. Murata. Differences in robustness of self-
organized control and centralized control in sensor networks caused by
differences in control dependence. In Proceedings of The Third IARIA
International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
(ICSNC 2008), Oct. 2008.
[22] A. L. Vizine, L. N. de Castro, E. R. Hruschka, and R. R. Gudwin.
Towards improving clustering ants: An adaptive ant clustering algorithm.
Informatica Journal, 29(2):143–154, July 2005.
[23] M. Younis, M. Youssef, and K. Arisha. Energy-aware routing in cluster-
based sensor networks. In Proc. 10th IEEE International Symposium on
Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Computer and Telecommunica-
tions Systems, Oct. 2002.
[24] D. Zaharie and F. Zamﬁrache. Dealing with noise in ant-based clustering.
IEEE Trans. Evolutionary Computation, pages 2395–2402, Sept. 2005.
[25] Y. Zhang, L. D. Kuhn, and M. P. Fromherz.
Improvements on ant
routing for sensor networks. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Workshop on Ant Colony Optimization and Swarm Intelligence, pages
154–165, Sept. 2004.
52
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

