96
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Multiradio, Multiboot Capable Sensing Systems for Home Area Networking 
Brendan O’Flynn, Marco De Donno, Wassim Magnin 
Tyndall National Institute 
University College Cork 
Cork, Ireland 
 
email: brendan.oflynn@tyndall.ie. marco.dedonno@tyndall.ie, wassim.magnin@tyndall.ie 
 
Abstract—The development of Wireless Sensor Networking 
technology to deploy in smart home environments for a variety 
of applications such as Home Area Networking has been the 
focus of commercial and academic interest for the last decade. 
Developers of such systems have not adopted a common 
standard for communications in such schemes. Many Wireless 
Sensor 
Network 
systems 
use 
proprietary 
systems 
so 
interoperability between different devices and systems can be 
at best difficult with various protocols (standards based and 
non-standards based) used (ZigBee, EnOcean, MODBUS, 
KNX, DALI, Powerline, etc.). This work describes the 
development of a novel low power consumption multiradio 
system incorporating 32-bit ARM-Cortex microcontroller and 
multiple 
radio 
interfaces 
- 
ZigBee/6LoWPAN/Bluetooth 
LE/868MHz platform. The multiradio sensing system lends 
itself to interoperability and standardization between the 
different 
technologies, 
which 
typically 
make 
up 
a 
heterogeneous network of sensors for both standards based 
and non-standards based systems. The configurability of the 
system enables energy savings, and increases the range 
between single points enabling the implementation of adaptive 
networking architectures of different configurations. The 
system described provides a future-proof wireless platform for 
Home Automation Networks with regards to the network 
heterogeneity in terms of hardware and protocols defined as 
being critical for use in the built environment. This system is 
the first to provide the capability to communicate in the 
2.4GHz band as well as the 868MHz band as well as the feature 
of multiboot capability. A description of the system operation 
and potential for power savings through the use of such a 
system is provided. Using such a multiradio, multiboot capable, 
system can not only allow interoperability across multiple 
radio platforms in a Home Area Network, but can also increase 
battery lifetime by 20 – 25% in standard sensing applications. 
Keywords - Smart Sensing; Low Power Consumption 
Protocols, Home Area Networks (HAN); Energy Management; 
Multiradio Systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) systems have the 
potential to be ubiquitous in today’s Society in a myriad of 
applications such as Smart Homes, Building Energy 
Management (BEM), Home Area Networking (HAN), micro 
grid management, environmental monitoring and smart 
cities. New architectures, such as those described in the 
conference paper [1] and from which this paper evolved, are 
required to offer improved inter-operability, to improve 
reliability of data communications and to address the spread 
spectrum requirements associated with next generation 
sensor systems through the development of smart radio 
systems. Currently available platforms exist that have 
multiple radios but these tend to operate in a single 
Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) band (typically 
2.4GHz) – and not in combination with the 868MHz ISM 
Band, which is ideal for the built environment due to its long 
range, low data rate properties.  
This type of architecture has some interesting commercial 
applications for interoperable networks, Home Area 
Networks, commercial buildings and smart cities. Compared 
to single-end radio devices, it has the potential to provide 
increased connectivity in deployment, and can potentially 
reduce the interference impact on the network because the 
system can hop from ISM band to ISM band in an 
autonomous and opportunistic manner. The development of 
multiradio 
sensing 
architectures 
lends 
itself 
to 
interoperability between the different technologies that 
typically make up a heterogeneous network of sensors. 
The value of WSNs as a sensing system is clear when 
you compare them to traditional wired sensing systems. 
Typically wired sensor systems are expensive to install with 
70-90% of the cost of a sensor system installation relating to 
labor and wiring, which ranges from $40 to $2000 per linear 
foot of wiring [2]. As such, the wireless nature of WSN 
technologies makes them easier and cheaper to deploy than  
wired technologies. 
However, a number of challenges still need to be 
addressed to ensure WSN technology achieves its’ full 
potential across all application areas. An abundance of 
communications technologies persist within the HAN 
domain, with no single technology identifying itself as the 
"one size fits all" solution. 
The AUTonomic HomE area NeTwork InfrastruCture 
(AUTHENTIC) project [3][4] funded by the International 
Energy Research Centre (IERC) [5], sought to develop and 
deploy a HAN infrastructure capable of supporting 
opportunistic decision making pertaining to effective energy 
management within the home. This required the integration 
of key enabling heterogeneous technologies including a 
variety of physical sensors within the home (temperature, 
contact sensors, passive infra-red), cyber sensor sources 
(services) outside of the home (e.g., meteorological data, 
energy providers dynamic pricing sites) together with 
effective interfacing with the smart grid beyond the home. As 
part of the AUTHENTIC project (final demonstrators were 

97
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
presented in 2015) the WSN group at Tyndall were 
developing the embedded systems and communications 
platforms to sense and transfer data in the built environment. 
The platform developed enables communications between 
the heterogeneous sensing systems that typically make up a 
HAN scenario in a power efficient implementation. 
Section I of this paper introduces the subject matter and 
application space associated with wireless sensing solutions 
for the built environment. Section II reviews some of the 
state of the art in current wireless sensing system 
technologies, with emphasis on multiradio systems. Section 
III describes the “AUTHENTIC Board” developed within the 
project [1]. Section IV describes the multiradio functionality 
and Section V examines the results of initial range testing 
trials and tests carried out using the system to investigate 
power consumption characteristics of the platform. Section 
VI investigates the power savings enabled by this multiradio, 
multiboot platform, through the implementation of different 
communications protocols based on the system level tests 
carried out in Section V. Section VII concludes the work and 
outlines some directions for future research in this area. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORKS 
There are a variety of standards available (proprietary and 
non-proprietary), which are widely used within the many 
deployments of HAN that exist. ZigBee, Bluetooth LE (Low 
Energy), IEEE 802.11x (Wi-Fi) are globally recognized as 
references in wireless communications and go far beyond the 
scope of WSN. Those technologies have been developed 
using the license-free ISM band of 2.4-2.5GHz, although 
ZigBee has an implementation for the 868MHz and the latest 
802.11.n standard used by Wi-Fi offers support for both 2.4 
and 5GHz. Indoor range above the GHz frequency is quite 
limited especially for indoor applications with dense 
obstacles. The Wi-Fi technology surpasses those issues with 
higher transmission power (up to 100 times higher than 
ZigBee/802.15.4), which is of course not suitable for battery 
powered systems in low power WSN deployments. 
Although some manufacturers provide WSN systems 
using 868MHz or even 433MHz, it is more common to see 
them designed around proprietary technologies such as 
ZigBee. An interesting trade off investigated in this paper is 
the development of a system with the ability to adapt its 
communications channel to use the best radio link depending 
on the throughput and range requirements in any 
configuration. 
Multiradio platforms are a subject of research for WSN 
as 
they 
offer 
some 
attractive 
characteristics 
and 
improvements over single radio WSN platforms. Multiradio 
systems with radios covering Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and 
6LoWPAN (IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area 
Networks) operating at the 2.45 GHz ISM band have 
reported to achieve enhanced robustness, latency and energy 
characteristics [ 6 ]. In a variety of implementations, 
multiradio systems operating at the 433MHz and 2.45 GHz 
ISM bands have been reported which use a preamble 
sampling technique in a wakeup radio implementation [7]. 
These multiradio platforms have been used to evaluate the  
performance of communications protocols in terms of power 
consumption and latency over different duty cycle values and 
under various amounts of traffic loads. Kusy [8] reports on 
the development of a new dual radio network architecture to 
improve communication reliability in a wireless sensor 
network, but the approach was limited to a single channel 
implementation, where the 900MHz and 2.4GHz radios were 
used in parallel rather than in conjunction with power saving 
protocols. A multiradio platform for on the body WSN 
applications operating in 433MHz and 868Mz is reported in 
[ 9 ] with focus on the platform architecture. More 
consideration on the issues of antenna design for such 
devices is found in [10] [11]. A comprehensive survey of 
MAC protocols is given by Jurdak et Al in [12]. They 
survey, classify, and analyze 34 MAC layer protocols for 
wireless ad hoc networks, ranging from industry standards 
to research activites. 
The BtNode V3 [13] platform features two radios. It 
incorporates a Chipcon CC1000 low power radio (433-915 
MHz) and also has an additional ZV4002 Bluetooth radio 
(2.4 GHz) as shown in Figure 1.a. Similarly the Shimmer 
mote [14] and the Wasp Mote [15] feature a CC2420 IEEE 
802.15.4 radio and can also be configured with an optional 
Bluetooth radio shown in Figure 1.b and Figure 1.c 
respectively. The Wasp Mote also has separate 868MHz and 
900MHz radio modular plug-in boards however, in this 
instance only a single radio module can be operated at a time 
and true multiradio operation is not feasible. Similarly, the 
Tyndall Mote (Figure 1.d), has the capability for adding 
multiple radios. With the Tyndall mote, because of the planar 
implementation, several different radios could be stacked on 
top of each other and operate simultaneously.  
The AUTHENTIC board described in this publication is 
not only a radio sensing platform but it can also be a repeater 
increasing the range of the network. Moreover, at the same 
time, the user can connect to each single platform in the 
network using a tablet or a smartphone via Bluetooth (for 
maintenance or data visualization). 
The AUTHENTIC board has been designed with 
interoperability in mind, it can be used in existing 
deployments that use ZigBee or 868MHz protocols, to 
improving the network range without increasing the 
interference. From a protocol perspective, each board can 
work as an end node or base station/coordinator as well. In 
fact, if there are some changes in the network one node can 
reboot and operate as in base station mode using its 
multiboot functionality. 
Similarly, the OPAL platform is an example of a 
multiradio platform where increased performance in terms of 
the network realization, latency, data throughput and power 
consumption were achieved compared to single radio 
platforms [16]. The OPAL platform is a high throughput 
sensing module that includes two onboard 802.15.4 radios 
operating in the 900MHz and 2.4GHz bands to provide 
communication diversity and an aggregate transfer rate of 3 
Mbps. It embeds a 96 MHz Cortex SAM3U processor with 
dynamic core frequency scaling, a feature that can be used to 
fine-tune processing speed with the higher communication 
rates while minimizing energy consumption. 
 

98
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a. 
 
 
b. 
 
c. 
 
d. 
 
Figure 1. Multiradio systems. a) Dual Radio BTnodeRev3 b) Dual Radio 
Shimmer c) Wasp Mote ZigBee & Bluetooth Modules d) The Tyndall 
25mm modular system 
III. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
The aim of this system development is to provide a 
future-proof wireless platform for HAN with regards to the 
network heterogeneity in terms of hardware and protocols 
currently in use and under development. 
A specification process was undertaken with industry 
partners and service providers in the area of building 
management – to identify the core requirements associated 
with a wireless system for deployment in homes and offices. 
The platform described in the following sections of this 
paper is a novel low power consumption multiradio system 
incorporating a 32-bit ARM-Cortex microcontroller and 
multiple radio interfaces - ZigBee/6LoWPAN/Bluetooth 
LE/868MHz platform, which features autonomous behavior 
to enable interoperability between systems utilizing different 
radio front ends. It provides a solution for network 
congestion in environments such as HAN and Commercial 
Buildings in a credit card sized form factor shown in Figure 
2. It also provides better interoperability than the usual 
wireless 
sensor 
devices 
approach, 
enhancing 
the 
communicability between different network entities (sensor 
nodes, smart meters, media, smartphones), and driving the 
wireless sensor networks to the smart cities application 
space. 
 
Figure 2. AUTHENTIC Credit Card Form Factor Platform. 
The four main issues that need to be considered prior to 
selecting any unit or design approaches are: over all power 
consumption, cost, complete module size and user 
friendliness. Technical features assessed and considered 
included: functionality requirements as regards actuation and 
control, quality of service, latency, number and types of 
sensors/meters 
and 
interfaces, 
programming 
methods 
(wireless/non wireless), power supplies/energy harvesting 
compatibility, radio frequency band, standards/non standards 
communications and data transmission range. 
  
Figure 3. Block diagram of AUTHENTIC Platform functionality. 

99
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In conjunction with these end users, as part of our system 
specification, three communication standards were identified 
as being needed within the HAN environment: ZigBee – 
2.4GHz, 6LoWPan – 2.4GHz, Bluetooth Low Energy – 
2.4GHz, as well as a non-standards based ISM band 868MHz 
transceiver as a response to the 2.4GHz limitations identified 
- bandwidth congestion and data loss associated with non 
line of sight (NLOS) effects of the building structure limited 
RF range. The board has been designed around the standard 
ARM CORTEX-M3 based microcontroller, which offers a 
good 
trade-off 
between 
power 
consumption 
and 
performance. See Figure 3 for an overview of features and 
functionalities. 
The final embedded system was designed around a credit 
card form factor (shown in Figure 4) and deployed in offices 
and homes for preliminary tests and characterization 
Microcontroller: The heart of the system is the ATMEL 
SAM3S8C microcontroller, a 32-bit ARM Cortex M3 Core. 
64MHz Maximum, 512KB flash, 64KB RAM, USB 2.0. 
External 
Flash 
Memories: 
Two 
external 
flash 
memories: 128MB NAND flash for data logging, 16MB 
NOR-flash for code execution. The two memories are 
connected to the microcontroller External Bus Interface 
(EBI). 
Radio Communication: The platform integrates three 
radio 
chips: 
Bluetooth 
Low 
Energy 
radio 
chip, 
(manufacturer: 
NORDIC, 
model: 
NRF8001), 
ZigBee/6LoWPAN radio chip, (manufacturer: ATMEL, 
model: AT86RF231), Sub-GHz radio chip (868MHz), 
(manufacturer: ST Microelectronics, model: SPIRIT1). 
Sensors: Two sensors were interfaced via an I2C 
interface: 
temperature 
sensor, 
accuracy: 
±0.5°C, 
(manufacturer: MAXIM, model: MAX31725MTA+), light 
sensor, range: 0.045 Lux to 188,000 Lux, (manufacturer: 
MAXIM, model: MAX44009EDT+T). These are used for 
detecting in-home activity monitoring occupancy through 
lighting usage. 
Battery: The battery used is a lithium prismatic battery 
with a capacity of 1300mAh, which is recharged through the 
USB port or through the use of energy harvesting systems 
compatible with the built environment [17]. 
 
Figure 4. AUTHENTIC multiradio embedded system. 
IV. 
MULTIRADIO FUNCTIONALITY 
In this section the functionality of the AUTHENTIC 
platform is presented in terms of its communication 
architectures, the multiradio and multiboot capabilities 
embedded in the system. 
A. Communication Architectures using Multiradio Systems 
In the context of “crowded radio frequency spectrum”, a 
wireless sensor network composed with a number of the 
proposed devices’ architectures can automatically adapt to 
the most reliable frequency communication channel based on 
the local interferences. This type of architecture has some 
interesting 
commercial 
applications 
for 
interoperable 
networks, HAN’s, commercial buildings and smart cities. 
Compared to single-end radio devices, it has the potential to 
provide increased connectivity in deployment, and can 
potentially reduce the interference impact on the network as 
the system can hop from ISM band to ISM band in an 
autonomous and opportunistic manner.  
 
Figure 5. AUTHENTIC multiradio system in operation 
By developing smart mechanisms for multi-protocol 
routing between the different radios, this architecture can 
potentially reduce the number of repeaters (and thus the 
infrastructure cost) compared to a standard single ended 
radio platform. In addition, multiradio systems provide better 
interoperability with Off-The-Shelf wireless devices, many 
of which operate on a variety of different standards and 
which may constitute a typical smart home deployment. 

100
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
From a research point of view, such a platform can be 
used to develop and evaluate firmware/wireless protocols 
using different frequency bands. 
The multiradio concept is illustrated in Figure 5 which 
shows how, by jumping between the 2.4GHz and 868MHz 
frequency bands, a connection can be made between remote 
clusters of ZigBee nodes, which are in different locations or 
separated by a congested spectrum making communication at 
2.4GHz difficult. 
Thus the network automatically switches to the 868MHz 
frequency in order to maintain communication with the out 
of range node. In that case, one node from the first cluster 
will act as a virtual “dual sensing” node, providing two 
inputs to the ZigBee Network. 
B. Multiradio Aspect 
The Bluetooth and 868MHz multiradio functionality has 
been tested as a proof of concept in a HAN as part of the 
AUTHENTIC deployment in office environments and in 
homes (for open field testing, the system was deployed 
temporarily outside).  
To 
evaluate 
the 
capabilities 
of 
the 
multiradio 
functionality, the remote node sends data (light, temperature 
or other peripheral sensor) to the base station using the 
868MHz radio or the 2.4GHz ZigBee network. The base 
station then sends the received data to a Smart Phone/HAN 
gateway using the Bluetooth interface that displays the data 
stream (in this case, temperature and light level from the 
remote sensor) as shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. AUTHENTIC multiradio system 
C. Multiboot - Autonomous System Implementation 
Multiboot capability enables the system to boot up and 
run according to various boot images [18] [19], which are 
stored in various sectors (region) of memory – see Figure 7.  
 
Figure 7. AUTHENTIC Multiboot reconfigurability 
To facilitate energy savings at an embedded system level, 
the multiboot configuration of the system will allow the 
platform to host two different applications and jump between 
them (via a boot loader). The applications can and will use 
different radios in future deployments, which will be useful 
for overcoming transmission issues in a congested/noisy 
environment. The targeted example is the mote running a 
ZigBee 2.4GHz application and an 868MHz application. 
Failing to transmit data at 2.4GHz due to electromagnetic 
effects or long range requirements, the node would switch to 
the 868MHz application to operate in a less congested ISM 
band. This behavior would be coordinated among the 
network nodes in protocols under development. In this case, 
the idea is to allocate memory regions to specific 
applications. 
The Multi-Application Software Management tool acts 
as a main application that we will call “Leader”. The 
Leader is programmed in a specific area of the memory and 
will act as what is commonly known as a Bootstrap Loader. 
The particular boot state functionality can be associated with 
a range of communications modalities say ZigBee, Bluetooth 
or Wireless Modbus according to application requirements 
associated with energy consumption, latency or Quality of 
Service. 
The Leader can access any location of the memory. The 
applications that will contain the required functionalities of 
the system (e.g., sensing, communication) will be described 
as “Users”. The Leader can then grant the leadership to the 
different Users that will need to return the leadership to the 
Leader (different solutions are possible for the latter).  

101
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Leader 
will provide an API (Application 
Programming Interface) in order to modify intrinsic 
parameters of the system (e.g., system clock frequency, 
timers etc.). Thus, this functionality will considerably reduce 
the complexity of the development from the user developer’s 
point of view. 
From a smart home/building management system 
deployment perspective, it will provide an essential software 
management tool for multiradio platforms. 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. AUTHENTIC Board Power Characterization 
To carry out the energy consumption tests, the following 
modalities were implemented as shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
SYSTEM POWER CONSUMPTION IN DIFFERENT MODES 
Symbol 
Operational Mode Measured 
Value 
Unit 
ITX868 
Current consumption in TX 
mode 868MHz module, 
POUT = +12 dBm, all 
components on 
43.98 
mA 
Isb868 
Current consumption in 
standby mode 868MHz 
module, all components on 
28.24 
mA 
ITXBLE 
0dBm 
Current consumption in TX 
mode BLE module, POUT = 
0 dBm, all components on 
24.80 
mA 
IsbBLE 
Current consumption in 
standby mode (between 2 
transmissions) BLE module, 
all components on 
17.29 
mA 
ITX, 
ZigBee
1 
Current consumption in TX 
mode ZigBee module, POUT 
= +3 dBm, all components 
on, 1 led on 
64.07 
mA 
ITX, 
ZigBee
2 
Current consumption in TX 
mode ZigBee module, POUT 
= +3 dBm, all components 
on, 1 led off 
71.12 
mA 
Isleep1 
Current consumption in sleep 
mode (microcontroller) and 
all the other components on 
15.73 
mA 
Isleep2 
Current consumption in sleep 
mode (microcontroller) and 
all the other components off 
3.18 
mA 
Isleep3 
Current consumption in 
deepest sleep mode 
(microcontroller) and all the 
other components on 
3.1 
mA 
Isleep4 
Current consumption in 
deepest sleep mode and 
components off / removed 
3.5 
µA 
The MCU is programmed to turn on all the devices, 
setting the output power of the module to (+12 dBm for 868 
MHz module, 0 dBm for BLE, +3 dBm for ZigBee), start the 
transmission of a single packet (1 byte length) and then put it 
in standby mode. Sleep mode tests include the MCU turning 
on all the devices before going into sleep mode, turning off 
all the devices and entering sleep mode, turning on all the 
devices and entering deepest sleep mode and turning off all 
the devices and going into deepest sleep mode. 
For the 868 MHz tests, GFSK (Gaussian frequency-shift 
keying) modulation with the Gaussian filter “BT Product” set 
to 1 was used. For the Bluetooth LE modules the default 
Gaussian filter used is 0.5. For the ZigBee module 
quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) modulation was used. 
Table I shows the results of all tests in different modes. 
These provide the building blocks for developing low-power 
networking algorithims for optimising the lifetime of the 
WSN systems and QoS parameters.  
B. Multiradio Range Test Comparison 
1) Indoor Non Line of Sight (NLOS) range testing 
This section focuses on the NLOS testing of the 868 
MHz, Bluetooth and ZigBee radio modules on the 
AUTHENTIC Board. Two boards are used: one acts as a 
sensing node and one as a Base Station.  
The node reads data from the temperature sensor as well 
as received signal strength indication (RSSI) values. This is 
then sent to the Base Station where it is converted into a 
value expressed in °C (minimizing energy consumption 
associated with processing on the node), which is in turn sent 
to our visual interface (a smartphone connected via 
Bluetooth).  
The test took place in an office environment consisting of 
open plan cubicles, closed offices, coffee dock facilities and 
meeting rooms in a simulated “home environment”. The 
node (represented by the star) was kept stationary while the 
base station and the smartphone moved around the entire 
area for data gathering at the different frequencies under test. 
In Figures 8, 9, 10, the areas where the data is received 
perfectly are reported in green, in orange the areas where the 
signal is poor and the data is received intermittently, in red 
the areas where there is no signal and data is not received. 
Theory would suggest that the range associated with 
lower frequency (868MHz) ISM bands would significantly 
outperform higher frequency ISM bands (2.4GHz). In this 
experiment, the difference is little more than a 10% 
improvement (see Table II).  
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF RANGE FOR INDOOR NLOS TESTS  
Radio 
Appoximate Area 
Covered 
Max. distance 
(Line of sight) 
868 MHz 
130.4 m2 
11.4 m 
Bluetooth LE 
60.04 m2 
7 m 
ZigBee 
108.6 m2 
10.6 m 
 
We expected 868MHz to be much better than ZigBee, a 
possible reason (under investigation) is that the 868MHz data 
rate (500 kbps) is higher than the ZigBee one (250 kbps) and 
there is a tradeoff between the range and the data rate. 
Moreover, the modulation used by the modules are different: 
the value of Eb/N0 (noise power per unit bandwidth) of the 
offset-QPSK is less than that of the GFSK; this means that 
the bit error rate is better for the ZigBee module operating at 

102
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2.4GHz. To improve the 868MHz range, it is possible to 
increase the power of the module (it can reach +16 dB) and 
reduce the data rate. Further experiments were carried out to 
validate this (as shown in Table III). 
 
Figure 8. 868MHz range test  
 
Figure 9. Bluetooth LE range test  
 
Figure 10. ZigBee 2.4GHz range test  
2) Sub-GHz range improvement. 
To improve the 868MHz range, 3 solutions have been 
adopted: the output power of the sensing node was increased 
up to +12 dBm (initially +11dBm). In addition, the data rate 
was reduced to 100 kbps (from 250 kbps). Finally, the GFSK 
modulation with BT product was set to 0.5 (from 1). BT is 
the Bandwidth Time. It is the product of adjacent signal 
frequency separation and symbol duration. A BT product of 
0.5 corresponds to the minimum carrier separation to ensure 
orthogonality between signals in adjacent channels. The 
beneficial result of this is the signal on one frequency 
channel does not interfere with the signal on the adjacent 
frequency channel. 
The sub-GHz radio chip uses an external crystal oscillator 
that provides a clock signal for the frequency synthesizer. 
The channel center frequency has been programmed to be 
868MHz. So as to ensure that this is the actual frequency 
used, it was measured using a Spectrum Analyser.  
We measured that the two boards in the deployment 
(remote multi radio node and multi radio base station) send 
and receive data at 868.027 MHz (+10.70 dBm) and 
868.0181 MHz (+11.02 dBm) respectively. This is found to 
be due to the crystal inaccuracy. To compensate the 
inaccuracy, a correction term (foffset) has been implemented in 
the firmware to ensure that the frequency for send and 
receive is exactly set to 868MHz. 
 

103
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Where fXO is the frequency of the crystal oscillator 
(52MHz) and FC_OFFSET is a 12-bit integer set by the 
FC_OFFSET registers of the radio chip.  
 
 
Figure 11. Output power.  
After this compensation, the 2 boards had the center 
frequency at 868.00MHz (Figure 11) and another range test 
has been made in the same environment of the previous tests 
with 2 AUTHENTIC boards (one as node remote and one as 
base station) and the result has been reported in Figure 12 
and Table III below showing the maximum range obtained 
using the 868MHz radio. 
 
Figure 12. 868MHz range test after compensation  
As can be seen from a comparison with the initial set of 
results reported in [1] and shown here in Table II, we 
achieved an improvement of 60% in performance (area 
covered) with the new configuration settings for the 
AUTHENTIC boards operating in the 868 MHz band. 
TABLE III.  
RANGE TESTING 868 MHZ BAND USING OPTIMISED 
CONFIGURATION SETTINGS  
Radio 
Approximate Area Covered 
868MHz (Test 1) 
130,4 m2 
868MHz (Test 2) 
211,5 m2 
 
3) Outdoor Line of Sight (LOS) range testing 
An open field is one of the simplest and most commonly 
used environments for RF range tests. In this section, tests 
for the three modules on the AUTHENTIC Board (868MHz, 
Bluetooth, and ZigBee) are reported. The tests took place in a 
sports field in University College Cork, which offered a long 
range LOS measurement. 
868MHz: 
To 
test 
the 
Sub-GHz 
module, 
two 
AUTHENTIC boards were used, one as Node Remote and 
one as Base Station. The first reads data every four seconds 
from the temperature sensor and sends it to the Base Station. 
The maximum range measured was 193m. 
Bluetooth: For this test, two devices were used: one 
AUTHENTIC Board and a smartphone. The board was left 
stationary and the smartphone was moved around the area 
checking if the connection was still available or not. The 
maximum LOS distance measured was 18.4m. 
ZigBee: To test the ZigBee module, two AUTHENTIC 
boards (one as Trust Center and one as Occupancy Sensor) 
were used along with a RF231USB-RD USB Stick (as 
Remote Control). The Trust Center creates the network and 
the other two devices join it. After this, the Occupancy 
Sensor reads the value of the LED (on/off) and sends it every 
four seconds to the Remote Control that moves around the 
area. The maximum range measured was 193m. 
The maximum distance measured in Line of Sight for 
both the ZigBee and 868MHz system was 193m, but this 
value could be greater and additional tests need to be carried 
out to establish the maximum range for each. The maximum 
range achieved was due to the presence of physical obstacles 
(walls/buildings, which would have interfered with the LOS 
measurements at the maximum extremity of the test location. 
The results are tabulated in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
COMPARISON OF RANGE FOR OUTDOOR LOS TESTS  
Radio 
Max. distance  
(Line of Sight) 
868MHz 
193m * 
Bluetooth LE 
18.4m 
ZigBee 
193m * 
* Limit of the field measurement, not the technology 
 
VI. 
AUTHENTIC MULTI HOP PROTOCOL 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The AUTHENTIC network has been designed to be an 
auto configurable network, this means that the network is 
autonomous in operation and has the capability to 
reconfigure itself. It is composed of one base station (that 
acts as both a router and gateway) and sensor nodes (sensing 
nodes that read data from the sensors on board and send the 
sensor data values to the base station/gateway) as shown in 
Figure 13. 

104
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 13. The AUTHENTIC network topology 
At system start up, the base station creates a sub-1GHz 
network with the sensor nodes by transmitting a broadcast 
message to the nodes and waiting for their reply. 
When the node receives the broadcast packet, it saves the 
base station’s address in its memory and replies with an ACK 
to confirm that it has received the message. 
When the base station receives the ACK, it checks the 
Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) to be sure that 
the link with the node is a robust one. If the RSSI value is 
higher than the threshold (it is taken to be -75 dBm), then the 
base station saves the node’s address in its list of the sub-
1GHz addresses, so as to be able to build an appropriate 
routing table. If the RSSI value is lower than the threshold, 
the base station sends another message to the node in order to 
change the radio communication to ZigBee. The default start 
up mode is in the 868MHz band operation mode. Two 
possible factors can affect the RSSI value: interference and 
the distance between the node and the base station. In these 
cases it is better to switch to another frequency.  
 
Figure 14. Node's state machine 
The node goes into RX mode every time it sends a packet 
to the base station in order to receive the command to switch 
to ZigBee. The protocol state machine for the node is shown 
in Figure 14. The node, after sending the ACK message 
regarding the broadcast packet, goes into RX mode for a 
certain period (it is taken for the purposes of these 
experiments to be 1 second). During this period the only 
message that it can receive is the command to change its 
communication to ZigBee due to the RSSI level 
measurements taken. If so, it will reboot (using the multi 
boot functionality described in [1]) with the ZigBee 
application and waits for the creation of the ZigBee network.  
If the node doesn’t receive any command from the base 
station it assumes that it is part of the sub-1GHz (868MHz) 
network, and goes into sleep mode (to reduce power 
consumption) for a random period between 4 and 5 minutes 
(Tsleep). The node then wakes up, reads the data from the 
sensors on board (temperature and light level) and sends 
them to the base station. Once the data packet is sent, the 
node again enters in RX mode for 2 seconds so as to receive 
an appropriate command from the base station, after that it 
goes into sleep mode for Tsleep, then it wakes up, sends the 
sensors readings and so on. 
Tsleep is a randomly assigned value to avoid the case that 
all the nodes send their sensor readings at the same time. 
This will reduce the probability of packet collision between 
the transmissions with the resultant requirement for 
retransmissions 
and 
increase 
in 
associated 
energy 
consumption. 
The 
base 
station, after the 
broadcast 
message, 
communicates with each node that has replied to the 
broadcast, and saves all their addresses in 2 lists, one for the 
sub GHz network (that contains the nodes’ addresses with 
RSSI higher than the threshold) and one for the ZigBee 
network (that contains the nodes’ addresses with RSSI lower 
than the threshold). Based on these tables, the coordinator is 
in a position to develop an appropriate network structure. 
The sub GHz network is created first, after which the base 
station starts the creation of the ZigBee network. Once the 
two networks have been defined, the basestation enters sleep 
mode to save power. The system can be woken up by 
receiving sensor data messages from the nodes associated 
with the 2 networks created. This wake up is instigated by an 
interrupt based on a received data packet used to wake the 
microcontroller up out of standby mode. 
For each message received, the base station sends the 
sensor data to a GUI enabled device connected via the 
Bluetooth interface on the AUTHENTIC Board (to any 
standard smartphone, tablet, PC etc.). The GUI displays data 
in real time from the different nodes and stores these in an 
associated database for analysis. The base station checks if 
the RSSI value of that node is higher or lower than the 
threshold (in this case -75 dBm). Only if it is lower than -75 
dBm will the base station send a message to the node in order 
to switch to ZigBee network. When the node receives this 
command it sends an ACK to the base station to confirm that 
the message has been received and it reboots with the ZigBee 
application mode operational. 

105
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
When the base station receives the ACK, it removes the 
node’s address from the sub GHz addresses list and adds it to 
the ZigBee addresses list. The packet structure is shown in 
Figure 15. 
 
Prea 
mble 
Sync 
Length 
Dest. 
Address 
Source 
Address 
Con 
trol 
Seq. 
No. 
ACK 
Pay 
load 
CRC 
Figure 15. The AUTHENTIC Board Zigbee packet structure 
Where:  
 
Preamble is a signal to synchronize transmission timing 
and it is a programmable field from 1 to 32 bytes; 
 
Sync is the synchronization word; 
 
Length is the packet length; 
 
Dest. Address is the destination address and can be set 
to a single, broadcast or multicast address; 
 
Source Address is the address of the transmitting board; 
 
Control is the control field of the packet; 
 
Seq. No. contains the sequence number of the 
transmitted packet. It is incremented automatically 
every time a new packet is transmitted; 
 
ACK is the acknowledgement field. If set to 1 means 
that it is the acknowledgement packet; 
 
Payload is information data;  
 
CRC is the error detecting code to detect errors in the 
data. 
 
The base station sends periodically (every 15 minutes) 
the general broadcast message in order to contact new nodes 
that did not reply at the first message or to contact any of the 
nodes that need to reboot so they can join the network. Nodes 
that are already in the network will ignore the message.  
The use of this protocol shows the interoperability 
between the different wireless technologies (Bluetooth, 
ZigBee, and 868MHz). It is proposed that this system is a 
solution for network congestion because it reduces 
interference in one particular frequency band. If interference 
is encountered in one band then the system simply changes 
the operational ISM band to avoid it. 
It is also a good solution to reduce power consumption 
associated with an individual nodes’ operation. In the first 
instance, power savings are enabled due to the fact that the 
nodes and the base station are in low-power sleep mode if 
they don’t need to transmit data. Moreover, since the base 
station is monitoring the RSSI signal levels, redundant and 
energy wasteful transmissions are eliminated (in the case that 
the node continues to transmit data but the base station can’t 
receive them - because it is out of range or there is too much 
interference in the network). 
An evaluation of potential power savings associated with 
the new protocol has been carried out regarding a network 
composed of one Base Station and three nodes and based on 
the power consumption reported in Table I, assuming to 
power the boards with a 3V battery, to transmit data every 5 
minutes and then go in sleep mode. 
In a scenario where three nodes join the sub-1GHz 
network and when the RSSI level referring to one node is 
lower than the threshold it joins the ZigBee network, the 
estimated power consumption of the Base Station is 
52.13mW and 14.43mW for a single node.  
As previously outlined, the Base Station is in standby 
mode when it is not transmitting or receiving and the nodes 
go into sleep mode after sending the data read from the 
temperature and light sensors. 
In a single radio scenario, where only the ZigBee network 
is available, it can happen that the nodes send the sensors 
data to the Base Station but it cannot receive them because of 
the interferences or long range issues, so the nodes transmit 
uselessly wasting power. In this case the estimated power 
consumption of the Base Station is 55.87mW and 16.83mW 
for a single node. 
System energy consumption for the multiradio platform 
was calculated based on a model which was developed using 
empirically 
derived 
power 
measurements. 
These 
measurements are reported in Table I, and are based on the 
board being powered by a 3V battery. The operational duty 
cycle for the sensor nodes was selected to be 5%. The system 
is considered to be in sleep mode for the rest of the cycle.  
From this energy model, we can see that the power 
consumption of the node that uses an appropriate 
communication protocol associated with a multiradio system 
(14.43mW) is reduced by approximately 15% compared to a 
node that works in a single radio system (16.83mW). This 
will translate to an increase in battery lifetime of 10-15% in a 
typical application (based on a standard AA battery). 
VII. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 
Interoperability 
between 
communications 
protocols 
operating using different radio technologies is a major issue 
within the realm of wireless sensor technology where 
numerous wireless sensor technologies could be operating in 
the same vicinity. Middleware is one software solution that 
aims to overcome this problem. Middleware runs at either the 
gateway or cloud level and incorporates drivers for numerous 
protocols (ZigBee, Z-Wave and EnOcean for example). 
This paper has shown how multi radio architectures and 
networks offer the possibility of increased interoperability 
and energy savings at a network and node level and thus are 
ideal for use in such HAN architectures. In addition, the 
multiradio architectures described address some of the issues 
associated with the fact that in the resource-constrained 
systems typically used in sensing systems for the built 
environment, energy is often the primary constraint and 
impacts on all aspects of the sensor system. 
This work describes the development and preliminary 
characterization of a novel low power consumption 
multiradio system incorporating multiple radio interfaces - 
ZigBee/6LoWPAN/Bluetooth 
LE/868MHz 
platform. 
It 
provides a solution for network congestion in environment 
such as Home Area Network and Commercial Buildings in a 
credit card sized form factor. The multiradio sensing system 
shows the potential for such systems to improve 
interoperability between the different wireless technologies 
enhancing the communications between heterogeneous 
network entities (Sensor Nodes, Smart Meters, Media, Smart 
Phones), and driving the Wireless Sensor Networks use case 
in the built environment. The configurability of the system 

106
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
can increase the range between single sensor points and can 
enable 
the 
implementation 
of 
adaptive 
networking 
architectures of different configurations. 
Additional characterization and optimization of the 
system in a variety of environments is underway and 
development of frequency hopping protocols to maximize 
the potential of the multiradio system and its possibilities to 
maximize system lifetime of a WSN in a Smart Home or 
office environment through the development of networking 
protocols leveraging off the platforms capabilities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of 
Enterprise Ireland and the International Energy Research 
Centre (IERC) for funding the AUTHENTIC project 
(TC20121002A/B). This publication has emanated from 
research supported in part by Science Foundation Ireland 
(SFI) and is co-funded under the European Regional 
Development Fund, Grant Number 13/RC/2077-CONNECT. 
Aspects of this work have been funded by the European 
Union Horizon 2020 project MOEEBIUS under grant 
agreement 680517. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. O’Flynn, M. De Donno, and W. Magnin, “Multiradio 
Sensing Systems for Home Area Networking and Building 
Management,” The Fifth International Conference on Smart 
Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (SMART 2016), 
IARIA, May 2016, pp. 25-30, ISSN: 2308-3727, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-4763. 
[2] F. Zhao and L. Guibas, Wireless Sensor Networks: An 
Information Processing Approach, ISBN-9781558609143, 
Elsevier, Chapter 8, pp. 294, 2004. 
[3] AUTHENTIC Webpage, 
http://www.creativedesign.ie/ierc_test/?homeareanetworks=A
UTHENTIC-for-home-area-networks-han 2016.11.25 
[4] K.Curran, Recent Advances in Ambient Intelligence and 
Context-Aware Computing, IGI global book series Advances 
in Computational Intelligence and Robotics (ACIR)(ISSN: 
2327-0411), Chapter 10, pp. 155-169. 
[5] IERC Website, http://www.ierc.ie/ 2016.11.25 
[6] M. T. Delgado, H. Khaleel, C. Pastrone, and M. A. Spirito, 
“Underlying connectivity mechanisms for multi-radio wireless 
sensor and actuator networks,” The 9th International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking 
and Communications (WiMob 2013), IEEE, Oct 2013, pp. 
408-413. 
[7] J. Ansari, X. Zhang, and P. Mahonen, “Multi-radio medium 
access control protocol for wireless sensor networks,” Int. J. 
Sen. Networks, 8(1):47-61, 2010.  
[8] B. Kusy et al., “Radio diversity for reliable communication in 
wsns,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inform. Process. Sensor 
Networks.,Chicago, IL, 2011, pp. 270–281. 
[9] J. Buckley et al.,“A novel and miniaturized 433/868mhz 
multi-band wireless sensor platform for body sensor network 
applications,” Ninth International Conference on Wearable 
and Implantable Body Sensor Networks (BSN 2012), May 
2012,, pp. 63-66, ISBN: 978-0-7695-4698-8. 
[10] L. Loizou, J. Buckley, and B. O’Flynn,” Design and analysis 
of a dual-band inverted-f antenna with orthogonal frequency-
controlled radiation planes,” Antennas and Propagation, IEEE 
Transactions on, 61(8):3946-3951, 2013.  
[11] L. Loizou, J. Buckley, B. O’Flynn, J. Barton, C. O’Mathuna, 
and E. Popovici,” Design and measurement of a planar dual-
band antenna for the Tyndall multiradio wireless sensing 
platform,” In Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS 2013) 
IEEE, Feb 2013 pp. 11-14, ISBN: 978-1-4673-4636-8. 
[12] R. Jurdak, C. V. Lopes, and P. Baldi, “A survey classification 
and comparative analysis of medium access control protocols 
for ad hoc networks.” IEEE Commun. Survey. Tutorials, vol. 
6, pp. 2–16, Jan. 2004. 
[13] BTNode http://www.btnode.ethz.ch/ 2016.11.25 
[14] Shimmer Mote link www.shimmer.com 2016.11.25 
[15] http://www.libelium.com/products/waspmote/hardware 
2016.11.25 
[16] R. Jurdak, K. Klues, B. Kusy, C. Richter, K. Langendoen, and 
M. Brunig, “Opal. A multiradio platform for high throughput 
wireless sensor networks,” Embedded Systems Letters, IEEE, 
3(4):121-124, 2011. 
[17] C. O’Mathuna, T. O'Donnell, R. Martinez-Catala, J. Rohan, 
and B. O'Flynn, “Energy Scavenging For Long-Term 
Deployable Wireless Sensor Networks,” Talanta, 75 (3):613-
623. 
[18] D. Fuji, T. Yamakami, and K. Ishiguro, “A fast-boot method 
for embedded mobile Linux: Toward a single-digit user 
sensed boot time for full-featured commercial phones,” Proc. - 
25th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl. Work., (WAINA 
2011), March 2011, pp. 81–85,  ISBN 978-0-7695-4338-3. 
[19] C. W. Chang, C. Y. Yang, Y. H. Chang, and T. W. Kuo, 
“Booting time minimization for real-time embedded systems 
with non-volatile memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 63, 
no. 4, pp. 847–859, 2014. 
 

