53
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
On the Study of Internet Ossification, Impacts, and Solutions 
Lin Han, Richard Li 
Futurewei Technologies, Inc. 
Santa Clara, California, U.S.A 
email: lin.han@futurewei.com; richard.li@futurewei.com
 
Abstract— The current Internet is based on IPv4 and IPv6. It 
has been in service for many years and is very successful. 
However, it is facing challenges in protocol ossification, security, 
and service quality. Recently, the geographical tension, trading 
confrontation, digital asset and digital sovereignty, the 
regulation for data protection and localization have raised 
decentralization requirements for the Internet. This paper 
analyses the factors for the Internet ossification and its impacts, 
it proposes a new architecture that is distributed based on 
region or country. It can maintain the support of the current 
IPv4/IPv6 and existing applications, and provide more 
flexibility for the protocol, thus mitigating the ossification of the 
Internet. With the new architecture, the Internet will be 
decentralized based on regional governance and provide more 
space for more diversities within different regions. Meanwhile, 
the global connectivity, accessibility and integrity of the Internet 
are kept. 
Keywords- Future Internet; Ossification; Decentralization; 
Distributed; Fragmentation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
This paper is an extended version of [1], which 
investigates the Internet ossification, proposes a new 
architecture and protocol to solve the problem. 
 
The Internet has penetrated everywhere in our life and has 
provided tremendous momentum to the development and 
progress in communication, technology, culture, and 
economy. The current Internet is based on IPv4 [2] and IPv6 
[3] protocols, and consists of many other protocols for 
different areas, such as address assignment, domain name 
service, routing and switching, security, transport. All these 
protocols are governed by the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF). In the document thereafter, the name IP 
represents both IPv4 and IPv6. 
However, the Internet’s deficiency and ossification are 
also noticed. This includes slow evolution, protocol 
ossification, resource allocation unfairness, security and 
privacy concerns. Digital asset [4] and digital sovereignty [5] 
are also debated in different countries and regions. All these 
problems are not easy to be solved under the current Internet 
architecture since those factors were never considered in the 
time of the Internet was born. 
The paper briefs our research on a new architecture for the 
Internet and associated protocol structures. It can provide 
extra flexibility for the Internet while maintaining the current 
IP based technologies and services. Internet ossification can 
be mitigated by a new architecture including distributed 
Internet resource management and domain name service, free 
choice of address type, and heterogeneous communications. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, 
we present an overview of the Internet architecture and 
protocols. Section III discusses the Internet ossification and 
analyzes the root causes. The technical factors are analyzed in 
Section IV. Our new network protocol is proposed in Section 
V. Section VI presents the detailed design. Section VII 
illustrates the new Internet architecture with the new protocol. 
The compatibility issues are discussed in Section VIII. 
Sections IX and X summarize the advantages and 
disadvantages of the new proposal, respectively. Section XI 
concludes the paper and gives further research directions.  
II. 
OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNET 
The Internet is the global system of interconnected 
computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite to 
communicate between networks and devices [6]. Recently, 
with the growth of 5G [7], Internet of Things (IOT) [8], Non-
Terrestrial-Network (NTN) integration [9], the Internet has 
become the communication infrastructure that almost every 
person, every device and everything can be connected to. The 
Internet scope is very broad and has a couple of key 
fundamental blocks: 
• The definition of IP address, the mechanism to allocate 
and assign the IP addresses. There are two types of IP 
addresses, one in IPv4 and another is IPv6. Currently, IPv4 
is in the process of becoming obsolete from the 
perspective of IETF, and IPv6 is the only supported 
address. The IP address (except the local address and non-
routed address) is globally significant and unique in the 
world. It is allocated by the Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority (IANA) [10] to each region and country. There 
are five Regional Internet Registries (RIRs). Each RIR has 
a couple of Local Internet Registries (LIRs) or National 
Internet Registries (NIRs). They are responsible for the 
allocation of the IP addresses block on their authorized 
areas. Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the hierarchical 
architecture of IANA [11]. 
• The definition of Asynchronous System Number (ASN) 
[12], and the mechanism to assign ASN. ASN is used for 
BGP [13] to represent autonomous systems across the 
Internet. Similar to IP address, the public ASN is also 
globally significant, it is managed by IANA. ASN is key 
to BGP that is critical protocol for the inter-connection and 
inter-working of different networks distributed globally. 
BGP will exchange the global IP address of different 
networks, thus making every global IP address reachable 
from anywhere around the world. 
• The definition of Domain Name, the mechanism to 
manage Domain Name Servers and provide the Domain 
Name System (DNS) [14] Service. Similar to IP address, 
Domain Name is also globally significant. The DNS root 
zone management [15] and DNS root servers [16] are 
managed by IANA as well. Domain Name and Domain 

54
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Name Servers are distributed globally. There are thirteen 
DNS root server located in U.S.A. Different leaf servers 
belonging to different region and country are deployed 
globally. In addition to this, some countries may have 
mirror root servers in their own region to back up the root 
server and speed up the DNS services. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The hierachy of IANA architecture 
 
Figure 2.  Understanding address management hierarchy [10] 
• The protocols to control the Internet. The fundamental 
protocols are IPv4, IPv6 and many other protocols on top 
of IPv4 and IPv6. Excluding protocols on L2 that are 
controlled by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers 
(IEEE) 
and 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), the protocols for 
Internet include layers from L3 to L7 that are controlled 
by IETF. There are thousands of protocols related 
standards that are called RFC (Request for Comments) 
documents, e.g., more than 500 RFC for IPv6 has been 
published. Below just lists a very small portion of RFCs 
and very typical protocols: 
1. Host configuration related protocols (ND[17], 
DHCPv6[18], etc.) 
2. L3 or routing protocols (BGP, IS-IS [19], OSPF [20], 
etc.),  
3. Traffic Engineering (MPLS [21], RSVP-TE [22], 
SRv6 [23], etc.) 
4. L4 or transport protocols (TCP [24], UDP [25], etc.),  
5. Upper layer protocols (QUIC [26], TLS  [27], HTTP 
[28], etc.),  
III. 
INTERNET OSSIFICATION 
A. Root Cause 
The Internet was essentially designed with simplicity and 
scalability. [29] has detailed analysis of how this is achieved 
and lists the important timeline for Internet evolution. After 
the Internet becomes available to the public in the 1990s, it 
experienced more than 40-years’ development of technology. 
Gradually, the evolution of the Internet becomes slower and 
slower. There are less and less new technologies and services 
coming up for the Internet, especially for the parts of 
infrastructure and fundamentals. The structure of the internet 
becomes more rigid and difficult to change over time, and this 
sometime is called Internet ossification. For example, IPv6 
was designed to replace IPv4, but this has not been 
accomplished since the first IPv6 standard RFC 2460 [30] was 
introduced in 1998. Even right now, there are still arguments 
that IPv4 should not be obsoleted [31], and the adoption of 
IPv6 in Service Provider is still slow. 
There are couple of research that proposed new or 
enhanced architecture for Internet, such as RINA [32], SCION 
[33], New IP [34], IPv10 [35], and Extensible Internet (EI) 
[36][37]. Detailed analysis and comparison of proposals of 
RINA, SCION and New IP can be found in [38]. IPv10 is to 
allow the communication between IPv6 and IPv4. EI 
introduces Layer 3.5 between L3 and L4 to provide services 
that were not available in the current Internet architecture. 
Two categories of factors associated with management 
and technical solutions can contribute to the Internet 
ossification: 
• Consensus challenges:  
The Internet is a huge global network. Many technical 
definitions, solutions, and changes are globally significant. 
Any decisions or changes about its development, 
operation and deployment involve a wide range of 
stakeholders, including governments, organizations, 
operators, and individual users. Reaching consensus on 
changes can be very difficult and slow, especially when 
there are competing interests or different priorities. As a 
comparison in the standardization in wireless area, 3GPP 
has finished the 5G (the fifth generations of wireless 
technology) in almost the same period that IETF has not 
completed the IPv4 to IPv6 transition. 
• Technical solutions:  
Due to the vast number of users, devices and applications, 
the Internet has accumulated many technical feedbacks 
and problem reports. Completely fixing those problems or 
enhancing the existing solutions are always slow. Some 
quick fixes that are implemented in a short term, but may 
need to be addressed or replaced later on. The slow global 
consensus on any problem fixing, new enhancements or 
features, can make it more difficult to change any piece of 
the internet's infrastructure. The Internet is a complex 
system 
that 
involves 
many 
different 
networks, 
technologies, and standards. How to drive the Internet 
moving forward but maintain the previous investment is 

55
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
not only a business objective but also a technical 
challenge. Ensuring compatibility between these different 
elements can be difficult, and changes to one part of the 
system may have unintended consequences elsewhere. 
Due to this reason, people are always conservative and 
hesitate to adopt new technologies.  
B. Consequence of Internet Ossification 
The Internet ossification has impacted the internet's ability 
to continue evolving and progressing. It contributes more or 
less to the slow solution for following issues and 
requirements:  
• Privacy 
and 
Security: 
These 
two 
contradictory 
requirements have never been solved with satisfaction 
from different parties. To solve the privacy issues, IETF 
has had the Working Group for “Host Identity Protocol” 
[39], HIP [40] provides a cryptographic namespace to 
applications, and the associated protocol layer, thus 
provide the best privacy protection. But since many 
nations do not want such information invisible to the law 
enforcement for the sake of security, this protocol was 
never widely deployed. TLS [27], HTTPS [28], IPSec [41] 
are all security protocols at different layers and are widely 
used in Internet, but the Internet security issues never 
disappear even many security events are not associated 
with the technologies used. Distributed Denial-of-service 
(DDoS) attack [42] is one of the most notorious security 
issues for many years. It caused lots of business losses and 
may lead to international conflict if the DDoS source and 
victim are in different nations. The current technologies to 
stop DDoS attacks need to have protection mechanism at 
different places from connected service provider network 
to the cloud the application is running [43], the solution is 
quite extensive and needs coordination between different 
organizations. To eliminate such attacks, without some 
Internet infrastructure changes, it is quite difficult.  
• Digital Asset and Digital Sovereignty: Bitcoin has been 
very succeeded in its security, value growth and become a 
hot trading target, but it has never been recognized as legal 
currency for the legal business. Non-Fungible Token 
(NFT) is another type of  digital identifier for any digital 
asset, its recognition is also doubtful due to no 
endorsement from any government or authorization. The 
Internet is a network with unified address, protocol, and 
centralized resource management. The failed acceptance 
of Bitcoin and NFT have driven us to think whether we 
should consider the requirements from the sovereignty at 
the original design of the Internet. Since none of the basic 
Internet resources (IP address, ASN and Domain name) is 
controlled and managed by a government or authorized 
administration for a country, it will naturally cause 
concerns. Digital Sovereignty is a controversial topic in 
the European Union and other countries recently. Even 
though its scope, target and method are still to be decided, 
it has raised a question how the Internet can be designed 
to consider such factors. 
• Fragility of Internet Architecture 
Even though the Internet architecture is claimed to be 
distributed and resistant to failure of partial network, it has 
never been tested for large scale failure due to unexpected 
incidents like nature disasters or war. The current Internet 
only relies on the BGP to establish new routes whenever 
some global network is not reachable. However, since the 
Internet scalability is super large now, any failure of some 
links crossing small regions may lead to unexpected and 
large scale of consequences. The research in [44] has 
indicated that the Internet in non-relevant countries will be 
severely degraded if some links between China and 
Taiwan are cut. [44] has also given the detailed analysis 
for the reason why such small scale of link failure can lead 
to large scale of impacts to the Internet, it also proposes to 
study “Wartime BGP routes” as a short-term solution to 
handle such scenario.  
IV. 
DESIGN FACTORS FOR INTERNET OSSIFICATION 
Even though there are many factors, technical or non-
technical,  contributing to the Internet ossification, we think 
some short-term  design of Internet has made Internet less 
flexible at the beginning, thus is one of the most important 
factors we need to consider when thinking about the future 
architecture. The following are some technical perspectives 
that contribute to the Internet ossification. 
• The Internet resource (IP address, ASN and Domain 
Name) assignment and management are essentially a 
centralized hierarchical architecture. The problem of this 
centralized architecture is that (1) IANA and Regional 
Internet Registries are both non-profit organizations that 
do not have any jurisdiction. (2) The Internet resources are 
hardly allocated fairly, for example, IPv4 address block is 
not enough in some countries but more than required in 
other countries. (3) Address preference is not the same in 
different regions, countries, operators, users, and 
applications. For example, IPv4 is still preferred by many 
service providers and enterprise network. That is one 
reason that IPv6 deployment is so slow. (4) Centralized 
architecture makes the Internet fragile when the 
geopolitical tensions are high. In the recent events of war 
and trading confrontation, some voices to stop the Internet 
service to specific area is around and has put the threat to 
the integration of Internet. 
• Since IP address is globally significant, it requires that all 
end-user devices and network devices use IP as unique 
format for the data packet header, all L3 devices should 
follow the same principle to process IP packet and provide 
the services to upper layer. This design is called “narrow 
waist”. Obviously, it  has benefits in simplicity and 
scalability, but it becomes one factor contributing to the 
Internet ossification, since any changes in IP header will 
have global impact and hard to get consensus in IETF. 
• From the IP packet forwarding perspective, the IP based 
Internet is flat. All internet packets are forwarded based on 
IP address lookup; thus, all globally reachable IP 
addresses must be stored in every network device (even in 
MPLS network, the Provider Edge (PE) Routers also must 
store all reachable IP prefix). This can result in two 
problems: (1) huge amount of IP addresses or prefixes 
storage leads to huge lookup table size. (2) BGP, the only 
protocol to exchange the global IP reachability between 

56
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
different networks in different regions or countries, must 
process huge number of global IP prefixes. Any small 
internet state changes may lead to BGP re-route huge 
amount of traffic as described in [44]. 
V. 
CONSIDERATION OF NETWORK LAYER 
A. Tecnology Progress Considerations 
From the analysis in Section IV, we can see that one of the 
major factors for Internet ossification is the IP design is too 
rigid. Such rigid design was partially because the hardware or 
semiconductor performance was limited in the 80s and 90s in 
the last century. To achieve the line rate of packet processing, 
it is hard to give too many flexibilities in the address and 
functions in the packet header, e.g., the address type and size, 
the extensions, and options. After many years’ development, 
the semiconductor industry has progressed a lot. Recently, 
high-performance chips with programmability have been 
commercialized. It is time to think about what we can do from 
a technical perspective that can mitigate the Internet 
ossification. 
B. Requirements of Internet Decentralization 
1) Compared with other system 
As a global data communication network, the Internet is 
supposed to be only responsible for the inter-connection 
between different networks in the world. The networks could 
be for enterprises, ISP (Internet Service Providers), a country 
or a region. Let us compare the similar situation in phone 
network 
and 
mail 
system. 
For 
those 
two 
global 
communication systems, there is no restriction on how to 
define a local phone number, and local address format. The 
international community only needs to get consensus on the 
country code for international calls, or the country names for 
global mail delivery. Each country will manage and design its 
own structure of phone numbers, mail addressing system and 
delivery infrastructure. We think the Internet should take the 
same approach. 
2) Regulation requirements 
Recently, more and more countries or regions have new 
legal requirements for international ISP to provide the service 
in the country. For example, the internet service provider’s 
infrastructure, including cloud, computers, storages, etc., that 
is associated with the locally provided services, must be 
deployed within the territories of the country. All provided 
services (applications, contents, accounting, etc.) should 
comply with local regulations for security, privacy, etc. These 
regulations naturally require ISP to have a decentralized 
Internet infrastructure and a decentralized Internet service. 
From this perspective, the major international ISPs already 
deployed their infrastructure and services in a distributed 
manner crossing different countries or regions. 
3) Trendes for the content localization 
To achieve better service (higher bandwidth, shorter 
latency, less probability of congestion) for content delivery, 
the content servers or data centers are moving closer to data 
consumers. This trend has been accelerated after 5G 
introduced the Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) technologies. 
Moving closer to data consumer needs to have the localization 
in Content Delivery Network (CDN), associated APP 
(Applications), Name resolving, Content searching, etc. All 
these trends lead to the Internet traffic to be grouped on the 
base of population and sovereignty.    
C. Design Principals for Ideal Internet 
Considering all above analysis for Internet history, the 
current requirement and trends happened for Internet, if we 
have a chance to redesign an ideal Internet, we may have 
following principals: 
• The Internet should have more flexibility, less restrictions 
and centralization. Keeping the technology diversity for 
the Internet will not only reduce the ossification but also 
satisfy different requirements easier. 
• The Internet should be distributed globally based on 
region or country. All regions are equal and there is no 
central control. No region can impact other’s decision in 
address selection, peering and service.  
• Small countries can decide to form a region if the countries 
do not want to be independent in internet resource and 
DNS management due to economy and other  constraints.  
• Each region has the freedom and authorization to manage 
the Internet resources used locally, such as address 
selection, address allocation, ASN allocation, domain 
name registration, DNS root server, etc. 
• The internet should support heterogeneous address types 
and communications. 
VI. 
DESIGN DETAILS 
The key aspects of the new architecture are as follows: 
• The Internet for each country or region is connected by a 
separate protocol. We have two options for this protocol. 
One is to design a new protocol (described in the sub-
section A), and another is using the current IP technology 
(described in the sub-section B). The comparison of two 
options is discussed in sub-section C. The paper focuses 
on the discussion of using the new protocol.  
• Each country or region will have independent internet 
resources including IP addresses, ASN number, DNS, etc. 
All these resources are managed by the country or region. 
Since the details of these architecture changes for two 
options (described in sub-section A and B) are the same, 
the paper will only focus on the discussion of the 
architecture changes, compatibility issue and benefits  (in 
Sections VII to IX ) for the 1st option or using new 
protocol. 
A. Using a New Protocol 
The new network protocol packet header for the Internet 
as shown in Figure 3.  The packet format is preliminary and 
only for illustration. Final design will decide the detailed 
coding. This new packet is on top of Layer 2, thus, a new 
EtherType assignment from IANA is required.  
 
Below is the explanation for each field in the Figure 3: 
• Declaration: This field defines the basic info about the 
packet, it may contain following essential info:  
1. HL: Hop limit, this value is decremented by one at 
each forwarding node and the packet is discarded if 
it becomes 0 (except on the last node). 

57
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2. Prot: The protocol number for payload, it could be a 
protocol number defined currently by IANA, e.g., 
IPv4 or IPv6, TCP or UDP, or a new protocol 
number defined in the future.  
3. Len: Total length of the packet including the Pay 
Load. The unit can be defined in standardization. 
4. Other definitions: other definitions for the packet 
header, it will be defined later. 
• Regional codes: This field may contain the “Src (Source) 
Region Code” and “Dst (Destination) Region Code” for 
source and destination. The size, code structure and 
detailed coding should be standardized by an international 
organization. It could contain region or country code that 
was defined by ITU E.164 [45], and have its own 
hierarchy, e.g., region, sub-region, and more granular 
definitions. See Figure 4 as an example. Only the 8-bit 
“Region Code” needs to be standardized by an 
international organization, “Sub-region code” will be 
managed locally in the region. 
• Service: This field contains information about the service 
and is to be defined. Its length is variable. 
• Payload: This part contains the payload which type is 
specified by the protocol number defined in Declaration. 
The Payload could be IP type or any other types for L2 to 
L4. 
 
Figure 3.  New Internet protocol packet header 
 
Figure 4.  The Region Code Example 
B. Using Current IP 
This option will use the existing IPv4 or IPv6 technologies 
to interconnect the networks in different countries and 
regions. By this option, the architecture for the internet is the 
same as by using a new protocol (sub-Section A). Following 
works must be done: 
• IANA should permanently reserve some un-used IPv4 or 
IPv6 addresses, then each country or region will have a 
permanent IP address assigned by an international 
organization. This address is similar to the area code for 
telephone system and can only be used to connect different 
countries. Whether each country will be assigned multiple 
IP address will be decided by the international community. 
• The IPv4 or IPv6 tunnels between countries and regions 
are established. These tunnels are only used for the traffic 
crossing border. 
• Each country or region will develop its own address 
assignment, management, and DNS server system. After 
all these systems are set up, the country can switch those 
management from the current to local. 
• An international organization is responsible for the DNS 
root connection and traffic distribution between countries 
and regions. 
C. Comparisons of Two Options 
• Using the new protocol can give us chance to go through 
all possible design aspects, make it possible to  fix the 
problems of the current Internet and to satisfy future 
requirements, thus, it should have longer term benefits. 
• Using the existing IPv4 or IPv6 is simpler than using a new 
protocol, but it will not have the benefits of the new 
protocol, e.g., it may not support the services that can be 
introduced by the new protocol. Additionally, it will 
overload the original IPv4 or IPv6 address definition 
(prefix plus length) for the use of Point-to-Point 
interconnection between countries, some existing address 
aggregation, forwarding, and protocols have to be re-
examined to make it not conflicting to the existing IP 
network. 
VII. ARCHITECTURE FOR INTERNET BASED ON NEW 
PROTOCOL 
A. Internet Resource Management 
The internet resources will include region code, IP address 
space or other type of address space, ASN, and protocol 
number. The management of those resource are based on 
following rules: 
International organization managed items: 
• The Region code structure and Region code assignment 
are responsible by international organization, ITU or 
IANA. 
• For the protocols that the interconnection between 
different region or country are supported, e.g., the new 
protocol defined by this paper (new EtherType), IPv4, 
IPv6, Ethernet, MPLS, etc., the protocol numbers are still 
managed by international organization IANA. 
Regional authority managed items: 
• Each region or country will be responsible for the sub-
region code assignment and management. 
• Each region or country will be responsible for the 
IPv4/IPv6 address and ASN number allocation and 
management for its own jurisdiction area. Different 
regions or countries may have different policies and 
schemes to manage the resource. 
• Each region or country can use the whole IPv4/IPv6 
address and ASN space. All addresses only have local 
significance in the region or country, thus different regions 
or countries may have the same address.  

58
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Each region or country can define new protocol numbers 
that are only used locally within the region or country. 
B. Scope of New Protocol 
The new protocol applies to the internet connection 
between different regions and countries as shown in Figure 5. 
It does not restrict communication within the region or 
country. The current IPv4 and IPv6 can still work. A region or 
country can define and run a new version of IP without any 
interruption or interference to the whole Internet. For 
example, IPv10 to support communication between IPv4 and 
IPv6 was proposed in IETF but was not accepted. With the 
new protocol, one region only needs to get consensus on 
IPv10 in its own sovereignty and then use it within the region.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Internet based on new network protocol 
It is important to note that a region can also use the new 
region-based protocol for communication within its own 
territory (see the communications between sub-regions in 
Region 4 in Figure 5). 
C. Domain Name Service 
The Domain Name Service architecture is similar to the 
current DNS hierarchy architecture, Figure 6 illustrates the 
new DNS architecture and Figure 7 demonstrates a DNS 
request and response crossing different regions or countries. 
The major difference with the current architecture is that the 
current centralized DNS root zone and root servers are 
removed, thus is a distributed architecture. Following are 
details: 
• Each region or country will have its own DNS root server 
and different root servers from different regions or 
countries are fully equal and there is no central control, 
thus the current DNS root zone and root servers not 
needed.  
• All DNS root servers are connected virtually to form a 
DNS network. The addresses of all root servers can be 
based on the new protocol, thus are unified for different 
regions. The network may run a dedicated protocol to 
exchange DNS information for all root servers. This 
network will be overlay on top of either existing IP or the 
new network protocol proposed in this paper. 
 
Figure 6.  Domain Name System architecture 
• The connection between all DNS root servers are fully 
meshed virtually. Any connection between two servers are 
voluntary and only managed by two servers’ regions or 
countries. When a new root server for a region or country 
joins the network, it should have agreement and then 
connection with existing root servers.  
•  The “.region” or “.country” domain is the only Top Level 
Domain (TLD) for the region or country. All other domain 
names are lower-level domains.  
• The “.region” or “.country” suffix is needed when the 
DNS requester and real domain name are in the different 
region or country. The suffix can only be omitted when the 
DNS requester and the real domain name are in the same 
region or country.  
• A domain name with a “.region” or “.country” suffix is 
always associated with an address physically located 
within the region or country.  
 
 
Figure 7.  DNS service crossing different regions or countries 
The DNS service will have some corresponding 
implementation changes with the new architecture. Also, there 
are some regulation or legal issues involved, e.g., a company 
name in a “domain name” in a different region must be 
approved by the local authority. 
Here is an example: An international company xyz has the 
header quarter in the country named as “ct1”,  then the domain 
name “www.xyz.com.ct1” always points to an address 
assigned by the DNS authorization in the country ct1. In 
another country ct2, if there is a branch or service from the 
company xyz, the DNS request of “www.xyz.com” from ct2 
will return an address info found in the name server “.com” in 

59
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the country ct2. If there is no registration for the company in 
ct2, DNS request of “www.xyz.com” from ct2 will return null. 
Due to the bonding of a name and IP address in every 
region physically, the new DNS mechanism will make the 
internet service localization more transparent and easier to be 
compliant to the local regulation or laws. 
D. Communication Between Region or Country 
To provide interconnection between different regions or 
countries using new network protocol, proper control plane 
and data plane must be defined. 
1) Control Plane 
• The border devices connecting different regions need to 
support the new control protocol.  
• The new control protocol will exchange information about 
the interconnected border devices, the associated links, the 
region code, and the reachable end-user’s address details, 
etc. 
• The new control protocol could be link-state routing 
protocol like IGP, or path-vector protocol like BGP. 
• New control protocol also must be running within a region 
or a country to populate the information learnt from border 
devices about the outside interconnected networks of other 
regions or countries, e.g., the links that can reach other 
regions or countries, the associated remote reginal code, 
the remote reachable address associated with the regional 
code, etc. 
2) Data Plane 
• For the egress region, where the traffic is originated from, 
the data packet forwarding is based on the lookup of 
“Region/Country code” at all network devices. See the 
country CT1 in Figure 8. 
• For the ingress region, where the traffic is destinated to, 
the data packet forwarding is based on the lookup of “the 
address of payload” at all network devices. See the country 
CT2 in Figure 8. In the example, the “address of payload” 
is IPv6 address. 
• For the transit region, there are two approaches, one is 
Transparent Mode, another is Tunnel Mode. 
1. For Transparent Mode, the data packet forwarding is 
based on the lookup of “Region/Country code” at all 
network devices in a transit region. See the country CT3 
in Figure 8. 
2. For Tunnel Mode, the data packet forwarding is 
based on the lookup of “Region/Country code” at edge 
network devices in a transit region. Proper packet 
encapsulation (at ingress router) or decapsulation (at 
egress router) are needed. See the country CT4 in Figure 
8. In the example, the IPv4 tunnel is used and IPv4 address 
lookup for the tunnel is done on every network device 
within the region. 
• For all scenarios, a very small table is needed to store all  
“Region/Country code” for the communication crossing 
regions. The table lookup will use “exact match”. These 
two behaviors are different as the IP prefix lookup, which 
needs huge amount of table to store global IP prefix, and 
the lookup is Longest Prefix Match using TCAM (Ternary 
Content-Addressable Memory). 
 
 
Figure 8.  Homogeneous communication: Transparent Mode and Tunnel 
Mode (only the essential parts of packet header are shown) 
3) Heterogeneous Communication Between Region or 
Country 
The above discussions are about the homogeneous 
communication between regions or countries, or the address 
type are the same for all end users.  
The new network protocol and architecture can support 
heterogeneous communication worldwide. Heterogeneous 
communications are communications with different types of 
address. This is very useful to many applications in security, 
privacy, IoT, etc., below are some supported address 
combinations for heterogeneous communication: 
• Different length of IP for source and destination, e.g., 
IPv10 or other type of IP that the address length is not 32-
bit and 128-bit. 
• Different type of address for source and destination, e.g., 
between Ethernet and IP. 
• No source address, the source address is hidden in the 
application data. 
• Variable length public key as address. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Heterogeneous communication: Transparent Mode and Tunnel 
Mode (only the essential parts of packet header are shown) 

60
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 9 illustrates the data plane for a case where IPv10 
is supported in country CT1 and CT2, and how an IPv4 host 
in CT1 sends data to IPv6 host in CT2. For IPv10 case, both 
IPv4 and IPv6 address are supported, thus the lookup of IPv6 
in CT2 is obviously supported. We can see that to support 
IPv10, only communication participants (CT1 and CT2) need 
to have an agreement to support it. This is much easier to have 
a global consensus to support IPv10. 
VIII. COMPATIBILITY ISSUES 
The major changes of the Internet based on the proposed 
new network protocol are the Internet resource management, 
the DNS architecture, and the use of new network protocol. 
For the communication or IP service within the same 
region or country, the current IP based internet service can still 
be used, and there is no compatibility issue. The new Internet 
resource management and new DNS architecture have very 
little impact on the end-user application and network 
operation, i.e., some provisioning (to the DNS server and 
domain name management) may need to be changed. 
For the communication or IP service crossing different 
regions or countries, the new network protocol needs to be 
used, and it is not compatible with the existing IP, but we can 
maximize the current Internet investment through the detailed 
design of new network protocol header. 
It is easy to notice that the new network protocol packet 
header is very similar to the IPv4. This is intended to make the 
future design easier to be implemented in IPv4 capable 
hardware. We have two options in the final design of the 
packet header encoding: (1) re-use the IPv4 packet header for 
the new network protocol, or (2) only re-use the 32-bit IPv4 
address space for the region code and redesign other fields in 
packet header. Since the current IPv4 header has design flaws 
in some areas, such as: (a) The protocol is not extensible due 
to the limited IPv4 option size, (b) The header checksum is 
not required, (c) Fragmentation is not a good design. So, we 
prefer the option (2): define the 32-bit source and destination 
region codes; redesign other fields in the packet header. 
With the above design considerations and coupled with 
redesigned protocol running between regions, by the minimal 
re-programming, the existing hardware can be easily re-used 
for the future Internet. 
IX. 
ADVANTAGES OF NEW NETWORK PROTOCOL 
A. Benefits 
The proposed new network protocol is only for the 
interconnection between regions and countries. The Internet 
based on new protocol will have following benefits: 
• Much less restriction at the protocol for interconnection: 
The new network protocol only defines the regional 
interconnection mechanism that is based on regional 
codes, but not limit the communication address and 
communication mechanism within a region or a country, 
thus reduces the restriction caused by globally uniformed 
IPv6 
header 
for 
global 
network. 
Heterogeneous 
communication support will be easier to achieve between 
interested parties.  
• Minimized changes on the current Internet architecture:  
The current IPv4 and IPv6 protocols and data forwarding 
can still work in a region or country. DNS changes very 
little. The architecture of IP based Internet is kept, and the 
investment is not wasted. 
The 
control 
protocol 
and 
data 
forwarding 
for 
interconnection between regions and countries can be 
realized based on extension of existing IP routing 
protocols and IP packet forwarding. It needs minimal 
investment. 
Existing and future IP based applications within a region 
can still run without any feeling that the underlayer 
networking is changed for the interconnection between 
regions. The application to reach outside of a region just 
needs minor modification for the address format to include 
the regional codes. 
The routing table size will be dramatically reduced due to 
the fact that routers in a region will only keep the prefix 
defined in the region. All addresses to outside of a region 
can be summarized as regional codes. 
• Independent technology evolution:  
With the new network protocol, Internet technology can 
evolve in different regions or countries independently. It 
is expected to be much easier and faster than the current 
situation that the global consensus is needed, thus will 
mitigate the Internet ossification a lot. 
• Distributed Internet resource management and DNS:  
The new Internet resource management and DNS are 
distributed and based on sovereignty and jurisdiction, thus 
has no legal obstacles to making the regional Internet 
technologies adaptive to local laws or regulations. It will 
make any security, privacy changes or enforcement much 
easier and faster.  
The new Internet resource management and DNS root 
servers are distributed and fully controlled by a region or 
country. The Internet service of any country will not be 
impacted by other countries. It makes the Internet more 
robust and resilient to any disasters and geopolitical 
interruption. 
The new distributed Internet resource management also 
makes each region or country able to use the whole IP 
address space and ASN space. This will not only eliminate 
the unfairness issues in IP address allocation, but also 
expand the IP address resource for all countries. 
The new architecture and network protocol gives each 
region or country full control and freedom of what type of 
address and communication are used for the internet 
service within the region.  This will eliminate the IPv4 to 
IPv6 migration mandates if IPv4 is preferred in a region or 
country. Also, other new types of address can be invented 
and adopted locally. 
• Internet integrity is maintained: 
Internet fragmentation [46] is always a concern for new 
technology proposals. From a technical perspective, the 
new proposal does not impede the ability of systems to 
fully interoperate and exchange data packets. The Internet 
functions are consistent as before at all end points. Internet 
interoperability, universal accessibility, the reusability of 
capabilities, and permissionless innovation are all not 
impacted. While the data protection and localization from 

61
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
many regional regulations can be naturally satisfied by the 
architecture, more freedom in addressing can provide 
more possibilities for new technologies in security and 
privacy. 
B. Advantages 
 
 
Comparing with the existing proposals, RINA, SCION, 
New IP, IPv10 and EI, the new proposal has following 
advantages: 
• Unlike RINA and SCION, the new proposal is not a clean 
slate solution, it can keep the current IP based internet 
service in a region or a country unchanged, it only impacts 
the interconnection between regions and countries. 
Considering most of internet traffic is local and 
international traffic crossing borders of countries are 
relatively small, the impact to current internet service is 
limited. Additionally, for the impacted interconnections 
between regions, proper migration strategy can be 
developed to upgrade inter-links individually to new 
protocol and minimize the service interruption. 
• The new protocol is orthogonal to other variations of IP, 
like New IP, IPv10 and EI. It can make those technologies 
easier to be adopted locally without global consensus and 
impacts.  
X. 
DISADVANTAGES OF NEW NETWORK PROTOCOL 
The proposal will have disadvantages compared to the 
current Internet architecture; these include: 
• The Internet is no longer a unified and flat network with 
the same type of addresses. While we can obtain the 
benefits of the new internet protocol such as diversified 
address, architecture and technologies, we also lose the 
simplicity of the current Internet. 
• The traffic crossing the boundary of regions and countries 
are discouraged. This is not economical sometimes, i.e., 
the same application may have to deploy more servers in 
different regions to provide the local services. This is the 
same side effect as the requirement to provide the 
localized services based the regulations in some major 
countries and regions. 
• The root DNS servers distributed in different region or 
country will require the information exchanging and 
database synchronization. This is not needed for the 
current DNS system. 
XI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper has proposed a new network protocol and 
architecture that can provide more flexibility and mitigate 
Internet ossification. The new architecture is distributed 
without any central control, thus making the Internet more 
robust and resilient to geopolitical interruption. It can also 
expand the usable Internet resources for each region and 
country. Meanwhile, the new proposal can keep the current IP 
based Internet in regions, thus it can minimize the impacts to 
Internet and maximize the old investments. 
Further works are needed for detailed solutions in every 
area where the new technologies or protocol redesign are 
required, such as protocol for distributed DNS, the control 
protocols and forwarding engine for interconnection between 
regions, upgrading and migration approaches, etc. 
It must be noted that the purpose of the paper is to analyze 
the internet ossification and possible solutions for future 
internet. It is expected that any solution including the proposal 
in the paper will face a lot of questioning, challenges, and 
objections. For example, the basic IPv4 and IPv6 packet 
formats have never been changed since the 1st version were 
proposed in IETF. But it is believed that doing something will 
be better than doing nothing. As the most important invention 
of human beings, the Internet can only be pushed forward after  
whole interested parties join the work and contribute the ideas. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Han and R. Li, “On the Study of Internet Ossification and 
Solution,” 
Internet 
2023, 
IARIA, 
https://www.thinkmind.org/articles/internet_2023_1_30_4000
6.pdf. 
[2]  “Internet Protocol,” RFC 791, Internet Engineering Task 
Force, Sept. 1981. 
[3] A. Bridgwater, “What is a digital asset?,” 
Computerweekly.com. 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.computerweekly.com/blogs/cwdn/2013/09/what-
is-a-digital-asset.html. [Accessed on Aug. 7, 2023] 
[4] J. Pohle and T. Thiel, "Digital sovereignty," Internet Policy 
Review, vol. 9, no. 4, 2020.  
[5] S. Deering and R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification,” RFC 8200, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
July, 2017. 
[6] “Internet,” 
Merriam-Webster.com 
Dictionary, 
Merriam-
Webster, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/Internet. [Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[7] 3GPP, 
“5G 
System 
Overview,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.3gpp.org/technologies/5g-system-overview. 
[Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[8] “Internet of Things,” Encyclopedia Britannica, Encyclopedia 
Britannica, 
Inc., 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.britannica.com/science/Internet-of-Things. 
[Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[9] 3GPP, “Solutions for NR to support Non-Terrestrial Networks 
(NTN),” 
TS 
38.821. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/38_series/38.821/388
21-g10.zip. 
[10]  “Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA),” [Online]. 
Available: https://www.iana.org/. [Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[11] APNIC, “Understanding address management hierarchy,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.apnic.net/manage-
ip/manage-resources/address-management-objectives-
2/address-management-objectives/ [Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023]. 
[12]  “Autonomous System (AS) Numbers,” Internet Assigned 
Numbers 
Authority. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iana.org/assignments/as-numbers/as-
numbers.xhtml. [Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[13] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares, “A Border Gateway Protocol 
4 (BGP-4),” RFC 4271, Internet Engineering Task Force, Jan. 
2006.  
[14]  “Domain Name Services,” Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority. [Online]. Available: https://www.iana.org/domains. 
[Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[15]  “Root_Zone Management,” Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iana.org/domains/root. [Accessed on Mar. 7, 
2023].  

62
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[16]  “Root Servers,” Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iana.org/domains/root/servers [Accessed on Mar.  
7, 2023].  
[17] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, and W. Simpson, “Neighbor 
Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6),” RFC 4861, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Sept. 2007. 
[18] T. Mrugalski et al., “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for 
IPv6 (DHCPv6),” RFC 8415, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
Nov. 2018. 
[19] C. Hopps, “Routing IPv6 with IS-IS,” RFC 5308, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Oct. 2008. 
[20] R. Coltun, D. Ferguson, J. Moy, and A. Lindem, “OSPF for 
IPv6,” RFC 5340, Internet Engineering Task Force, July 2008. 
[21] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan and R. Callon, “Multiprotocol Label 
Switching Architecture,” RFC 3031, Internet Engineering Task 
Force, Jan. 2001.  
[22] Daniel O. Awduche et al., “RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for 
LSP Tunnels,” RFC 3209, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
Dec. 2001 
[23] L. Ginsberg, B. Decraene, S. Litkowski, and R. Shakir, 
“Segment Routing Architecture,”. RFC 8402, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, July 2018. 
[24] J. Postel, “Transmission Control Protocol,” RFC 793, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Sept. 1981. 
[25] J. Postel, “User Datagram Protocol,” RFC 768, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Aug. 1980. 
[26] J. Iyengar and M. Thomson, “QUIC: A UDP-Based 
Multiplexed and Secure Transport,” RFC 9000, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, May 2021. 
[27] E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol 
Version 1.3”, RFC 8446, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
August 2018. 
[28] E. Rescorla and A. Schiffman, “The Secure HyperText 
Transfer Protocol", RFC 2660, Internet Engineering Task 
Force, August 1999. 
[29] J. Mccauley, S. Shenker, and G. Varghese, “Extracting the 
Essential Simplicity of the Internet,” Communications of the 
ACM, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 64-74, February 2023. 
[30] S. Deering, R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification,” RFC 2460, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
Dec. 1998. 
[31] S.D. Schoen, J. Gilmore, and D. Täht, “IETF Will Continue 
Maintaining IPv4, ” draft-schoen-intarea-ietf-maintaining-ipv4, 
Internet Engineering Task Force, Sept. 2022. 
[32] J. Day, Patterns in Network Architecture: A Return to 
Fundamentals, Prentice Hall, 2008. 
[33] X. Zhang et al., "SCION: Scalability, Control, and Isolation on 
Next-Generation Networks," 2011 IEEE Symposium on 
Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 212-227, 
doi: 10.1109/SP.2011.45. 
[34] S. Jiang, S. Yan, L. Geng, C. Cao, and H. Xu, “New IP, 
Shaping Future Network: Propose to initiate the discussion of 
strategy transformation for ITU-T”, TSAG C-83, Sept. 2019. 
[35] K. Omar, “Internet Protocol version 10 (IPv10) Specification,” 
draft-omar-ipv10, Internet Engineering Task Force, Sept. 2017. 
[36] H. Balakrishnan et al., “Revitalizing the public internet by 
making 
it 
extensible,” 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 18–24, April 2021. 
[37] International Computer Science Institute, University of 
California, Berkeley, “An Extensible Internet for Science 
Applications 
and 
Beyond,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/icsi/projects/extensible-
internet/science-applications. 
[38] T. Eckert, L. Han, C. Westphal, and R. Li, “An Overview of 
Technical Developments and Advancements for the Future of 
Networking,” ITU Journal on Future and Evolving 
Technologies, vol. 3, no. 3, December 2022. 
[39] “Host Identity Protocol Working Group,” IETF, [Online] 
Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/hip/about/. 
[40] R. Moskowitz and P. Nikander, “Host Identity Protocol (HIP) 
Architecture,” 
RFC 
4423, 
IETF, 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4423.txt. 
[41] S. Frankel and S. Krishnan, “IP Security (IPsec) and Internet 
Key Exchange (IKE) Document Roadmap,” RFC 6071, IETF, 
[Online] Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6071.txt. 
[42] “Understanding Denial-of-Service Attacks,” Cyber Security 
and Infrastucture Security Agency, U.S.A, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/understanding-
denial-service-attacks. 
[43] “Understanding and Responding to Distributed Denial-of-
Service Attacks,” Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
Agency, 
U.S.A, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/understan
ding-and-responding-to-ddos-attacks_508c.pdf. 
[44] Nick Merrill, “Taiwan & the internet during world war,” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.else.how/p/taiwan-and-the-
internet-during-world. 
[45] “E.164 : The international public telecommunication 
numbering plan,” International Telecommunication Union. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-E.164/. 
[Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[46] W. J. Drake, V. G. Cerf, and W. Kleinwächter, “Internet 
Fragmentation: 
An 
Overview,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FII_Internet_Fragmen
tation_An_Overview_2016.pdf. [Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023]. 
 
 

