Performance Comparison of Wireless pH Sensor Modules for Application to Health 
Monitoring  
Short Paper  
Lan Zhang, Jian Lu, and Ryutaro Maeda  
Device Technology Research Institute  
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)  
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8564, Japan  
e-mail: chou-ran@aist.go.jp  
e-mail: jian-lu@aist.go.jp  
e-mail: maeda-ryutaro@aist.go.jp  
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents a compact pH sensor system and 
its extension to health monitoring, particularly for monitoring 
the urine of infants. Three types of sensing electrodes, namely, 
plate, comb, and pillar, are fabricated and evaluated to 
determine the suitable approach for different application 
requirements. Moreover, to realize a highly compact pH sensor 
system with a biofriendly interface that offers good user 
experience, a highly compact transmission module and new 
sensing materials are introduced to optimize the sensor 
structure and measurement system. Sensing electrodes 
fabricated 
with 
different 
materials 
are 
characterized 
comprehensively; two types of wireless transmission boards are 
proposed and compared. Temperature calibration is adaptably 
performed for the wider application of the proposed pH sensor 
system. The results indicate that the performance of the 
proposed compact pH system with a wireless transmission 
function is adequate and it can monitor the urine condition of 
infants in real time. In addition, the proposed pH sensor system 
can be used for healthcare, well-being, and medical applications.  
Keywords-pH; field effect transistor; health condition; 
calibration; radio frequency; Bluetooth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Infant diseases, also known as childhood illnesses, can 
infect children several months after birth. Serious infant 
diseases include pertussis, Candida albicans infection, and 
measles, which may lead to death, if not detected in time [1] 
[2]. Parents are becoming increasingly concerned about their 
children’s health. The detection and prevention of infant 
diseases is a critical task for doctors as well as researchers. 
Hence, the related products for infant health monitoring, 
which are in great demand worldwide, need to be developed 
as soon as possible [3].  
The detection of physicochemical and biological 
parameters is generally based on three main types of media: 
blood, saliva, and urine [4]. A typical process for biological 
detection involves professional staff, such as nurses, who 
obtain samples from the target person, after which these 
samples are collected and sent to the designated laboratory 
for analysis. In general, such tests require several hours to 
days, according to the procedural difficulty. The real-time 
monitoring of pathological parameters can efficiently 
indicate the health condition of infants and provide a 
reference to doctors for early treatment. However, blood 
specimen collection is an invasive sampling procedure, and 
after the sampling process, the target needs to hold a small 
gauze pad over the puncture site for a few minutes to stop the 
bleeding. Although saliva sampling is a noninvasive method, 
it is still challenging because the suitability of the collection 
method for the analyte of interest has not been sufficiently 
investigated. Among these physicochemical media, real-time 
monitoring of urine is the easiest approach. This is because a 
urine sensor can be placed in the diaper and can monitor the 
urine condition continuously without affecting the normal 
life of the infant [5][6].   
Of late, there have been several developments in silicon-
based microelectromechanical system (MEMS) technology, 
such as the realization of highly compact sizes and high 
performances [7][8][9][10]. Using the MEMS process, we 
have fabricated a highly compact pH sensor that has already 
been applied not only in chemical engineering but also in 
other fields such as agriculture and industry [11][12]. In this 
study, previous as well as latest work on the fabrication and 
evaluation of the improved pH sensor electrodes and wireless 
transmission approaches has been summarized. Moreover, 
extension of the application of the proposed sensor for health 
monitoring has been discussed. We modify the pH sensor 
system and casing method and optimize the sensing material 
of the electrode with a biofriendly surface such that it can be 
suitable for monitoring the urine of infants in the diaper. The 
settings of the sensors placed in the diapers of newborns are 
not well-developed for neonatal health monitoring. For 
monitoring neonatal conditions, nurses usually need to use 
traditional sensors (temperature or pH sensors) to measure 
the urine in the diapers every few hours. The efficiency of this 
method is very low, and precision is hard to guarantee. The 
sensor system developed in this paper, using MEMS 
technology and a wireless transmission method, can greatly 
improve work efficiency, save time, and enhance 
measurement precision.  
Fig. 1 depicts the wireless pH sensor system and its 
potential applications as well as the proposed pH sensor 
electrodes. The sensor system mainly includes the sensing 
108
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

electrodes and measurement and transmission PCBs (inset 
images). The electrodes are connected to the gate terminal of 
a 
metal-oxide-semiconductor 
field-effect 
transistor 
(MOSFET) on the measurement board for measuring the pH 
value of the target solution [11]. The electrodes were 
fabricated using the MEMS technique for realizing high-
dimension and performance homogeneity. To determine the 
appropriate approach for health monitoring, we fabricated 
and evaluated three types of sensing electrodes, the plate, 
comb, and pillar type, to detect the urine in the diaper. 
Different sensing materials such as indium tin oxide (ITO), 
stannic oxide (SnO2), tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5), and 
antimony (Sb) were evaluated and compared. Two types of 
wireless transmission boards based on the radio frequency and 
Bluetooth techniques were proposed and evaluated (Fig. 1, 
left). Moreover, temperature calibration was adaptably 
performed for practical application of the proposed pH sensor 
system. Based on a smart phone Android operating system 
with an easy-to-use user interface, a barrier-free operating 
system was developed. The measured data can be obtained 
through a wireless transmission function. After stability 
testing through field measurements, several potential 
applications can be considered (Fig. 1, right). The compact 
sensing system unit can be placed in a diaper for real-time 
monitoring of the health of children or elders. Moreover, the 
compact sensor can be packaged with a biofriendly surface. 
The ultrasmall low-power wireless sensor node can also be 
implanted into the body of a pet animal to measure its body 
fluid condition. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents experimental setup and procedure; Section 
III presents measurement results and Section IV introduces 
the user interface of the proposed pH sensor based on an 
android smartphone. Finally, Section V summarizes the paper.  
 
Figure 1. Wireless pH sensor system and its potential applications.  
 
 
Figure 2. (a) Comb and (b) pillar pH electrode fabrication sequence.  
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND PROCEDURE  
A. Design and fabrication of the pH-sensing electrodes 
We designed, fabricated, and evaluated plate, comb, and 
pillar type sensing electrodes. The fabrication process of a 
plate-type sensing electrode has been presented in our 
previous work [11]. Similar processes can be used to 
fabricate the comb and pillar structures. The comb electrode 
was fabricated through a micromachining process using three 
photomasks. Fig. 2a illustrates the comb electrode fabrication 
sequence. The device substrate was fabricated by polishing a 
glass wafer with a thickness and diameter of 200 µm and 
100 mm, respectively. A 100-nm sensing material layer was 
initially deposited on the surface of the glass substrate 
through a sputtering process. The sensing electrodes were 
then patterned through photolithography and an etching 
process. Finally, using the sputtering and liftoff processes, 
the reference electrode was generated and patterned (see Fig. 
2a). Fig. 2b shows the fabrication sequence of the pillar-type 
electrode. By sputtering with uniform rotation, a 150-nm-
thick sensing material layer was deposited on the cylindrical 
surface of a 5-mm diameter glass pillar. Then, using 
photolithography, sputtering, and liftoff, the lead and 
connecting electrodes were generated on the pillar electrode 
(see Fig. 2b). A highly compact reference electrode (R2K712, 
Toyorika Co.) was selected for the pH sensor system.  
 
109
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Fabrication of the measurement system 
An 18 mm × 12 mm measurement board was fabricated, 
which included a sensing unit, the related power supply units, 
and a standard inter-integrated circuit (I2C) interface. In our 
previous work, the measurement board of the pH sensing 
system and the test philosophy have been described [11]. The 
n-type channel of the MOSFET is the sensing unit of the 
measurement system, which is connected to the sensing 
electrode for measuring the H+ density of the measured 
solution.  
In the power supply units, DC/DC converters and 
regulators are used for the voltage drain and provide the 
reference voltage between the reference electrode and ground. 
I2C (INA 231, Texas Instruments Inc.) has 16-bit analog-to-
digital converters for recording the measured analog data.  
C. Design and fabrication of the wireless transmission 
system  
Two types of control and transmission modules, a radio 
frequency integrated circuit (RFIC) and Bluetooth board, are 
introduced here. The specification and performance of the 
RFIC for animal testing are mentioned in our previous work 
[13]. An RFIC with a low-power type Si4010, which is a fully 
integrated crystal-less RF transmitter with an embedded 
microcontroller unit (CIP-51 8051), was selected. The 
transmission approach included a transmitter but not a 
transceiver because power consumption is crucial in health 
monitoring devices. The transmitter method can efficiently 
reduce the standby current by a factor of 100 [13], and the 
power consumption of the system can be reduced by several 
orders correspondingly.  
Fig. 3 displays the front and back images of the Bluetooth 
transmission board as well as its circuit diagram. A four-layer 
PCB with a thickness of 1.6 mm was employed, and the 
fabricated Bluetooth transmission board was compact at 19 
mm × 12 mm. The supply voltage was designed to be 3 V 
such that it can be provided by a standard cell battery with a 
nominal voltage of 3 V. A standard I2C interface was set in 
connector CN3 to control the measurement board of the 
sensor system. The largest component on the transmission 
board was the Bluetooth chip (MDBT42V-512KV2, Raytac 
Co.), with high-performance and excellent connectivity (Fig. 
3a). To realize a compact transmission module, we used the 
least number of components possible. Typically, a crystal 
oscillator, three capacitors, and three capacitor networks 
(CNs) were assembled on the transmission board.  
D. Experimental apparatus  
Sputter equipment SME-200E (Ulvac Co.) was used to 
deposit the material films on the wafer substrate. Mask 
aligner SUSS MA6/BA6 (SUSS MicroTec Co.) was used to 
implant the lithograph for generating the designed pattern on 
the photoresist. Four-point resistance processor Sigma-5 
(NPS Inc.) was used to measure the sheet resistance of the 
fabricated sensing electrode. The topographies of the sensing 
material layers were measured using an atomic force 
microscope (AFM) SPA-500 (SII Nanotechnology Inc.). A 
mixed signal oscilloscope DLM2024 (Yokogawa Electric 
Co.) was employed to record the flow current on the shunt 
resistor. A cabinet chamber LHL-114 (ESPEC Corp.) was 
utilized to provide a varying ambient temperature 
environment. Digital anatomy 3D printer J750 (Stratasys. 
Co.) was employed to fabricate the casing of the pH sensor 
module for field measurement.  
III. 
MEASUREMENT RESULTS  
A. Configuration comparison of the proposed sensor 
electrodes 
Using the AFM, four-point resistance probe, and optical 
microscope, the mechanical properties of the fabricated 
sensing electrodes were investigated and characterized 
comprehensively. Table 1 shows the property comparisons of 
the proposed sensing electrodes. The comb- and pillar-
sensing electrodes were fabricated using ITO; Ta2O5 and 
SnO2 were examined as sensing materials for the plate-type 
electrode. The sizes of the proposed comb, plate, and pillar 
sensing electrodes were 15 mm × 4 mm, 12 mm × 9 mm, and 
Φ5 mm × 30 mm, respectively. Correspondingly, the contact 
area of these sensing electrodes were 39.0 mm2, 28.3 mm2, 
and 471 mm2, respectively. As the pillar-type sensing 
electrode has the largest contact area under a similar electrode 
size, it exhibits high sensitivity, but function failure can occur 
due to surface contamination. Moreover, compared to the 
traditional two-dimensional MEMS technique, in the 
fabrication process of a pillar electrode, a uniform speed 
rotating device is required in the sputter equipment to coat 
the sensing film on the surface with homogeneous thickness.  
 
 
Figure 3. (a) and (b): fabricated Bluetooth transmission board; (c): circuit 
diagram of the Bluetooth transmission module.  
 
110
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF THE SENSING ELECTRODES 
 
Sensor type 
Comb 
Plate 
Pillar 
Electrode 
size 
15 mm × 4 mm 
12 mm × 9 mm 
Φ5 mm × 30 
mm 
Fabrication 
method 
Photolithography 
Sputtering 
Lift-off/Etching 
Photolithography 
Sputtering 
Lift-off/Etching 
Sputtering 
(uniform 
speed rolling 
device) 
Contact area 
39.0 mm2 
28.3 mm2 
471 mm2 
Sheet 
resistance 
10Ω/sq 
(Film on the 
SiO2 substrate) 
SnO2:0.85Ω/sq 
Ta2O5:0.91Ω/sq 
(Films on the 
metallic under-
electrode) 
10-30Ω/sq 
(Films on the 
glass 
substrate) 
Surface 
homogeneity 
[14] 
1.1 nm (Ra) 
SnO2:1.2 nm 
(Ra) 
Ta2O5:2.5 nm 
(Ra) 
Unmeasured 
 
The surface roughness of the different sensing materials 
was measured as an arithmetical average value (Ra). For the 
surface topographies of the fabricated Ta2O5, SnO2, and ITO, 
it was 2.5 nm, 1.2 nm, and 1.1 nm, respectively. The sensing 
films on the electrodes retained their smoothness with fewer 
morphological defects after the MEMS etching process. The 
fabricated sensing electrode had a uniform surface and was 
suitable for application in electronic devices. In some cases, 
sensing films have rough grain surfaces, which can 
completely obscure the material intrinsic charge transport 
properties [15].  
 
B. Comparison of the electrical properties of the pH 
sensing materials  
To characterize the electrical properties of the sensing 
materials and determine the performances of the fabricated 
sensor electrodes, we evaluated the output sensitivity of the 
ITO, SnO2, and Ta2O5-based pH sensor electrodes. Their 
outputs were linear, proportional to the pH value changes, 
with sensitivities ranging from 0.29–0.53 mV/pH [16]. Some 
researchers have proposed Sb-based pH sensors for 
application in biosensing for better biocompatibility [17]. 
Therefore, in this study, we also compared the sensitivity of 
a typical ITO-pH sensing electrode and Sb electrode. The 
range of the measured pH solution was set to 4.5–7.5 because 
urine is weakly acidic with a pH range of 4.6–8.0 and an 
average of 6.0 under normal dietary conditions [18]. Fig. 4 
compares the output of a typical ITO-based pH sensor 
electrode and an Sb-based one. The Sb sensing electrode 
maintains a linear output proportional to the changes in the 
pH value. Moreover, its output slope is similar to that of the 
ITO-based pH sensor; the relative error between the two 
sensors does not exceed 5 % on average. The minuscule 
difference between the slopes of the fitting curves shows that 
the Sb–pH sensor electrode has a relatively high sensitivity 
(Fig. 4, fitting curves). Long-term stability (months of testing 
of deviation and drift) evaluation is in progress and will be 
reported in future works. After evaluating the electrical 
properties, we can reasonably determine the advantages and 
disadvantages of the sensing materials. In addition, the 
measured sensitivity data can be used to calibrate the 
proposed sensors, after which the sensor module can be used 
to perform field measurements to establish its stability and 
reliability.  
 
C. Temperature calibration of the sensor system  
The developed MEMS sensor will be used in different 
working conditions, and several environmental factors such as 
the environmental noise, humidity, and temperature may 
affect the sensor function. Environmental noise and humidity 
can be easily removed using packaging with good sealing; the 
temperature is critical and is generally eliminated through 
calibration. Therefore, temperature calibration of the 
proposed compact pH sensor needs to be completed before 
field measurements. Fig. 5 shows the voltage output of the 
proposed pH sensor with respect to the temperature variation. 
A typical ITO sensing electrode was used for demonstration. 
The measurement and transmission boards were placed in the 
cabinet chamber, and the temperature range was set from 20–
60 °C. We found that the proposed pH sensor system was 
temperature dependent, i.e., in the measured solution with a 
stable pH value, the sensor voltage output increased when the 
environmental temperature decreased. The reason for this is 
that there are many electrical components, and the working 
resistances, in particular, are easily influenced by the 
environmental temperature changes. However, the output 
voltage deviation has a linear relationship with the 
temperature change; therefore, we can conclude that the 
calibration, i.e., output voltage, can be resolved using a first-
degree polynomial equation with the temperature variation.  
 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of output values of typical ITO- and Sb-based pH 
sensor electrodes.  
 
111
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 5. Temperature calibration of the proposed sensor module. Inset is 
the continuous record of the sensor voltage output with respect to the 
temperature change.  
 
D. Power consumption of the measurement systems  
The lifetime of the power supply is one of the critical 
issues for health monitoring sensors. Hence, we measured the 
power consumption of the proposed transmission approaches. 
To record the input current flow into the sensor’s 
measurement and transmission circuits, a 1-ohm shunt 
resistor was connected between the power supply and sensor 
system. An oscilloscope was used to continuously measure 
and record the corresponding voltage on the shunt resistor. 
Fig. 6 compares the input current flow of pH sensors with the 
RFIC transmitter and Bluetooth transmission system. 
The results show that the RFIC transmitter sensor system 
can implement each data acquisition under a measurement 
average of 128 times and transmit in 250 ms. The power 
consumption was calculated to be 7.0×10−4 mAh for a one-
time test. Correspondingly, the Bluetooth device had a 
capacity charge, stable process before the measurement 
operation under a 32-times data average, and the power 
consumption was calculated to be 2.8×10−4 mAh. To 
minimize the package size of the sensor system for user 
comfort, a CR1220 battery has been developed for providing 
the power supply in future, considering the balance between 
the sensor system size and battery capacity. The lifetimes of 
the coin cell battery for the RFIC wireless and Bluetooth 
sensors can be calculated and are estimated to be more than 
three months under a 10-min-interval measurement condition, 
which is a sufficient sampling rate for the real-time 
monitoring of the target pH value.  
E. Long-term measurement of the sensor output with 
ambient temperature variation  
The proposed compact pH sensor system has several 
potential applications. Typically, the sensor prototype is 
placed in a diaper for monitoring the urine conditions of 
infants. Generally, a diaper will be used and changed within 
a few hours; thus, a relatively long-term measurement should 
be verified. Fig. 7 shows the long-term measurement results 
of the proposed pH sensor output and the environmental 
ambient temperature. The tested data were collected and 
recorded by a PC-based receiver for more than two days. The 
proposed pH sensor could continuously measure a stable 
solution for 48 h with a reasonable output and maintain a 
stable baseline. Simultaneously, a digital thermal infrared 
temperature sensor was loaded on the transmission board; 
after temperature calibration of the output voltage, the 
proposed sensor exhibited a highly linear output performance. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Input current flow comparison between pH sensors with the RFIC 
wireless and Bluetooth transmission systems.  
 
 
Figure 7. Long-term measurement of the proposed pH sensor voltage 
output at ambient environmental temperature.  
 
112
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
DEVELOPMENT OF A USER INTERFACE FOR THE PH 
SENSOR BASED ON AN ANDROID SMARTPHONE 
A. Sensor module casing using a 3D printer for field 
measurement  
A digital anatomy 3D printer (J750) was used for 
fabricating the sensor module casing using a biofriendly 
material. Fig. 8 depicts the casing of the pH sensor module 
for field measurements. The size of the sensor module case 
was 26 mm × 17 mm × 13 mm (inset in Fig. 8). A CR1220 
(Panasonic. Co.) cell battery was placed in the battery case to 
provide power to the sensor system. Two signal-line wires are 
connected to the sensing board with the sensor electrodes. 
During field measurement, the sensor electrodes were placed 
in a layer of superabsorbent polymers, where the sensor can 
contact the target solution adaptably (Fig. 8). The plate and 
comb sensing electrodes are thin and are therefore suitable 
for this application. A smartphone was used to monitor the 
pH value via Bluetooth transmission. 
 
B. Development of the pH sensor user interface based on 
an Android smartphone 
Using the integrated development environment of 
SEGGER Embedded Studio 4.30c, a customized Android 
application with a friendly user interface was coded in C- 
language. The application program, mainly comprising the 
pH sensing function control and Bluetooth transmission, was 
successfully developed. Fig. 9 shows the user interface of the 
pH sensor system; a Pixel 4 smart phone (Google Co.) was 
used as the terminal device.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Casing of the pH sensor module and field measurement.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. User interface of the wireless pH sensor system.  
 
 
Fig. 9a displays the calibration page of the pH sensor 
system, where the primitive raw data is the voltage value of 
the shunt resistance. Because the calculation formula is 
embedded in the program, the user can calibrate the pH 
sensor using two different pH values with a standard 
reference solution or two liquids with known pH values. The 
conversion formula between the voltage and pH values is 
written in the program. Therefore, the pH sensor system can 
be used to measure the target solution, similar to a 
commercial pH sensor (Fig. 9b). In addition, the interval 
time can be adjusted from 1–100 s. The latest 15 data points 
can be directly observed on the screen, and all the data are 
saved in the memory with a time stamp.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, a highly compact pH sensor system was 
developed and the extension of its application for health 
monitoring was discussed. Three types of sensing electrodes, 
plate, comb, and pillar, were fabricated and evaluated to 
determine the appropriate approach for different application 
requirements. The results indicated that the pillar type, 
which had the largest contact area, was suitable for 
complicated testing environments, whereas the comb type, 
which was the most compact, was suitable for use in limited 
space. Different sensing materials such as ITO, SnO2, Ta2O5, 
and Sb were characterized and evaluated comprehensively. 
The advantages and disadvantages of these sensing 
materials were determined to establish their suitability for 
different application requirements. The SnO2 sensing 
electrode exhibited the highest sensitivity for pH detection 
and the least output voltage, reducing the power 
consumption. Moreover, two types of wireless transmission 
boards were proposed and compared. Both had low power 
113
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

consumption, suitable for long-term measurement. The 
proposed compact pH sensor system with adequate 
performance can be used in healthcare, well-being, and 
medical applications. Future study in this area will include 
further optimization of the sensor system to make it smaller 
and more comfortable to wear. Empirical and field 
experiments are also expected to be implemented as soon as 
possible. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Mr. Yoshihisa Mishima 
for his collaboration on the early stages of this work.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Zhang, J. Lu, and R. Maeda, “Performance comparison of 
pH sensor module with wireless transmission function,” The 
Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, 
Actuators, Metering and Sensing (ALLSENSORS 2020), 
IARIA Press Mar. 2020, pp. 18-19, ISSN: 2519-836X/ ISBN: 
978-1-61208-766-5.  
[2] Information on diseases & conditions for parents with infants 
& 
toddlers 
(Ages 
0-3). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cdc.gov/ 2020.07.25 
[3] A. Symon, N. Hassan, H. Rashid, I. Ahmed, and S. Reza, 
“Design and development of a smart baby monitoring system 
based on Raspberry Pi and Pi camera,” 4th International 
Conference on Advances in Electrical Engineering (ICAEE 
2017), IEEE Press, Sept. 2017, pp. 117-122, doi: 
10.1109/ICAEE.2017.8255338.  
[4] L. Manjakkal, S. Dervin, and R. Dahiya, “Flexible 
potentiometric pH sensors for wearable systems,” RSC Adv., 
vol. 
10, 
pp. 
8594–8617, 
Feb. 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1039/D0RA00016G.  
[5] M. Obatake, T. Muraji, S. Satoh, E. Nishijima, and C. Tsugawa, 
“Uninary sulfated bile acids: A new simple urine test for 
cholestasis in infants and children,” J. Pediatr. Surg., vol. 37, 
pp. 1707–1708, Dec. 2002, doi: 10.1053/jpsu.2002.36701.  
[6] P. Li, L. Ma, and S. Wong, “Is bag urine culture useful in 
monitoring urinary tract infection in infants?,” J. Paediatr. 
Child Health, vol. 38, pp. 377–381, Aug. 2002, doi: 
10.1046/J.1440-1754.2002.00010. x. 
[7] G. Ciuti, L. Ricotti, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario, “MEMS sensor 
technologies for human centred applications in healthcare, 
physical activities, safety and environmental sensing: A review 
on research activities in Italy,” Sensors, vol. 15, pp. 6441–6468, 
Mar. 2015, doi: 10.3390/S150306441. 
[8] R. Bogue, “Recent developments in MEMS sensors: A review 
of applications, markets and technologies,” Sens. Rev., vol. 33, 
pp. 300–304, Sept. 2013, doi: 10.1108/SR-05-2013-678. 
[9] X. Hu, Y. Wei, Y. Chen, and C. Liu, “Design of the smart pH 
sensor based on ion selection electrode,” Sensors & 
Transducers, vol. 26, Special Issue, pp. 92-100, Mar. 2014, 
ISSN: 2306-8515, e-ISSN 1726-5479.  
[10] S. Lozovoy, A. Kukla, and A. Pavluchenko, “Investigation of 
metrological performance of the ISFET-based pH sensors,” 
Sensors & Transducers, vol. 27, Special Issue, pp. 225-232, 
May 2014, ISSN: 2306-8515, e-ISSN 1726-5479.  
[11] L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, T. Itoh, and S. Arai, 
“Low-power highly sensitive pH sensor with μ-dots protective 
structures for monitoring rumen in cows in real-time,” IEEE 
Sens. J., vol. 17, pp. 7281–7289, Sept. 2017, doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2017.2757701.  
[12] L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, and T. Itoh, 
“Development of ITO- and FET-based cow rumen sensor for 
long-term pH value monitoring,” 2016 Symposium on Design, 
Test, Integration and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS (DTIP 
2016), 
IEEE 
Press, 
May 
2016, 
pp. 
92-96, 
doi: 
10.1109/DTIP.2016.7514846.  
[13] J. Lu, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, S. Matsumoto, H. Hiroshima, R. 
Maeda, M. Sato, A. Toyoda, T. Gotoh, and N. Ohkohchi, 
“Development of implantablewireless sensor nodes for animal 
husbandry and medtech innovation,” Sensors, vol. 18, pp. 979–
1–12, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.3390/s18040979.  
[14] L. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Maeda, and H. Nogami, “Research on the 
performance of solid-State pH sensor affected by the sensing 
materials,” The Fourth International Conference on Advances 
in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing (ALLSENSORS 
2019), IARIA, Feb. 2019, pp. 1-2, ISSN: 2519-836X, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-691-0.  
[15] Y. Diao, L. Shaw, Z. Bao, and S. Mannsfeld, “Morphology 
control 
strategies 
for 
solution-processed 
organic 
semiconductor thin films,” Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 7, May 
2014, pp. 2145–2159, doi: 10.1039/C4EE00688G. 
[16] L. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Maeda, and H. Nogami, “Research on the 
performance of solid-state pH sensor affected by the sensing 
materials,” The Fourth International Conference on Advances 
in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing (ALLSENSORS 
2019), IARIA, Feb. 2019, pp. 1-2, ISSN: 2519-836X, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-691-0.  
[17] T. Kazuyoshi, A. Saad Mohammad, K. Daiki, K. Kagemasa, 
and K. Minoru, “ Development of one electrode type pH sensor 
measuring in microscopic Region,” Int. J. Appl. Electrom., vol. 
52, pp. 1417–1424, Dec. 2016, doi: 10.3233/JAE-162139.  
[18] What is the normal pH range of urine? Available from: http:// 
www.medicalnewstoday.com/ 2020.12.09  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

