GeoOLSR: Extension of OLSR to support Geocasting in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Volker K¨oster, Andreas Lewandowski, Dennis Dorn and Christian Wietfeld
Communication Networks Institute (CNI)
TU Dortmund University, Germany
Email: {Volker.Koester|Andreas.Lewandowski|Dennis.Dorn|Christian.Wietfeld}@tu-dortmund.de
Abstract—Safety critical applications of IEEE802.15.4 net-
works require autonomous network reconﬁguration and dy-
namic meshing in case of node failures or changing environ-
mental inﬂuences. This paper demonstrates the application of
Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) and Optimized
Link State Routing (OLSR) on IEEE802.15.4 nodes based
on an IP layer. The modular concept leads to the proposed
extension of Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) protocol to
provide location-based services and addressing inherently in the
protocol design. We demonstrate the changes in message ﬂows
and information exchange that are necessary to develop a geo-
implementation of OLSR, which we call GeoOLSR throughout
this paper. For performance evaluation, we will ﬁrst examine
mobile ad hoc relevant metrics like time delay, maximum
throughput and generated overhead. Furthermore, the lifetime
of the novel node architecture is evaluated in comparison
to the ordinary IEEE802.15.4 conﬁguration and IEEE802.11.
Finally, the real-world protocol behavior of GeoOLSR is
shown for different mobility speeds by using realistic ray
tracing for modeling the physical transmission in a harsh
industrial environment. Thus, it is proven by results that
GeoOLSR is able to support both IP enabled unicast trafﬁc and
geographical addressing even in resource constrained networks
like IEEE802.15.4.
Keywords-Geocasting; OLSR; AODV; IEEE802.15.4;
Ray Tracing.
I. INTRODUCTION
The application of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) or
mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) based on IEEE802.15.4
in safety-critical processes requires a fault tolerant network
design, which supports autonomous reconﬁguration [1]. Re-
cent developments in the area of Wi-Fi networks propose
meshing algorithms on ISO/OSI layer 3 like the reactive
Ad hoc On demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing [2]
or the proactive Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) [3],
which are capable to update communication paths in case of
failures and mobility of network nodes. In contrast to that,
original IEEE802.15.4 networks rely on topologies like star
or cluster tree, in which failures of single nodes can isolate
even complete network trails.
Therefore, the IEEE task group 802.15.5 Mesh Net-
working currently examines necessary mechanisms that are
designed for the physical (PHY) and medium access control
(MAC) layer. In order to enable a ﬂexible network setup
for different application scenarios within heterogeneous
networks, we analyze multihop forwarding via IP routing
Physical Layer
Medium Access Control Layer (non beacon enabled)
IPv4 Layer
UDP Layer
TCP Layer
IEEE802.15.4 Speciﬁcation
MANET
Routing Protocols
e.g., AODV, OLSR
Application 1
Application 2
Higher Protocol Layers
GeoTable
Figure 1.
The extended Layer Model of our proposed architecture to sup-
port IP enabled unicast trafﬁc and geographical addressing in IEEE802.15.4
mechanisms (on layer 3 – also known as Route-over [4]).
We propose a node design (see Figure 1), which includes an
IPv4 layer – instead of utilizing the ZigBee protocol stack
[5]. The integration of the IP protocol for WSNs is proposed
in [4] and [6]. The big advantage of these approaches is the
seamless integration into the Internet. In [7], it has been
shown that the implementation of a tiny TCP/IP protocol is
feasible for the integration on low power devices, such as
IEEE802.15.4 without major changes of the PHY- or MAC
layer. Following these approaches, this paper demonstrates
the application of OLSR and AODV routing schemes as
proposed in [8] by applying a peer-to-peer network topology.
Here, every node is assumed to operate as a router and uses
CSMA/CA channel access.
Besides an easy integration of IEEE802.15.4 nodes into
preexisting infrastructures, diversiﬁed application domains
are one key performance indicator of MANETs. Thus,
there is an increasing need for a simultaneous support
of geographical addressing to realize e.g., location based
messaging and alarming. As an extension to [1], it is an
objective of this paper to show an extension of OLSR –
which will be called GeoOLSR throughout this thesis – to
build up a routing protocol, which supports unicast (IP-
based) as well as geographical multicast communication
inherently. Therefore, a slight modiﬁcation to the original
protocol architecture is made by adding an additional rout-
ing table (called GeoTable), which contains positions of
reachable nodes (cf. Figure 1). The major beneﬁt of using
13
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a proactive routing protocol like OLSR is the periodical
exchange of routing information in discrete time intervals.
This enables knowledge of a node’s last position even in
case of malfunctions. In contrast to that, on-demand routing
mechanisms only search for a new route prior a speciﬁc
communication request.
The work is part of a research project with one of the
world’s largest steel fabricants ThyssenKrupp Steel. They
will install the presented solution to increase the security of
the factory employees in case of emergency. The developed
solution is integrated in a gas sensor network, which consists
of stationary and mobile equipment. Hence, not only factory
employees, but also ﬁrst responders proﬁt from this solution,
as they do not have to carry additional devices for navigating
through the incident scene. Thus, this work presents several
major contributions:
• Demonstration of the general applicability of meshed
network approaches within IEEE802.15.4 networks by
implementing our IP enabled sensor node architecture
based on the physical layer of IEEE802.15.4 using a
peer-to-peer enabled CSMA/CA MAC layer.
• Introduction of a detailed performance evaluation of
AODV and OLSR in IEEE802.15.4 networks.
• Proposal of an OLSR extension, which enables geo-
casting as well as IP-based unicast messages combined
with high node mobility support.
• Comparison of different geocast routing protocols e.g.,
Location Based Multicast (LBM), ﬂooding GRID,
ticket GRID and GeoTORA with GeoOLSR.
• Evaluation of the inﬂuence of different moving speeds
and patterns on GeoOLSR.
• Brief identiﬁcation of the resulting overheads of
GeoOLSR compared to OLSR.
• Analysis of the proposed GeoOLSR protocol in a
real-world scenario considering realistic radio channel
effects by application of the Actix Radiowave Prop-
agation Simulator (RPS) [9], which includes a high-
precision 3-dimensional CAD drawing of the applica-
tion scenario within the steel production plant.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses
related works. Afterwards we demonstrate the design of the
new node in Section III in detail, before the implementation
of the applied simulation model in OMNeT++ 4.0 is shown
as well as details of the simulation measurements in Sec-
tion IV. After that, we illustrate the protocol extension of
GeoOLSR within Section V by presenting necessary changes
in message ﬂows and information exchange to realize a geo-
implementation of OLSR, followed by corresponding anal-
ysis in Section VI. Performance evaluations via OMNeT++
simulation together with a sophisticated PHY layer model
based on the ray tracing tool RPS are presented in Section
VII. Finally, Section VIII draws conclusions.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this Section, we will give a brief introduction into
state-of-the-art routing protocols divided into four groups –
unicast MANET protocols, geographical multicast protocols,
mobile agents protocols and hierarchical routing protocols.
A. Unicast Mobile Ad-Hoc Network Protocols
Linking an IP address with a geographical location has
been of interest for quite some time already. On the other
hand, there has also been signiﬁcant research to increase
network redundancy in general, based on unicast routing
protocols for MANETs, in which all mobile hosts typically
behave as routers. A route between a pair of nodes in a
MANET may go through several other mobile nodes. Due
to the mesh network approach these routes may vary when
nodes change their locations. Many attempts have been made
on MANET protocols [2], [3], [10]. There are two major
types of networking protocols deﬁned in the literature for
this application ﬁeld [11]:
• Proactive routing: A node manages the whole network
topology in a periodically updated routing table, which
causes additional trafﬁc.
• Reactive routing: The route is determined when a
packet has to be transmitted. Hence, the delay for a
single packet transmission is higher in comparison to
proactive routing; however, the additional trafﬁc for
route maintenance is minimized.
In the following paragraphs, basic principles of OLSR as
a proactive and AODV as a reactive routing scheme are
described in detail.
OLSR
The Optimized Link State Routing is speciﬁed in the
RFC 3626 [3]. Simulative and experimental performance
evaluation on Wi-Fi devices is presented in [11]. Route
table calculation is done by topology information, which
is gathered from topology control messages (TCM). If a
node generates its neighbor list, the TCMs are transmitted
through the network. A node is deﬁned as a neighbor, if
a bi-directional physical connection between two nodes is
available. Following RFC 3626, OLSR communicates using
a uniﬁed packet format for all data related to the protocol.
This is meant to facilitate extensibility of the protocol with-
out breaking backwards compatibility. This also provides an
easy way of piggybacking different ”types” of information
into a single transmission like geographic data in the ﬁeld
of GeoOLSR. A RFC 3626 standard implementation is
embedded in IPv4. The basic layout of any packet in OLSR
consists of an OLSR header, which includes three types of
messages:
• OLSR-Hello To perform link sensing, neighborhood de-
tection and Multi-Point-Relay (MPR) selection, Hello
messages are exchanged between 1-hop neighbors pe-
riodically. This message is sent as the data-portion of
14
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the general packet format with the ”Message Type”
set to HELLO MESSAGE, the Time-to-live ﬁeld set
to one and Vtime set accordingly to the value of
NEIGHB HOLD TIME.
• OLSR-Topology-Control The link sensing and neighbor
detection part of the OLSR protocol basically offers
a neighbor list in each node, which contains a list of
neighbors to which a direct communication is possible.
In combination with the packet format and forward-
ing mechanism, an optimized ﬂooding through Multi-
Point-Relays (MPRs) is implemented. This mechanism
is based on the OLSR-Topology-Control (TC) mes-
sage format, which disseminates topology information
through the whole network.
• OLSR-Multiple-Interface-Declaration
The
OLSR-
Multiple-Interface-Declaration
(MID)
message
is
used to map more than one IP address to one node.
Therefore, all interface addresses other than the main
address of the originator node are put into the MID
message.
The use of multipoint relays (MPRs) reduces the network
load by concentrating the trafﬁc on dedicated nodes. The
speed of topology update processes can be regulated by vary-
ing Hello and TC intervals. The main performance indicators
of OLSR are summarized in Table I. The willingness for a
MPR is deﬁned by the remaining battery power of the node.
Table I
PARAMETERIZATION OF OLSR NODES
Hello Interval
inter-arrival time of hello packets
Hello Jitter
maximum deviation from the hello interval
TC Interval
inter-arrival time of TC packets
TC Jitter
maximum deviation from the TC interval
Hello Timeout
maximum timeout of hello messages
until the node is removed from the neighbor list
Willingness
willingness of a node to act as MPR
To reduce the negative inﬂuence of packet losses due
to high mobility in OLSR, Benzaid et al. proposed a new
method of integrating fast mobility in the OLSR protocol
[12].
AODV
The Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector routing is
speciﬁed in RFC 3561 [2].
An application for IEEE802.15.4 networks has been pro-
posed by [13] without applying an IP layer. Each node op-
erates as a router and determines point to point connections
on demand without periodical updates. Thereby, memory
and energy demand is optimized for battery driven mobile
devices and the additional network load is minimized. An
included sequence number avoids the count-to-inﬁnity rout-
ing problem [2]. In contrast to other routing protocols, the
quality of a connection is determined by the actuality and not
Table II
PARAMETERIZATION OF AODV NODES
Active Route Timeout
deﬁnes the validness of a route
Hello Interval
deﬁnes the inter-arrival time of
hello packets
Allowed Hello Loss
deﬁnes the maximum hello packet loss
until a route is deleted
Delete Period
deﬁnes the limit of route from node
A and B to D, if node A has
deleted the route
Net Diameter
maximum number of hops
between two nodes
Node Transversal Time
estimated for a 1-hop transmission
Net Transversal Time
2* Node Transversal Time * Net Diameter
Path Discovery Time
2* Net Transversal Time
RREQ Retries
number of attempts for route determination
by the length of the path. The main conﬁguration parameters
of AODV are summarized in Table II.
B. Geographical Multicast Protocols
In addition to the work mentioned before, there has also
been signiﬁcant work on multicasting based on the loca-
tion of the particular nodes. Several approaches have been
proposed [14] [15]. The schemes for multicasting can be
broadly divided into two types: ﬂooding-based schemes and
tree-based schemes. Flooding-based schemes (like Location-
Based Multicast [16]) do not need to maintain as many
network states as tree-based protocols. On the other hand,
ﬂooding-based schemes can potentially deliver multicast
packets to many nodes that are currently outside the lo-
cation, which is energetic inefﬁcient. Tree-based schemes
(cf. GeoTORA [14] and GeoGrid [15]) reduce the amount
of sent messages. However, a higher overhead is needed to
maintain the network’s tree.
C. Mobile Agents Protocols
Other routing schemes are based on mobile agents and
are inspired from social insects’ behavior [17]. One of the
main ideas of ant algorithms is the indirect communication
of a colony of agents, based on so called pheromone trails.
Pheromones are used by real ants for communication pur-
poses. The ants know the other ants’ paths by the pheromone
trails, and the amount of pheromone on a trail reﬂects its
importance.
D. Hierarchical Routing Protocols
Besides the location based routing approach some attempt
has been made to support a routing algorithm that inte-
grates geo-coordinate and table-driven IP addressing [18].
This routing protocol called ”GeoLANMAR” uses link-state
routing in a local scope and geo-routing for out-of-scope
packet forwarding. The protocol keeps track of the routes to
destinations up to a certain distance away from the source
whereas the geo-routing scheme applied in GeoLANMAR is
used to route packets to the remote landmark nodes outside
the local scope.
15
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. DESIGN OF AN IP-ENABLED WIRELESS SENSOR
NODE
The simulation model is implemented in the discrete,
event-based network simulator OMNeT++ [19] and the
INET framework. Figure 1 shows the implementation of
the communication node. The IEEE802.15.4 physical layer
implementation [20] of OMNeT++ is used for the proposed
extensions. By using the IP layer, also the existing UDP
and TCP protocol implementations of the INET framework
can be evaluated for new services. An additional 20 byte
IP header and an 8 byte UDP header decrease the overall
capacity. But 74 byte payload are left, which is enough
for sensor monitoring applications and additional services,
as the maximum payload size of the messages in this
application area is usually inherently small.
In order to highlight the generated overhead in compari-
son to a conventional IEEE802.15.4 network, the resulting
throughput is measured in a simple point-to-point scenario.
The new node is operating with AODV in the ﬁrst case and
OLSR in the second case. For system startup, a time off
of 10 s is set before mesurement values are captured. The
applied parameters of the meshing protocols are summarized
in Table III.
Table III
PARAMETERIZATION OF THE TEST SCENARIO
Trafﬁc proﬁle
OLSR settings
AODV settings
74Byte
Willingness = 3
Active Route Timeout = 6s
(UDP Payload)
Hello Interval = 1s
Hello Interval = 1s
every 30ms
TC Interval = 2s
Allowed Hello Loss = 2
≈19.73kbit/s
MID Interval = 2s
Delete Period = 10s
Net diameter = 2 Hops
Node transversal time = 40ms
RREQ Retries = 2
This parameterization is assumed for all following per-
formance evaluations. The values for the hello interval (HI)
of OLSR and AODV are chosen equally for an optimal
comparison.
Figure 2 depicts the resulting overhead generated by the
new implementation. About 10kbit/s overhead must be cal-
culated for the application of IP-based meshing protocols in
a simple point-to-point scenario. The following performance
evaluation will also clarify the scalability up to an 8 hop
scenario.
IV. EVALUATION OF THE NOVEL PEER-TO-PEER
APPROACH
To demonstrate general feasibility of the novel archi-
tecture, we ﬁrst evaluate important performance indicators
like end-to-end transmission delay, goodput during handover
processes, handover delay and achievable throughputs in an
OMNeT++ simulation environment. However, typical PHY
layer issues like CCA delay [21] or co-channel interferences
[22] are neglected at this point. Figure 3 depicts a hidden-
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10
40
70
100
10
40
70
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
IEEE802.15.4 with IPv4
OLSR
AODV
throughput [kbit/s]
time [s]
Overhead by AODV
Overhead by IEEE802.15.4
Overhead by OLSR
Overhead by IP
Basic data rate ≈ 19kbit/s
IEEE 802.15.4 CSMA
Figure 2.
Comparison of network load between IEEE802.15.4 and
the peer-to-peer implementation with applied AODV and OLSR routing
algorithm for a simple point-to-point setup without mobility. The parameters
of Table III are applied.
stationary source
mobile source
sink
dmax
dmax
dmax
movement path
old conn.
active conn.
Figure 3.
Hop-to-hop Scenario for Performance Evaluation
station hop-to-hop scenario. The setup consists of 8 hops
placed in a hop distance of dmax = 150m, which represents
the maximum radio range. Here, the string topology repre-
sents the worst case for OLSR due to the fact that the MPR
forwarding becomes obsolete.
In each test, 74Byte packets (payload) are sent over
the network from the stationary source each 30ms until
the mobile node reaches the end of the playground. The
performance evaluation is then structured as follows. First,
we analyze the end-to-end delay in stationary node constel-
lations before an analysis of handover scenarios between
ﬁxed network nodes and mobile nodes is achieved. Finally,
the energy consumption is compared to an IEEE802.15.4
node implementation.
A. Evaluation of End-to-End Transmission Delay
The end-to-end delay is a good indicator to measure
the response behavior and the real-time capability of the
network. The parameterization of this experiment is de-
scribed in Table III. The test is repeated 100 times, before
the distribution function is calculated (cf. Equation 1) to
determine the µ ± 2σ interval, which includes 95.4 % of all
possible end-to-end delay values.
16
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

F(x) =
1
σ
√
2π
x
Z
−∞
e− 1
2(
t−µ
σ )
2
dt
(1)
OLSR
AODV
1 Hop
2 Hops 3 Hops 4 Hops 5 Hops 6 Hops 7 Hops 8 Hops
1
10
100
1000
10000
µ ± 2σ end-to-end interval length [ms]
[ms]
Figure 4.
Interval length of the end-to-end delay for OLSR and AODV
depending on the hop count for a stationary scenario depicted in Figure 3.
The interval contains µ ± 2σ.
The results are assembled in Figure 4. The expected value
for end-to-end delay of AODV is lower compared to OLSR
in the one hop case, but in all other cases OLSR seems to be
predominant. As a consequence, AODV exhibits an interval
of [0 ms, 1435.1 ms] for the 8 hop case, which means that
95.4 % of the examined cases ﬁt into this interval, whereas
OLSR features an interval of only [0 ms, 41.5 ms]. The high
delay of AODV can be explained by the route determination
process. With an Active Route Timeout of 6s and a Delete Pe-
riod of 10s, routes are updated frequently assuming constant
bitrate (CBR) trafﬁc. The needed additional trafﬁc for the
route determination process rises with an increasing number
of hops.
B. Performance Evaluation of Hand-Over Processes
As mobile sensors are regarded for typical application
scenarios, fast handover processes are needed for reliable
measurement transmission. The following experiments base
on the measurement setup shown in Figure 3 with one mov-
ing source node transmitting data continuously (cf. Table III)
over the next ﬁxed node to the sink at a predeﬁned constant
speed for the mobility.
Figure 5 depicts the achievable goodput at different
mobility speeds and hop counts for AODV. The reference
line at 0 m/s shows the impact of the hop count on the
maximum goodput. It can be seen that the throughput is
almost constant until a hop count of 4. This ﬁnding correlates
to the end-to-end delay for AODV depicted in Figure 4. A
higher hop count decreases the achievable throughput, as the
delay is nearly doubled from 4 Hops to 5 Hops. The same
observation can be made for moving nodes. Here, the impact
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0 m/s
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
16 m/s
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
AODV
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0 m/s
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
16 m/s
Goodput [%]
number of hops
Figure 5.
Goodput in percent for AODV depending on the hop distance
to the sink with a mobile source transmitting to the next stationary node
in range, which then forwards the information to the sink.
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0m/s
2m/s
4m/s
8m/s
16m/s
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
OLSR
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0 m/s
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
16 m/s
Goodput [%]
number of hops
Figure 6.
Goodput in percent of OLSR depending on the hop distance to
the sink with a mobile source transmitting to the next stationary node in
range, which forwards the information to the sink. Whilst performing route
updates, the trafﬁc is interrupted.
increases with higher mobility speeds, which is caused by
the switching time of the accomplished handover processes.
For comparison of the performance of OLSR and AODV,
Figure 6 depicts the achievable goodput for OLSR in the
same network and measurement setup. OLSR starts at a
lower goodput for the reference measurement at 0 m/s, as
OLSR gathers – as a proactive routing scheme – the routing
information for the entire network in advance, which takes
about 6 seconds for this setup before the data transmission
can start. As a consequence, higher overhead decreases
the achievable goodput. Due to continuous trafﬁc for route
updates, the probability of collisions between OLSR control
and data packets rises with the number of intermediate hops.
As a consequence, the goodput decreases with a higher
number of hops between source and sink.
The handover process itself decreases the goodput. A
tradeoff between HI, which causes additional trafﬁc (cf.
Figure 2) and switching time for the handover has to be
determined. Figure 7 depicts the OLSR handover delay for
17
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Delay [s]
OLSR
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
Parameter set 1
Parameter set 2
Parameter set 3
Parameter set 4
update
Figure 7. OLSR Handover delay for different mobility speeds and network
conﬁgurations. Parameter set 1: Hello=1s, TC=1s, MID=1s; Parameter set
2: Hello=1s, TC=2s, MID=2s; Parameter set 3: Hello=2s, TC=5s, MID=5s;
Parameter set 4: Hello=5s, TC=5s, MID=5s;
different network conﬁgurations and mobility speeds. It can
be observed, that the main performance indicator is the hello
interval (HI). As the HI is small, high speeds are supported
by the network. As the HI is enlarged (e.g., to reduce the
trafﬁc overhead), the handover delay rises. This ﬁnding is
comparable to a Wi-Fi study on OLSR [23], where the hello
interval is described as the main performance parameter.
Analyzing performance related parameters of OLSR and
AODV has been subject of many papers in recent years
[23] [24]. However, each publication assumed IEEE 802.11
as the physical and data link layer protocols. To ensure a
good comparability of our measurement results with the
preexisting ones, we analyzed the mean values of the average
throughputs and their standard deviations at varying speeds
and parameter sets for both OLSR and AODV. Here, we let
the mobile sink of Figure 3 move towards and away from
the destination node and calculated the mean throughput for
the whole distance. The results are depicted in Figure 8.
As expected, AODV outperforms OLSR in terms of
mobility support due to periodical route maintenance of the
pro-active routing algorithm. Considering the relative high
throughput of our measurements and the shorter coverage ar-
eas of IEEE802.15.4, one can conclude that both ﬁndings are
nearly congruent. In [23] the decrease of average throughput
between a node speed of 0 m/s and 15 m/s varies from 25 %
(HI = 1s, TC = 5s) to 26 % (HI = 2s, TC = 5s), whereas our
simulative results show a difference of 28.59 % (HI = 1s,
TC = 2s) and 25.97 % (HI = 2s, TC = 5s) respectively. The
results for AODV comparison behaves equally, concluding
that AODV still ensures a delivery ratio of more than 90 %
even at high speeds for hop distances of up to 8 hops.
C. Energy consumption of meshed sensor nodes
Energy consumption is a critical issue for the design of
wireless sensor nodes. IEEE802.15.4 standard divides the
network in node classes, where routers and coordinators
are always switched on for maintaining connection between
nodes. The end device is the node class, which is designed
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
16 m/s
Average Throughput (kbit/s)
OLSR (HI=2s TC=5s)
OLSR (HI=1s TC=2s)
AODV (HI=2s)
AODV (HI=1s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Figure 8.
Comparison of the average throughputs of OLSR and AODV
at different speeds
for transmitting sensor information. It operates with low en-
Table IV
PARAMETERIZATION OF BATTERY MODEL FOR TI CC2420
(IEEE802.15.4) AND MAX2822 (IEEE802.11B)
TI CC2420
MAX2822
(Pout = 0dBm)
(Pout = +3dBm)
Supply Voltage
3V
3V
Standby-Mode Supply Current
1.38mA
25mA
Receive-Mode Supply Current
9.6mA
80mA
Transmit-Mode Supply Current
16.24mA
98mA
Rx Sensitivity
-95dBm
-85dBm
ergy consumption due to sleep phases and is only connected
to a coordinator or cluster head. If the next higher node in
hierarchy fails, the end device will be isolated from the rest
of the network.
The applied battery model of OMNeT++ utilizes the
parameterization shown in Table IV based on the data sheets
of the TI CC2420 [25] transceiver for IEEE802.15.4 and
the MAX2822 [26] for IEEE802.11b. Adaptive bit rate
adjustment and changing power levels are neglected in this
study; only worst case assumptions are evaluated, which
means that always a transmit power of 0 dBm is applied for
the CC2420 transceiver. Nevertheless, the parameter dmax is
adjusted for maximum transmission range for Wi-Fi (250 m)
and IEEE802.15.4 (150 m) respectively.
Following this parameterization, Figure 9 shows the en-
ergy consumption of applied AODV and OLSR in compari-
son to a regular IEEE802.15.4 end device and IEEE 802.11b.
Following this parameterization, Table V shows the sim-
ulated battery lifetimes of AODV and OLSR in comparison
to a regular IEEE802.15.4 end device and IEEE 802.11b,
which also applies both AODV and OLSR. We found that
18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
50
100
150
200
250
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
AODV
OLSR
IEEE802.15.4
IEEE802.11(AODV/OLSR)
end device
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Battery Capacity [mAh]
time [s]
Figure 9. Lifetime of a 250mAh battery for different operation modes with
the applied trafﬁc pattern in Table III in a point-to-point scenario without
mobility
Table V
BATTERY LIFETIME DEPENDING ON APPLIED ROUTING SCHEME FOR
PARAMETERIZATION IN TABLE III FOR IEEE802.15.4 AND IEEE802.11
IEEE802.15.4 CSMA/CA
173h 36min
IEEE802.15.4 AODV
59h 20min
IEEE802.15.4 OLSR
54h 57min
IEEE802.11b (1Mbit/s) OLSR
55min
IEEE802.11b (1Mbit/s) AODV
55min
OLSR consumes slightly more energy than AODV in this
conﬁguration, which is caused by the relative high rate
of control packets to maintain overall network topology
information in each node. However, in comparison to Wi-Fi
networks operating at 1MBit/s, the node lifetime is about 60
times higher for both cases.
V. GEOOLSR
In this chapter, we extend the original OLSR with geocast-
ing capabilities. The main idea of GeoOLSR is shown in Fig-
ure 10. Each node within the whole network administrates
a modiﬁed routing table, which contains the IP address and
position of every neighbor node. This enables a direct map-
ping of position information to regular IP addresses, which
facilitates efﬁcient forwarding of location based information.
However, the performance of maintaining moving nodes in
the routing table strongly depends on the update process,
which is regulated by the periodic emission of OLSR control
packets. Hence, relevant parameters have to be optimized
for a sophisticated use within wireless sensor networks. We
assume that each node participating in the entire network is
aware of its position, which may be expressed by absolute or
relative coordinates to a given ﬁxed-point. For performance
analysis, we use a random mobility model.
A. Extension of OLSR with Geocasting Capabilities
Due to the periodical exchange of Hello and Topology-
Control messages in OLSR networks (cf. Section II), the key
assumption is to use these two packet formats to broadcast
position information as well as regular IP-based topology
geocast
source
(1 m,9 m)
(9 m,9 m)
(16 m,1 m)
(16 m,7 m)
(12 m,8 m)
(39 m,28 m)
x
y
GeoOLSR
extension
192.168.2.2
192.168.2.2
192.168.2.2
192.168.2.3
192.168.2.3
192.168.2.3
192.168.2.3
192.168.2.3
192.168.2.4
192.168.2.5
192.168.2.6
192.168.2.36
Routing Table of 192.168.2.1
Position (x,y)
Destination
Gateway
Figure 10.
Basic idea of extending OLSR to map location based services
on IP-based unicast messaging
information within the network. The new GeoOLSR Hello
frame extends the standard OLSR Hello packet with an
additional header as follows:
• Type (1 Byte) The type ﬁeld indicates the applied
position format e.g., GPS-RMC (GPS-Recommended
Minimum Sentence C), GPS- or Cartesian coordinates
(8 Byte ﬂoating point for each x- and y-coordinate).
• Length (2 Bytes) Due to the variable length of GPS pay-
load, this ﬁeld denotes the byte length of the additional
(position) payload.
• Reserved (1 Byte) This ﬁeld enables future extensions
like geo-referenced rescue maps, situation photos etc.
In contrast to that, Topology Control (TC) messages are
used to broadcast information beyond 1 hop distances. TC
messages are only forwarded by Multi Point Relays (MPRs),
which are used to decrease the number of transmissions
required for OLSR related control mechanisms. To broad-
cast position information of each node participating in the
considered network, the TC message format also has to be
adapted to GeoOLSR. In contrast to the GeoOLSR Hello
packet, a GeoOLSR TC message may include more than
one node position. Hence, a separate position data header
is denoted for each advertised neighbor’s main address.
This additional header also includes a Type, Length and
Reserved ﬁeld. However, the two packet formats GeoOLSR
Hello and GeoOLSR TC are only used during initialization.
After network setup phase, recently joined or moving nodes
can be added or updated to the topology by using the
proposed GeoOLSR frames Fast Hello and Fast TC, which
will be explained later in this section. The application of the
modiﬁed GeoOLSR Hello and TC packets only at network
startup enables a fast convergence to the original OLSR
algorithm without changes on speciﬁc OLSR route and MPR
selection. As a consequence, there will not be any position
related update after initialization when there is no node
mobility within the network. However, each node needs to
maintain a node list, in which the coordinates are saved
together with the corresponding IP addresses, which enables
a mapping of position information to regular IP addresses.
19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Position update
Position update
Position update
+ Increment Seq#
+ Increment Seq#
+ Increment Seq#
Fast TC
Fast TC
Fast TC
Fast TC
Fast TC
Fast TC
(Seq# = 1)
(Seq# = 1)
(Seq# = 1)
(Seq# = 1)
(Seq# = 1)
(Seq# = 1)
Drop Fast TC message as
Drop Fast TC message as
message Seq# ≤ own Seq#
message Seq# ≤ own Seq#
Fast Hello
Fast Hello
Drop every Fast TC message as node
Drop every Fast TC message as node
is originator of this update process
is originator of this update process
Drop Fast TC because
Seq# is equal (here:1)
Seq# = 0
Seq# = 0
Seq# = 0
Seq# = 0
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
Seq# = 1
t0
t1
t2
Mobile Node
1 Hop
1 Hop
2 Hops
Figure 11.
Update Process exchanging Fast Hellos and Fast TCs
In order to enable accurate position updates at high node
mobilities even in far-off nodes, we modiﬁed the Fast OLSR
approach of Benzaid et al. [12] (cf. Figure 11).
In this paper, we also use fast hello messages to track
the fast moving nodes’ motion sufﬁciently. To achieve this
goal, a moving node (or a node, which recently joined
the regarded network) emits position update packets to its
direct neighbors at a high frequency in form of GeoOLSR
Fast Hello messages. In contrast to the original Fast OLSR
approach, we do not apply GeoOLSR Fast Hellos to increase
overall network redundancy, but rather accuracy of position
information. That means we reduce fast hello message
ﬁelds to a minimum, including only position data. Here,
no additional IP address of the sending node is required
as this information is already denoted in the regular OLSR
header. The frequency of GeoOLSR Fast Hello emission
is determined by the new parameter Fast Hello Interval.
Thus, our GeoOLSR Fast Hello packet format is developed
for resource constrained IEEE802.15.4 nodes and allocate a
minimum of payload.
In contrast to GeoOLSR Fast Hello messages, GeoOLSR
Fast TC messages are used to transfer position updates
to far-off nodes within the network. In contrast to regu-
lar Topology-Control messages of OLSR, GeoOLSR Fast
TC messages are distributed using broadcast. To limit the
broadcasts after each node has received the updated position,
a 2 Byte sequence number is integrated in the GeoOLSR
Fast TC message format besides the IP address and the new
position of the moving node. This allows a fast distribution
of position updates without profound changes of the OLSR
protocol. An example of the update process is shown in
Figure 11. At the beginning the mobile node recognizes that
it is moving and thus sends GeoOLSR Fast Hellos to all
neighboring nodes. All nodes, which receive a GeoOLSR
Fast Hello update the corresponding position information
of their geocast table. The explicit assignment is achieved
by ﬁxed IP addresses. Each geocast table entry is equipped
with an additional sequence number that is incremented
when a position update is performed. After that, another
GeoOLSR Fast TC message is generated and broadcasted,
which includes the recently updated position, the IP address
of the moving node and the incremented sequence number.
Every node, which receives a GeoOLSR Fast TC - except
the originator of the update process - checks if the packet’s
sequence number is larger than its own. If true, the new
position is updated and forwarded, otherwise the packet
is discarded. In Table VI the most important GeoOLSR
parameters and their behavior on network performance are
shown.
Table VI
MAIN PARAMETERS OF GEOOLSR
Hello Interval
Emission interval of GeoOLSR Hello messages.
TC Interval
Emission interval of GeoOLSR TC messages.
Fast Hello Interval
Emission interval of GeoOLSR Fast Hello messages.
Network Init Time
Based on the network size this value limits the time
until GeoOLSR Hello and TC messages are used
for position updates. After Network Init Time only
GeoOLSR Fast Hellos and GeoOLSR Fast TCs are used
for position updates.
B. Broadcasting data using geocast regions
A general problem that occurs using location based ser-
vices in a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is the limited
payload of IEEE802.15.4 Medium Access Control (MAC)
layer. Thus, the MAC layer, on which an IP and an UDP
layer are based, offers only a maximum payload of 74 Byte.
Assuming many nodes to be situated in the considered
geocast region, it is not advisable to route the ﬁle to each
destination node separately. Therefore, the packets are ﬁrst
delivered to one or more gateways. After that, they will be
broadcasted within the corresponding geocast region. This
method is shown in Figure 12. Due to the proactive approach
of OLSR, the source node has a full overview over all node
positions in the entire network. Thus, it can calculate, which
nodes are situated in the destination region. Then, the source
node determines a node, which is placed most closely in the
middle of the desired geocast region.
20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Geocast Region
Diameter of the cell
Diameter of radio coverage
Figure 12.
Broadcasting location based data via GeoOLSR
To ensure an adequate connectivity within the geocasting
regions, the cell sizes must be smaller than the radio cov-
erage of the nodes. If the resulting coverage area does not
overlap fully with the desired destination region, two or more
gateway nodes must be selected by the corresponding source
node. Furthermore, the particular recipients are always aware
of their own positions and may drop data packets, if the node
is currently situated outside the desired geocast region.
The amount of gateways depends on the size of the
considered geocast region and the cell size, which is strongly
inﬂuenced by particular application environment properties
(i.e., outdoor or indoor). Furthermore, environmental condi-
tions inﬂuence the radio coverage and have to be estimated
with certain channel models in advance. The selection of
the cell size has a high impact on the connectivity between
neighboring grids. Hence, a smaller cell size means more
number of gateways in the network, resulting in a higher
overhead of delivered packets and decreased battery lifetime
especially in WSNs. However, this discussion has already
been made in the GeoGrid thesis of Wen-Hwa Liao et al.
(cf. [15]) and is not part of the present work.
VI. GEOOLSR PROTOCOL ANALYSIS
To evaluate the performance of GeoOLSR, we imple-
mented a full mesh capable node based on the physical layer
of the IEEE802.15.4-2006 standard in OMNeT++ 4.0 [19].
To achieve this goal, a new developed non beacon enabled
MAC layer was used with an IP and UDP layer based on
it. This step was necessary because regular IEEE802.15.4
nodes usually imply a network coordinator to synchronize
the nodes of the entire network. On the other hand, network
coordinators depict a Single-Point-of-Failure (SPOF), which
is not desired in safety critical applications. Furthermore,
the non beacon enabled MAC layer enables the WSN nodes
to perform peer-to-peer communication, which is essential
for mesh networks. In addition to that, the IPv4 compli-
ant approach enables various standard applications that are
widely-used on the Internet like VoIP or Email. Those VoIP
capabilities are appropriate to push voice alarming or warn-
ing messages into endangered zones addressed by geocast
regions. For a more intelligible comparison of GeoOLSR
with various Geocast algorithms, we ﬁrst analyze only the
performance impact of the applied protocols and neglect
PHY layer issues. These effects will be demonstrated in
detail in Section VII.
750 m
450 m
Destination
Region
1st Experiment:
Only the black
marked node moves
2nd Experiment:
All marked
nodes move
Figure 13.
Performance evaluation scenario
A. Validation Scenario
To analyze the performance of GeoOLSR, the following
scenario (Figure 13) will be used for all test setups. The
scenario measures 750 m x 450 m and consists of 45 nodes
distributed homogeneously. To compare GeoOLSR with
other geocast algorithms, the source node forwards data into
the marked destination zone. In this application scenario the
destination region consists of four neighbored zones.
B. Comparison between GeoOLSR and widely used Geocast
Algorithms
This section analyzes and evaluates the performance of
GeoOLSR with various Geocast algorithms in the scenario
mentioned above (cf. Figure 13). In this scenario we omit
node mobility and analyze the resulting overhead for a data
transmission of 10 kByte from source to the marked desti-
nation region. This data transmission is repeated 100 times
before a mean value e.g., End-to-End Delay or Transmission
Time is calculated. In this experiment the destination region
measures 300 m x 300 m and the cell ranges are set to 150 m,
which is the maximal free space range of IEEE802.15.4
applying 1 mW transmission power. The results are shown
in Table VII.
Table VII
COMPARISON OF THE DIFFERENT GEOCASTING ALGORITHMS
Effective
Data Rate [kBit/s]
End-to-End Delay [ms]
Transmission Time [s]
(UDP Payload = 10 kB)
Number of Packets
for Transmission
Overhead [Byte]
Payload to overall
frame size [%]
LBM
ﬂooding
ticket
GRID
GRID
GeoTORA GeoOLSR
Inherent IP support
4.5
12.4
9.8
35
36.2
45.6
15.2
39.4
12.8
12.8
19.2
7.1
10.7
2.5
2.4
4943
2269
1800
668
648
14
12
21
4
2
75.7
78.4
66.2
89.1
91.9
yes
no
no
no
no
21
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We observe, that only the route maintaining algorithms
support high effective data rates and low end-to-end de-
lays (cf. Section II-B). However, the resulting differences
between GeoTORA and GeoOLSR regarding effective data
rate and transmission time are caused by our implementation
of GeoTORA on ISO-OSI layer 7 whereas GeoOLSR is
implemented on ISO-OSI layer 3. Thus, GeoOLSR is able to
support slightly higher effective data rates and a little lower
transmission time for each delivered packet than GeoTORA.
Another important fact that can be omitted is the real
time capability of LBM, ﬂooding and ticket based GRID,
GeoTORA and GeoOLSR. If we interpret the 10 kByte of
Payload as a 5 s speech packet (16 kBit/s sampling rate and
G.726 voice codec), we see that GeoTORA and GeoOLSR
need 2.5 s and 2.4 s respectively to forward this voice alarm
message into a certain destination area. In comparison to
that LBM and the two GRID derivates show signiﬁcant
higher transmission times than the original speech length
contained in the 10 kByte data packet. Hence, we can
conclude that only the two route maintaining algorithms
are able to support real time simplex voice transmissions.
Furthermore, GeoTORA and GeoOLSR are able to save
battery lifetime signiﬁcantly as the overall number of packets
needed for the transmission is smaller than the values for
LBM, ﬂooding GRID and ticket GRID. Finally, GeoGrid
uses 4 Byte for Next Hop, Message Type and Packet Number
signaling whereas GeoOLSR uses only 2 Bytes for packet
sequence numbering.
Thus, we can postulate that GeoTORA and GeoOLSR are
both suited for an application in Wireless Sensor Networks.
However, we neglected node mobility until now, which
is a very important issue for the aimed application in
safety critical scenarios where nodes can exhibit relatively
high mobilities. Nevertheless, GeoOLSR depicts two main
advantages in comparison to GeoTORA. First, GeoOLSR as
a proactive MANET algorithm is able to send an alarm mes-
sage out immediately form a certain control center, whenever
a threatening situation occurs without initiating a previous
polling mechanism. Another advantage of GeoOLSR is the
simultaneous support of IP-based trafﬁc and location based
trafﬁc. That means, no additional geocasting algorithm is
needed and the network management is completely inte-
grated in ISO-OSI layer 3.
C. Node Mobility
The previous section neglected nodes’ mobility. However,
the knowledge of the correct position of each node has a
high inﬂuence on geocast algorithms. As a quality indicator
we regard the position deviation of all ﬁxed nodes between
the routing table entry and the real position. That means
the difference of the predicted mobile node’s position and
the real location is calculated for 100 seconds in each node.
After that, an overall mean value of the position deviations
of all nodes is computed. To allow easier comparability, we
FH Ival = 0.3 s
FH Ival = 0.3 s
FH Ival = 0.5 s
FH Ival = 0.5 s
Hello Ival = 1 s
Hello Ival = 1 s
Hello Ival = 2 s
Hello Ival = 2 s
TC Ival = 2 s
TC Ival = 2 s
TC Ival = 5 s
TC Ival = 5 s
∆ Pos [m]
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
10 m/s
16 m/s
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
16
Figure 14.
Position Deviation of GeoOLSR depending on varying moving
speeds and parameter sets regarding 1 moving node
FH Ival = 0.3 s
FH Ival = 0.3 s
FH Ival = 0.5 s
FH Ival = 0.5 s
Hello Ival = 1 s
Hello Ival = 1 s
Hello Ival = 2 s
Hello Ival = 2 s
TC Ival = 2 s
TC Ival = 2 s
TC Ival = 5 s
TC Ival = 5 s
∆ Pos [m]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
10 m/s
16 m/s
Figure 15.
Position Deviation of GeoOLSR depending on varying moving
speeds and parameter sets regarding 4 moving nodes
show the same scales for varying motion patterns. In the
ﬁrst experiment, we consider only one node moving around
at different speeds. In the second setup, four nodes move
through the scenario (cf. Figure 13). The results of the ﬁrst
experiment are shown in Figure 14. The overall mean value
of position differences increases as expected with higher
node mobility. Here, the same phenomenon can be observed
with standard deviations, which indicate a successive rise
with higher speeds. However, we can conclude that the
ratio of the position deviation to the observed movement
speed is always constant. That means, there is a constant
average time, in which no communication between nodes
is possible due to route maintenance, disconnections etc.
Furthermore, we do not see an obvious impact of Hello
and TC intervals on position accuracy in contrast to the
key parameter Fast Hello interval. As a consequence, po-
sition deviation and standard deviation values using equal
parameters for Hello and TC interval show nearly the same
∆ positions. In the next step we evaluate the inﬂuence of
higher node mobility within our scenario. Therefore, we
compare position deviations of four moving nodes (Figure
15) with those of only one moving node (Figure 14). It is
obvious that the increased number of moving nodes does
22
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the position accuracy.
The difference between position deviations caused by one
moving node and four mobile nodes does not exceed 30 %
when the most network load generating parameters (Fast
Hello = 0.3 s, Hello = 1 s and TC = 2 s) are applied at a
node speed of 16 m/s. Furthermore, the average increase of
position deviations between the one moving node scenario
and the four moving nodes scenario is 15.55 %. This leads
to an important question whether higher route maintaining
updates imply higher position accuracies. It is visible that the
application of the parameters Fast Hello = 0.3 s, Hello = 2 s
and TC = 5 s leads to similar position accuracies like using
the parameter set Fast Hello = 0.3 s, Hello = 1 s and TC =
2 s. Due to battery and resource constrains it is advisable to
use the parameter set with lower Hello and TC intervals as
this approach saves battery life and decreases the number of
collisions.
D. Analysis of resulting overheads
In this section, we will analyze the overhead evoked by
GeoOLSR in comparison to regular OLSR. The test scenario
is the same as shown in Figure 13. As a reference, regular
OLSR is considered without geocasting functionalities. In
this experiment we consider one moving node and four
moving nodes for two different OLSR parameter sets. Here,
we neglect varying speeds as GeoOLSR only uses time
triggered route maintenance packets, which are independent
of different speeds. The results are shown in Table VIII.
Table VIII
RESULTING OVERHEADS COMPARED TO REGULAR OLSR
OLSR
OLSR
GeoOLSR
GeoOLSR
Hello Interval = 1 s
TC Interval = 2 s
Hello Interval = 2 s
TC Interval = 5 s
Fast Hello = 0.3 s
Fast Hello = 0.3 s
Fast Hello = 0.5 s
Fast Hello = 0.5 s
regular OLSR with 45 static nodes
regular OLSR with 45 static nodes
1 moving Node
1 moving Node
4 Moving nodes
4 Moving nodes
44.42 kBit/s
25.61 kBit/s
60.88 kBit/s
79.5 kBit/s
51.57 kBit/s
71.94 kBit/s
51.42 kBit/s
72.69 kBit/s
42.29 kBit/s
65.74 kBit/s
In contrast to Section III, we did not evaluate goodputs
here, because the use of the random mobility model leads to
ﬂuctuating goodput values and are not comprehensible due
to variable hop distances between source and sink.
We see that even the most accurate parameter set shows
an overhead of 35.08 kBit/s (OLSR compared to GeoOLSR
with Fast Hello Interval = 0.3 s and 4 moving nodes).
Furthermore, the overhead of one moving node compared to
4 moving nodes is in-between 18.62 and 23.45 kBit/s (Fast
Hello Interval = 0.3 s versus Fast Hello Interval = 0.5 s).
Thus, even in the most data rate consuming parameterization
there are still 170.5 kBit/s left for payload trafﬁc.
VII. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION IN A REAL WORLD
ENVIRONMENT
Industrial scenarios pose a challenging network environ-
ment for IEEE802.15.4 networks due to the special fading
conditions. In order to analyze the performance of protocols
and applications, network simulators like OMNeT++ only
apply a deterministic free space loss propagation model. This
model, however, poorly reﬂects the channel characteristics
of real world conditions. Therefore, a sophisticated ray
tracing tool (Radiowave Propagation Simulator) is used to
represent shadowing effects and multipath propagation. To
increase accuracy of the simulation results, we used a 3D
laser scan for creating a CAD model of the scenario, which
considers every pipe, tube and steel girder included in the
observed basements underneath a batch annealing plant of a
ThyssenKrupp cold rolling mill (cf. Figure 16).
it/s
Figure 16.
Top: Image of the supply machinery basement underneath the
analyzed cold rolling mill. Bottom: Detailed 3D CAD model of the scenario
shown above.
The combination of a highly detailed CAD model with
ray tracing allows an accurate determination of Received
Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) values as well as Signal
to Noise plus Interference Ratios (SNIR). IEEE802.15.4a-
CSS, as applied in the gas concentration monitoring scenario
for employee localization in case of emergency, possesses a
minimal RSSI value of -95 dBm and a minimal SNIR of
-17 dB. Hence, we modiﬁed the applied OMNeT++ PHY
23
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

OMNeT++
RPS
Initialization of
simulation model
Is this node mobile?
computation of received
power from all other
static nodes (S1)
saving data in
intermediate variables
computation of re-
ceived power from
all nodes (N1)
n
n
n
n
n
y
y
y
y
y
packet received
is packet for
receiving node?
no SNIR needed
is receiving node mobile?
is sending node (s) mobile?
calculate received
power of all mobile
nodes (M1)
calculate received
power of mobile
nodes (M1\{s})
changed position?
update interim values
recalculation of re-
ceived power of all
other nodes (N1)
using interim values
(N1) to calculate SNIR
SNIR =
s
(S1\{s})∪M1
SNIR =
s
S1∪(M1\{s})
SNIR =
s
N1
Figure 17.
Simulation Architecture consisting of OMNeT++ and Ra-
diowave Propagation Simulator (RPS) to increase PHY layer modeling
accuracy. For computational time reduction, two intermediate result sets
(S1 and N1) are applied during initialization period of the OMNeT++
model.
layer implementation to discard incoming packets that do
not exhibit these minimum values and extended it with a
direct connection to the ray tracing tool. However, to re-
duce computational complexity, we perform a special SNIR
computation, in which two different intermediate results are
saved, which may be reused on every SNIR calculation.
The simulation architecture is shown in Figure 17. During
initialization of OMNeT++, the sum of all adjacent sta-
tionary nodes is calculated for each non mobile node (S1)
(anchor nodes that are mounted to the wall), whereas the
received power of all adjacent nodes is cumulated for every
mobile node in the scenario (N1). The intermediate value
of each stationary node remains constant during simulation
process and must be modiﬁed by the sum of all mobile nodes
(M1) that do not participate in the observed communication
process. M1 must be recomputed every time a SNIR value
is requested by the PHY layer due to the mobility of this
node set and the consecutive changes in RSSI and SNIR
values. To reduce the amount of computational steps once
again, the intermediate result set N1 is updated every 1 m
only. The applied movement paths are shown in Figure 18.
In this setup, we apply a radio channel, which occupies
80 MHz of bandwidth with a center frequency of 2.45 GHz
as our installed localization tags and anchor nodes use
IEEE802.15.4a-CSS. Furthermore, we use dipole antennas
with 2.2 dB gain and a transmission power of 0 dBm. The
sent trafﬁc proﬁle applies packets encapsulating a payload
static anchor points (APs)
node receiving packets from mobile node (destination)
mobile node sending packets to destination (source)
moving direction No. 1 of mobile node (2 m/s - 16 m/s)
moving direction No. 2 of mobile node (0.5 m/s)
master anchor node(s) in basements
master anchor backbone connection
Basement 1
Basement 2
−40 dBm
−51 dBm
−62 dBm
−73 dBm
−84 dBm
−95 dBm
(RSSI)
Coverage
Figure 18.
Applied moving direction of a mobile node which sends data
to a static anchor point (AP). The other APs depict potential interferers in
the observed positioning system.
of 74 Byte with an interarrival time of 30 ms (as applied
in the evaluations before). First, we analyze the resulting
goodput for different speeds in this scenario (cf. Figure
19) including a basement change (moving direction No. 1)
and an exemplary maintenance of an anchor point (mov-
ing direction No. 2). During maintenance of machinery
or stationary anchor points the service employees might
be shadowed by surrounding tubes or pipes. Here, reliable
handover processes must ensure connectivity of the mobile
personnel.
As the scenario omits a very good radio coverage (as
shown in Figure 18), there are only connections with a
maximal 2 hop distance between source and destination.
However, the resulting SNIR affect the radio channel signif-
icantly. Hence, the main inﬂuencing factor for the resulting
goodputs of the ﬁrst four measurements (0.5 m/s, 2 m/s,
4 m/s and 8 m/s) is multipath propagation (for both desired
24
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Goodput [%]
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
16 m/s
0.5 m/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
moving direction No.1
moving direction No.2
Figure 19.
Resulting Goodput of GeoOLSR depending on varying moving
speeds and parameter sets regarding 1 moving node under real-world
channel conditions. (FH Ival = 0.5 s,HI = 2 s, TC Ival = 5 s)
∆ Pos [m]
2 m/s
4 m/s
8 m/s
16 m/s
0.5 m/s
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
moving direction No.1
moving direction No.2
Figure 20.
Position Deviation of GeoOLSR depending on varying moving
speeds and parameter sets regarding 1 moving node under real-world
channel conditions. (FH Ival = 0.5 s,HI = 2 s, TC Ival = 5 s)
connections and undesired interference signals). Here, we
only show exemplary results in Figure 19 without declara-
tion of mean values or standard deviations. Compared to the
original OMNeT++ analysis of OLSR (cf. Figure 6), a 20 %
worse result is achieved considering the 1 and 2 hop cases.
The 16 m/s measurement is subject to the increased speed as
well as in the original OMNeT++ simulation. Nevertheless,
the goodputs are still satisfying in such a scenario if low
pedestrian speeds are assumed. Usual movement speeds for
employees would be around 1 m/s up to 2 m/s.
Another important metric for safety critical localization
systems is the position deviation as analyzed in Section V.
The position deviation of GeoOLSR in a real-world scenario
(Figure 20) is nearly equal to the previous scenario setup
(Figure 14). This may be explained by the slightly reduced
maximal hop count in the real-world scenario compared to
the original measurement in Section VI. Furthermore, the
deviation is still relatively small for low mobility speeds,
which are typical due to the construction type of industrial
environments where fast movements of employees do not
occur frequently. Thus, fast evacuation is ensured as the
resulting position deviations correspond an ”arm’s length”
(for mobility speeds of up to 2 m/s), which enables ﬁremen
to rescue people quickly and reliable even if sight is limited.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We presented a novel peer-to-peer enabled IEEE802.15.4
node design for meshed network topologies and compared
it against the original IEEE802.15.4 solution. We have seen
that the energy consumption of our GeoOLSR nodes is about
3 times higher (3297 minutes) than the energy optimized end
devices of the IEEE802.15.4 standard (10416 minutes), but
the lifetime is enhanced in comparison to IEEE802.11 (55
minutes). The major advantage of the node is the enhanced
fault tolerance against node failures and the autonomous
reconﬁguration capability. The routing algorithms provide
good performance in handover processes in terms of switch-
ing times and goodput.
Subsequently, we also outlined a geocasting algorithm
based on Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) that is able
to support high mobilities at a reasonable trafﬁc overhead.
Due to the proactive nature of the underlying OLSR protocol
this extension is well suited for real time alarming services
in safety critical scenarios, which do not permit an additional
polling mechanism e.g., if danger zones must be evacuated
immediately.
The deployment of IP in wireless sensor networks enables
an easy integration of sensor nodes into preexisting infras-
tructures, without the need of special gateways, as well as a
wide variety of services, which are widely accepted within
the Internet community. Finally, GeoOLSR is able to use
IP-based unicast trafﬁc as well as location based services
without the need of an additional geocasting algorithm
beside the applied mesh network algorithm.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is conducted within the SAVE Project (Ge-
ographic Information System for Alarming using au-
tonomous, networked Gas Sensors) and is funded by the Ger-
man Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
– 16SV3711
25
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES
[1] A. Lewandowski, V. Koester, and C. Wietfeld: Perfor-
mance Evaluation of AODV- and OLSR-meshed IP-enabled
IEEE802.15.4, 2010 Third International Conference on Ad-
vances in Mesh Networks (MESH 2010), Venice, Italy, July
2010
[2] C. Perkins, E. Royer, and S. Das: Ad hoc On-Demand Distance
Vector (AODV) Routing, IETF RFC 3561, 2003
[3] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet: The Optimized Link State Routing
Protocol (OLSR), IETF RFC 3626, October 2003
[4] Z. Shelby and C. Bormann: 6LoWPAN: The wireless Embedded
Internet, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, ISBN: 978-0-470-74799-5,
2009
[5] ZigBee Alliance. ZigBee Speciﬁcation. Technical Report Doc-
ument 053474r17, Version 1.0, ZigBee Alliance, October 2007
[6] J. W. Hui and D. E. Culler: IP is dead, long live IP for wireless
sensor networks, In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference
on Embedded Network Sensor Systems (SenSys ’08), Raleigh,
NC, USA, November 2008
[7] A. Dunkels, T. Voigt, and J. Alonso: Making TCP/IP Viable
for Wireless Sensor Networks, In Proceedings of the First
European Workshop on Wireless Sensor Networks (EWSN
2004), Berlin, Germany, January 2004
[8] K. Kim, S. D. Park, G. Montenegro, and S. Yoo: 6LoWPAN
Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector Routing (LOAD), draft-
daniel-6lowpan-load-adhocrouting-01,
IETF
Internet
Draft
(Work in progress), July 2005
[9] J.
Deissner,
J.
Huebner,
D.
Hunold,
and
J.
Voigt:
RPS
Radiowave
Propagation
Simulator,
User
Manual,
www.actix.com, last visited June 2011
[10] D. B. Johnson, D. A. Maltz, and Y.-C. Hu: The Dynamic
Source Routing Protocol (DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
for IPv4, IETF RFC 4728, February 2007
[11] S. Hamma, E. Cizeron, H. Issaka, and J.-P. Guedon: Perfor-
mance evaluation of reactive and proactive routing protocol in
IEEE 802.11 ad hoc network, In Proceedings of ITCom 06,
Boston, MA, USA, October 2006
[12] M. Benzaid, P. Minet, and K. Alagha : Integrating fast
mobility in the OLSR routing protocol, 4th IEEE Conference on
Mobile and Wireless Communications Networks , Stockholm,
Sweden, September 2002
[13] C. Gomez, P. Salvatella, O. Alonso, and J. Paradells: Adapting
AODV for IEEE802.15.4 mesh sensor networks: theoretical
discussion and performance evaluation in a real environment,
2006 International Symposium on World of Wireless, Mobile
and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM 2006), pp. 159 - 170,
Buffalo, NY, USA, June 2006
[14] Y.-B. Ko and N.H. Vaidya: GeoTORA: a protocol for geo-
casting in mobile ad hoc networks, In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Network Protocols, pp. 240-250,
Osaka, Japan, November 2000
[15] W.-H. Liao, Y.-C. Tseng, K.-L. Lo, and J.-P. Sheu : GeoGrid:
A Geocasting protocol for mobile ad hoc networks based on
grid, Journal of Internet Technology, pp. 23-32, 2000
[16] Y.-B. Ko and N.H. Vaidya: Geocasting in Mobile Ad Hoc Net-
works: Location-Based Multicast Algorithms, In Proceedings
of the Second IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computer Systems
and Applications (WMCSA 1999), Washington, DC, USA,
1999
[17] D. Camara and A. Loureiro: A Novel Routing Algorithm
for Ad Hoc Networks, Baltzer Journal of Telecommunications
Systems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, vol. 18:1-3, pp. 85-100,
2001
[18] B. Zhou, F. De Rango, M.Gerla, and S. Marano: GeoLAN-
MAR: geo assisted landmark routing for scalable, group motion
wireless ad hoc networks, IEEE 61st Semiannual Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC), Stockholm, Sweden, 2005
[19] A. Varga: The OMNeT++ Discrete Event Simulation System,
In Proceedings of the European Simulation Multiconference,
2001
[20] Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Speciﬁcations for Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area
Networks (WPANs), IEEE802.15.4 (Standard), 2006
[21] A. Kiryushin, A. Sadkov, and A. Mainwaring: Real-World
Performance of Clear Channel Assessment in 802.15.4 Wire-
less Sensor Networks, 2008 Second International Conference
on Sensor Technologies and Applications (SENSORCOMM
2008), pp. 625-630, Cap Esterel, France, August 2008
[22] A. Lewandowski, M. Putzke, V. Koester, and C. Wietfeld:
Coexistence of 802.11b and 802.15.4a-CSS: Measurements,
Analytical Model and Simulation, 71st IEEE Vehicular Tech-
nology Conference (VTC), Taipei, Taiwan, May 2010
[23] Y. Huang, S. N. Bhatti, and D. Parker; Tuning OLSR,
2006 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor
and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC 2006), pp. 1-5,
September 2006
[24] I.
D.
Chakeres
and
L.
Klein-Berndt:
AODVjr,
AODV
simpliﬁed,
ACM,
SIGMOBILE
Mob.
Comput.
Commun.
Rev.,
vol.
6,
no.3,
pp.
100-101,
2002
doi:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/581291.581309, last visited June
2011
[25] Texas
Instruments
CC2420
Single-Chip
2.4
GHz
IEEE
802.15.4
RF
Transceiver,
Datasheet,
http://focus.ti.com/docs/prod/folders/print/cc2420.html,
last
visited June 2011
[26] Maxim
MAX2822
2.4
GHz
IEEE
802.11b
RF
Transceiver,
Datasheet,
http://www.maxim-
ic.com/datasheet/index.mvp/id/3938, last visited June 2011
26
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

