Introduction to Practical Deployments on Wireless Sensor Networks 
Jaime Lloret 
Department of Communications, Polytechnic University of Valencia 
Camino Vera s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain 
jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
 
 
Abstract—In the recent years there have been many published 
papers related on sensors. We can say that it is one of the hot 
topics of the last decades. But, the more we read, the more we 
realize that almost all are theoretical proposals or new 
theories. Very few works show real sensor networks 
deployments. While sensor network surveys show their benefits 
and the fields where they can be applied, they don't show who, 
how and where they have been deployed. In this paper, we are 
going to explain which motivation has roused us to create this 
special issue, and we will provide the main steps that a 
practical deployment should follow to be implemented. Then, 
we will introduce all the papers that have been selected to be 
published in this issue. 
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Networks, Practical Deployments, 
Real-world Implementations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sensor has been a hot topic since the 90's [1]. The more 
parameters are needed to be measured from the environment, 
the more sensors have been deployed. Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSNs) provide a self-configured and a self-
powered wireless infrastructure for any type of environment. 
In order to build a WSN, the technology to join many of 
these sensors must be provided. In the late 90's, many 
theories and protocols were proposed for WSNs [2][3][4]. 
The main issues discussed in those works were the first three 
network layers. In the first layer, the physical layer, 
researchers proposed new wireless technologies for the 
sensors with the main objective of providing communication 
with low power consumption. In the second layer, where the 
medium access control protocols are placed, many 
researchers proposed new methods about how the wireless 
sensor devices have to see each other and establish a network 
topology [5][6]. In the third layer, many researchers focused 
their efforts on designing and developing new routing 
algorithms to route the information inside the wireless sensor 
network in an efficient manner and saving energy.  
In all research fields related with WSNs, the main issues 
taken into account have been the low processing capacity, 
few computing resources and their energy limitation. Many 
more new theories appeared in the beginning of the 2000 
[7][8]. Moreover, many researchers improved the WSN 
protocols and systems in existence. During the 2000, the 
technology advanced enough to create small devices with 
enough 
computing 
capacity 
and 
with 
low 
power 
consumption while being able to sense the environment 
[9][10]. We can see how WSN can benefit developing 
countries [11]. Moreover, the last researches have been 
focused on developing upper layer protocols for WSNs such 
as multimedia [12], transport layer protocols [13], etc. 
Many articles show the wide range of application 
environments of the WSNs [14], but very few were about 
real implementations, compared to the amount of theoretic 
published works. 
WSN lifecycle is formed by different differentiated steps. 
The first step is to know what the application of the WSN is. 
The second step is to design (or choose the appropriate) the 
hardware of the sensor node, its operative system, the system 
architecture, the wireless technology used by the nodes, the 
medium access protocol for all nodes and the routing 
protocol used in the sensor network. The third step is to 
implement the WSN in a testbench. WSN test is the fourth 
step. It should be performed in order to check its proper 
operation and its performance. The fifth step us the 
deployment of the WSN in the real world. Once, the WSN is 
running, its maintenance and continuous monitoring should 
be taken into account. Figure 1 shows the steps followed in 
the WSN. The peculiarity of the WSN lifecycle versus others 
is the number of disperses topics taken into account during 
the design step and the difficulty of the deployment step 
because of the number of devices and topics tackled. 
In the beginning, there were some works published 
proposing algorithms and strategies for practical WSN 
deployment in terms of sensing coverage area [15][16], 
better detection and sensing range [17], the radio coverage 
[18][19], the optimal deployment based on the physical layer 
[20], the cost and lifetime [21], the topology control [22], 
energy saving issues [23], probability of target detection 
[24], and the scalability [25]. Later, some authors published a 
work with a theoretic analysis for the WSN deployment [26] 
and there was another work published about how to check 
the quality of the WSN deployments [27]. But, all of these 
papers are theoretic works. 
We can also find in the literature some papers whose 
authors discuss the design and deployment issues [28], others 
that explain the WSN deployment procedure [29], and 
surveys about the steps that it should be made for a proper 
deployment [30]. Nowadays, there are studies about how the 
wireless technology affects to the deployment [31]. Others 
use the real world to test and validate their proposals [32], 
and even propose a deployment time validation consisting of 
techniques and procedures for WSN status assessment and 
verification [33]. Some authors state that the Self-Monitoring 
and Self-Configuration are the main keys for the WSN 
deployment success [34]. There is also a work that shows the 
development of robots to put the sensor nodes carefully in 
the appropriated place [35]. 
1
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
Figure 1. WSN lifecycle. 
 
Finally, some software applications have been developed 
for designing WSNs, such as the one presented in [36], and 
for monitoring and control the WSN once it has been 
deployed [37][38]. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II shows some related work and explains our 
motivation to create this special issue. The papers selected 
for this special issue are described in Section III. Finally, 
Section IV provides the conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK AND MOTIVATION 
Along the years, there have been many conferences 
where one of the topics has been the deployment of the 
WSN. But, very few papers related with WSN deployments 
can be found between the papers published in their 
proceedings. Some examples of WSNs deployments found in 
some conferences are: for the agriculture [39], for a 
petroleum environment [40], for a Semiconductor Plant [41], 
for Coastal Marine Environments [42], for bridge monitoring 
[43], and for monitoring heritage buildings [44]. Although 
we can find one paper about the deployments performed by a 
research centre (in this case CSEM [45]), it is very rare to 
find such type of papers between the published papers. But, 
the 
Sensor-specialized 
conferences 
that 
have 
been 
differentiated because of the amount of papers published 
about practical deployments along the years, up to 2010, 
have been RealWSN (its first event is referenced in [46]) 
and, one of the biggest ones, SENSORCOMM (its first event 
is referenced in [47]), both having four past events. Others 
have disappeared or focused on more topics. 
When we search for research books related with WSN 
deployments, we can see that there is no book focused 
exclusively on it, and, moreover, very few works about WSN 
deployments are published in books. 
When we have a look at the research journals, we can 
find some sporadic paper publications. Some examples are: a 
deployment for structural monitoring [48], a deployment for 
management of irrigation [49] and a deployment of rural and 
forest fire detection system [50]. We have not seen any topic 
related with WSN deployments or real WSN experiences in 
any international journal. In the recent months, some call for 
papers for Special Issues of international journals have 
appeared with the topic WSN deployments such as the one 
called "Special Issue on Mobility in Wireless Sensor 
Networks" in [51], but it will be published in mid 2011. 
Moreover, we have found a Special Issue focused on with 
the main topic WSN Real-World Deployments and 
Deployment Experiences, but it will be published at the end 
of 2010. To the extent of our knowledge, there is not any 
Special Issue related with WSN deployments before the 
publication of this issue. 
III. 
PAPERS SELECTED 
This section describes the papers published in this special 
issue. We have selected 15th papers. They can be ordered in 4 
parts. The first part shows WSN deployments in agricultural, 
rural and forest environments. Four papers have been 
selected to cover it. The second part shows four WSN 
deployments for healthcare and human assistance. The third 
part is formed by 2 papers about WSN deployments in 
oceanography and marine zones. The last part is formed by 
several types of WSN deployments. This part is ended by a 
survey of WSN deployments found in the related literature. 
The need to monitor or
measure the environment, 
a place, the body, …
Hardware
Operative
System
System
Architecture
Wireless
Technology
Medium Access 
Protocol/Algorithm
Routing
Protocol/Algorithm
WSN Implementation
WSN Simulation Test 
WSN Deployment
WSN Maintenance
WSN Design
2
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

A. Part 1: Deployments in agricultural, rural and forest 
environments 
In the first paper of this special issue, C. Anand et al. 
present "Wireless multi-sensor embedded system for Agro-
industrial monitoring and control". The paper shows the 
development of a low cost multi sensor embedded system for 
measuring up to eight input analog sensor parameters along 
with reconfigurable automation, and communicating with 
host (wired and wireless), optimized by appropriate 
algorithms. The developed system has been deployed with 
resistance 
temperature 
detector 
(RTD) 
sensors, 
for 
temperature measurement, decision-making and their control 
in order to reduce the false alarms and unwanted process shut 
downs. Moreover, a mobile robotic platform is developed to 
test the multi-sensor embedded system for Agro-Industrial 
Applications (such as grain and fruit storage, vegetable 
storage smart pond automation for fresh aquaculture and so 
on). It has been also successfully tested to monitor the soil 
parameters in the farm and transmit the data to the central 
system using wireless protocol for precision agriculture. The 
data sent using wireless communication allows the system to 
be efficient and effective. It also allows making intelligent 
decisions based on the processed data. Furthermore, the 
average loss in signal is measured and received power is 
calculated and compared. The authors observed that for 
better transmission of signals via wireless communication, 
the low frequency along with low baud rate and line of sight 
range is required to minimize the signal loss. 
The second paper, "Distributed Monitoring Systems for 
Agriculture based on Wireless Sensor Network Technology", 
authored by D. Di Palma et al., presents the design, 
optimization and development of an application to the 
agrofood chain monitoring and control. The authors try to 
reach the best architectural solutions with particular focus on 
hardware implementation and communication protocol 
design. The overall system was addressed in terms of the 
experienced platform, network issues related both to 
communication protocols between nodes and gateway 
operations up to the suitable remote user interface. They 
show the results given by several pilot sites in different 
vineyards throughout Italy and France. Finally, they present 
the commercial system "VineSense", based on WSN 
technology and oriented towards 
market and user 
applications. It was born from their previous experiments. At 
last, some important agronomic results achieved by the use 
of VineSense in different scenarios were sketched out, thus 
emphasizing the positive effects of the WSN technology in 
the agricultural environment. 
The third paper is titled "Evaluation of Environmental 
Wireless Sensor Network - Case Foxhouse" and is authored 
by I. Hakala et al. This paper describes the implementation 
of an environmental monitoring system in a Foxhouse. They 
use a WSN in order to collect real-time data (luminosity, 
temperature and humidity) in hard outdoors conditions over 
a period of one year. In this paper they evaluate the 
communication over IEEE802.15.4, by providing and 
analyzing the throughput and the link quality statistics. They 
also present the power consumption measurements and 
discuss the observations performed. 
The paper "Infrared wireless network sensors for 
imminent forest fire detection", authored by I. Bosch and L. 
Vergara, is the fourth paper. It presents an automatic forest 
fire surveillance ground system applied to early fire detection 
based on several sensors strategically located to render a 
required coverage. The images obtained from an infrared 
sensor network are processed by advanced thermal image 
processing techniques with the purpose of determining the 
presence of fire. The sensor wireless network supervises 
remotely the wide-forest area in order to detect immediately 
any fire threat. It provides total control of a tolerable level of 
false alarms and has maximum sensitivity to the presence of 
an uncontrolled fire for the defined false-alarm rate. The 
authors present some results obtained from a real 
environment in order to corroborate the control of the 
probability of false alarm and to evaluate the probability of 
detection dependence on signal to noise ratio. The delays of 
the system for alarm detection of controlled fire are also 
evaluated in order to show the performance of the system in 
the real environment.  
B. Part 2: Deployments for healthcare and human 
assistance 
P. Bustamante et al. present the fifth paper "A new 
Wireless Sensor for Intravenous Dripping Detection". This 
paper presents a WSN deployment for Intravenous Dripping 
System, which can detect when an intravenous liquid, 
provided to patients in hospitals, run out, as well as detecting 
obstructions in the catheter. The system allows more 
efficient and immediate attention in sanitary centers because 
the observation of the state of the container will not need 
human supervision. They paid attention to the reduction in 
consumption in comparison to other wireless devices with 
the same characteristics, the low cost of the wireless devices, 
the size of the devices, the flexibility forming the network, 
and the scalability of the system. 
The sixth paper is authored by K. F. Navarro et al. with 
title "A Distributed Network Management Approach to 
WSN in Personal Healthcare Applications". It describes the 
development of a WSN for personal health monitoring 
system called Medical MoteCare. It uses a combination of 
medical and environmental sensors in an inherent network 
management distributed environment for the handling of 
medical data for patients. The use of SNMP and CodeBlue 
agents and a tailored MIB enhanced the scalability, 
modularity and flexibility of the system by potentially 
bringing the freedom of selecting from a vast range of 
existing SNMP based network management tools (such as 
the network management software Jaguar SX, iReasoning 
MIB Browser, and SysUpTime Network Monitor) to fit their 
specific 
WSN 
application 
requirements. 
Network 
management tools provide data storage correlation and 
dissemination as well as timely alerts when parameters are 
breached. They implemented JaguarSX in order to add 
intelligence to the system by utilizing network management 
correlation techniques that interpret the collected events 
3
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

automatically and react, or sometimes even anticipate from 
the collected statistical data, to harmful health conditions. 
The paper "Design and Implementation of Multi-User 
Wireless Body Sensor Networks", by J. A. Afonso et al. is 
the seventh paper. It describes the design and development of 
two multi-user low power wireless body sensor network 
(BSN) that allow the real-time monitoring of wearable 
sensors data of several users with a single central monitoring 
unit (base station). They use inertial sensors that allow the 
monitoring of users’ posture, goniometric development, 
movement as well as heart rate and respiratory rate sensors. 
Both BSNs present differences in the architecture, wireless 
network hardware and implemented protocols. They took 
into account the requirements of quality of service 
provisioning and low energy consumption. Their results 
show that their system provides good bandwidth efficiency 
and decreases the delivery error rate without significant 
increase in the energy consumption. The system can be used 
for the monitoring of teams of athletes in a gymnasium for 
sports with the goal of providing detailed information in 
order to enhance the performance of both the athletes 
individually and the team as a whole, and it can also be used 
for the medical field, namely in physiotherapy sessions, 
where such a system can benefit both the patient, by 
increasing his levels of confidence, and the therapist, by 
providing detailed information about the patient evolution.  
In the eighth paper, "Human-Assisted Calibration of an 
Angulation based Location Indoor System with Preselection 
of Measurements", J. Kemper et al. present a software aided 
approach for the calibration of a triangulation-based indoor 
location system. The aim of their approach is to significantly 
reduce the calibration effort of the system by automating the 
process of node localization. The system estimates the 
localization of the sensor nodes using an algorithm based on 
the Newton-Raphson method for solving non-linear equation 
systems. It uses a passive sensor technology. The sensor 
nodes are equipped with infrared sensors only. As infrared 
radiation does not penetrate walls, the location system is 
limited to one room and the number of required sensors is 
small. Node localization is realized without any prior 
knowledge of sensor positions, orientations or the location of 
the moving person. The system has been implemented using 
a location system that exploits the thermal radiation of 
humans for localization. The algorithm works fine under the 
influence of noise. Moreover, an increased number of source 
locations improve the node localization accuracy. 
C. Part 3: Deployments in oceanography and marine 
zones 
O. Bondarenko et al. authored the ninth paper: 
"Deployment of Wireless Sensor Network to Study 
Oceanography of Coral Reefs". They deployed a WSN for in 
situ monitoring the Coral Sea and upwelled on the reef. The 
array of underwater sensors was deployed at various depths 
on the coral reef in Nelly Bay, Magnetic Island, Great 
Barrier Reef Australia (GBR). They used the temperature 
and 3D dense spatial data to correctly describe upwelling and 
their impact on plankton abundance (they collect the 
plankton data in real time synchronized to the temperature 
changes). The temperature data are sent in real time via the 
ad hoc network using RF signal to the on-shore base station. 
They also deployed dataloggers to collect temperature data 
from the same location. They used the WSN to demonstrate 
that short term stratification can occur in shallow tropical 
waters and influence the distribution of plankton.  
The tenth paper is "Target Tracking in Marine Wireless 
Sensor Networks", by A. M. Mahdy and J. M. Groenke. 
They describe the main underwater tracking algorithms and 
thoroughly present a perspective on target tracking in marine 
WSNs. They also show the major challenges and 
applications about the deployment of underwater WSNs. 
Then, they present a two-layer broadband wireless 
infrastructure for marine/terrestrial sensor networks with 
military, inhabit monitoring, and homeland security 
applications. This paper has been included in this special 
issue because of the practical point of view provided in this 
work. 
D. Part 4: Several types of deployments 
The paper "An Integrating Platform for Environmental 
Monitoring in Museums Based on Wireless Sensor 
Networks", by L. M. Rodríguez and L. M. Pestana, is the 
eleventh paper. They present a WSN deployment for 
automatically and continuously monitoring the environment 
(temperature, humidity and light, throughout the day and 
night) of a Contemporary Art Museum located in Madeira 
Island, Portugal. They developed a new wireless sensor node 
that 
allow 
to 
automatically 
control 
real-time 
the 
dehumidifying, maintaining the humidity at more constant 
levels. They found some problems related with the signal 
propagation (because of the building walls where the WSN is 
being deployed), and with the hardware characteristics and 
resource limitations of the sensor nodes. 
 D. Bri et al. authored the twelfth paper: "A Wireless IP 
Multisensor Deployment". They present the deployment of a 
Wireless IP multisensor that uses IEEE 802.11b/g standard. 
It is able to gather several types of data from the 
environment and transmit the result of their combination. It 
is flexible and it could be adapted to any type of environment 
and to any type of physical sensor with a serial output. They 
took into consideration its development costs, its expansion 
capacity, the possibilities provided by the operating system, 
and its flexibility to add more features to the sensor node. 
Finally, they compared it with other existing sensors in the 
market.  
The thirteenth paper is authored by F. Kerasiotis et al. In 
their work "Evaluation of Outdoor RSS-Based Tracking for 
WSNs Aiming at Topology Parameter Ranges Selection" 
they use the received signal strength (RSS), of the exchanged 
messages, for outdoor localization and tracking application 
under well defined topology constraints. They combine 
target tracking considerations by means of tracking 
techniques, topology parameters and factors influencing the 
tracking accuracy. Their study was focused on identifying 
the most crucial RSS-based tracking problems and to 
determine and evaluate the topology parameters that can 
guarantee successful tracking. The real outdoor tracking test 
demonstrates that the RSS can be used for outdoor 
4
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

localization and tracking applications under well-defined 
topology constraints and only after the proper calibration. 
The paper "Deployment Considerations for Reliable 
Communication in Wireless Sensor Networks", authored by 
T. Stoyanova et al., is the fourteenth paper selected for this 
special issue. In this work, the authors study the deployment 
factors and requirements, which can ensure reliable 
communication links among the sensor network nodes. They 
used a RF signal propagation-based connectivity algorithm 
(RFCA), which utilizes an outdoor RF signal propagation 
model for predicting the RSS in the positions (based on the 
RF frequency, transmission power, transmitter–receiver 
distance, 
height 
from 
the 
ground 
and 
antenna’s 
characteristics such as gain, polarization and orientation, 
etc.), where sensor nodes are supposed to be deployed. The 
RFCA is able to find the most appropriate, from the 
communication point of view, deployment parameters 
(height from the ground, T-R distance, and transmission 
power) for positioning the sensor nodes in outdoor 
environment in order to guarantee reliable connectivity level 
and minimize the interference from non-neighbor nodes. 
Finally, real outdoor measurements are compared with the 
simulation results for the verification of their RF propagation 
models. 
Finally, the fifteenth paper selected has been "Practical 
Deployments of Wireless Sensor Networks: a Survey", by 
M. Garcia et al. The paper is focused on classifying 
applications of WSNs and describing real implementations. 
The goal of the authors is to complement the existing 
surveys, by presenting details of real implementations and 
practical deployments in order to understand how these 
networks run, and how they are designed, maintained and 
operated. Finally, the authors compare them in terms of 
network size, technology used, the communication type, 
single/multiple use and the domain where they are applied. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this special issue, we have seen a great variety of 
WSN deployments. We observed that the problems found in 
the real world could make the wireless sensor network 
deployment a difficult task. The WSN must be adapted to the 
environment in order to take the most advantage of them. 
We hope the reader enjoys the papers published in this 
special issue and learns from the experiences provided by the 
authors in these papers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author wants to give special thanks to Petre Dini 
because he has believed in this special issue. We have tried 
to make closer the practical deployments of WSNs, and the 
main problems given by their real implementations, to the 
scientific community. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
W. Göpel , J. Hesse, J. N. Zemel. Sensors: A Comprehensive Survey, 
pp. 1–7. New York: VCH. 1995.  
[2] 
R. Min, T. Furrer, A. Chandrakasan, Dynamic voltage scaling 
techniques for distributed microsensor networks, Proceedings of 
ACM MobiCom’95, August 1995. 
[3] 
P. Letteri, M.B. Srivastava, Adaptive frame length control for 
improving wireless link throughput, range and energy efficiency, 
Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM’98, San Francisco, USA, March 
1998, pp. 564–571. 
[4] 
Wendi Heinzelman, Joanna Kulik, and Hari Balakrishnan, “Adaptive 
Protocols for Information Dissemination in Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, 5th ACM/IEEE Mobicom Conference, Seattle, WA, 
August 1999. 
[5] 
Stephan Mank, Reinhardt Karnapke, Jorg Nolte, MAC Protocols for 
Wireless Sensor Networks: Tackling the Problem of Unidirectional 
Links. International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services. 
Vol 2, No 4, year 2009. Pp. 218 – 229. 
[6] 
Jian Zhong, Peter Bertok. Self-organization supported algorithms for 
wireless sensor networks. International Journal on Advances in 
Security. Volume 2, Number 4, 2009. Pp. 298 – 311. 
[7] 
J. N. AL-Karaki, A. E. Kamal, “Routing Techniques in Wireless 
Sensor Networks: A Survey”, IEEE Wireless Communications, 
Volume 11, Issue 6, Dec. 2004. Page(s):6 – 28. 
[8] 
Kemal Akkaya, and Mohamed Younis. A survey on routing protocols 
for wireless sensor networks. Ad Hoc Networks. Volume 3, Issue 3, 
May 2005, Pages 325-349   
[9] 
I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci. 
Wireless sensor networks: a survey. Computer Networks, 38(4):393–
422, April 2002. 
[10] Jennifer Yick, Biswanath Mukherjee, and Dipak Ghosal. Wireless 
sensor network survey. Computer Networks. Volume 52, Issue 12, 22 
August 2008, Pages 2292-2330. 
[11] Al-Sakib Khan Pathan, Choong Seon Hong, Hyung-Woo Lee. 
Smartening the Environment using Wireless Sensor Networks in a 
Developing Country. Proceedings of 8th IEEE ICACT 2006, Volume 
I, February 20-22, Phoenix Park, Korea, 2006, pp. 705-709  
[12] Ian F. Akyildiz, Tommaso Melodia, and Kaushik R. Chowdhurya, A 
survey on wireless multimedia sensor networks, Computer Networks. 
Volume 51, Issue 4, 14 March 2007, Pages 921-960. 
[13] I. Khemapech, I. Duncan and A. Miller, A survey of wireless sensor 
networks technology, in Proceedings of the 6th Annual PostGraduate 
Symposium on the Convergence of Telecommunications, Networking 
& Broadcasting, PGNET 2005. Liverpool, UK, 2005. 
[14] Ning Xu, “A Survey of Sensor Network Applications,”. University 
of. 
Southern. 
California. 
2003. 
Available 
at. 
http://enl.usc.edu/~ningxu/papers/survey.pdf 
[15] L. Filipe, M. Augusto, L. Ruiz, A. Alfredo, D. Ceclio, and A. 
Fernandes, “Efficient incremental sensor network deployment 
algorithm,” in Proc. of Brazilian Symposium on Computer Networks 
2004, Gramado/RS, Brazil, 2004, pp. 3 – 14.  
[16] Wu, Chun-Hsien; Chung, Yeh-Ching. 2009. "A Polygon Model for 
Wireless Sensor Network Deployment with Directional Sensing 
Areas." Sensors 9, no. 12. Pp. 9998-10022. 
[17] Jingbin Zhang, Ting Yan, Sang H. Son, “Deployment Strategies for 
Differentiated Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks,” 3rd Annual 
IEEE International Conference on Sensor Mesh and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks (IEEE SECON'06), Reston, VA, 
2006. 
[18] A. S. Ibrahim, K. G. Seddik, and K. J. R. Liu, "Improving 
connectivity via relays deployment in wireless sensor networks," in 
Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (Globecom'07), pp. 1159-
1163, Nov. 2007. 
[19] You-Chiun Wang and Yu-Chee Tseng. Distributed Deployment 
Schemes for Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks to Ensure Multi-level 
Coverage. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems. 
Vol. 19, No. 9, Sept. 2008, pp. 1280-94 
[20] S. Toumpis and L. Tassiulas, "Optimal deployment of large wireless 
sensor networks," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, 
no. 7, pp. 2935-2953, 2006.  
5
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

[21] K. Xu, Q. Wang, H. Hassanein and G. Takahara, Optimal wireless 
sensor networks (WSNs) deployment: minimum cost with lifetime 
constraint, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications 
(WiMob’05). Montreal, Canada. 24-22 Aug. 2005. 
[22] Chun-Hsien Wu and Yeh-Ching Chung. Heterogeneous Wireless 
Sensor Network Deployment and Topology Control Based on 
Irregular Sensor Model, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 
4459/2007. Pp. 78-88. June 2007. 
[23] Leila Ben Saad, Bernard Tourancheau, Towards an Optimal 
Positioning of Multiple Mobile Sinks in WSNs for Buildings. 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, 
2009. Pp. 411-421. 
[24] L. Lazos, Radha Poovendran, and James A. Ritcey, "On the 
Deployment of Heterogeneous Sensor Networks for Detection of 
Mobile Targets," 5th International Symposium on Modeling and 
Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks (WiOpt '07), 
April 16-20, Limassol, Cyprus . 2007. 
[25] M.  Sheldon, Deji Chen,  M.  Nixon, A. K. Mok, A practical approach 
to deploy large scale wireless sensor networks. IEEE International 
Conference on  Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems Conference, 2005. 
Washington, DC. 7 November 2005. 
[26] Dario Pompili , Tommaso Melodia , Ian F. Akyildiz, Deployment 
analysis 
in 
underwater 
acoustic 
wireless 
sensor 
networks, 
Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Underwater 
networks, September 25-25, 2006, Los Angeles, CA, USA.  
[27] E. Onur, C. Ersoy and H. Deliç, "Quality of Deployment in 
Surveillance Wireless Sensor Networks,'' International Journal of 
Wireless Information Networks, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 61-67, Jan. 2005. 
[28] Mohamed Youssef and Naser El-Sheimy. Wireless Sensor Network: 
Research vs. Reality Design and Deployment Issues. Fifth Annual 
Conference on Communication Networks and Services Research 
(CNSR'07). Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, May 14-17, 2007. 
[29] Tzu-Che Huang, Hung-Ren Lai and Cheng-Hsien Ku, A deployment 
procedure for wireless sensor networks, The 2nd Workshop on 
Wireless, Ad Hoc, and Sensor Networks (WASN 2006). National 
Central University, Taiwan. August 10, 2006.  
[30] Zoran Bojkovic , Bojan Bakmaz, A survey on wireless sensor 
networks deployment, WSEAS Transactions on Communications, v.7 
n.12, p.1172-1181, December 2008. 
[31] Bin Tong, Zi Li, Guiling Wang, and Wensheng Zhang, "How 
Wireless Power Charging Technology Affects Sensor Network 
Deployment and Routing," The 30th International Conference on 
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), Genoa, Italy, June 21-25, 
2010. 
[32] Ashok-Kumar Chandra-Sekaran, Peter Schenkel, Christophe Kunze, 
Klaus D. Müller-Glaser. RealWorld Evaluation of a New 
Environment Adaptive Localization System. International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences. Vol. 1, Number 4, 2009. Pp. 143 - 157.  
[33] H. Liu, Leo Selavo, John A. Stankovic: SeeDTV: deployment-time 
validation for wireless sensor networks. Fourth. Workshop on 
Embedded Networked Sensors (EmNets 2007). Cork, Ireland. June 
25-26, 2007. 
[34] Niclas Finne, Joakim Eriksson, Adam Dunkels, Thiemo Voigt, 
Experiences from Two Sensor Network Deployments - Self-
Monitoring and Self-Configuration Keys to Success, Lecture Notes In 
Computer Science archive. Proceedings of the 6th international 
conference on Wired/wireless internet communications, Tampere, 
Finland. Pp 189-200. 2008 
[35] Tsuyoshi Suzuki, Kuniaki Kawabata, Yasushi Hada and Yoshito 
Tobe. Deployment of Wireless Sensor Network using Mobile Robots 
to Construct an Intelligent Environment in a Multi-Robot Sensor 
Network. Boock Chapter "Advances in Service Robotics". Editor Ho 
Seok Ahn. InTech Education and Publishing, July 2008 
[36] Antony Guinard, Alan McGibney, Dirk Pesch. A wireless sensor 
network design tool to support building energy management. 
Proceedings of the First ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing 
Systems for Energy-Efficiency in Buildings 2009, Berkeley, 
California, November 03, 2009. Pp. 25-30. 
[37] José Pinto, Alexandre Sousa, Paulo Lebres, Gil Manuel Gonçalves, 
João Sousa, MonSense – Application for Deployment, Monitoring 
and Control of Wireless Sensor Networks. ACM Workshop on Real-
World Wireless Sensor Networks REALWSN'06. June 19, 2006. 
[38] Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Georgios Mylonas, and Sotiris Nikoletseas. 
The Design of an Environment for Monitoring and Controlling 
Remote Sensor Networks. International Journal of Distributed Sensor 
Networks, 5: 262–282, 2009 
[39]  Prabhakar T V , N V Chalapathi Rao, Sujay M S, Jacques Panchard, 
H S Jamadagni, Andre Pittet. Sensor Network Deployment For 
Agronomical Data Gathering in Semi-Arid Regions. In Proceedings 
of the Second International Conference on COMmunication System 
softWAre and MiddlewaRE (COMSWARE 2007), January 7-12, 
2007, Bangalore, India. 
[40] Johnstone, I.; Nicholson, J.; Shehzad, B.; Slipp, J. Experiences from a 
wireless sensor network deployment in a petroleum environment. In 
Proceedings of the International Wireless Communications and 
Mobile Computing Conference 2007 (IWCMC'07), Honolulu, HI, 
USA, August 12–16, 2007; pp. 382–387. 
[41] Lakshman Krishnamurthy, Robert Adler, Phil Buonadonna, Jasmeet 
Chhabra, 
Mick 
Flanigan, 
Nandakishore 
Kushalnagar, 
Lama 
Nachman, Mark Yarvis, Design and Deployment of Industrial Sensor 
Networks: Experiences from a Semiconductor Plant and the North 
Sea. Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Embedded 
networked sensor systems SenSys’05, November 2–4, 2005, San 
Diego, California, USA. 
[42] Umberto M. Cella, Nicholas Shuley and Ron Johnstone. Wireless 
sensor networks in coastal marine environments: a study case 
outcome. Proceedings of the Fourth ACM International Workshop on 
UnderWater Networks (WUWNet'09). Berkeley, California. 2009 
[43] Michael V. Gangone, Matthew J. Whelan, Kerop D. Janoyan, 
Ratneshwar Jha, Field deployment of a dense wireless sensor network 
for condition assessment of a bridge superstructure, SPIE Smart 
Structures Symposium, San Diego, California. 2008 
[44] Matteo Ceriotti, Luca Mottolal, Gian Pietro Picco, Amy L. Murphy, ¸ 
Stefan Guna, Michele Corrà, Matteo Pozzi, Daniele Zonta, Paolo 
Zanon. Monitoring Heritage Buildings with Wireless Sensor 
Networks: The Torre Aquila Deployment. 8th Int. Conf. on 
Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN), 13-16 April 
2009, San Francisco, California, USA. Pp. 277-288. 
[45] J. Rousselot, Ph. Dallemagne, J.-D. Decotignie, Deployments of 
Wireless Sensor Networks performed by CSEM, Proceedings of the 
1st conference on COGnitive systems with Interactive Sensors 
(COGIS'09), Paris, 16-18 November 2009. 
[46] Workshop 
on 
Real-World 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks 
(REALWSN'05). Available at http://www.sics.se/realwsn05/ 
[47] International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications 
(SENSORCOMM 
2007). 
At 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2007/SENSORCOMM07.html 
[48] Shamim N. Pakzad, Gregory L. Fenves, Sukun Kim, and David E. 
Culler, Design and Implementation of Scalable Wireless Sensor 
Network for Structural Monitoring. Journal of Infrastructure Systems. 
Volume 14, Issue 1, MARCH 2008.Pp 89-101. 
[49] Lea-Cox, J. D., A. G. Ristvey, F. R. Arguedas, D. S. Ross and G. F. 
Kantor.  2008.  Wireless Sensor Networks for Real-Time 
Management of Irrigation and Nutrient Applications in the Nursery 
and Greenhouse Industry. HortScience, Vol.43, July 2008. 
[50] Lloret, Jaime; Garcia, Miguel; Bri, Diana; Sendra, Sandra. 2009. "A 
Wireless Sensor Network Deployment for Rural and Forest Fire 
Detection and Verification." Sensors 9, no. 11: 8722-8747. 
[51] Special Issue on Mobility in Wireless Sensor Networks (Guest 
editors: Damianos Gavalas, Grammati Pantziou, Charalampos 
Konstantopoulos), 
The 
Computer 
Journal, 
At: 
http://www2.aegean.gr/dgavalas/ComputerJ_SI.pdf [Last access: July 
2010] 
6
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

[52] Special Issue on Wireless Sensor Networks: Designing for Real-
World Deployment and Deployment Experiences (Guest editors: 
Elena Gaura, Utz Roedig and James Brusey ), Measurement Science 
and 
Technology 
Journal 
(Institute 
of 
Physics). 
At: 
http://www.coventry.ac.uk/researchnet/external/content/1/c4/24/92/v1
258035327/user/MST_WSN_special_issue.pdf [Last access: July 
2010]. 
 
7
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

