New  Sensing Model for Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Peter Soreanu, Zeev (Vladimir) Volkovich 
Software Engineering Department, ORT Braude College, Israel 
speter@braude.ac.il, vlvolkov@braude.ac.il
 
 
 
Abstract -The paper presents a  new sensing model for 
Wireless Sensor Networks. This model, named Circular Sector 
Sensing Coverage, was first introduced by the authors at 
SENSORCOMM 09 conference. It uses circular sectors with 
variable central angles and radii. The purpose of the model is to 
minimize the energy consumption of the sensing itself, 
improving the energy balance of the sensor node (mote). This is 
especially relevant when the sensing is done remotely, by 
sending waves to detect intrusion or acquire data. Simulation of 
this model shows energy savings versus previously published 
schemes, suggesting the viability and the advantages of this new 
sensing model. However, no analytical model was yet developed.  
The present paper expands the scope of the previous one by 
adding background information about known sensing models, 
describing in greater details the algorithm used for simulation 
and by presenting new and significant simulation results. The 
obtained data confirms the advantages of this new sensing 
model. The possible implementation of such a WSN may 
significantly improve the energy-related performance of the 
WSN, allowing the development of new applications and 
improving the performance of existing ones. 
 
Keywords: Wireless Sensor Network; sensing models; 
sensing coverage; energy efficiency; circular sector  
 
1. Introduction 
 
The paper presents a new model of sensing coverage, 
supposed to achieve a better efficiency of energy utilization 
for remote sensing, by using an adaptable radii and angles 
algorithm. Coverage areas of circular sector shapes, 
adapted to the residual energy available, are used. The 
model was first introduced by the authors in [1]. The 
algorithm is intended to optimize the energy used for 
sensing, in order to extend the life of the sensor network. It 
does not assure a complete coverage of the area to be 
sensed - an NP-hard problem. Although an analytical model 
was not yet developed, the proposed model is interesting 
and efficient, and is presented as such to the wireless sensor 
networks community. 
The Introduction section gives a succinct account of 
WSN-related problems, with emphasize on energy-
efficiency related factors: placement and topology, 
management, coverage, lifetime. 
Research in WSN is advancing at a fast pace, as can be 
seen in recent surveys of this topic - see [2][3].  
Simultaneously, more and more actual deployments are 
implemented.  One of the main problems facing WSN 
applications is the limited life span of the network. A 
typical node (mote) is powered by a battery, which is 
generally not field-replaceable. Also, energy harvesting 
was developed only as a proof-of-concept, and is not yet a 
viable option for real life implementations.  A good survey 
of energy-related problems may be found in [4].  
A typical mote has three energy-hungry subsystems: 
radio, processing and sensing unit.  It is generally agreed 
that most of the mote’s energy is required for 
communication (Ɛc), followed by processing (Ɛp) and, 
finally, sensing (Ɛs). The total lifetime of the WSN is a 
function 
of 
their 
sum 
Ʃ, 
as 
shown 
in 
(1): 
 
Ʃ = Ɛc + Ɛp + Ɛs       
 
 
         (1) 
 
The energy needed for communication Ɛc has the same 
order of magnitude whilst the radio subsystem is 
transmitting, receiving or in idle state. To reduce the 
communication costs, two approaches were developed: 
 
Duty-cycling, i.e., putting the radio in a sleep 
mode and transmitting only when necessary. This 
imposes the use of a sleep/wake-up algorithm to 
coordinate their activities. 
 
Data-driven approaches, which decrease the 
amount of sensed data to be transmitted, by 
optimizing the sampling time, and using data 
fusion/aggregation/compression schemes. 
The power consumption of the processing unit Ɛp is 
generally three-four times of magnitude less than Ɛc . 
Finally, research has shown that the energy consumption of 
the sensing subsystem Ɛs may be significant, even greater 
than the energy consumption of the radio or processing 
subsystems [5]. The main factors are power hungry 
transducers and A/D converters, long acquisition time and 
the use of active sensors. The class of active sensors 
contains sensors that use active transducers, as sonar, laser 
or radar. They cover a dedicated sensing area, by sending 
out a probing signal. It may acquire data such as remote 
temperature, information about localization and tracking of 
moving objects, or simple binary intrusion detection. 
261
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Sensing is strongly related not only to energy-efficiency, 
but also to important problems such as area coverage and 
connectivity. Both problems may be viewed as a measure 
of quality of service in WSN. Maximizing coverage and 
ensuring network connectivity is a difficult task and many 
solutions were described [6][7]. The coverage of the sensed 
field is conditioned by an optimum deployment of the 
motes [8]. Various algorithms and approaches were 
proposed [9-16]. The lifetime requirements of mote 
deployment are related to their placement in the site to be 
surveyed [17]. A comprehensive theoretical presentation of 
the minimum-cost arrangement of the motes in order to 
achieve the wanted coverage lifetime may be found in [18]. 
Analytical methods use Linear Programming, Voronoi–
diagram based heuristics or Delaunay triangulation in order 
to achieve an energy-efficient coverage. While the coverage 
problem is not solved for all cases and methods, good 
results have been obtained for particular cases. One of the 
best examples is described in  [19] and [20].  
 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we 
present various models of sensing area coverage, with 
emphasize on the disk model and his improvement, the 
variable radii circular model. The new Circular Sector 
Sensing Coverage (CSSC) model, which is a further 
improvement, forms the object of Section 3. The simulation 
environment for running the algorithm implementing this 
model is described in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the 
obtained results, while Section 6 proposes future research 
paths and concludes the paper. 
 
2. Sensing Area Coverage Models 
 
From a functional point of view, there are two kinds of 
sensing activities: local sensing and remote (or range) 
sensing. The first one relates to local measurements, while 
the late try to detect or measure a change of property of a 
distant location or range. A typical local measurement may 
be temperature, humidity, level of radioactivity, etc. in the 
immediate proximity of the sensor. A typical remote 
measurement may use ultrasound or a laser ray to detect an 
intrusion or to track the velocity of a moving object. 
Remote 
measurements 
make 
use 
of 
physical 
characteristics of wave propagation. The time-of light 
method uses pulses of energy transmitted toward the target, 
and measures the time difference between the transmitted 
and reflected signals. Another method use the relative 
phase shift of these two signals. Lasers scanners may send 
continuous frequency modulated signals, varying linearly 
with time.  
The results of the sensing may be deterministic or 
probabilistic data. For local sensing, the probabilistic factor 
is due to the precision range of the sensor. For remote 
sensing, the probabilistic model takes into consideration the 
inherent uncertainty of detections or measurements at 
increasing distance.  
 
2.1 Disk model of sensing 
This model defines the sensing area as a circle with 
radius Rs  for a sensor Si, constant for every i. This sensing 
model is also known as the unit disk model [6][21]. 
It is generally accepted that the quality of sensing 
decreases nonlinearly with the increase of the distance, like 
in (2) 
(2)
, )
(
, )
(


d S P
S P
S
i
i

 
where S(Si, P) is the sensitivity of the sensor si at point 
P, α and λ are parameters, and d(Si,P) is the distance 
between the sensor and the point where the measurement is 
done. 
In the deterministic disk sensing model, sensing is done, 
with a given accuracy, in and only in the area of a disk with 
radius Rs, around sensor si. This is also called a binary 
sensing model. 
In the probabilistic model, the probability of detection 
(or the accuracy of the measurement) varies as the distance 
between the sensor si, and the point at coordinates (xi, yi), 
P(xi, yi) increases. Figure 1 illustrates the different sensing 
areas, while (3) defines the probability that a node will 
detect a point P((xi, yi). The latest property is called the 
probabilistic coverage of P(xi, yi), denoted 
)
(
,
i
x y
s
C
i i
. 
Note that the quantity 

R is a measure of uncertainty in 
detection , 

R <
s
R  
 
 
) 
(
,
i
x y
S
C
i i
   
 
Fig.1 Probabilistic disk sensing model 
Generally, p is evaluated as 
e a
p


, where 
)
(
, )
(
R
R
d S P
a
s
i



 while ω and β are empirical 




R
R
R
if
R
R
R
R
R
if
p
R
R
R
if
s
s
s
s







0
( )3
]
,
[
1
262
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

parameters that define the detection probability, when an 
object is situated at a certain distance from the node. 
Due to  the fact that a point 
)
,
(
P xi yi
may lie in the 
sensing area of more than one node, the total is defined as 
in (4). 





k
i
i
x y
x y
S
C
C
i
i
i
i
1
,
,
))
(
1(
1
()
                  (4) 
where χ is the set of nodes whose sensing ranges cover the 
point 
2,1 ,..., }
{ ,
),
( ,
k
s i
P x y
i
i
i

 
. 
This model reflects the sensing behaviour of devices like 
ultrasound or infrared sensors. 
 
2.2 Variable radii circular model 
While the disk model of sensing is simple and the 
coverage may be relatively easily achieved by using an 
equal-spaced 
grid 
deployment 
in 
an 
obstacle-less 
environment, this model is not realistic and not energy-
efficient. It is not realistic because the variance in sensor 
calibration and residual battery energy may substantially 
vary from sensor to sensor during their lifetime. It is not 
energy-efficient, because the overlapping of sensed areas 
with more than the necessary sensing radius Rs causes a 
waste of energy. Another argument is that a large sensing 
radius will increase the consumption of energy, due to the 
use of more sophisticated filtering and signal processing 
methods. The later operation is required to improve the 
signal-to-noise ratio, in order to achieve an energy-efficient 
confidence level. 
Various models of variable radii circular sensing models 
were proposed, see [19][22]. They achieve an efficient 
coverage of the sensed area, while using centralized or local 
optimization algorithms. The basic idea is represented in 
Figure 2. It can be seen that by using different radii (R1, R2, 
R3), the sensed field can be better covered, with less 
overlapping 
of 
sensed 
areas. 
Practical 
implementations/simulations use discrete values for radii. 
         
 
Fig. 2 Different sensing radii 
 
It was shown [6] that this model, when compared to the 
disk model, presents a more energy-efficient behavior, 
especially in algorithms which try to solve the coverage 
problem, i.e., the sensing through all the monitored area. It 
allows for a more flexible and less redundant deployment 
policy, while ensuring an optimal approach of solving 
known coverage problems like  
 
Minimal exposure path, which is a measure of 
how well a sensed field is covered for detecting a 
moving target. 
 
Maximal breach path, defined as the highest 
observability path in a sensing field 
 
Maximal support path, which minimize the 
distance from any point to the closest sensor. 
2.3 Other sensing models 
In order to achieve even more energy-efficiency, and to 
accommodate real-life scenarios, other sensing models 
were proposed. A brief survey of the most significant ones 
is given below. 
The irregular sensing range model is based on extending 
the variable radii circular model to a closed polygon. No 
better energy efficiency is achieved, the sensing range 
remaining the same. However, the analytical model 
facilitates a better simulation of the WSN, efficiently 
identifying fully covered sensors and discovering holes. 
Centralized or distributed algorithms are used to analyze 
the coverage problem [23].  
 Most of the WSN deployments are not truly two-
dimensional, but in the majority of cases the height is small 
enough relatively to the length and width of the network. 
When simulating the behavior of such a terrestrial network, 
the third dimension (3D) of the motes may be safely 
neglected. This is not the case with the underwater, 
atmospheric or space deployment of WSN. The coverage 
and connectivity aspects of 3D networks was also 
researched, and the proposed solutions use generally 
Voronoi tessellation to partition the space in hexagonal 
prisms or rhombic dodecahedrons. [24]. These results have 
energy-related practical consequences. Consider using 
unmanned aircrafts for airspace surveillance, or underwater 
unmanned autonomous vehicles for ocean surveillance. 
Obviously, finding the optimal placement of vehicles, 
minimizing their number while guaranteeing total coverage 
of the space, makes a better use of the energy.  
A possible approach to mitigate the coverage problem is 
based on redeploying mobile redundant motes to uncovered 
areas [25]. Nevertheless, obtaining location information in 
a GPS-less wireless mobile sensor network demands a lot 
of energy. This is due to heavy processing and extensive 
message exchanges. A number of algorithms were devised 
to alleviate these problems [26]. 
 To be compared, each of the sensing models described 
in Section 2 would ideally have a complete analytical 
description. However, the majority of research papers 
relates to specific aspects, like coverage, connectivity, most 
exposed path, etc. The energy-effective aspect is generally 
263
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

taken in consideration mostly by presenting results of 
running simulations of these algorithms. 
 
3. The Circular Sector Sensing Coverage 
(CSSC) Model 
 
Our work proposes a new sensing model - the Circular 
Sector Sensing Coverage (CSSC) - based on circular 
sectors with variable central angles and radii. The sensing 
area is the portion of a circle enclosed by two radii and an 
arc, whose values are set after analyzing the data received 
from neighbor motes.  
In Figure 3 an example of a possible partition of sensing 
areas between three neighbor sensors (Sj, Sk, Sm) is given. 
The sensed area between them is dynamically allocated as 
follows: 
 
Sensor Sj senses the area covered by the circular 
sector SjAB, with radius R1 and circular angle θ1 
(toward sensor Sk) 
 
Sensor Sk senses the area covered by the circular 
sector SkAB, with radius R2 and circular angle θ2 
(toward the sensor Sj), and the area covered by the 
circular sector SkCD, with radius R3 and circular 
angle θ3 (toward sensor Sm ) 
 
Sensor Sm senses the area covered by the circular 
sector SmCD, with radius R4 and circular angle θ4 
(toward sensor Sk).  
The same notation Si is used for the sensor itself and its 
location. Observe the small overlapping areas between the 
intersections of circular sectors.  
                     
 
Fig. 3 CSSC model schematics - an example 
 
The CSSC model is based on exchange of residual 
energy information between neighbor motes. The received 
data is used to calculate the parameters of the circular 
sectors covering the sensing areas. The goal is to maximize 
the coverage, while optimizing the energy consumption. 
Motes with more residual energy left in their battery may 
increase the sensing area toward a neighbor with less 
residual energy. The latest will correspondingly decrease 
the sensing area in the direction of the neighbor that helps 
him. The process is iterative, based on negotiations and 
subject to convergence conditions. It is periodically 
repeated during the lifetime of the WSN. 
The following subsections describe the data exchanged 
by motes, the implementation of the proposed CSSC 
algorithm, and the visualization of the whole process. 
 
3.1   Mote communication 
 In order to establish the sensing areas of each mote, 
they have to find their neighbors and send relevant 
information. Finding neighbors is done by broadcasting 
notification 
messages 
and 
assuming 
symmetric 
communication. After that, they send localization data and 
synchronization control commands. In the next stages, 
actual energy-related and sensing area information is 
exchanged.  The relevant fields of such a packet contain 
sender and receiver ID, sender location, operation code, 
energy level and coverage percentages, maximum and 
actual coverage distance, supplementary parameters.  
The purpose of the communication is to: 
 
receive enough data to calculate a variable called 
StatParam, used in simulation - See  (5). 
 
notify neighbors about the current sensing area, 
decided as a function of the value of  StatParam                             
 
 
The variables are defined as follows: 
 
StatParam is the relative residual energy of the 
mote, function of the currently covered sensing 
area. 
 
EnergyLeft is the absolute value of the residual 
battery energy.  
 
CoverageConsum is the energy needed to sense 
the covered circular sector area. 
 
TimePeriod is the time interval between 
StatParam evaluation 
 
CrntCoverage is the area of the circular sensor 
where this mote does the sensing 
If this value is greater (by a predefined threshold)  than 
that of a neighbor node, the sensing area in his direction 
will be increased. 
 
3.2 Area coverage algorithm  
The algorithm used for the simulation of the CSSC 
model is described, skipping only minor details. The 
following steps are done for every mote: 
Step 1 
Broadcast and receive control messages from all 
sensors. Based on localization information, build a list of 
neighbors. A neighbor sensor is one which is situated closer 
than twice the maximum sensing distance (radius). The 
assumption is that the communication range is greater than 
5)
(
1


CrntCoverage
TimePeriod
nsum
CoverageCo
EnergyLeft
StatParam
 
264
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

the sensing one, and location information is available and 
part of the control message. Go to Step 2. 
Step 2 
Check the number of neighbors in the list. If no 
neighbors are found, use the UnitDiskModel of sensing, i.e., 
circular sensing with maximum radius, and apply the 
algorithm to the next mote. If only one neighbor is found, 
go to Step 3. If more than 1 neighbors are detected, order 
them according to their angular orientation: sort them 
beginning with the least angle (from 0), clockwise. Go to 
Step 3. 
Step 3 
For every neighbor, check if the maximum coverage 
distance was received. If not, ignore the neighbor till 
receiving this parameter. For all other neighbors, calculate 
the radicals, i.e., the intersection lines of their maximal 
radius sensing coverage circles. If radicals were found, 
select and retain only the relevant ones (i.e., those that are 
not hidden by other neighbors).  
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Discarding radicals example 
 
As can be seen in the example from Figure 4, the radical 
KL of motes Sj and Sm is situated in the sensing area to be 
covered by motes Sk and Sm. Consequently, radical KL will 
be discarded, while radical MN will be retained for further 
use. Go to Step 4. 
Step 4 
Calculate the StatParam values and compare them. 
Decide for each neighbor if you can help to preserve its 
energy reserve by increasing the covered sensing area in his 
direction. Communicate the changed radical to the 
neighbor. Do Step 3 for all neighbors and go to Step 5.  
Figure 5 gives an example, showing how two equivalent 
circular sector sensing areas ( SjPQ and SkPQ) may be 
substituted by two asymmetric ones (SjRS and SkRS). This 
allows mote Sk to consume less energy, at the expense of 
mote Sj.  
Step5 
Eliminate overlapping of temporary calculated sensing 
areas for pairs of motes, using the results of the sort done in 
Step2. Do the sensing according to the newly defined 
circular sectors. 
 
Fig. 5  Moving the radical example 
Steps 1 to 5 are repeated periodically (in our simulation, 
every 5 minutes) for all motes. In order to avoid 
unnecessary changes, hysteresis was implemented when 
evaluating the differences of the StatParam values.  
  
3.3 Visualization of the process  
      While running the algorithm described in the previous 
subsection, "housekeeping" calculations are  taking place, 
to find and draw the current circular sectors. The results are 
used mainly to dynamically draw the sensing areas of the 
WSN on the screen.  Furthermore, the obtained data is also 
used in energy calculations and as help to check the 
analytical model in work. These calculations doesn't  affect 
the concept of the CSSC model, being based on specific 
geometric and programming implementations. The same 
results may be obtained using different procedures. While 
running interleaved with the computations needed to 
implement the CSSC algorithm, these calculations are done 
mostly during Step 4. Results from [27] were used for 
clipping arcs.   
        After eliminating the unneeded radicals, belonging to 
hidden neighbor motes (Step 3), a tentative temporary new 
radical, defining the boundary of circular sectors for two 
neighbor motes, is calculated (Step 4).  A collection of 
intersection segments is saved for each pair of neighbor 
motes. The mote with the bigger sensing area will save 
three segments, while the mote with a smaller sensing area 
will save only one. Referring to Figure 5, mote Sj will save 
segments PR, RS, and SQ - while mote Sk will save only 
segment RS.  
       The next actions are needed to eliminate the ambiguity 
of  areas which may be covered by different pairs of 
neighbor motes, i.e., they are overlapping. This is done by 
comparing the relative positions of the saved intersection 
lines, filtering them and even defining new ones.  
       Finally, the current circular sectors for the mote, 
illustrating the received sensing areas, is decided. In the 
example given in Figure 6, three circular sectors were 
obtained, with the following parameters: 
θ1=2π/3, 1 
θ2= π/4, r2 
θ3= π/4, r3, and  r1> r2> r3  
265
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

    
 
 
     Fig. 6 Coverage example 
 
      It has to be noted that no complete coverage may be 
guaranteed for a given deployment and residual energy of 
motes. Conditions (6) and (7) hold for every mote: 
 
 
∑ θi  ≤ 2π 
 
 
            (6) 
 
where θi are the circular angles of the sensing circular 
sectors of a mote. 
 
 
ri + rj ≤ Ri + Rj 
 
                         (7) 
 
where  ri , rj are the current radii of neighbor motes Si and 
Sj, while Ri , Rj are their maximum sensing radii.  
     The algorithm may be implemented centralized or as a 
distributed process, at each mote. The energy of processing 
overhead is obviously smaller than the energy used by 
emitting light, electromagnetic or sound waves. 
4. Simulation 
A dedicated simulation program was developed, based 
on .NET and GDI+ environments. For the simulation data, 
XML format was used. The simulator allows the 
programming of the following WSN coverage sensing 
models: disk unit (i.e., constant radius), circular (i.e., 
variable radii), and circular sector CSSC (i.e., variable radii 
and angles). It has the usual features: mote deployment 
methods, editing mote proprieties, save/import/export 
scenarios, logs, result analysis, GUI and viewing area, etc. 
The simulation may be checked in virtual real time, using 
an adjustable virtual clock, which allows specifying a 
desired running timeline.  
The use of Opnet or ns-2 simulators was also 
considered. However, when weighting their advantages 
versus the flexibility of a purpose built dedicated simulator, 
the last solution was preferred. The main reason was the 
complexity of the CSSC model visualization. 
Special care was given to chose the parameters of the   
simulation. Data from similar simulations were evaluated. 
The effects of routing protocols, which were not the object 
of this research, were minimized (by using single hop 
connections). A decision to not use, at this stage of the 
research, heterogeneous motes, was also taken. The 
planned testbed for WSN, to be built this year, also 
influenced the choices. During the simulation process, 
some of the settings and parameters were slightly changed, 
mainly to achieve better visualization.  
The main parameters and data for the simulated network 
are given in Table 1. 
Parameter 
Value 
Maximum number of motes 
100 to 200 
Sensed area 
60m x 60m 
Network type 
Homogenous 
Mote distribution 
Normal/manual 
Initial capacity of the battery 
1-4Ah 
Drain current 
40mA 
Routing algorithm 
Single hop 
Communication power/message - Tx 
40mW 
Communication power/message - Rx 
5mW 
Packet length (data and management) 
1kB 
Maximum sensing range 
10m 
Maximum sensing power (full circle, 
maximum radius) 
20mW 
Central angle increments 
π/18 
Radius increments 
0.5m 
 
Table1 Network and mote parameters  
 
Typical timing parameters may be found in Table 2. 
Parameter 
Value 
Location transmission 
10s after start 
First data transmission 
30s after start 
Data transmission intervals 
10s 
Neighbor motes negotiations interval 
5s 
 
Table 2 Timing parameters  
 
266
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

The main metrics used are enumerated in Table 3. 
 
Metric 
Defined as 
Data reports 
Quantity of data sent by 
all motes 
Redundant data 
Measurement already sent 
by neighbor motes 
Application messages 
Number of data messages 
Management messages 
Number of management  
messages 
Number of motes 
Current number of active 
motes 
 
Table 3 WSN simulator metrics 
 
 
For the purpose of simulation, all messages were defined 
as having the same number of bits. 
 
The simulator may be relatively easy expanded to 
process new sensing  models, mote parameters, running 
conditions, measurements, and visualizations. A typical 
screenshot, representing a partial view of the WSN area 
may be seen in Figure 7. It illustrates the initial phase of the 
algorithm. The weight of the red rectangles is proportional 
to the residual energy of the batteries. 
The simulated scenario used a uniform random 
distribution of motes, while the virtual simulated time was 
1000 hours. Three algorithms were implemented: unit disk, 
circular model, and circular sector (CSSC) model. A 
variable number of sensors were deployed (between 100 
and 200), and performance differences were observed and 
will be discussed in the next section. 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Network View screen – partial initial field snapshot 
 
5. Results 
Extensive running of the CSSC algorithm were 
done. The results were compared to both the disk unit 
and the circular model. The life span of sensors, in 
various 
deployment 
situation 
and 
energy 
reserve/consumption assumptions were calculated 
during the simulations. The CSSC algorithm shows 
performance improvements of the lifetime of 
simulated WSNs.  
 Typical results are presented in Figure 8 and 
Figure 9. Although different number of motes were 
used in simulations, the graphs represent the 
minimum and the maximum number of motes only. 
Running of algorithms can be seen in two situations: 
deployment of 100 motes (Fig. 8) and 200 motes 
267
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

(Fig. 9) in the same field. Both graphs plot the 
number of active motes, i.e., the motes with still 
residual battery energy as function of running time. 
As a consequence of the single-hop communication 
model adopted, the communication range is supposed 
to be always operational till the sink, and therefore 
the possible loss of the transmission connectivity is 
not an issue. It can be seen that the CSSC model is 
consistently more energy-efficient.  
Interpreting the chart from Figure 9, it can be seen 
that after 1000 hours (simulated time), the WSN field 
utilizing the CSSC model had about twice more 
active nodes left, compared to the circular model. 
The CSSC model demonstrated, under the same 
conditions, a 50% increase in the number of active 
nodes also vs. the circular sensing model. 
 An interesting performance difference emerged 
from the simulations obtained by running 100 vs. 200 
motes. The chart in Figure 9 shows shorter  life-spans 
of WSN with 200 motes, compared to WSN with 
100motes. The advantage of CSSC model, while 
observed, is less significant. A possible explanation 
may be the differences in the energy dissipation 
mechanisms required by the three sensing models. 
The energy-efficiency of the disk unit sensing model 
was not influenced by the number of motes, while the 
circular model was slightly affected and the CSSC 
model even more. 
 We have found a strong negative correlation 
between the density of motes in the WSN field and 
the energy-efficiency of the CSSC model. This model 
is less energy efficient for densely populated WSN 
fields. As can be seen in Fig. 10, a strong positive 
correlation exists between the motes density and the 
number of exchanged management messages. The 
presence of more neighbors in the sensing range of a 
mote implies an increased number of negotiations to 
establish the mutual optimal sensing areas. While this 
density decreases with time, it contributes to the 
energy consumption balance of the WSN.  
 
 
Fig. 8 Sensor field life – 100 motes 
 
 
Fig. 9 Sensor field life – 200 motes 
 
 
 
Fig. 10 Number of management messages (CSSC 
sensing model) 
 
When varying the data transmission intervals, 
slightly modified simulation results were obtained. 
As expected, the maximum rate of 5s produced the 
greater energy consumption, while the minimum 
simulated rate of 15s presented a much more energy-
efficient behavior. The results of these simulations 
are plotted in Figures 11(a), 11(b), and 11(c). They 
show the decrease of the number of remaining active 
motes vs. simulated time, when varying the data 
transmission intervals, for 100 motes initially in  the 
WSN field. It may be seen that the relative 
performance of the three sensing models remains 
invariant, and no significant advantage of CSSC may 
be reported. At the beginning of the simulation, the 
increased energy consumption has no influence on 
motes depletion, due to the still enough existent 
residual energy.   
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
0.025
0.035
0.045
0.055
0.065
Messages/mote/min
Motes density (motes /sqm) 
 
0
50
100
150
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
Di
sk
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
Disk
Circular
CSSC
268
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
 
Fig. 11(a) Varying the data transmission intervals 
(5s to 15s) – Disk model/100 motes 
 
 
 
Fig. 11(b) Varying the data transmission intervals 
(5s to 15s) – Circular model/100 motes 
 
 
Fig. 11(c) Varying the data transmission intervals 
(5s to 15s) –CSSC model/100 motes 
 
During the simulation runs, we also changed the 
rate of negotiation management messages between 
neighbor motes. For the disk model, where no 
management messages are used, obviously no 
performance change occurred. For the circular 
sensing model, the simulation showed a significant 
performance worsening when increasing the rate of 
these messages, as can be seen in Figure 12(a). The 
increased 
number 
of 
management 
messages 
exchanged between neighbor motes, in order to 
negotiate a possible change of the sensing radii, 
achieved an increased energy-consumption, resulting 
in a bigger depletion rate. Simulation showed that the 
expected improvement of the sensing energy needs 
was not achieved.   
When decreasing the sensed data transmission rate 
beyond a certain value, a similar increase of the 
energy consumption was observed. This result is the 
consequence of using a not actualized and therefore 
less efficient set of sensing radii. Establishing an 
optimal rate is obviously needed. It have to be noted 
that (because of the one-hop communication model 
implemented) the simulation neglected data fusion 
scenarios, in which case the negative influence of 
increased data transmission rates may be alleviated. 
A similar behavior was observed for the CSSC 
model. From Figure 12(b) it can be seen that the 
influence of varying the rate of the exchanged 
messages is even greater than for the circular model. 
The simulation used the same no. of bits for both 
models. Therefore, this result may be attributed to the 
following two factors: 
 
Increased processing time, calculating not 
only the radius, but also the value of the angle 
and the position of the arc. 
 
Less energy-efficient sensing optimization.  
While the CSSC model is more energy-efficient than 
the circular model, it is also more sensible to timing 
considerations. 
 
 
 
Fig. 12(a) Varying the neighbors’ negotiation 
interval (2s to 12s) – Circular model/100 motes 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0 2004006008001000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
5
s
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0 2004006008001000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
5
s
 
0
50
100
150
0
500
1000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
 
0
50
100
150
0
500
1000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
269
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
 
Fig. 12(b) Varying the neighbors’ negotiation 
interval (2s to 12s) - CSSC model/100 motes 
 
From the results of these simulations, it can be 
seen that the number of active motes remains 
constantly greater when using CSSC, if the rate of 
management messages is below a certain level. This 
level has to be found empirically for every specific 
WSN using this sensing model. 
Comparing graphs for this worst-case scenario, as 
represented in Figure 13, it can be seen that for 
improperly chosen parameters, the energy-efficiency 
of the CSSC model may be even lower than that of 
the Circular model. 
 
 
Fig. 13 Circular and CSSC sensing models – 
worst case scenario 
   
Even if sometimes, at the beginning of the WSN 
activity, the use of CSSC model seems less energy-
efficient than the circular model, toward the end of 
life-span of the networks it performs better. 
Significant improvements vs. the circular sensing 
model were obtained after 1000 simulated hours of 
sensing/transmitting. The simulation was stopped at 
this time interval, due to the fact that the remaining 
number of motes was not enough to effectively cover 
the sensed field. However, it has to be noted that the 
simulator has no facilities to check the connectivity 
of the covered areas. As such, although the lifetime 
of the WSN was obviously increased, it was not 
possible to accurately assess coverage data. 
6. Conclusion and Future Work 
 
A new model of sensing coverage for active 
sensors, based on circular sector sensing coverage – 
CSSC, was developed. The performance of this 
model was checked vs. previously published 
schemes, using a dedicated simulation program.. The 
results of the simulations showed energy savings, 
suggesting the viability and the advantages of this 
new sensing model. After 1000 hours of simulated 
sensing and data reporting, up to a 50% increase in 
the number of active motes was observed. The best 
performance, from an energy-efficiency point-of-
view, was obtained in a sparsely populated WSN 
field, using a moderate rate of management 
messages.  
The possible implementation of such a WSN may 
improve the energy-related performance of the WSN, 
allowing the development of new applications and 
improving the performance of existing ones. There 
are a lot of such applications, civilian or military 
alike, which implement some remote discovery, 
localization or tracking activities. 
We want to stress again, that no analytical model 
exists yet for CSSC. However, it is a new sensing 
model, which as observed during simulations, shows 
energy-efficiency related performance improvements 
vs. other known sensing models. 
Suggested future possible research topics include: 
 
Describing analytically the CSSC model.  
 
Minimizing the required communication 
overhead, to further increase the energy 
savings. 
 
Maximizing the coverage area, while using 
minimal energy. 
 
Studying the minimal exposure path, to check 
its behavior vs. other sensing models. 
 
Testing the connectivity of sensing areas, in a 
multi-hop communication environment.  
 
Researching the behavior of the model in a 
mobile WSN environment 
At this stage, our work concerning the circular 
sector sensing coverage model CSSC concentrates 
on:  
 
Developing 
an 
accurate 
and 
complete 
analytical model.  
 
Defining the optimal rate of the management 
messages. 
 
0
50
100
150
0
500
1000
Nr. of motes
Time (Hours)
 
0
50
100
150
0
500
1000
Nr. of motes
Time (hours)
C…
C…
270
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

 
Adding new metrics and functions to the 
simulator, for a more accurate modeling of 
sensing models and a deeper understanding of 
the behavior of the circular sector CSSC 
model.  
. 
  
Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to thank the students who 
programmed the simulator and implemented the 
CSSC model, especially Itzik Shoshan and Itay 
Ronen.  
References 
[1] P. Soreanu and Z. Volkovich, “Energy-efficient 
circular sector sensing coverage model for wireless 
sensor networks”, Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications,  
June 
2009, 
Athens, 
Greece 
pp.229-233,  
doi:10.1109/SENSORCOMM.2009/45 
[2] J. Yick, B. Mukherjee and D. Ghosal,  "Wireless 
sensor network survey",  Computer Networks: The 
International Journal of Computer and Telecom-
munications, Elsevier, vol.52(12), August 2008, 
pp.2292-2330, doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2008.04.002 
[3] V. Potdar, A. Sharif and E. Chang, “Wireless sensor 
networks: a survey”, Proc. 2009 International Conf.  
on Advanced Information Networking and Appl. 
Workshops, May 29-29, Bredford, UK, pp. 636-641,  
doi:10.1109/WAINA.2009.192 
[4] G.  Anastasi, M. Conti, M. Di Francesco and A.  
Passarella," Energy conservation in wireless sensor 
networks ",  Ad Hoc Networks, Elsevier, vol. 7(3),May 
2009, pp. 537-568, doi:10.1016/j.adhoc.2008.06.003 
[5] C. Alippi, G. Anastasi, M. Di Francesco and M. 
Roveri, “Energy Management in Wireless Sensor 
Networks with Energy-Hungry Sensors”, IEEE 
Instrumentation and Measurement Magazine”, IEEE 
Press, 
vol.12, 
April 
2009, 
pp. 
16-23, 
doi:10.1109/MIM.2009.4811133 
[6] Ghosh and S. K. Das, "Coverage and connectivity 
issues in wireless sensor networks ", Pervasive and 
Mobile Computing, Elsevier, vol.4(3), June 2008, pp. 
303-334,  doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2008.02.001 
[7] D. Zorbas, D. Glynos, P. Kotzanikolaou and C. 
Douligeris, "Solving coverage problems in wireless 
sensor networks using cover sets", Ad Hoc Networks, 
Elsevier, vol. 8(4), June 2010, pp.400-415, in press, 
doi:10.1016/j,adhoc.2009.10.003 
[8] M. Younis and K. Akkaya, "Strategies and techniques 
for node placement in wireless sensor networks",  Ad 
Hoc Networks, Elsevier,  vol.6(4), June 2008, pp. 621-
655, doi:10.1016/j.adhoc.2007.05.003 
[9] C.-F. Huang, Y.-C. Tseng and H.-L. Wu, "Distributed 
protocols for ensuring both coverage and connectivity 
of a wireless sensor network", ACM Transactions on 
Sensor Networks, vol. 3(1), March 2007, 24 pp , 
doi:10.1145/1210669.1210674  
[10] C.-Y. Chang and H.-R. Chang, "Energy-aware node 
placement, topology control and MAC scheduling for 
wireless sensor networks", Computer Networks: The 
Int'l Journal of Computer and Telecommunications, 
Elsevier, vol.52(11), August 2008, pp. 2189-2204, 
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2008.02.028 
[11] C.-F. Wang and J.-W. Ding, "The optimum sensor 
redeployment scheme using the most frangible cluster 
sets", 
Computer 
Communications, 
Butterworth-
Heinemann, vol. 31(14), September 2008, pp.3492-
3502, doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2008.06.004 
[12] B.Wang, C,-F. Hock, B, Lim, "Layered diffusion-
based coverage control in wireless sensor networks", 
Computer Networks: The International Journal of 
Computer 
and 
Telecommunications 
Networking, 
Elsevier,vol. 53(7), May 2009, pp. 114-1124, 
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2008.12.013 
[13] C.-F. Huang and Y.-C. Tseng, “The coverage problem 
in a wireless sensor network”, Mobile Networks and 
Applications, Springer, vol. 10(4), August 2005, pp.  
519-528, doi:10.1007/s11036-005-1564-y 
[14] C.-H. Wu, K.-C. Lee and Y.-C. Chung, "A Delaunay 
triangulation based method for wireless sensor net- 
work 
deployment", 
Computer 
Communications, 
Butterworth-Heinemann, vol. 30(14-15), Oct. 2007,   
pp.2744-2752, doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2007.05.017 
[15]  Y.-R. Tsai, "Coverage-preserving routing protocols 
for randomly distributed wireless sensor networks", 
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 
IEEE Press, vol. 6(4), April 2007, pp. 1240-1245, 
doi:10.1109/TWC.2007.348320 
[16] I. G. Siqueira, L. B. Ruiz, A. A. F. Loureiro and J. M. 
Nogueira, "Coverage area management for wireless 
sensor networks", International Journal of Network 
Management, John Wiley & Sons, vol.17(1), January 
2007, pp. 17-31, doi:10.1002/nem.604 
[17] J. Wang and N. Zhong, "Minimum-cost sensor 
arrangement for achieving wanted coverage lifetime", 
International 
Journal 
of 
Sensor 
Networks, 
Inderscience Publishers, Geneva,  vol. 3(3), May 
2008, pp. 165-174, doi:10.1504/IJSNET.2008.018481  
[18] T. H. Lai and S. Kumar, "Foundations of coverage in 
wireless sensor networks", Ohio State University Pub., 
2006, ISBN:978-0-542-78170-4 
[19] J. Wang and S. Medidi, "Energy efficient coverage 
with variable sensing radii in wireless sensor 
networks", Proc.  of the Third IEEE International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, 
Networking and 
Communications 
(WiMob 
07), 
Oct.2007, White Plains, NY, IEEE Computer Society, 
vol2, pp. 61-68, doi:10.1109/WIMOB.2007.30 
[20] C.T. Vu and Y. Li, "Delaunay-triangulation based 
complete coverage in wireless sensor networks", Proc. 
of the 2009 IEEE International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom 
2009),March 2009, IEEE Computer Society, pp.1-5, 
doi:101109/PERCOM.2009.4912842 
[21] S.-C. Lee, S.-B. Shin, H.-S. Hwang and C.-S. Kim, “A 
Study on the Circular Sensing Model with a Low 
271
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Power Profile in Wireless Sensor Networks”, Proc. of 
5th ACIS International Conference on Software 
Engineering Research, management & Applications 
(SERA 2007), 20-22 Aug. 2007, Busan, S. Korea, pp. 
616-622, doi:10.1109/SERA.2007.32 
[22] M. Cardei, J. Wu and M. Lu, "Improving network 
lifetime using sensors with adjustable sensing ranges", 
International 
Journal 
of 
Sensor 
Networks, 
Inderscience Publishers, Geneva,  vol. 3(1/2), January 
2006, pp. 41-49, doi:10.1504/IJSNET.2006.010833 
[23] A. Boukerche  and   X. Fei,   "A coverage-preserving 
scheme  for  wireless  sensor network  with  irregular 
sensing range", Ad Hoc Networks, Elsevier, vol.5(8), 
pp. 1303-1316, doi:10.1016/adhoc.2007.02.020 
[24] S.M.N. Alam  and Z.J. Haas, “Coverage and 
connectivity in three-dimensional underwater sensor 
networks”, Wireless Communications & Mobile 
Computing, John Wiley & Sons, vol8(8), Oct.2008, 
pp. 995-1009, doi:10.1002/wcm.v8:8  
[25] Y.-C. Wang and Y.C. Tseng, "Distributed deployment 
schemes for mobile wireless sensor networks to ensure 
multilevel coverage", IEEE Transactions on Parallel 
and Distributed Systems, vol. 19(9), pp.1280-1294, 
doi:10.1109/TPDS.2007.70808 
[26] W.Y. Chang, C.-H. Wang, L. C. Hsu, K. J. Cheng., 
“Coverage algorithms in GPS-less wireless mobile 
sensor networks”, Proc. Intl. Conference on Mobile 
Technology, Applications, and Systems (Mobility ’08), 
September 10-12, Yilan, Taiwan, ACM Publisher, 
doi:10.1145/1506270.1506368 
[27] C. J. Van Wyk, “Clipping to the Boundary of a 
Circular-Arc Polygon”, Computer Vision, Graphics, 
and Image Processing, vol. 25(3), March 1984, pp. 
383-392    
272
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

