 
An Integrating Platform for Environmental 
Monitoring in Museums Based on Wireless Sensor 
Networks 
Laura M. Rodríguez Peralta, Lina M. Pestana Leão de Brito 
Centro de Ciências Matemáticas (CCM) 
Exact Sciences and Engineering Competence Centre (CCCEE) 
University of Madeira (UMa),  
Campus da Penteada, 9000-390 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal 
{lmrodrig, lina}@uma.pt 
 
 
Abstract – Monitoring the museum’s environment for 
preventive conservation of art purposes is one major concern 
to all museums. In order to properly conserve the artwork it is 
critical to continuously measure some parameters, such as 
temperature, relative humidity, light and, also, pollutants, 
either in storage or exhibition rooms. The deployment of a 
Wireless Sensor Network in a museum can help implementing 
these measurements in real-time, continuously, and in a much 
easier and cheap way. In this paper, we present the first 
testbed deployed in an Contemporary Art Museum, located in 
Madeira Island, Portugal, and the preliminary results of these 
experiments. On the other hand, we propose a new wireless 
sensor node that offers some advantages when compared with 
several commercially available solutions. Furthermore, we 
present a system that automatically controls the dehumidifying 
devices, maintaining the humidity at more constant levels.  
Keywords – Art preventive conservation, Awareness tool, 
Environmental monitoring, Wireless Sensor Networks. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Today’s museum managers are faced with the constant 
demanding of gaining greater control of the indoor 
environment, under increasing budgetary constraints. Those 
in charge of historic buildings have the added complexity of 
preserving not only the existing artwork but also the 
building’s historic structure. In this type of environments, it 
is very important to minimize the visual impact caused by 
monitoring systems for esthetical reasons. So, both kinds of 
protections must be accomplished with minimal intrusion 
from the new system being installed. 
The conservation of artwork in museums is a very well 
known problem, either in exhibition rooms or in archival 
collections. Monitoring the museum’s environment is one of 
the most important tasks and concerns of all museums. In 
order to properly conserve the artwork it is critical to 
continuously measure and control some parameters, such as 
temperature, relative humidity, light and, also, pollutants 
(such as: carbon dioxide, several types of acids, dust 
particulates, etc.). 
It is also crucial to consider that the desired values of 
these parameters depend on the type of material or on the 
group of materials (typical in contemporary art) that 
constitute the artwork. So, depending on the type of works 
that are in exhibition or in storage rooms, different rooms 
may have different requirements regarding environmental 
conditions. The main goal of preventive conservation is to 
maintain the artworks under basically constant levels of, 
above all, humidity and temperature. However, in the case 
of rare objects and artefacts, it is required an extremely 
precise control of temperature and humidity levels. 
The deployment of a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN), 
which is composed by wireless sensor nodes, in a museum 
can help implementing these measurements continuously, 
and in a much easier and cheap way. It causes almost no 
visual impact due to the small size of sensor nodes and to 
the absence of cables, what is extremely important in a 
museum. Also, it eliminates the problems inherent to 
traditional measuring equipments, such as mechanical 
hygrothermographs, psychometers and hygrometers; there 
are no moving parts to break and it stays in calibration.  
A WSN typically consists of a large number of tiny 
wireless sensor nodes (often referred to as nodes or motes) 
that are densely deployed [2]. Nodes measure some ambient 
conditions in the environment surrounding them. These 
measurements are, then, transformed into signals that can be 
processed to reveal some characteristics about the 
phenomenon. The data collected is routed to special nodes, 
called sink nodes (or Base Station, BS), typically in a multi-
hop basis. Then, the sink node sends data to the user. 
Depending on the distance between the user and the 
network, a gateway may be needed in order to bridge both, 
either through the Internet or satellite. 
A sensor node typically consists in five components: 
sensing, memory, processor, transceiver (transmitter and 
receiver) and battery. Nowadays, nodes are intended to be 
small and cheap. Consequently, their resources are limited 
(typically, limited battery, reduced memory and processing 
capabilities). Moreover, due to short transmission range 
114
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
(caused by restrained transmission power), nodes can only 
communicate locally, with a certain number of local 
neighbours [2]. So, nodes have to collaborate in order to 
accomplish 
their 
tasks: 
sensing, 
signal 
processing, 
computing, 
routing, 
localization, 
security, 
etc. 
Consequently, WSNs are, by their nature, collaborative 
networks [3].  
Taking advantage of wireless communications, WSNs 
allow for a wide range of applications: environmental 
monitoring, catastrophe monitoring, health, surveillance, 
traffic monitoring, structural monitoring, security, military, 
industry, agriculture, home, etc.  
In this paper, which is an extension version of paper [1], 
we describe the experimental deployment of a small WSN 
carried out in a contemporary art museum called Fortaleza 
São Tiago, in Madeira Island. This WSN aims at monitoring 
the environment of the museum, for artwork and for 
building conservation purposes. We highlight all the 
problems identified at the initial phase, which influenced the 
final deployment of the complete WSN. We also present a 
new wireless sensor node that we have developed 
specifically to environmental monitoring applications, but 
considering the specific requirements of the museum, for 
example, reduced size and cost. This is one of the main 
contributions of our work.  
This work was developed in the context of the WISE-
MUSE project (Environmental Monitoring based on 
Wireless Sensor Networks for conservation of artwork and 
historical archives project).  
This paper is organized as follows. In section II, we 
describe the related work in the area of WSNs applied to the 
monitoring of museums or historical buildings. Section III 
presents the problem of environmental monitoring of 
museums and the use of WSNs as a cheap and suitable 
solution. Still in the same section, a practical testbed 
deployed in a museum is described, as well as all the 
problems identified. The results of these experiments are, 
also, described. Section IV presents the proposed WISE-
MUSE sensor node and Section V presents the humidity 
control device. Finally, Section VI provides some 
conclusions and some perspectives of future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are some works that are related to the deployment 
of WSNs in museums. However, the most common 
applications are, usually, to use WSNs for security reasons 
[4, 6]; or to monitor the number and distribution of visitors 
in the museum [5]; or for the creation of interactive 
museums [5, 7, 8]. 
There are also some wireless equipments that measure 
humidity and temperature commercially available (Omega, 
2007 [9], 2DI 2007 [10]), however they have bigger 
dimensions and they are more expensive than wireless 
sensor nodes. 
Spinwave Systems offer a solution for preserving a 
building's architecture using WSNs [11]. Spinwave provide 
precise control and monitoring of environmental variables, 
such as temperature and humidity, in buildings where wired 
sensors are not feasible or are prohibitively expensive. 
However, they do not monitor light or pollutants. Besides, 
the nodes are expensive. They claim to ensure minimal 
disruption to building occupants and improved indoor 
climate. But, nodes are quite big for being applied in an 
environment where the visual impact is of extreme 
importance. 
Lee et al. [12] present a scenario of applying WSNs to 
monitor the environment of art galleries, but focusing in 
measuring only humidity and temperature. However, the 
paper focus on a different problem, i.e., on evaluating the 
efficiency of the ALOHA protocol without retransmission, 
when transmitting from sensor nodes to a base station. Del 
Curto & Raimondi [13] present a work where WSNs have 
been used for preserving historic buildings. Crossbow 
manufacturers [14] present two systems to be applied in 
museums and archives: a system that monitors humidity and 
temperature, the CLIMUS, and a system that controls the air 
conditioning unit, the REAQUIS. However, they do not use 
WSNs; sensors used are wired are much bigger than 
wireless sensor nodes commercially available. 
Our goal is to create a WSN for monitoring not only 
humidity and temperature, but also light and pollutants, in a 
museum. We are also using smaller and cheaper wireless 
sensor nodes than the ones used by [11]. These factors are 
the basis that makes our solution more suitable to the 
environmental monitoring of museums or historical 
building. 
III. 
APPLYING WSNS IN MUSEUMS ENVIRONMENTAL 
MONITORING 
Today’s museum managers are faced with the constant 
demanding of gaining greater control of the indoor 
environment for preventive conservation of art purposes, 
under increasing budgetary constraints. In the particular case 
of Fortaleza São Tiago, in Madeira Island, Portugal, 
environmental measurements are performed in a very 
rudimental way, using traditional and very expensive 
measuring 
equipments, 
such 
as 
mechanical 
hygrothermographs, psychometers and hygrometers. These 
measurements take too long to be performed in the all 
museum and require a specialized person for this purpose. 
These equipments require calibration and caused visual 
impact on visitors and on exhibition rooms. And, so far, 
these measurements haven’t been performed as often as it 
should. The administration choices regarding a more 
flexible and practical solution are limited by severe 
budgetary constraints.  
The deployment of a WSN in a museum can help 
implementing these critical measurements automatically, 
continuously, and in a much easier and cheap way. It causes 
almost no visual impact due to the small size of sensor 
115
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
nodes and to the absence of cables, what is extremely 
important in a museum. Also, it eliminates the problems 
inherent to traditional measuring equipments; there are no 
moving parts to break and it stays in calibration. 
Our goal is to create a WSN for monitoring not only 
humidity and temperature, but also light and some 
pollutants, in a museum, for art conservation purposes. This 
work was developed in the context of an ongoing project 
named WISE-MUSE, which aims to applying WSNs to 
museum environmental and structural monitoring and 
automatic control. 
Our initial deployment at the museum of contemporary 
art, Fortaleza São Tiago, has served as a proof-of-concept 
and consisted of a small group of wireless nodes capturing 
environmental data continuously. Data collected by sensor 
nodes is sent wirelessly to a database, through the sink node 
that is connected to a PC. Data can be visualized, in real 
time, through a web page, in different ways: tables, 
graphics, colour gradients, etc.  
As Fig. 1 illustrates, we have defined, essentially, five 
phases involved in the environmental monitoring of a 
museum. The first phase regards the monitoring of 
temperature, humidity, light and pollutants; then, collected 
data is sent to a data repository; after that, this data can be 
visualized in different formats (graphics, tables, colour 
gradients, etc.); afterwards, data is analyzed to verify its 
compliance with the art conservation rules; finally, as a last 
phase, the environment conditions are automatically 
optimized accordingly to the analysis results. 
A. Field Deployment 
With this first experimental testbed, we aimed at testing 
the behaviour of the wireless sensor nodes and at identifying 
some problems regarding both the nodes and the application 
scenario. This way, we were able to choose the sensor nodes 
that best suit to this specific application. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Phases involved in a museum’s environmental monitoring. 
As this was an experimental testbed, we have only 
deployed three wireless sensor nodes and one sink node (or 
base station), as Fig. 2 illustrates. So, we decided to install 
three Crossbow [14] mica2 motes, equipped with an 
MTS400CA data acquisition board and a mote equipped 
with a mib520 board, functioning as the base station. The 
radio transceiver of these nodes operates at the 868,919 
MHz ISI band and they communicate using the ZigBee [19] 
communication protocol. 
The MTS400CA data acquisition board measures: 
ambient light, relative humidity, temperature, 2-axis 
accelerometer, and barometric pressure. This board has a 
common humidity and temperature sensor, the Sensirion 
SHT11, which can measure a temperature range from -10 to 
+60°C and a humidity range from 0 to 90% RH. The 
ambient light sensor is a TAOS TSL2550D, which has a 
spectral response similar to human eye [14]. In our future 
experiments, we intend to replace the humidity and 
temperature sensor by the Sensirion SHT15, because it has a 
higher accuracy than the Sensirion SHT11. 
Mica2 nodes are smaller than Spinwave [11] nodes, with 
58 x 32 x 7mm (excluding the battery pack) opposed to 121 
x 70 x 25 mm, respectively. Nevertheless, our WISE-MUSE 
sensor node implemented in this project is smaller and 
cheaper than Mica2 node, which will be described next. Fig. 
3 shows mica2 motes equipped with the battery pack.  
Currently, this WSN measures the most important 
parameters, which are temperature, humidity and light; 
however, internal voltage is also monitored so that the user 
is aware of the state of the nodes’ batteries. The sensor 
nodes are programmed to measure and send data each 60 
seconds. 
B. Preliminary Results 
As explained before, all collected data is centralized in a 
PC, connected to the Internet. Fig. 4 shows some 
screenshots of the web interface created for the specific 
application of museums’ environmental monitoring. In this 
figure we present the 24 hours’ graphics of temperature, 
humidity, light and internal voltage. 
Fig. 2. Experimental WSN deployment in Museum Fortaleza São 
Tiago. 
116
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
Fig. 3. Crossbow Mica2 mote. 
After analysing this data, it was possible to achieve 
some conclusions about the behaviour and the type of 
variations of temperature and humidity throughout the day 
and night, in a single room of the museum. Considering the 
graphics of each node, we verified that temperature varies 
about 2ºC whereas humidity varies about 6% RH (see Fig. 4 
a) and b)). According to the museums’ managers, these 
variations are typical during the winter, in this museum; 
however, these parameters usually vary a lot more in 
summer. Fig. 4 c) shows that light varies, essentially, 
accordingly to the day and night periods, or when the lights 
are turned on or off (corresponds to the variations at the end 
of the graphic). 
So, we verified that these parameters are not as constant 
as they ideally should be. Therefore, it is very important that 
the WSN is connected to the air conditioning and 
dehumidifying systems in order to automatically control, 
above all, the temperature and the humidity of these rooms. 
As mentioned before, the sensor nodes are programmed 
to measure and send data each 60 seconds. Fig. 4 d) 
illustrates the decrease of batteries level during a 24 hours’ 
period. 
To evaluate the duration of batteries, we changed this 
value by programming the nodes to perform one 
measurement and transmission each 10 seconds. Comparing 
the internal voltage parameter obtained in both cases, we 
concluded that the duration of the batteries is proportional to 
the energy consumption. In this specific experiment, the 
batteries lasted about 6 times less than in the first case.  
 
Fig. 4. Initial Web interface created to the museum’ environmental monitoring application, showing the 24 hours’ graphics of temperature (a), humidity (b), 
light (c) and internal voltage (d) measurements. 
b) 
d) 
c) 
a) 
117
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
C. Problems Identified 
Several 
problems 
were 
identified 
during 
this 
experimental phase. These problems are related, essentially, 
with the type of building where the WSN was deployed and, 
also, with the hardware characteristics and resource 
limitations of the wireless sensor nodes. 
Type of building - Fortaleza São Tiago was built in the 
17th century as a military fortress. Therefore, the width of 
the walls is very large (from 0,5 to 1m, with 1m being the 
predominant width). The building has double doors and 
windows. It has an irregular shape and its rooms and 
terraces are distributed among three floors, as shown in Fig. 
5. All these factors influence and difficult the signal 
propagation and, consequently, the transmission range of 
sensor nodes. 
Location of the sensor nodes - Sensor nodes must not be 
placed near to the visitors’ passageways, in order to avoid 
the risk of being stolen or damaged. This will also help to 
minimize the visual impact caused by the nodes. As can be 
seen in Fig. 6, nodes were located in rather discrete places. 
(Fig. 6 shows nodes 1 and 2; node 3 is located on the 
opposite side of the exposition room, also above an 
electricity socket, like node 2).  
Batteries - The batteries of sensor nodes do not last more 
than some days and their transmission range is not as good 
as described in the manufacturer’s datasheets, even in line-
of-sight conditions. In order to increase the transmission 
range of sensor nodes, we had to set their transmitting 
power to its maximum value (5dBm). This obviously affects 
the energy consumption, which is a typical problem of 
WSNs. To minimize this problem we have decreased the 
number of measurements and transmissions per time period 
(one each 60 seconds). The program can still be changed so 
that the nodes perform even less measurements and 
transmissions in order to save more energy. Decreasing the 
transmission power, by increasing the total number of nodes 
or using a more efficient antenna, or equipping the nodes 
with a better radio device will also decrease the energy 
consumption. 
Type of antenna – Nodes are equipped with 
omnidirectional antennas. Thus, the location of the nodes 
near the walls can cause signal reflections. Changing the 
type of antenna to a more efficient one (directional) will 
improve the signal propagation characteristics and, 
consequently increase the duration of batteries. 
Offset adjustment – Even though the sensors used on the 
nodes do not have to be calibrated, an offset adjustment has 
to be made. This way, more reliable measurements are 
ensured.  
Temperature and humidity sensor – This sensor should 
be placed away from the main circuit board, to avoid that 
the chip’s temperature affects the readings. 
 
Fig. 5. Museum Fortaleza São Tiago and correspondent floor plants. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Wireless Sensor Network deployment in an exposition room of 
Fortaleza São Tiago 
D. 
Awareness tool for WSNs visualization 
Opposing to traditional networks, WSNs are only useful 
if sensor nodes are aware of the environment surrounding 
them. This means that the great potential of WSNs lies in its 
ability to correlate collected data in time and in space [17, 
18]. 
This is one of the reasons why we are developing a 3D 
web-based awareness tool for WSNs visualization, which 
will be applied to the specific case of a museum’s 
environmental monitoring. This tool is based in the CWSN 
(Collaborative Wireless Sensor Networks) model, published 
in [16].  
CWSN is a formal model of collaborative work created 
specifically to the case of WSNs. It is, essentially, a graph-
based model; but, it also includes other objects in order to 
make the modelling of all the entities of a WSN (presented 
in Table I) possible, which is fundamental to completely 
represent a WSN. The network hierarchy (from the collected 
data to the user) can be visualized, as well. Moreover, it is a 
generic model because it can be applied to heterogeneous 
networks (any type of nodes, any size, any hardware 
characteristics, any types of signals, etc.). According to the 
WSNSCW model definitions, the specific case of this small 
WSN deployed in the museum will be represented as 
deployed in Fig. 7. Due to the reduced number of sensor 
118
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
nodes available, data collected by nodes 1,  2 and 3 is sent to 
the sink node on an one-hop basis. Accordingly, nodes 2 
and 3 send data to node 1, which, in turn, sends data to the 
sink node. The obstacle existent between nodes 2 and 3 is 
shown in Fig. 8. 
Regarding the awareness tool, one of its most important 
properties is the 3D representation of the network. This is 
very important so the user can have a more realistic view of 
the network, becoming more aware of the surrounding 
environment (different types of terrains, different types of 
rooms, 
which 
obstacles 
might 
interfere 
with 
the 
collaboration established between nodes, etc.). 
This tool will allow for the visualization of different 
granularities: fine-grain (sensor nodes), middle-grain 
(clusters) and coarser (sessions) modelling level. Also, it 
will allow for an interactive navigation in the map of the 
network. 
We will apply this awareness tool to the specific case of 
a 
museum’s 
environmental 
monitoring. 
So, 
data 
visualization will be enhanced by integrating it in a 3D 
representation of the museum, giving the user a much more 
realistic view of the network. 
 
Fig. 7. Representation of the WSN created in Fortaleza São Tiago, 
using the entities and notations defined in the CWSN Model [16]. 
Fig. 8. Artwork that obstructs the line-of-sight between nodes 2 and 3, 
impeding communication. 
IV. 
THE WISE-MUSE SENSOR NODE 
We have developed a new wireless sensor node, which 
is shown in Figure 9. It is designed specifically for 
environmental monitoring applications, but also considering 
the specific requirements of the museum, for example, 
reduced size and cost. This device emerges as the element 
that collects the environmental parameters, such as 
temperature, humidity and light. In addition to these three 
parameters, it is possible to send the battery status (internal 
voltage) and the RSSI signal. The sensor node transmits the 
captured data to the base station, via radio frequency (RF).  
 
 
Fig.9. New Wise-Muse sensor node. 
The radio module used is the XBee or the XBee PRO, 
from the Digi manufacturer [20], which operate according to 
the ZigBee protocol [19], i.e., it is designed according to the 
IEEE 802.15.4 standard and to support the specific 
requirements of WSNs (above all, low cost and low power). 
The ZigBee protocol allows the creation of Personal Area 
Networks (PAN) networks, supporting several network 
topologies, namely star, mesh and cluster-tree.  
To meet the requirements of the museum in terms of the 
physical location of the rooms that needed to be covered by 
the WSN and, consequently, in terms of transmission range, 
we had to employ a cluster-tree topology. As a result, the 
type of nodes we needed to deploy were some end devices, 
some routers and one coordinator. The end devices and the 
routers were developed by us, whereas the coordinator was 
acquired to DIGI manufacturer. Nevertheless, the router 
created can also act as an end device whenever needed; in 
our experiments, it was used as both a router and as an end 
device. The differences between the end devices and the 
routers, at the hardware level, reside in the power supply 
module since it has to be connected to an electricity socket; 
the router can never be turned off or go into the sleep mode. 
At the software level, there are also some differences since 
it has to be programmed as a ZigBee router, i.e., it has to 
receive data from the end devices that are wirelessly 
connected to it (i.e., end devices that are not under the range 
of the coordinator), and forward this data to the coordinator 
(sink node).  
The WISE-MUSE sensor node, which corresponds to 
the ZigBee end device, was designed and built from scratch, 
119
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
with a set of components to meet the proposed 
requirements. This is a node of small dimensions, which 
causes minimum impact in the Museum. Its low cost is one 
of the strengths of this sensor node (less than 70€). Another 
advantage is its low energy consumption.  
To be more precise, the WISE-MUSE sensor node has 
four main blocks: 
 
The power unit, which is composed of two AA 
batteries and a step-up circuit that allows to 
guarantee the supply of a constant power (3.3V) to 
the microcontroller Xbee and to the sensors; 
 
The microcontroller that is the "brain" of the node. It 
receives data from multiple individual sensors, 
processes it and, then, sends it through an Xbee radio 
frequency card; 
 
Two specific sensors: a light sensor that measures 
the brightness in the rooms of the Museum, and a 
sensor that measures both temperature and humidity; 
 
The transceiver module that transmits the collected 
data. 
 
TABLE I 
ENTITIES OF THE CWSN MODEL 
Symbol 
Concept 
Description 
 
Sensor node 
Wireless sensor nodes, typically with limited resources. These nodes can be either 
stationary or mobile. Also, they can be in one of two possible states: active or 
inactive (sleep mode) in order to save energy. 
 
Sink node/ 
Base Station 
Node to which data collected by ordinary nodes is sent; being responsible to send 
data to the gateway. 
 
Anchor 
node 
Node with known localization.  
 
Cluster 
Group of nodes, created according to: geographical area, type of sensor, type of 
phenomenon, task, etc. 
 
Cluster 
Head 
Sensor node to whom all sensor nodes in the cluster send the collected data; it is 
responsible for sending the received data to the Sink node.  
 
Relationship 
The arrow represents a relationship between nodes A and B. It also represents and 
adjacency relation between nodes A and B (see section 3.2); nodes A and B are 
neighbours. 
A relationship can be established based on: localization, phenomenon, type of 
sensor node, etc. 
 
Data flow 
This label identifies both the type of signal being used (radio frequency, ultrasound, 
acoustical or light) and the type of data being transmitted between nodes 
(temperature, humidity, light, sound, video, internal voltage, etc.).  
 
Gateway 
Device responsible to send the data to the user, through the Internet. 
 
Obstacle 
An object (building, tree, rock, etc.), which obstructs line-of-sight between two or 
more nodes, not allowing for direct communication between them. 
 
Session 
In a certain moment, there may be several collaborative sessions in a WSN. A 
session can be established based on the objective (type of phenomenon to monitor, 
geographical area to monitor, etc.) of the WSN. 
 
Battery 
It represents the percentage of the sensor node’s remaining battery. 
 
User 
Person that interacts with the WSN, querying the network, visualizing data, etc. The 
user customizes the work of the sensor nodes; the data collected by sensor nodes is 
used by the users’ application. 
 
A
S
CH
120
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
As just mentioned, the microcontroller is the sensor’s 
core. To guarantee an easy programming of this component, 
it was designed to be easily connected to a programmer, 
using the AVR-ISP500 protocol (AVR-ISP500 is USB low 
cost in-system programmer for AVR microcontrollers; it 
implements the STK500v2 protocol as defined by Atmel. 
ISP stands for In-System Programmable). Using this 
connection, the code can be easily updated whenever 
necessary. The chosen microcontroller is the Atmega 168 
(Atmel, 2009), since it presents a set of characteristics that 
fits almost perfectly all our purposes; its low cost, low 
consumption and high performance are the main reasons for 
this choice. 
The sensor elements chosen are the SHT15 humidity 
and the temperature sensor, from the Sensirion Company 
[21], and the S1087 photocell, from the Hamamatsu 
Company [22]. The photocell captures the sunlight and 
returns a value of voltage to the microcontroller, which is 
then converted to the intensity of sunlight (LUX) unit 
values. The SHT15 sensor calculates the relative humidity 
and the temperature values. This is a CMOS industrial 
device, totally calibrated, that allow for good stability at low 
cost. Its accuracy is much appropriated considering the 
requirements of the project (+/-2% for humidity and +/-
0.3Cº for temperature). 
In order to meet the power autonomy requirements of a 
sensor node, each node is powered by two AA batteries 
(1.5V each) that feed the microcontroller, the Xbee module 
and the sensor STH15. These batteries have a capacity of 
2450mAh and an output voltage of 1.5V. Their technology 
is the Nickel Metal hydride and they weight only 28g.  
Finally, we describe the modules for radio transmission 
frequency (Xbee or Xbee-PRO from Digi manufacturer). 
These modules were chosen because they require minimal 
power and because they provide a real and consistent 
delivery of information between devices, operating at the 
2.4GHz ISM frequency band. Although there are other 
brands for radio transmission modules with lower power 
consumption, the popularity and the characteristics of Xbee 
modules determined our choice. 
Table II presents a comparison of sensor nodes that 
could be used in the environmental monitoring of museums. 
We have considered the nodes’ characteristics, as described 
in the manufacturers’ datasheets. It is important to highlight 
that, in the current market, there are several RF modules 
separated from the sensing modules. Therefore, we attempt 
to look beyond the prototype created in the project, by 
analysing other solutions that perform the collection and 
transmission of data in these indoor environments. 
Analysing Table II, there are several advantages and 
disadvantages of each solution proposed for monitoring 
environmental parameters. At the sensing module level, the 
sensors presented are quite similar. Most of the modules use 
the SHT15 or STH11 sensors, by Sensirion, and their 
accuracy does not vary much, about +/-0.3ºC for 
temperature and about +/-3% for relative humidity.  
Almost all sensor nodes collect light, temperature and 
humidity, with the exception of the Mica2 Sensor Board 
MTS101CA that can’t measure the humidity. The Mica Z 
reads other kind of data, but this is not necessary in the 
specific case of the Museum. Besides, Mica Z has the 
disadvantage of a higher cost. 
Regarding 
the 
microcontroller 
there 
are 
some 
considerable 
differences. 
Most 
microcontrollers 
are 
manufactured by Atmel, with the exception to the Tmote 
Sky sensor, which is manufactured by Sentilla [23]. Atmega 
devices have many features in common with our prototype; 
The WISE-MUSE prototype presents a smaller flash 
memory; however, this factor should not be seen as a 
disadvantage since it conducts to a reduction on the amount 
of 
code 
programmed 
into 
the 
microcontroller. 
Consequently, the microcontroller has to process less 
amount of code what leads to a lower power consumption of 
the node. Therefore, it is not necessary a bigger flash 
memory. We verified that the energy consumption of our 
prototype can be reduced when operating at a frequency of 
1MHz. In these conditions, its consumption can be 
decreased to 0.3mA, a value smaller than for the other 
devices. 
The Mica motes [14] must be programmed through a 
base station, which involves an additional cost. The Tmote 
Sky and the WISE-MUSE nodes offer an advantage over 
the others; they are more easily programmed. The Tmote is 
programmed using USB, while the Wise-Muse prototype is 
programmed using the Olimex programmer that uses the 
AVR-ISP500 protocol.  
In relation to the transceivers of each sensor node, all of 
them use the IEEE.802.15.4 protocol, which is the most 
appropriate protocol for WSNs. The Mica 2 operates in the 
868/916Mhhz, 433MHz or 315MHz ranges, while the 
others use the 2.4GHz range. 
We believe that the Xbee module used in the WISE-
MUSE prototype is well ranked due to its higher power 
transmission. Using the Xbee-PRO, which allows an even 
higher transmission range what is one advantage when 
comparing to the other nodes. Its disadvantage regards the 
energy consumption; however, the Xbee is designed to enter 
in the sleep mode, waking up only in pre-defined intervals 
to send data; in this way, the problem of energy 
consumption is minimized.  
Figure 10 shows the battery status of the two AA 
batteries that are used on the WISE-MUSE prototype. We 
have collected samples during several days to get an 
estimated battery lifetime. Analysing the graph, we can 
observe that the batteries’ level follows a typical behaviour: 
in the first 10 days, the battery level dropped from 2.8 to 2.6 
volts; however, from that point on, the battery level only 
dropped 0.1V during the next 30 days, which represents 
lower battery consumption. Therefore, after 40 days, the 
sensor node remains operational. 
121
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
TABLE II 
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE WISE-MUSE MOTE AND OTHER COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE MOTES. 
SENSOR NODES 
Characteristics 
WISE-MUSE 
Mica 2 
(MPR400CB) + 
Sensor Board 
(MTS101CA) [14] 
Mica Z (MPR2400CA) 
+ Sensor Board 
(MTS400CB) [14] 
Tmote Sky [19] 
Produced by: 
The authors at the 
UMa 
Crossbow 
Crossbow 
Moteiv Corporation 
Sensors  
Ambient parameters 
Light, relative 
humidity, 
temperature and 
battery level. 
Light, temperature, 
and prototyping area 
Light, relative humidity, 
temperature, 2-axis 
accelerometer, and 
barometric pressure 
Humidity, temperature, 
and light 
Temperature and 
humidity sensors 
SHT15 
Termistor 
SHT11 
SHT11 or SHT15 
Accuracy 
Temp: +/- 0.3Cº  
Hum: +/- 2% 
Temp: 0.2 Cº 
Temp: +/- 0.2ºC 
Hum: +/- 3.5% 
Temp: +/- 0.2ºC or     
+/- 0.3Cº 
Hum: +/- 3.5% or +/- 
2% 
Light Sensors 
S1087 by 
Hamamatsu  
CdSe photocell 
TLS2550, by TAOS 
S1087, by Hamamatsu  
Transceiver 
Module 
Xbee or Xbee PRO, 
both by Digi 
Chipcon Wireless 
Transceiver 
 TI CC2420 
802.15.4/ZigBee compliant 
radio 
Chipcon Wireless 
Transceiver 
Frequency 
2.4GH 
868/916 MHz, 
 433 MHz or 
315MHz 
2.4Gh 
2.4GHz 
Standard 
IEEE.802.15.4/ 
Zigbee 
IEEE.802.15.4/ 
ZigBee 
IEEE.802.15.4/ 
ZigBee 
IEEE.802.15.4/ 
ZigBee 
RF Power 
0dBm to 18dBm 
(PRO) 
-20 to 5dBm 
-24 to 0dBm 
0dBm 
Outdoor range1 
100mt to 1200m 
(PRO) 
150mt 
75 to 100mt 
50 to 125mt 
Current Draw (Tx) 
35mA @ 0dBm2 
27mA @5dBm 
17,4mA @ 0dBm 
17,4mA @ 0dBm 
Processor 
MCU  
Atmel, Atmega 168 
Atmel, 
ATmega128L. 
Atmel, ATmega128 
Texas Instruments 
MSP430 
microcontroller 
Current Draw 
(in Active mode) 
0.3mA @1MHz 
1.9mA @4MHz 
6.8mA @8MHz 
5mA @4MHz 
17mA @8MHz 
5mA @4MHz 
17mA @8MHz 
2.4mA @ 8MHz 
Flash Memory 
16Kb 
128kb 
128kb 
48kb 
Programming access 
ISP 
Base station 
Base station 
USB 
Serial 
Communication 
UART 
UART 
UART 
UART 
Physical dimensions 
(mm) 
(Excluding battery 
pack) 
(58x28x12) 
(58x32x10) 
(58x28x10) 
(65x32x22) 
Sensor Node Price 
70€ 
352€ 
3 
82€ 
 
 
                                                 
1 Considering an outdoor environment without obstacles. 
2 The consumption of the Xbee´s module regarding the RF transmission is certainly a little below 35mA, because this value is not totally 
spent with the RF transmission, but it also includes some processing activities. 
3 No information has been obtained so far on this feature, however as the sensing module of the Mica Z is superior than the Mica 2, the 
total cost of the module will be higher. 
122
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
Even though the decrease of the battery level does not 
follow a linear function, we think that the battery level will 
remain stable for some more days. Further tests will continue 
to be carried out, nevertheless, the WISE-MUSE prototype is 
supposed to have at least 1 month of autonomy, although its 
batteries can last 2 months. These tests were performed on 
one node only, but in the future all the nodes should be 
tested.  
Looking to the sensor nodes as a whole, they all have 
similar dimensions, and the WISE-MUSE mote presents a 
very low cost when compared to the Mica motes.  
In conclusion, it is important to note that the module 
created was designed and built for the specific indoor 
environment monitoring at the Museum, presenting a 
number of advantages that may be attractive for this 
monitoring application, where its skills are within the 
requirements of the final client. Moreover, this new sensor 
node brings some advantages when compared to other 
commercially available solutions, such as low cost, small 
size, low power consumption, and higher transmission range. 
V. 
HUMIDITY CONTROL DEVICE 
The humidity control device has been developed in the 
WISE-MUSE project to carry out the automatic control of 
dehumidifiers in order to regulate relative humidity levels 
inside the rooms where the WSN is implemented. 
Figure 11 shows the developed device. It is essentially 
composed of one Xbee module, one relay, and one AC-DC 
converter, integrated in a box that allows the device to be 
plugged into an electrical outlet and at the same time to the 
dehumidifier. 
When the humidity values reach an unacceptable limit 
(this limit were specified by the Museum), the base station 
sends a control message by radio frequency to the control 
device (more precisely to the XBee module, activating one 
of its pins). It receives the control message and analyzes it.  
As a consequence, it activates the relay. If humidity level is 
above the maximum limit then it turns on the dehumidifier. 
In opposite, if humidity level is below the minimum limit 
then it turns off the dehumidifier. 
 
 
Figure 10. Average battery level 
 
 
Figure 11. Humidity control device. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, the first experimental WSN for 
automatically and continuously monitoring the environment 
of a museum was presented. This solution was compared 
with related solutions, being outlined its advantages.  
Besides being a simpler solution, the use of WSNs for 
environmental monitoring of a museum is, indeed, a more 
reliable solution. It is also less expensive than manual data 
collection or than a wired central monitoring system. Several 
problems were identified during the experiments, but they 
can be classified in two types. The problems related with the 
type of building where the WSN is being deployed, because 
it affects the signal propagation; and the problems related 
with the hardware characteristics and resource limitations of 
the sensor nodes, with the battery being the most limited 
resource. Equipping the nodes with a more efficient antenna 
and using a higher number of nodes will lead to the need of a 
lower transmission power, increasing the duration of the 
batteries. Also, changing the node’s program so that they 
perform less frequent measurements and transmissions will 
allow for high energy savings. 
We also analyzed the graphics of collected data, what 
allowed us to understand the behaviour and the type of 
variations of temperature, humidity and light, throughout the 
day and night. 
One of the main contributions of our work is the 
development of a new sensor node created for environmental 
monitoring applications, which is still a prototype since it is 
currently being tested. Nevertheless, even at this stage, we 
have already demonstrated that it brings some advantages 
when comparing to other commercially available solutions. 
Furthermore, in order to increase the efficiency of this 
environmental monitoring system, we have implemented a 
system that automatically controls the dehumidifying 
devices, maintaining the humidity at more constant levels.  
Regarding the visualization of data, data is available in 
different formats (tables, graphics, colour gradients, etc.), in 
a real-time basis. Additionally, an historic of collected data 
is kept for future consults in Microsoft excel and word 
format. 
As for future work, we have several tasks to accomplish. 
After understanding the environment variations in Fortaleza 
São Tiago and after identifying all the existent problems, we 
123
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
have to carefully plan the deployment of a complete WSN 
that coverage all the exhibition rooms, archives and library. 
At the moment, only the Museum´s storage rooms are being 
monitored and controlled by the WISE-MUSE platform. We 
also have to extend the WSN to monitor some pollutants, in 
particular the carbon dioxide (CO2). 
We are developing a 3D awareness tool, based in the 
WSNSCW model, and that will be validated applying it to 
this specific application. So, data visualization will be 
enhanced by integrating it in a 3D representation of the 
museum, giving the user a much more realistic view of the 
network. 
We also intend to carry out an analysis of the battery 
performance of other existing sensor nodes, in order to proof 
the effectiveness of the WISE-MUSE prototype. 
Finally, we intend to connect the WSN to the air 
conditioning and dehumidifying systems in order to 
automatically control the temperature and the humidity of 
the exhibition and storage rooms. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to express my gratitude to Bruno Gouveia, 
Filipe Santos and Roberto Fernandes who have collaborated 
in this project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Brito, L. Rodríguez, F. Santos, and R. Fernandes, 
“Environmental Monitoring of Museums Based on Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, Proc. 4th International Conference on 
Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC 2008), IEEE 
Computer Society Press, Jul/Aug 2008, Athens, Greece, pp. 
364- 369. 
[2] 
I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
“A Survey on Sensor Networks”, IEEE Computer Networks, 
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 393-422, March 2002. 
[3] 
D. Gracanin, K. Adams, and M. Eltoweissy, “Data 
Replication in Collaborative Sensor Network Systems”, Proc. 
25th IEEE International Performance, Computing, and 
Communications Conference (IPCCC 2006), April 2006, pp. 
389-396. 
[4] 
D. Wang, Q. Zhang, and J. Liu, The Self-Protection Problem 
in Wireless Sensor Networks, ACM Transactions on Sensor 
Networks (TOSN), vol. 3, no. 4, article no. 20, October 2007. 
[5] 
S. Pai, P. Kurylosk, H. Yip, S. Yennamandra, S. Wicker, K. 
Boehner, and G. Gay, Networks of Sensors in Public Spaces: 
Combining 
Technology 
with 
Art, 
Proc. 
IEEE 
21st 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking and Applications (AINAW '07), vol. 2, May 
2007, pp. 396-402.  
[6] 
T. Onel, E. Onur, C. Ersoy, and H. Delic, Advances in 
Sensing with Security Applications: Wireless sensor 
networks for security: issues and challenges, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers Group, pp. 95-120, January 2006. 
[7] 
J. Heidemman and N. Bulusu, Using Geospatial Information 
in Sensor Networks, Center for Embedded Network Sensing 
Papers. Paper 735, http://repositories.cdlib.org/cens/wps/735, 
September 2001. 
[8] 
F. Oldewurtel and P. Mähönen, Neural Wireless Sensor 
Networks, 
International 
Conference 
on Systems 
and 
Networks Communications (ICSNC '06), October 2006, pp. 
28. 
[9] 
Omega, February 2008, http://www.omega.com 
[10] 2DI, February 2008, http://e2di.com/catalog.html. 
[11] Spinwave 
Systems, 
June 
2009, 
http://www.spinwavesystems.com/ 
[12] A. Lee, C. Angeles, M. Talampas, L. Sison, and M. Soriano 
“MotesArt: Wireless Sensor Network for Monitoring Relative 
Humidity and Temperature in an Art Gallery”, IEEE 
International Conference on Networking, Sensing and 
Control (ICNSC 2008), April 2008, pp. 1263-1268. 
[13] D. Del Curto and F. Raimondi, “WISPHER: cooperating 
WIreless Sensors for the Preservation of artistic HERitage, 
Case study: Arena di Verona, in Adjunct Proc. of Embedded 
WiSeNts (Project FP6-004400), Zurique, January 2006. 
[14] Crossbow, June 2009, http://www.xbow.com/ 
[15] L. Liu, H. Ma, D. Tao, and D. Zhang, “A Hierarchical 
Cooperation 
Model 
for 
Sensor 
Networks 
Supported 
Cooperative Work”, Proc. 10th International Conference on 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
in 
Design 
(CSCWD’06), May 2006, pp. 1-6. 
[16] L. Brito and L Peralta, “A model for Wireless Sensor 
Networks Supported Cooperative Work”, 3rd International 
Conference on Computer Graphics Theory and Applications 
(GRAPP 2008), Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, January 2008, 
pp. 505-511. 
[17] M. Broxton, J. Lifton, and J. Paradiso, “Localizing a Sensor 
Network via Collaborative Processing of Global Stimuli”, 
Proc. 2nd European Workshop on Wireless Sensor Networks, 
Jan/Feb. 2005, pp. 321-332. 
[18] A. Hu and S. Servetto, “Algorithmic Aspects of the Time 
Synchronization Problem in Large-Scale Sensor Networks", 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 10, 2005 Springer 
Science + Business Media Inc., 2005, pp. 491-503. 
[19] ZigBee Alliance, 2004, www.zigbee.org 
[20] Digi, 
May 
2009, 
http://www.digi.com/products/wireless/zigbee-mesh/ 
[21] Sensirion, May 2009, http://www.sensirion.com/ 
[22] Hamamatsu, 
April 
2009, 
http://jp.hamamatsu.com/en/product_info/index.html 
[23] Sentilla (formerly, Moteiv Corporation), April 2009, 
http://www.sentilla.com/ 
 
124
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

