244
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Packet Scheduling Architecture with Service Specific Queue Sorting and Adaptive 
Time Domain Scheduling Algorithms for LTE-Advanced Networks 
 
Rehana. Kausar, Yue. Chen, Kok. Keong. Chai, John Schormans 
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science 
 Queen Mary University of London 
London, UK 
rehana.kausar,yue.chen,michael.chai@elec.qmul.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— In this paper, a cross layer design packet scheduling 
architecture is proposed for Long Term Evolution-Advanced 
downlink transmission, to guarantee the support of quality of 
service requirements in a mixed traffic environment. The 
proposed architecture uses service specific queue sorting 
algorithms for different traffic types and an adaptive time 
domain scheduling algorithm to adaptively allocate available 
resources to real time and non real time traffic. Multiuser 
diversity is exploited both in the time domain and frequency 
domain by jointly considering the channel state information 
and queue state information. The aim is to improve the 
support of QoS guarantees to real time voice and non real time 
streaming video traffic and to maintain a good trade-off 
between system throughput and user fairness by optimizing the 
use of available radio resources. Results show that proposed 
packet scheduling architecture reduces delay, delay viability 
and packet drop rate of real time traffic while satisfying 
minimum throughput requirements of non real time traffic 
and it maintains the system throughput and fairness among 
users at good level. 
 
Keywords-LTE-A; 
Packet 
Scheduling 
(PS); 
OFDMA; 
Quality of Service (QoS); mixed traffic.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Long Term Evolution Advanced (LTE-A) is an all-IP 
(Internet Protocol) based future wireless communication 
network, which is aiming to support a wide variety of 
applications and services with different Quality of Service 
(QoS) requirements. It is targeting at superior performance in 
terms of spectral efficiency, fairness, QoS support and 
service satisfaction as compared to the existing Third 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) wireless networks. 
To achieve the goal, Radio Resource Management 
(RRM) plays a vital role. Packet Scheduling (PS) being one 
of the core functionalities in RRM is very crucial to optimise 
the network performance and it has been under extensive 
research in recent years. Different PS algorithms have been 
deployed aiming at utilising the scarce radio resource 
efficiently. A QoS aware Packet Scheduling Architecture 
(PSA) is presented in [1], which takes into account different 
prioritizing stages such as QoS aware queue sorting and 
adaptive Time Domain (TD) scheduler with built-in 
congestion control to the existing conventional QoS aware 
PS algorithms. Delay dependent queue sorting algorithm for 
Real Time (RT) traffic reduces average delay of RT traffic 
and built-in congestion control policies reduce Packet Drop 
Rate (PDR) by adaptively allocating radio resources to RT 
and Non Real Time (NRT) traffic types based on QoS 
feedback of RT traffic. And by exploiting multiuser diversity 
in the TD and Frequency Domain (FD), system overall 
throughout is improved. By prioritising users with longer 
delays in RT and NRT streaming video traffic and using 
conventional Proportional Fairness (PF) algorithm to sort 
users in RT, NRT and Best Effort (BE) queues respectively, 
the proposed PSA in [1] maintains a good trade-off between 
system throughput and user-fairness. However, there is still 
need of further work on PSA [1] in order to meet the 
requirements of QoS for RT traffic and throughput 
requirements of NRT traffic. Service specific queue sorting 
algorithms are needed for each queue to guarantee the QoS 
support. In addition, the fix built-in congestion control 
policies used in [1] need to be replaced with an adaptive 
scheme to make the PSA capable to adapt to the network 
conditions, traffic patterns, system load and the QoS 
requirements of different traffic types. 
Thus, the functionalities of queue sorting and adaptive 
TD scheduler are enhanced by extended research on these 
algorithms. New queue sorting algorithms for RT and NRT 
queues have been proposed to further improve the support of 
the provision of QoS guarantees for both RT and NRT 
traffics [2]. The results show that the queue sorting 
algorithms have reduced average delay, delay viability and 
PDR of RT traffic while satisfying the minimum throughput 
requirements of NRT streaming video traffic at the cost of 
minor delays in the BE traffic. It also shows that system 
overall throughput and user fairness are maintained at good 
level. To emphasise the significance of new queue sorting 
algorithms, the adaptive TD scheduler with built-in policies 
as in [1] was not used   instead  the users were picked from 
the queues one-by-one from each queue starting from the top 
most queue by simple fair scheduling method. 
In [1], the λ denotes the proportion of available Physical 
Resource Blocks (PRBs) assigned to RT users and (   )  
to NRT users where   is the total number of PRBs available. 
The initial value of λ is decided based on the trade-off 
between the average delay of RT and NRT traffic as shown 
in Fig. 1. Then the value of λ is adaptively adjusted 
according to the PDR of RT traffic using built-in congestion 
control policies. In [1] however, only the average delay of 
RT and NRT traffic is considered to set an initial value of λ 
which is not very realistic as other performance metrics such 
as throughput of NRT traffic, system throughput and fairness 

245
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
among users should also be taken into account while setting 
this value. An extensive research has been done to adjust the 
initial value of λ so that a stability region can be found which 
takes into account various performance measures such as 
average delay of RT and NRT traffic, minimum throughput 
of NRT traffic and overall system throughput and fairness 
among users instead of only considering trade-off between 
RT and NRT average delay. After setting the initio value of 
λ, a new adaptive TD scheduling algorithm is used to make 
adaptive TD scheduler capable of controlling PDR at all 
traffic patterns instead of using a fix traffic pattern with only 
a number of built-in policies as in [1]. The results in [1] only 
consider a traffic pattern in which RT and NRT users are 
equal which is should be analysed by considering variable 
number of RT and NRT users as the number of RT and NRT 
users may vary with time. That is why the behaviour of the 
proposed PSA is analysed under different traffic patterns 
with varying number of RT and NRT users. 
In this paper, the proposed PSA with new queue sorting 
algorithms [2] and novel adaptive TD scheduler algorithm is 
presented to enhance PS performance both at service level 
and network level. At the service level, the QoS of RT and 
NRT streaming video traffic are significantly improved as 
compared to the existing PS algorithms. At the system level, 
overall system throughput performance and fairness among 
all users are improved in the new PSA. As described above, 
this work is based on [1] that was presented in UBICOMM 
2010.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, the related work on PS algorithms is discussed. 
System model is presented in Section III and the proposed 
PSA with new queue sorting and adaptive TD algorithm is 
described in Section IV. In Section V, the proposed packet 
scheduling algorithm and performance metrics to analyse the 
proposed packet scheduling algorithm, are presented. The 
results and discussion section (Section VI) presents 
analytical results from different perspectives to show the 
performance of the proposed PSA; the first part of Section 5 
presents a set of results to compare the performance of PSA 
with existing QoS aware PS algorithm and the second part 
evaluates the performance of PSA under different traffic 
patterns.  Finally, conclusion and future work are presented 
in Section VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The classic packet scheduling algorithms exploiting 
multiuser diversity are the MAX C/I and Proportional 
Fairness (PF) algorithms. MAX C/I algorithm allocates a 
physical resource block (PRB) to a user with the highest 
channel gain on that PRB, and can maximize the system 
throughput [1] [3-4]. PF algorithm takes fairness among 
users into consideration and allocates resources to users 
based on the ratio of their instantaneous throughput and its 
acquired time averaged throughput [1] [5]. However, these 
algorithms aim only at improving resource utilization based 
on channel conditions of users; QoS requirements, for 
example delay requirements of real time (RT) traffic or 
minimum throughput requirements of non-real time (NRT) 
traffic, are not considered at all. In the next generation of 
mobile communication networks, apart from system 
throughput and user fairness, the crucial point is to fulfil 
users’ QoS requirements in a multi-service, multi-user mixed 
traffic environment. This is because different traffic types are 
competing for radio resources to fulfil their QoS 
requirements. To allocate radio resources efficiently and 
intelligently in such complex environments is challenging. 
Various methods have been proposed aiming to use radio 
resources efficiently to fulfil QoS requirement of different 
traffic types [6-8].   
A low complexity QoS aware PF multicarrier algorithm 
is presented for OFDM system in [9]. The objective is to 
achieve proportional fairness in the system while improving 
QoS performance. A greedy method based multi carrier PF 
criterion is proposed with the consideration that traditional 
single carrier PF is not suitable for OFDM systems. A 
subcarrier reassignment procedure is used to further improve 
QoS performance. This paper proposes PS algorithm 
specifically for the multimedia traffic and improves QoS, 
throughput and fairness in the system. However, there is a 
need to analyze the behaviour of the proposed algorithm 
when the system has to deal with different traffic types such 
as interactive, background traffic, etc. In [6], a service 
classification scheme is used which classifies mixed traffic 
into different service specific queues and grants different 
scheduling priorities to them. QoS of RT traffic is improved 
at the cost of system spectral efficiency, when the RT queue 
is granted the highest priority. And fairness is significantly 
improved when fair scheduling is used in the TD to pick 
users from the queues instead of strictly prioritizing RT 
traffic queue. Fair scheduling picks users one-by-one from 
each queue and strict priority empties queues one after other 
giving priority to RT queue. Conventional PF and MAX C/I 
are used to prioritise users in the queues. The QoS of RT and 
NRT traffic can be improved by using service specific queue 
sorting algorithms to prioritise users. In [10], an urgency 
factor is used to boost the priority of a particular traffic type. 
When any packet from a queue is about to exceed its upper 
bound of delay requirement, its priority is increased by 
adding an urgency factor. Although most of the packets are 
sent when they are nearly ready to expire, a lower packet loss 
rate is achieved thus improving the performance of system 
by guaranteeing QoS requirements to different traffic types.  
In mix traffic scenarios, queue state information (QSI) 
becomes very important in addition to channel state 
information (CSI) [11-12]. It can make scheduling decision 
even more efficient; especially in QoS aware scheduling 
algorithms it is very crucial. Typically this implies to 
minimize the amount of resources needed per user and thus 
allows for as many users as possible in the system, while 
still satisfying whatever quality of service requirements that 
may exist [13]. A time domain multiplexing (TDM) system 
based Modified Largest Waited Delay First (M-LWDF) is 
presented in [11] which takes into account both QSI and 
CSI. This algorithm serves a user with the maximum 
product of Head of Line (HOL) packet delay, channel 
condition and an arbitrary positive constant. This constant is 
used to control packet delay distribution for different users. 

246
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
It updates the queue state after each TTI rather than 
updating after each sub carrier allocation. M-LWDF 
significantly improves the support of QoS guarantees to the 
RT and NRT traffic for TDM systems. In [14], an 
exponential (EXP) rule is proposed for scheduling multiple 
flows that share a time-varying channel. The EXP rule is 
applied in M-LWDF as one of the parameters that equalizes 
the delays of different RT packets to reduce the PDR of RT 
traffic due to time-out. M-LWDF algorithm is applied in a 
frequency domain multiplexing (FDM) system in [15] to 
optimize sub-carrier allocation in Orthogonal Frequency 
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) based networks.  It 
shows improved performance in terms of QoS but like M-
LWDF updates the queues state each TTI rather than after 
each sub-carrier allocation. In [16], M-LWDF for OFDMA 
systems is modified by updating the queue status after every 
sub-carrier allocation. It takes into account RT and NRT 
traffic types and provides better QoS for both services. The 
results show that the support of provision of QoS guarantees 
in terms of delay and PDR for RT and minimum throughput 
for NRT traffic is improved. However this idea can be 
extended to more effective scheduling framework by adding 
more traffic types and making resource allocation more 
adaptive based on the QoS. In [17] an adaptive algorithm 
with connection admission control (CAC) design is 
proposed. Due to large number of users and limited PRBs, 
CAC restricts the ongoing connections to provide required 
QoS and makes decisions whether to reject or accept new 
connections. It improves the QoS of RT traffic by 
prioritizing RT users and delaying users of other traffic 
types. In [18], a prioritizing function is used for packet data 
scheduling in OFDMA systems to satisfy QoS requirements 
of RT and NRT traffics. Priority is associated to different 
traffic types by setting different values of the prioritizing 
function. This algorithm allocates resources in a static way 
by setting the value of priority function for different traffic 
types and cannot cope with the highly dynamic variation of 
wireless channel conditions.  In [19], a server allocation 
scheme to parallel queues with randomly varying 
connectivity is presented. The allocation decision is based 
on the connectivity and on the lengths of the connected 
queues only. The main aim of the work presented in [19] is 
to stabilize different queues. However this allocation policy 
can minimize the delay and maximize throughput for the 
special case of symmetric queues i.e., queues with equal 
arrival, service, and connectivity. However the work 
proposed by the author aims at considering system level and 
service level PS performance jointly. That is why various 
parameters are considered instead of only taking into 
account the stability of user queues, as in [19]. It takes 
scheduling decisions based on channel conditions to 
increase system spectral efficiency, average PDR to reduce 
PDR and delay viability and queue length to reduce packet 
delay and make the user queues stable. 
   As described in [11-18] and certain of the references 
therein, the PS algorithms improve scheduling performance 
in different domains separately such as system throughput, 
user fairness, QoS of RT and NRT traffic types. The 
Combined consideration of service level (QoS) and system 
level performance (system throughput and user fairness) 
improvement has got very little or no attention despite the 
fact that it is very crucial. Scheduling performance in 
different domains needs to be united in an efficient PS 
architecture so that the system can be made cost effective 
and radio resources may be utilised at the best. PS 
performance in different areas can be improved jointly by an 
intelligent PSA which is capable to make scheduling 
decisions adaptive to the environment and to the achieved 
performance in terms of QoS of different traffic types. The 
detailed traffic types can be considered in PSA to make the 
PS algorithms more realistic. 
III. 
SYSTEM MODEL  
    An OFDMA system is considered in which minimum 
allocation unit is one Physical Resource Block (PRB) 
containing 12 sub-carriers in each Transmission Time 
Interval (TTI) of 1ms duration. There are K mobile users and 
M PRBs. The downlink channel is a fading channel within 
each scheduling drop. The received symbol     ( ) at the 
mobile user   on sub channel   is the sum of the additive 
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and the product of actual 
data and channel gain, as given in (5) [10-11]. 
                   ( )      ( )    ( )      ( )           (1) 
 where, 
 t
Y
k,m
is  data symbol from eNodeB to user   at sub 
channel  ,     ( ) is the input, [    ( )]
  is the complex 
channel gain of  sub channel   for user  , and     ( ) is the 
complex White Gaussian Noise [11]. It is assumed, as in [11] 
[14-17], that the power allocation is uniform,   ( )    
⁄
 
on all sub channels where,   is the total transmit power of 
eNodeB,   ( )is the power allocated at channel   and M is 
total number of sub channels. At the start of each scheduling 
drop, the channel state information (CSI)     ( ) is known 
by the eNodeB. 
The achievable throughput of a user   on sub channel   
can be calculated by (6) as used in [11] and [12]. 
                    ( )       [  
|    ( )| 
   
  ( )]         (2) 
where,  is the bandwidth of each PRB, 
 2
is the noise 
power density i.e., noise power per unit bandwidth and Γ is 
a constant signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) gap and has a simple 
relationship with the required Bit Error Rate (BER). 
                             
   (    )
   
                             (3) 

247
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Real Time Traffic
Control Traffic
Streaming Traffic
Background Traffic
FD 
Scheduler
 
 
 
 
PDR 
Feedback 
Adaptive TD 
Scheduler
Mixed 
Traffic
Receiver 
terminal
QoS 
Measures
CQI Reports 
Per PRB CQI 
Reports
Traffic pattern
 and 
System load
Traffic 
Classifier
Traffic differentiation
Queue sorting
 
Figure 1. The cross layer packet scheduling architecture 
 
IV. 
PACKET SCHEDULING ARCHITECTURE (PSA) 
    A schematic diagram of proposed PSA is shown in Fig. 1. 
It consists of a traffic classifier, adaptive TD scheduler and 
FD scheduler. Mixed traffic is classified into service 
specific queues at classifier stage. Users in these queues are 
prioritized according to QoS requirements. Adaptive TD 
scheduler adaptively allocates available radio resources to  
RT and NRT traffic types based on traffic pattern and 
system load information from traffic classifier and PDR 
information from QoS measure unit. QoS measure unit 
calculates PDR of RT traffic and minimum throughput of 
NRT traffic in each TTI to analyze the support of QoS 
provision to RT and NRT streaming video traffic. FD 
scheduler actually maps these resources to the selected 
users.  
    The detailed description of functionality, algorithms and 
policies of each proposed PSA stage are described as below. 
A. Classifier 
    The need for traffic differentiation arises when there is a 
question to deal with mixed traffic demanding different QoS 
guarantees. In such an environment, it becomes very 
important to classify traffic into different service queues to 
enable queue specific prioritizing schemes effectively. 
Service differentiation is the first step towards optimising 
the utilization of available radio resources where the 
available radio resources are allocated according to the well-
defined demands of traffic types [1].  
    In the proposed PSA mixed traffic is classified into four 
queues; Control, Real Time, Non Real Time and 
background traffic queue, as in [1]. These queues are 
represented by control, RT, NRT and BE queue hereafter. 
The queues at the traffic classifier stage are prioritized in the 
sequence as discussed above. These classes cover most of 
the common traffic types such as control information, low 
latency RT conversational, high throughput NRT streaming 
video 
and 
low 
priority 
background 
data. 
Control 
information is the signaling information exchanged between 
the User Equipment (UE) and eNodeB and it is separated 
from other data queues and is served before any other data 
queues. The control queue is always allocated enough radio 
resources to transmit signaling information to users. 
Background traffic represents the best effort (BE) class of 
traffic and does not have any QoS requirements. The service 
specific queue sorting algorithms used to prioritise users in 
these queues are as follows. 
Control queue 
    In the proposed classifier, the control information is 
equally important information between users and therefore it 
is transmitted in Round Robin (RR) manner for all 
scheduled users. 
RT queue 
    In RT queue, the delay requirement for each RT user is 
defined as        where    is the delay of user k,       
the delay budget which is the upper delay bound of RT 
traffic. A delay dependent priority metric is used to sort 
users in the RT queue. The priority metric is shown in (4). It 
is the product of normalised waiting time of each RT user 
and its channel state information, and the product is added 
with the square of the user’s queue length. In this priority 
metric, users with longer waiting time (normalised by DB), 
good channel conditions and longer queues, are prioritised 
in the front of the queue. By prioritising users with longer 
delays (normalised with DB), the priority metric reduces 

248
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
average delay of RT traffic significantly. In addition users 
are given equal opportunity to be scheduled thus improving 
fairness among users. By giving priority to users with longer 
queues, this priority metric reduces PDR of RT traffic due to 
time out. This is because in a user’s queues, packet with the 
longest delay (provided it is not timed out) is transmitted 
first provided a PRB is allocated to this user. The overall 
system throughput is improved by exploiting multiuser 
diversity when users with good channel conditions are 
prioritised over the users with bad channel conditions.  
    The priority of an RT user k at time t is given by (4) 
below [2]. 
    
  ( )  (
  
       
    ( )  [  
  ( )] )  [  ( )]            (4) 
where, ,   
  ( )  is the priority of RT user   at time  ,   
  
        is the waiting time of RT user  ,     is the delay 
budget of RT traffic,     
   is the channel state information 
of RT user k and   ( ) is queue length of user   at time  .  
NRT queue 
    The QoS requirement for NRT streaming video traffic is 
defined as      ( )    , where   ( )  is the instantaneous 
throughput of user   at time   and    is throughput 
requirement of NRT user  . A QoS aware priority metric is 
used to sort users in NRT queue. The priority metric for 
NRT queue is shown in (5) It is the product of normalised 
waiting time, a ratio of minimum required throughput and 
average achieved throughput, and channel state information, 
of each NRT user. The priority metric reduces delay of NRT 
queue users by prioritising users with longer delays and 
improves fairness among users by allocating them fair share 
of time, to be scheduled. This is because when users with 
longer delays are put in the front of queue, then at the end 
users’ total number of scheduling intervals become almost 
equal. the ratio of minimum required throughput and 
average achieved throughput increases the priority of users 
achieving low throughput and tries to allocate to each user 
equal or more than the minimum throughput required by 
NRT queue users. Multiplication of channel state 
information helps improving the overall system throughput 
by prioritising users with good channel conditions as in (4). 
    The priority of a NRT user k at time t is given in (5) 
below [2]. 
                 
   ( )  
  
       
      
  ( )
  ( )  [  
   ( )]              (5) 
where   
   ( ) is the priority of NRT user   at time  , 
  
   ( )is the channel state information of NRT user   at 
time   and         is the delay budget of NRT streaming 
video traffic. 
    The time average throughput of user k,   ( )  is updated 
by the following formula as used in [1] [9], 
         (   )  [  
 
  ]   ( )  
 
  ∑
    
 ( )
 
   
           (6) 
 where   is the length of time window to calculate the 
average data rate;    
⁄
 is called attenuation co-efficient 
with classic value 0.001,     
 ( ) is the acquired data rate of 
user   at PRB   if   is allocated to  , else it is zero and    
is instantaneous and   is average throughput of user  . 
BE queue 
BE traffic has no QoS requirements so priority is given to 
users based only on channel conditions. However to 
maintain some amount of fairness between users, classic PF 
algorithm is used as the queue sorting algorithm for BE. The 
priority metric for BE users is given below in (10), 
                                           
  ( )  
  
                               (10) 
where   
  ( ) is the priority of BE user   at time  . 
B. Adaptive TD scheduler  
After prioritising users in the queues, adaptive TD 
scheduler selects the most suitable users from the queues 
based on the priority of traffic types and the available PRB 
in the FD. 
Packet scheduling algorithm is mainly focused on PRB 
allocation based on users’ channel state information, traffic 
queue information and QoS requirements. However because 
of too many users and limited PRBs, it is infeasible to 
guarantee all ongoing users’ QoS in each TTI. In this case, a 
TD scheduling algorithm is needed to make decisions 
adaptively whether to admit or reject scheduling request of a 
user. A novel Adaptive TD scheduling algorithm is 
proposed in this paper, where it chooses a pool of users 
from the queues of traffic classifier based on current 
network conditions and PDR feedback of RT traffic. This 
algorithm consists of two main steps. In the first step, it 
allocates the radio resources to RT and NRT traffics based 
on current traffic pattern, system load and service, and 
system level performance metrics. In the second step, it 
adjusts the RT resource allocation at the cost of minor delay 
in NRT traffic. This algorithm lowers the PDR of RT traffic 
and at the same time ensures that the minimum throughput 
requirement of NRT traffic is met. It is achieved by 
decreasing resource allocation to RT queue and allocating 
resources to NRT traffic queues when the PDR is lower than 
the threshold.  
    The adaptive TD scheduling algorithm works as follows. 
Let the total number of available PRBs are denoted by  . 
Let λC be the proportion of PRBs assigned to RT traffic 
users and  (   )  is assigned to NRT traffic users. At the 
first step the default value of λ is set from the built-in 

249
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
policies based on different parameters then the value of λ is 
adaptively adjusted according to PDR of RT traffic. A built-
in policy defines the resources reserved for RT and NRT 
traffics e.g., policy (60%, 40%) means that 60% of the 
available PRBs are reserved for RT traffic and 40% are 
reserved for NRT traffic. At the start of transmission, TD 
adaptive scheduling algorithm uses a default policy to 
distribute PRBs between RT and NRT traffic types. A 
default policy is set at a point where the PS algorithm 
performs well in terms of all performance metrics thus 
improve the PS performance at service level and system 
level. This is defined as a stability region at which the PS 
algorithm produces balanced performance regarding all 
performance metrics. The default value of λ is adjusting 
with the current network condition. This is because the 
network conditions are changing rapidly in wireless 
environments. In this way the main challenanges in setting 
the default value of λ are; i) finding a stability region and ii) 
updating the value of λ based on changing wireless 
conditions. To find a stability region is subject the practical 
user distribution and total number of active users. It means 
that there may be different traffic patterns such as RT users 
are equal to NRT user or RT users may be lesser or more 
than NRT users.  Similarly, the number of active users can 
vary with time. The default value of λ can have different 
values under different traffic patterns and varying system 
load. To set a stable default value of λ under different traffic 
patterns and with variable system load, a series of 
experiments have been done as described below. 
Results Analysis of Built-in Policy  
    In this section an analysis is presented based on a series 
of simulation results which is done to make the PS 
algorithm work effectively under different traffic patterns 
and with variable system load. For this analysis, the QoS of 
RT traffic (delay, PDR), QoS of NRT traffic (minimum 
throughput), system throughput, user throughput fairness 
and a  trade-off between system throughput and user 
fairness are analysed at  the system load varying from 40 to 
100 active users in a single cell scenario.  These simulations 
have been conducted in the following traffic patterns.  
 
RT users              
 
RT users              
 
RT users      NRT users 
    For each traffic pattern, simulations are run for network 
loads varying from 50 to 100. The reason of running these 
simulations is that PS performance behaves differently 
under different traffic patterns and different system load, 
and there is a need of finding out a stability region where 
PSA can produce balanced performance in terms of all PS 
performance metrics used in this paper. Fig.2 shows an 
example how these simulations are run. In Fig.2 the average 
delay of 80 users is calculated by using different built-in 
policies. This is to find a policy where the average delays of 
RT and NRT traffic are balanced. As shown, both RT and 
NRT traffic have a balanced delay at policy (70%, 30%). 
Trade-off between RT and NRT delay shows an insight how 
the simulations are run for analysis purpose. 
 
Figure 2.  A trade-off between delay of RT and NRT traffic. 
   This trade-off value is different under different network 
loads for the same traffic pattern. And this trade-off value is 
different under different traffic patterns with the same 
system load. This difference appears for other performance 
measures such as in PDR, minimum throughput, and 
fairness etc. For all performance metrics, a balanced point is 
traced out by considering QoS requirements of RT and NRT 
traffic types. Based on all information, a stability region is 
analysed to set the default value of λ. The conclusion of the 
series of all experiments is as follows.  
    For the first traffic pattern (RT users  >  NRT users), if 
the total number of active users in the cell are more than 60, 
the built-in policy (70%, 30%) works well in terms of QoS 
of RT and NRT traffics and system throughput and user 
fairness. This is shown by analysis results that the system 
can work well at this policy for all traffic loads greater than 
60. If the number of active users is lesser than 60, then 
policy (60%, 40%) works well and comes up with required 
performance guarantees. For second network condition (RT 
users = NRT users), policy (50%, 50%) works well for all 
network loads. For third network scenario (RT users < NRT 
users), if the number of users is greater than 60, policy 
(30%, 70%) works well and for a load lesser than 60, policy 
(20%, 80%) works well.  In this way this algorithm reserves 
radio resources for RT and NRT traffic types based on a 
stability region where the proposed algorithm shows a 
balanced performance under variable system load and 
specific traffic pattern, in terms of all aimed performance 
metrics. The next step is to further improve QoS of RT and 
NRT streaming video traffic by making adaptive changed in 
the value of λ based on PDR of RT traffic. If the PDR of RT 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Average delay (ms) 
(RT,NRT capacity proportion) 
RT
NRT

250
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
traffic is increased above a certain threshold, RT resource 
allocation is increased at the cost of minor delay in NRT 
traffic. And if PDR of RT traffic is lower than the threshold, 
RT resource allocation is decreased by diverting resources 
to NRT traffic types.  
    The adaptive change in the value of λ for the second step 
of adaptive TD scheduler follows the following rule (11).   
    (   )  {
 ( )                     ( )   
 ( )                 ( )    
 ( )                 ( )   
                (11) 
where η is the increment/decrement of the resources 
reserved for RT traffic and φ is the PDR threshold set for 
RT traffic. Packets of RT users are dropped when they 
exceed upper bound of delay. PDR is calculated by QoS 
measure unit of the proposed PSA in each TTI and is fed 
back to the adaptive TD scheduler. And based on PDR value 
adaptive TD scheduler adaptively increment or decrement 
resources reserved for RT and NRT traffic.  
    If PDR of RT traffic is equal to φ, value of λ will not 
change. However if PDR is higher than φ, there will be  an 
increment equal to η in the resource allocation to RT traffic, 
and if PDR is lower than φ, the resource allocation to RT 
traffic will be decremented by the same amount η.  
    This algorithm lowers the delay, delay viability and PDR 
of RT traffic and considers the minimum throughput 
requirements of NRT traffic to be satisfied at the same time. 
This is achieved by increasing NRT resource allocation 
when PDR is under the threshold. 
C. FD scheduler 
    In the frequency domain, PRBs are mapped to the users. 
Multiuser diversity is exploited by using channel dependent 
frequency domain proportional fairness (PF-FD) algorithm. 
Per PRB CQI reports of each user are fed back to this stage 
and for each scheduling unit, the best PRB is selected and 
allocated to it. 
V. 
THE PROPOSED PACKET SCHEDULING ALGORITHM 
AND PERMANCE METRICS 
    In this section the packet scheduling algorithm and the 
performance metrics for its performance evaluation are 
given. 
A.     Packet Scheduling Algorithm  
    A list of prioritized users is generated after applying queue 
sorting and adaptive TD scheduling algorithms at the 
classifier and adaptive TD scheduler stage of the PSA, 
respectively. The proposed PSA flow and the PRB allocation 
method is formalized in the following algorithm. At a given 
time t, PRBs are allocated to the prioritized users by this 
algorithm.  
 
Figure 3. The proposed packet scheduling algorithm. 
    Resource allocation is completed when all PRBs are 
allocated. 
B. Performance Metrics  
    We analyze the propose packet scheduling framework 
under performance metrics of system throughput, fairness 
among users and QoS of RT and NRT traffic types.  
    The system throughput is the sum of average throughput 
across all the users [20]. Individual user throughput helps 
calculating minimum throughput requirements of NRT users 
and system overall throughput is used to analyze network 
level PS performance in terms of system spectral efficiency.  
    To measure the fairness among users Raj Jain fairness 
index is adopted which is defined as below [20-21]. 
                     













K
k
k
K
k
k
R
K
R
Fairness
1
2
~
2
1
~
                         (12) 
    The value of fairness index is 1 for the highest fairness 
when all users have same throughput such as at lower 
system loads. In (12),    represents total number of users 
and  ̌   is the time average throughput of user  . 
      User delay is equal to the number of TTIs in which the 
user is not scheduled and average delay of RT traffic is the 
total delay experienced by all RT users divided by the total 

251
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
number of users. The PDR is calculated by the ratio of 
number of packets dropped (due to time out) to the total 
number of RT packets as given in (14) as used in [2] [16]. 
                                    
    
  
       
  
                                   (13) 
      Where   
   is the PDR,    
        is total number of 
dropped packets by RT user   and   
      is total number of 
packets generated by RT user . Overall PDR for RT traffic 
is calculated by taking the ratio of total packets dropped by 
all RT users to the total number of packets of RT users. And 
the delay violation probability is taken as the PDR of a user 
  with the maximum value of PDR out of all RT users as 
given by (15), as used in [2] [16]. 
                                           (  
   )            (14) 
      Where   
    is the PDR of RT user  . The long-term 
minimum throughput is taken as the minimal throughput 
among all NRT streaming video traffic users and is given by 
(15) [2] [16], 
                                                      
      Where     is the minimal throughput of all NRT 
streaming video traffic users and    is the throughput 
achieved by NRT streaming video traffic user  . 
VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
    Simulation model used in all simulations is presented in 
this section. The results obtained are discussed in detail in 
this section. 
A. Simulation model 
    The proposed PSA for LTE-A networks is simulated 
using a single cell OFDMA system with total system 
bandwidth of 10 MHz which is divided into 55 PRBs and 
PRB size is 180 kHz. The total system bandwidth is divided 
into 55 PRBs.  
The wireless environment is typical Urban Non Line of 
Sight (NLOS) and the LTE-A system works with carrier 
frequency of 2GHz. The most suitable path loss model in 
this simulation is COST 231Walfisch-Ikegami (WI) [3] as 
used by many other literatures on LTE. In the simulation we 
assume all users are random distributed.   
In the simulations, we take full buffer traffic model and 
packet is fixed to 180 bits/s. The first simulation is to 
compare the performance of the proposed PSA against the 
existing QoS aware PS algorithm. In these simulations the 
total number of RT users is equal to the total number of 
NRT users. The simulation results are shown in Figs. 4 to 9.  
In the second set of simulation, the performances of the 
proposed PSA are analysed under different traffic patterns 
as mentioned in Section III. The second set of the simulation 
results compare the PS performances of the proposed PSA 
at different traffic patterns and variable system loads. The 
results are shown in Figs. 10 to 12.   
    The simulation parameters for the system level simulation 
are based on [22] and these values are used typically in most 
of 
the 
literatures. 
The 
simulation 
parameters 
and 
configurations are shown in Table 1. 
TABLE 1 SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value/comment 
Cell topology 
Single cell 
Cell Radius 
1 km 
UE distribution 
Random 
Smallest distance from UE to 
eNodeB/m 
35 m 
Path Loss model 
COST 231 Walfisch-
Ikegami (WI) model 
Shadow fading standard 
deviation 
8 dB 
System bandwidth 
10 MHz 
PRB bandwidth 
180 kHz 
Carrier frequency 
2 GHz 
BS transmission power 
46dBm(40w) 
Traffic model 
Full buffer 
 
In each of the simulation, the delay upper bound for RT 
traffic is set to 40 ms [16] [23] which is equivalent to 40 
time slots. The minimum throughput required by NRT 
streaming video traffic users is to 240 kbps as used in [2] 
and [16]. The total eNodeB transmission power and Bit 
error rate (BER) for all users are set to 46dBm (40w) and 
4
10 respectively. 
    In [1], each user is assumed to have one service type and 
one scheduling unit (SU) carries the information about the 
user, service type and buffer status. However in this paper 
three separate traffic models are used for RT, NRT 
streaming video and BE traffic. For RT traffic, an “ON and 
OFF” traffic model is used with 35% “ON” time, and the 
packets are generated by using Poisson distribution. Poisson 
distribution is also employed for NRT streaming video and 
BE packet generation. The BER without buffering for RT 
traffic, NRT streaming and BE traffics are 0.1579, 0.8596 
and 0.7448 respectively. For the BER with buffering of RT, 
NRT and BE, the values are 9.864e-007, 9.9219e-007 and 
9.881e-007 respectively. Using the above simulation model, 
all simulations are run in Matlab R2009a on Windows 7 
with 2.4 GHz CPU and 4-GB RAM. 
B. Simulation results 
    The performance of the proposed PSA is evaluated 
against the standalone PF and QoS aware SWBS algorithm 
[15]. In the simulation result figures, PPSA represents the 
proposed PSA, PF represents the proportional fairness 

252
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
algorithm and SWBS represents the QoS aware packet 
scheduling algorithm. 
    First, we present results for the QoS support to RT and 
RT streaming video traffic. The conventional PF algorithm 
does not take into account QoS support to RT and NRT 
streaming video traffic and is not considered in these results. 
Fig.4 shows the average delay of RT traffic by the proposed 
PSA and SWBS algorithm. Both PPSA and SWBS show 
almost same average delay for a system load      as the 
total number of active users is small and users are frequently 
scheduled. At higher system loads, the average delay shown 
by both algorithms increases because of resource 
competition. However the performance of SWBS is poorer 
than the proposed PPSA. As can be seen for      , 
average delay of PPSA is 0.56 ms which is significantly 
lower than the average delay by SWBS. This is because the 
proposed PSA is designed in such a way that it reduces user 
delay by giving high priority to the users with longer delays. 
At lower system load, both algorithms show almost the 
same performance because the available resources are 
sufficient enough to meet the requirements of all users. 
 
 
Figure 4. Average delay of RT traffic. 
    The PDR performance is analysed as the average PDR of 
RT traffic and the delay viability of RT users. The average 
PDR of RT traffic is calculated by (13) and is shown in Fig. 
5. The performance shown by PPSA and SWBS is same for 
lower system loads when     . When     , the 
average PDR increases significantly with the user number. 
However PPSA can still maintains the best PDR 
performance. At      , the PDR performance of PPSA 
is 30 % better than SWBS as shown. This is due to the 
particular design of adaptive TD scheduler in the proposed 
PSA as described in Section IV 
 
Figure 5. Average PDR of RT traffic. 
    The delay viability is a measure of difference of PDR 
among RT users and shows the highest PDR by an RT user. 
It is calculated by (14) and is shown in Fig.6. As can be 
seen, delay viability for both algorithms increases with the 
number of users. However PPSA shows higher performance 
as compared to SWBS particularly at higher system loads.     
The proposed PSA at its classifier stage, prioritises users 
with longer queues and transmits packets with the highest 
delay (provided it is not timed out), once PRB is allocated to 
the user. In this way it significantly reduces the number of 
dropped packets due to time out. Delay viability is further 
reduced by PSA when adaptive TD scheduling algorithm 
adaptively adjusts the radio resource allocation to RT traffic 
based on PDR threshold. That is why it has capability to 
keep the PDR of each user lower than the PDR shown by 
other algorithm.  
    The QoS support for NRT traffic is analysed by the 
minimum throughput of streaming video traffic as shown in 
Fig. 7. It is calculated by (5) for the proposed PSA, SWBS 
and conventional PF algorithm. The results for PF algorithm 
are included hereafter because it is designed to improve 
system throughput and fairness among users. While 
showing results on throughput of users and system 
throughput and fairness among users, PF shows comparable 
results. 
    The proposed PSA and SWBS can support minimum 
throughput guarantee of streaming video traffic and achieve 
more than required throughput(          ). However 
the conventional PF algorithm can only support minimum 
throughput guarantee at lower system load,       
When     , minimum throughput achieved by PF 
decreased and becomes 135 kbps at       as shown.  
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
50
60
70
80
90
100
Average delay  (ms) 
System load 
PPSA
SWBS
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
50
60
70
80
90
100
Average PDR of RT traffic 
System load 
PPSA
SWBS

253
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 6. Delay delay viability of RT users. 
 
Figure 7. Minimum throughput of streaming video traffic.   
   The fairness performance is analysed by (12) for PF, 
proposed PPSA and SWBS algorithm and is shown in Fig.8. 
The proposed PSA significantly improves The PF algorithm 
shows the highest fairness among all algorithms at all 
system loads because it has a fairness control in its design. 
Fairness achieved by PPSA is almost similar to that 
achieved by PF up to a system load of 70 active users. 
However it is slightly lower than PF at system load higher 
than 70 active users. This is because at higher system loads, 
the 
resource 
competition 
among 
users 
increases 
significantly and PPSA is a QoS aware algorithm. It is 
designed to balance the PS performance in terms of all 
performance metrics. That is why at higher system load its 
fairness performance decreases slightly as shown. The 
SWBS algorithm however shows the lowest performance 
because in its design there it lacks fairness control. 
 
Figure 8. Fairness among users. 
 
    We define the average system throughput as the average 
transmitted bits per second in the system [9]. Fig.9 shows 
system throughput achieved by the proposed PSA, SWBS 
and conventional PF algorithm. As can be seen, the 
proposed PSA achieves the highest throughput among all 
the algorithms. PF algorithm also achieves a high 
throughput because it is designed to make a good trade-off 
between system throughput and user fairness thus maintain 
system throughput at good level. However its performance 
results are poorer than that for PSA at all system loads. For 
example at a system load of 70 active users, system 
throughput achieved by PPSA is 24Mbps which is 6Mbps 
higher than PF algorithm and 9 Mbps higher than SWBS 
algorithm. This is because the proposed PSA exploits 
multiuser diversity both in the TD and FD and always gives 
priority to users with good channel condition. The SWBS 
algorithm achieves the lowest system throughput because it 
is only designed to improve QoS of RT and NRT traffic 
types and does not improve overall system throughput. 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
50
60
70
80
90
100
Dlay viability 
System load 
PPSA
SWBS
0
75
150
225
300
375
450
50
60
70
80
90
100
Minimum throughput (kb/s) 
 
Number of active users in the cell 
PF
PPSA
SWBS
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
50
60
70
80
90
100
Fairness 
System  load 
PF
PPSA
SWBS

254
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
    
 
Figure 9. System throughput. 
C.     Performance results for different traffic patters 
In this paper simulations have also been conducted to 
analyse the performance of the proposed PSA with three 
traffic patterns with number of users varying from 50 to 
100. This is to prove the validity of the proposed PSA in 
varyig network condtions in terms of traffic patterns and 
system loads. In the first set of traffic  pattern, the total 
number of active users are equally divided between RT and 
NRT traffic. The second set of traffic pattern consists of 
70% RT active users and 30% of NRT active users. In the 
third set of traffic pattern, there are 30% of RT users and 
70% of NRT users.  
In these results the default value of λ is set according to  
the current traffic pattern and system load. This value is then 
adaptively adjusted based on PDR of RT traffic as discussed 
in Section IV. 
    In 
the 
previous 
set 
of 
results, 
the 
proposed 
PSAperformance is analysed on the service level by average 
delay, delay viability and PDR of RT traffic and minimum 
throughput of NRT traffic and on the system level by 
system throughput and  fairness among users.    In this set of 
simulation results, the performance results of the proposed 
PSA for varying network conditions are given. Thses results 
are shown in Figs. 10 to 12.  As can be seen, there is not any 
huge different in the PS performance at the service and 
system level. And  the proposed PSA is capable to maintain 
good performance under all varying network conditions . 
Average delay for RT traffic at        and        
is almost equal, however its value at        is slightly 
lower. Delay viability at        and at        is 
almost same and its value for        shows very small 
difference at system load when     . PDR with all traffic 
patterns is almost equal except at a system load when 
     , where it shows verty slight difference. 
Thesupport for minimum throughput gaurantee to NRT 
streaming video traffic is well satisfied at all traffic patterns 
and all users achieve a throughput higher than the 
requirement           , as shown.System overall 
throughput value is almost same at all conditions and 
fairness at        is slightly lower than the other two 
network conditions 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    In this paper, we have presented a QoS aware packet 
scheduling architecture which is composed of three main 
units for the resource allocation in the downlink 
transmission of OFDMA-based LTE-A networks. The 
queue sorting algorithms at the classifier stage segregate 
mix traffic into service specific queues and prioritize users 
in these queues according to their QoS requirements. The 
novel adaptive TD scheduling algorithm sets a default value 
of radio resources for RT and NRT traffic based on traffic 
pattern and system load at first step. The default value is the 
changed adaptively based on PDR of RT traffic. In this way 
it helps maintaining good performance of the proposed PSA 
with variable conditions of traffic patterns, system load and 
PDR of RT traffic. In the FD the prioritized list of users is 
allocated PRBs in such a way that those users get the best 
PRB available. It helps improving the system spectral 
efficiency significantly. In this way the proposed PSA 
provides better QoS to different traffic types. It is able to 
improve system spectral efficiency by optimizing the use of 
given radio resources and maintains certain degree of 
fairness among users at the same time, by adaptively 
providing just enough resources to RT traffic and 
distributing extra resources efficiently to NRT services. The 
results show an improved QoS of RT traffic and a better 
trade-off between user fairness and system overall 
throughput. The performance comparison under different 
traffic patterns and with variable system loads also show 
that good performance of proposed PSA is maintained with 
variable conditions. 
    This work mainly focus on user-level PS performance by 
evaluating average delay and average PDR of RT traffic, 
delay viability of RT users and minimum throughput 
guarantees to NRT users. However packet-level PS 
performance may be evaluated by calculating jitter which is 
an importance performance metric at packet-level. 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Rehana. K., Yue. Chen, Kok. K. C., Laurie C., and John S., ”QoS 
aware mixed traffic packet scheduling in OFDMA based LTE-
Advanced networks”, UBICOMM 2010, Copyright © IARIA 2010, 
pp. 53-58. 
[2] Rehana. K., Yue. C., and Kok. K. C., ” Service Specific Queue 
Sorting and Scheduling Algorithm for OFDMA-Based LTE-
Advanced Networks” Sixth International Conference on Broadband 
and Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications 2011, 
Barcelona, Spain [accepted]. 
[3] Harri H., and Antti T., “LTE for UMTS OFDMA and SC-FDMA 
Based Radio Access”, John Wiley and sons ltd 2009, pp 181-190. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
50
60
70
80
90
100
System throughput (Mb/s) 
Number of active users in the cell 
PF
PPSA
SWBS

255
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[4] Martin S. (2008,April 23).WirelessMoves, 3GPP Moves on: LTE-
Advaced. Last viewed  23 Jan. 2012 at 18:35 GMT. Website:   
hhttp://mobilesociety.typepad.com/mobile_life/2008/04/3gpp-moves-
on-l.html 
[5] Stefania S., Issam T., and Matthew B.,  “The UMTS Long Term 
Evolution Forum Theory to Practice”, 2009 John Willey & Sons 
Ltd.ISBN: 978-0-470-69716-0. 
[6] Jani P., Niko K.,. H., Martti M. and Mika R., ”Mixed Traffic Packet 
Scheduling in UTRAN Long Term Evaluation Downlink” IEEE 
2008, pp 978-982. 
[7] Won-Hyoung P., Sunghyun C. and Saewoong B.,  ”Scheduling design 
for multiple traffic classes in OFDMA networks”, IEEE 2006, 
pp,790-795. 
[8] Bilal S., Ritesh M., and Ashwin S., “Downlink Schedulinh for 
Multiclass Traffic in LTE”, EURASIP Journal on Wireless 
Communications and Networking, Vol. 2009, Article ID 510617, 18 
pages. 
[9] Zhen K., Yu-Kwong, and Jianzhou W., ”A low complexity QoS 
aware proportinal fair multicarrier scheduling algorithm for OFDM 
systems” vehiculer transaction on IEEE technology, June 2009, 
volume 58. 
[10] Gutierrez I., Bader F., Pijoan J. L., ”Prioritization function for packet 
scheduling in OFDMA systems”, Wireless internet conference 08, 
Nov. 2008, Maui, USA. 
[11] Andrews P., Kumaran K., Ramanan K., Stolyar A., Whiting P., 
Vijayakumar R.,  ”Providing quality of service over a shared wireless 
link”, Communication magazine, IEEE, vol.39, 2001, pp.150-154. 
[12] Suleiman Y. Y., and Khalid A. B.,  ”Dynamic buffer management for 
multimedia QoS beyond 3G wireless networks”,  IAENG 
International Journal of computer science, 36:4,  IJCS_36_4_14, Nov. 
2009. 
[13] Toskala A., and Tiirola E., ”UTRAN Long Term Evaluation in 
3GPP,” Proceedings of IEEE Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio 
Communications Conference (PIMRC’06), September 2006. 
[14] Sanjay. S., and Alexander L. S, ”Scheduling for Multiple Flows 
Sharing a Time-Varying Channel: The Exponential Rule” Bell Labs, 
Lucent Technologies, NJ 07974. 
[15] Parimal P., Srikrshna  B., and Aravind R., “A subcarrier allocation 
algorithm for OFDMA using buffer and channel state information”, 
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2005. VTC-2005-Fall.2005 IEEE 
62nd, pp.622-625. 
[16] Jun S., Na Y., An L., and Haige X., “Opportunistic scheduling for 
heterogeneous services in downlink OFDMA system,” School of 
EECS, Peking University, Beijing, P.R.China, IEEE computer 
Society 2009,  pp.260-264. 
[17] Haipeng L. E. I., Mingliang, A. Z., Yongyu C., and Dacheng Y., 
”Adaptive Connection Admission Control Algorithm for LTE 
Systems”,  IEEE 2008, pp. 2336-2340. 
[18] Kian C.B., Simon A., Angela D., “Joint Time-Frequency Domain 
Proportional Fair Scheduler with HARQ for 3GPP LTE Systems”, 
IEEE 2008.  
[19] Leandros T., and Anthony E., “Dynamic Server Allocation to Parallel 
Queues with Randomly Varying Connectivity” IEEE Transaction on 
Information Theory, Vol. 39, N0. 2, March 1993, pp. 466-478. 
[20] Lin X, and Laurie C. “Improving fairness in relay-based access 
networks,” in ACM MSWIM, Nov.2008,  pp. 18-22.  
[21] Chisung B., and Dong-Ho C., ”Fainess-Aware Adaptive Resource 
Allocation Scheme in Multihop OFDMA Systems,” Communications 
Letters, IEEE, vol.11,  pp. 134-136, Feb. 2007. 
[22] 3GPP TSG-RAN, “TR25.814: Physical Layer Aspects for Evolved 
Utra”. Version 7.0.0,June  2006. 
[23] Ekstrom H., Furuskar A., Karlsson J., Meyer M., parkvall S., Torsner 
J., and Wahlqvist M., ”Technical Solution for 3G LTE,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine”, vol. 44, March 2006,  pp.38-45. 
 
 
 
 

256
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 10. Average delay and delay viability of RT traffic. 
 
 
Figure 11. PDR of RT traffic and minimum throughput of NRT traffic. 
 
 
Figure 12. System throughput and fairness among users. 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
50
60
70
80
90
100
Average delay (ms) 
System load 
RT=NRT
RT>NRT
RT<NRT
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
50
60
70
80
90
100
Delay viability (ms) 
System load 
RT=NRT
RT>NRT
RT<NRT
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
50
60
70
80
90
100
PDR of RT traffic 
System load 
RT=NRT
RT>NRT
RT<NRT
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
50
60
70
80
90
100
Minimum throughput (kb/s) 
System load 
RT=NRT
RT>NRT
RT<NRT
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
50
60
70
80
90
100
System throughput (Mb/s) 
System load 
RT=NRT
RT>NRT
RT<NRT
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
50
60
70
80
90
100
Fairness 
System load 
RT=NRT
RT>NRT
RT<NRT

