Resource Management in Multi-Domain Content-
Aware Networks for Multimedia Applications 
Eugen Borcoci, Mihai Stanciu, Dragoş Niculescu, Șerban Obreja 
Telecomunications Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
{eugenbo, ms, dniculescu, serban}@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The significant orientation of the current Internet 
towards information/content determined the appearance of 
new solutions and concepts among which the Content Aware 
Networking is a significant one.  Virtual Content Aware 
Networks (VCAN) constructed as overlays over IP network 
substrate is considered an efficient solution to incrementally 
introduce content awareness at network level. This paper 
continues a previous effort to define and develop   a new 
framework for connectivity resources management in overlay 
VCANs,  built over multi-domain, multi-provider IP networks. 
The VCANs are created and managed  by novel business 
entities called CAN Providers and they offer enhanced 
connectivity services to high level Services Providers (SP), 
including unicast, multicast, and P2P in a multi-domain 
networking context. The paper develops the   management 
system 
and 
procedures 
to 
negotiate 
and 
allocate the 
connectivity 
resources 
in 
different 
network 
domains, 
independently managed, but cooperating to create VCANs. 
The management framework is based on vertical and 
horizontal Service Level Agreements (SLA) negotiated and 
concluded 
between 
providers 
and 
possibly 
also 
on 
content/service description information (metadata) inserted in 
the media flow packets by the servers.  
Keywords—Content-Aware Networking; Network Aware 
Applications; 
Connectivity 
services; 
CAN 
Management; 
Multimedia distribution; Future Internet 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Future Internet has a strong orientation towards 
services and content [1][2][3]. A new solution to make the 
Future Internet more content oriented, is to create virtualized 
Content-Aware Networks (CAN) and Network-Aware 
Applications (NAA) on top of the flexible IP [3][4][5][6]. 
Additionally to routing, the CAN routers are optimized for 
filtering, forwarding, and transforming inter-application 
messages on the basis of their content and context.  
The work of this paper is part of an activity performed in 
the framework of a new European FP7 ICT research project, 
“Media 
Ecosystem 
Deployment 
Through 
Ubiquitous  
Content-Aware Network Environments”, ALICANTE [7] 
[8][9] and is a continuation and extension of the work 
presented in [10] and [11]. The following inter-working 
multi-actor environments are defined: User Environment 
(UE), to which some end users belong; Service Environment 
(SE), to which Service Providers (SP) and Content Providers 
(CP) belong; Network Environment (NE), to which the 
Network Providers (NP) belong. Environment is a generic 
name for a grouping of functions defined around the same 
common goal and which possibly vertically span one or 
more several architectural layers. 
Note that in this text the Service provider is actually a 
High Level Service Provider, offering high level services 
(Video on demand, VoIP, conference services, etc.). It is not 
mandatory the owner of the network and transport resources, 
but may uses such capabilities hired from the network 
owners named here Network Providers (NP). This approach 
defines a flexible business model. In practice the same 
commercial entity can play several roles ( e.g. CP+SP+ NP), 
but they can be as well, separated. 
We propose a new framework, for management of the 
resources necessary for connectivity services management in 
overlay VCANs built over multi-domain, multi-provider IP 
networks. The VCANs are created and managed by a CAN 
Provider (CANP), at the request of high level Services 
Providers which exploit these networks to the benefits of 
their 
individual 
users. These requests are 
actually 
“provisioning actions” in the sense that the SP have some 
forecasted traffic and services data on the future needs and 
decides to construct some new “networks”, for the future. 
43
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The traffic and services forecast is not in the scope of this 
paper. However our solution  is neither  a static provisioning 
nor an over-provisioning one; the VCANs can be 
established, modified in terms of their capabilities and 
terminated dynamically, given 1) the support of several 
negotiation protocols existing between the managers (i.e 
dynamic SLAs (Service Level Agreements) can be 
established any time, by negotiation); 2) an integrated 
monitoring system exist covering all environments, capable 
to offer measurement data on traffic load and thus permitting 
to the managers to take appropriate decision about resource 
(re)allocation for different VCANs. 
The CANP offers to SPs enhanced connectivity services 
including unicast, multicast and peer-to-peer (P2P). The 
management framework is based on vertical and horizontal 
SLAs defined in the Management and Control (M&C) Plane  
negotiated and concluded between providers and possibly 
also on content/service description information (metadata) 
inserted in the media flow packets (Data Plane) by the 
servers. 
The paper continues the starting work on VCAN 
management presented in [8][10][11].  
Note that this complex system is still under development, 
therfore some final and evaluation results will be presented 
in future papers. This paper is organized as follows. Section 
II presents samples of related work. Section III summarizes 
the overall ALICANTE architecture. Section IV presents the 
content awareness features of the system and QoS assurance 
solutions. Section V describes the peering approach to 
extend a VCAN over several domains. The proposed CAN 
management architecture and functionalities is presented in 
Section VI. Section VII discusses the scalability aspects of 
the system. Section VIII contains some conclusions and 
future work outline. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A higher coupling between the Application and Network 
layers was recently proposed as a new approach in order to 
make the IP network more adapted to content and services. 
In the framework of rethinking the architecture of the Future 
Internet, the concepts of CAN and NAA are proposed. CAN 
adjusts network layer processing based on limited 
examination of the nature of the content, and NAA implies 
processing the content based on limited understanding of the 
network conditions. The work presented in [1] emphasizes 
the strong orientation of the Future Internet (FI) towards 
content and services and shows the importance of 
management. CAN/NAA can offer a way of evolution of 
networks beyond IP, as presented in [6]. The implementation 
of such an approach can be supported by virtualization as a 
strong method to overcome the ossification of the current 
Internet [2][3][4][5]. 
The work in [12] discusses the content adaptation issues 
in the FI as a component of CAN/NAA approach. The 
CAN/NAA approach can also offer QoE (Quality of 
Experience) and QoS capabilities of the future networks, [6] 
[13]. Context awareness is added to content awareness in 
[14]. However, the CAN approach requires a higher amount 
of packet header processing, similar to deep packet 
inspection techniques. The CAN/NAA approach can also 
help to solve the current networking problems related to the 
P2P traffic overload of the global Internet [15]. The 
Application Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) problem 
studied by the IETF can be solved by the cooperation 
between the CAN layer and the upper layer. The 
management architecture of the CAN/NAA oriented 
networks is still an open research issue.  
Virtualization, including its management and control is seen 
as a key method in the FI, to increase the flexibility and 
collaboration capabilities among network and SPs. The 
challenges are to develop: 
• 
Virtual networks creation, abstracting the subset of 
network 
resources 
(link 
bandwidth, 
element 
processing power, etc.). Parallel logical slices can be 
defined, based on mechanisms independent or 
dependent on technology [16] [24]. Virtualization 
based 
on 
overlays 
have 
been 
proposed 
in 
[3][4][5] [21] [25].  
• 
Flexible management to create virtual network 
services 
on-demand 
(e.g., 
security, 
content-
awareness) offered to upper layers, i.e., in  [25], by 
defining a VNet Provider and VNet Operator. Such 
entities provide the VNet planning / advertising/ 
discovery/offering, 
negotiation, 
provisioning, 
operation (installation, modification, manipulation, 
monitoring, termination) while cooperating with IP 
network layer, [16] [23] [24] [25].  
• 
Support for VNets across multiple network domains 
based on inter-domain peering conforming to certain 
SLA/SLSs (Service Level Agreement/ Service Level 
Specifications), while preserving each domain’s 
resource 
management 
independency 
[16] [23] [24] [25] [26]. 
Inter-domain 
QoS-enabled 
routing  based on Virtualization is proposed 
 [21] [22] [30].  
• 
Support of unicast and multicast services on top of 
the 
virtual 
networks. 
The 
CURLING 
 [23] 
architecture is content-centric using a multicast-style 
receiver-driven service model, but does not address 
content adaptation, mapping to native IP multicast, 
or QoS. In  [27] a support for multicast streams 
adapted to each terminal’s needs is proposed, by 
encoding media in multiple Scalable Video Coding 
(SVC) layers, and defining independent multicast 
trees for each layer, but it only supports overlay 
multicast.  
Multi-domain Network Resource Management and QoS 
Support: there are limitations of existing work that are 
related to management and control. The Management and 
Service-aware Networking Architectures (MANA) Group 
 [28] evaluated several issues either not yet solved, or having 
limitations. Among them, one can identify some issues 
related to the area of CAN/Network Environment: 
• 
Guaranteeing availability of service according to 
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and high-level 
objectives; facilities to support Quality of Service 
(QoS) and SLAs; 
44
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Mobility of services; 
• 
Facilities for the large scale provisioning and 
deployment of both services and management; 
support for higher integration between services and 
networks; 
• 
Facilities for the addition of new functionality, 
capability for activating a new service on-demand, 
network functionality, or protocol (i.e., addressing 
the ossification bottleneck); 
• 
Support of security, reliability, robustness, context, 
service support, orchestration and management for 
communication and services’ resources. 
• 
Multi-domain QoS support: the [16][17] [24] [26] 
projects are examples of architectures supporting 
end-to-end QoS across multiple domains. However, 
they do not specifically address media content.   
• 
Dynamic assignment, provisioning and interfacing 
of customizable multi-domain network services to 
upper layers (e.g. SPs): this challenge is tackled in 
[16] [24] [26]. However, the aforementioned works 
do not address the cross-layer optimisation between 
the network layer and upper layers.  
 
Specific comparisons between previous work presented 
in various research project are given below. The ALICANTE 
approach for network management versus other research 
project solutions is compared (The list is not exhaustive). 
Correlating their scope with ALICANTE’s objectives, the 
selected projects’ solutions are (partially) media and content 
oriented, including end-to-end QoS, and consider multi-
provider, multi-domain, multi-technology architectures; they 
also cover (partially) the integrated management of both 
high-level services and networking resources. The scope and 
limitations of the proposed solutions are identified, in order 
to clarify the ALICANTE design choices and/or progress 
with respect of these solutions. 
The FP6 project MESCAL “Management of End-to-end 
Quality of Service Across the Internet at Large” project 
[17][18][19], 
proposed 
an 
evolutionary, 
scalable 
architecture, enabling flexible delivery flows over multi-
domains, with QoS.  The main actors are: Service Providers 
(SPs), IP Network Providers (INPs), Physical Connectivity 
Providers (PCPs) and Customers. MESCAL has a complex 
management 
system 
mainly 
focused 
on 
resource 
management and traffic engineering (offline and online) 
intra and inter-domain. It does not have a multimedia 
orientation as a main design direction.  
While applying sophisticated techniques for traffic 
engineering intra and inter-domain MESCAL has no 
concept of parallel planes as ALICANTE VCANs. However 
ALICANTE will use the MESCAL concepts of QoS classes 
(local, extended, meta-QC) in a multi-domain environment, 
but fitted to VCAN oriented architecture. ALICANTE 
proposes a joint algorithm for QoS constrained routing , 
admission control and resource mapping and reservation, 
both in inter and intra-domain. 
The FP6 project ENTHRONE “End-to-End QoS through 
Integrated 
Management 
of 
Content, 
Networks 
and 
Terminals” [26][29],  proposed an evolutionary architecture 
on top of IP, to cover an entire Audio/Video (A/V) service 
distribution 
chain 
(content 
generation, 
protection, 
distribution across QoS-enabled heterogeneous networks 
and delivery at user terminals). ENTHRONE targeted 
primarily multimedia distribution services.  
ALICANTE offer as well as Enthrone QoS enabled 
paths on top of a multi-domain, but its management at 
network level is more powerful, being able to create VCAN 
parallel planes. 
The 
FP6 
project 
AGAVE 
“A 
liGhtweight 
Approach for Viable End-to-end IP-based QoS Services” 
[16][24], aims to solve the E2E provisioning of QoS-aware 
services over multi-domain IP networks. The Service 
Providers (SPs) and the IP Network Provider (INPs) 
cooperates. The INP offer enhanced connectivity services 
across multiple domains, by extending a Network Plane 
(NP) to A Parallel Internet (PI) spanning several domains  
In AGAVE  the NPs implement  local virtual network 
segments while PIs can be seen as end-to-end “virtual 
network segments”, each PI exposing  specific performance 
characteristics. The NPs are built by specific  Traffic 
Engineering (TE) techniques applied in each INP domain. 
AGAVE suggests  an incremental solution for network 
virtualization. However, it  does not  create virtual network 
segment as slices “for sale” to SPs or peer network 
providers. It manages the complexity of performing the 
Connectivity Provisioning Agreements (CPA)  concluded 
between SPs and INPs, aiming to the provisioning and 
delivering of different types of traffic in multi-domain 
context. The NP and PI notions are said to be internal to 
INPs, and their definition and realization, through TE, while 
the SPs sees only the CPA. The AGAVE authors state that 
“the definition of NPs and PIs and their engineering are 
hidden from SPs. AGAVE does not consider content-aware 
aspects at network level.  
The novelty in ALICANTE is that it  creates VCANs 
which are known to SPs. However, ALICANTE  benefits 
from, and extends the AGAVE concepts of PIs, by offering 
the VCAN as an enhanced equivalent of Network Planes. 
This is done  in the framework of a more complete 
architecture, of the proposed Media Ecosystem. 
 
This paper further develops previous work of the same 
group of authors. The work in [8] is only a first description 
of concepts and high level description of the ALICANTE 
system 
architecture, 
with 
no 
details 
on 
functional 
capabilities. The paper [10] is the first approach description 
of the CAN management architecture. The work in [11] is 
focused only on QoS aspects of the system. While parts of 
these works are present or referenced here, this work is a step 
forward in integrating the various components into the 
system assembly. 
 
45
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The main concepts and general ALICANTE architecture 
are defined in [7][8][9]. The business model is defined, 
composed of traditional SP (Service Provider), CP (Content 
Provider), NP (Network Provider) and End-Users (EU). A 
new actor is the CAN Provider (CANP) offering virtual layer 
connectivity services.  A new entity is also defined: Home-
Box (HB) - partially managed by the SP, the NP, and the 
end-user, located at the end-user's premises and gathering 
content/context-aware and network-aware information. The 
HB can also act as a CP/SP for other HBs, on behalf of the 
EUs. Two novel virtual layers exist: the CAN layer for 
network level packet processing and the HB layer for the 
actual content delivery, working on top of IP.  The virtual 
CAN routers are called Media-Aware Network Elements 
(MANE) to emphasize their additional capabilities: content 
and context - awareness, controlled QoS/QoE, security and 
monitoring features, etc. 
The SE uses information from the CAN layer to enforce 
NAA procedures, in addition to user context-aware ones [8]. 
Apart from VCANs provisioning, per flow adaptation can be 
deployed at both HB and CAN layers, as additional means 
for QoS, by making use of scalable media resources.  
The management and control of the CAN layer is 
partially distributed; it supports CAN customization as to 
respond to the upper layer needs, including 1:1, 1:n, and n:m 
communications, and also allow efficient network resource 
exploitation. The rich interface between CAN and the upper 
layer allows cross-layer optimizations interactions, e.g., 
including offering distance information to HBs to help 
collaboration in P2P style. At all levels, monitoring is 
performed in several points of the service distribution chain 
and feeds the adaptation subsystems with appropriate 
information, at the HB and CAN Layers. Figure 1 presents a 
partial view on the ALICANTE architecture, with emphasis 
on the CAN layer and management interaction. The network 
contains several Core Network Domains (CN); each of them 
can be extended up to Autonomous System – (AS), the main 
idea being an unified management of each domain. 
Therefore, each domain is supposed to have an Intra-domain 
Network Resource Manager (IntraNRM), as the authority 
actually configuring the network nodes. Access Networks 
(ANs) also exists, connected to the core domains; however 
the ALICANTE  VCANs do not cover the ANs. This design 
decision has been taken because the heterogeneity of AN 
technologies in terms of managing and guaranteeing the QoS 
capabilities. On the other side, from the business point of 
view, the Access Providers have complete independence on 
“if” and “how” to control the access network resources. The 
CAN layer cooperates with HB and SE by offering them 
CAN services. One CAN Manager (CANMgr) exists for 
each IP domain to assure the consistency of CAN planning, 
provisioning, advertisement, offering, negotiation installation 
and exploitation. However, autonomous CAN-like behavior 
of the MANE nodes can be also offered in a distributed way 
by processing individual flows. 
The following contracts/interactions of SLA/SLS types 
performed in the Management and Control Plane and the 
appropriate interfaces are shown in Figure 1: 
SP-CANP(1): the SP requests to CANP to provision/ 
modify/ terminate  new VCANs and the  CANP to inform SP 
about its capabilities; CANP-NP(2) - through which the NP 
offers or commits to offer resources to CANP (this data is 
topological and capacity-related); CANP-CANP(3) - to 
extend a VCAN upon several NP domains; Network 
Interconnection Agreements (NIA) (4) between the NPs or 
between NPs and ANPs; these are not new ALICANTE 
functionalities but are necessary for NP cooperation. 
 
Access 
Network 
AS1 
IntraNRM@NP 
HB1 
 
AS2 
IntraNRMr@NP 
MANE 
CANMgr 
CANMgr 
Service 
Manager@SP 
2 
3 
IntraNRM@ANP 
1 
CAN layer 
Management 
NIA 
4 
 
Multi-domain VCAN 
HB-SW 
NIA 
 
NIA 
 
HB + SP Environment 
EU 
host 
PHY 
connection 
 
Contract(SLA/SLS) or 
interaction in Mng. Plane or  
Control Plane 
Logical 
relationship 
 
Data and signaling connections 
(PHY and/or logical) 
 
Network elements 
config. commands 
 
MANE 
MANE 
MANE 
AR 
Service  Provider 
Media flow 
 
Input 
 
Output 
 
5 
 
Figure 1. ALICANTE architecture:  CAN management interactions 
46
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

After the SP negotiates a desired VCAN with CANP, it 
will issue the installation commands to CANP, which in turn 
configures via IntraNRM (5) the MANE functional blocks 
(input and output).  
IV. CONTENT AWARENESS AND QOS ASSURANCE AT CAN 
LAYER 
The content awareness (CA) is realized in three ways:  
• 
by concluding an SLA between SP and CANP, 
concerning different VCAN construction. The 
content servers are instructed by the SP to insert 
some special Content Aware Transport Information 
(CATI). This simplifies the media flow classification 
and treatment by the MANE. 
• 
the SLA is concluded, but no CATI information is 
inserted in the data packets. The MANE applies deep 
packet inspection for data flow classification and 
assignment to VCANs. The treatment of the flows is 
based on VCANs characteristics defined in the SLA. 
• 
no SLA exists between SP and CANP. No CATI is 
inserted in the data packets. The treatment of the 
data flows can still be CA, but conforming to the 
local policy established at CANP and IntraNRM. 
An important issue related to multimedia flow 
transportation is the QoS assurance. The DiffServ 
philosophy can be applied to split the sets of flows in QoS 
classes (QC), with a mapping between the VCANs and the 
QCs. 
Several levels of QoS granularity can be established 
when defining VCANs.  The QoS behavior of each VCAN is 
established inside the SLA between SP and CANP. 
Actually, the CAN layer may offer to the SP, several 
Parallel Internets (PI), specialized in different types of 
application content [16]. We adopt the PI concept, enriching 
it with content awareness. A PI enables end-to-end service 
differentiation across multiple administrative domains. The 
PIs can coexist, as parallel logical networks composed of 
interconnected, per-domain, Network Planes. A given plane 
is defined to transport traffic flows from services with 
common connectivity requirements. The traffic delivered 
within each plane receives differentiated treatment, so that 
service differentiation across planes is enabled in terms of 
edge-to-edge QoS, availability and also resilience. 
In ALICANTE, generally a one-to-one mapping between 
a VCAN and a network plane will exist. Specialization of 
CANs may exist in terms of QoS level of guarantees (weak 
or strong), QoS granularity, content adaptation procedures, 
degree of security, etc. A given network plane or VCAN can 
be realized by the CANP, by combining several processes, 
while being possible to choose different solutions concerning 
some 
dimensions: 
route 
determination, 
data 
plane 
forwarding, packet processing, and resource management. 
The definitions of local QoS classes (QC) and extended 
QCs were adopted, to allow us to capture the notion of QoS 
capabilities across several domains [17][18][19]. For a 
simplified design, we also used the concept of Meta-QoS-
Class [17]. A meta-QC captures a common set of QoS ranges 
of parameters spanning several domains. It relies on a 
worldwide common understanding of application QoS needs. 
For example, VoD service flows need similar QoS 
characteristics whatever AS they transit. The meta-QC 
concept offers the advantage that the existence of well 
known classes greatly simplifies the inter-domain signaling 
in the sequence of actions needed to establish domain 
peering in the multi-domain context. This concept simplifies 
the peering of different domains inside the same VCAN. 
The types of VCANs for different QoS granularities 
based on QCs are described in [9]. In short, the following use 
cases have been defined for multi-domain VCANs:  VCANs 
based on meta-QC, VCANs based on local QC composition, 
hierarchical CANs based on local QC composition.  
The last case is the most efficient but also the most 
complex. Each domain may have its local QoS classes. 
Several local QCs can be combined to form an extended QC. 
Inside each CAN, several QCs are defined corresponding to 
platinum, gold, silver, etc. In such a case, the mapping 
between service flows at SP level and CANs can be done per 
type of the service: VoD, VoIP, Video-conference, etc.  
Note that in ALICANTE architecture, apart from 
resource provisioning at CAN layer, there is another 
subsystem, performing per flow adaptation (e.g. for flows 
generated by Scalable Video Codecs in several layers) [8][9]. 
This adaptation can adjust the numbers of layers received by 
a given HB or EU terminals depending on terminal 
capabilities and network status. For reasons of dimension 
and focus, this adaptation subsystem is not described in this 
paper.  
V. CAN  MULTI-DOMAIN PEERING 
A VCAN may span one or several IP domains. In a 
multi-domain context, one should distinguish between two 
topologies (in terms of how the domains are linked with each 
others): Data Plane Topology and Management and Control 
(M&C) topology.  The first can be of any kind, e.g a 
heterogeneous graph representing a partial mesh (depending 
on SP needs and including the domains spanned by a given 
VCAN). The M&C topology defines how the CAN 
Managers associated to different domains inter-communicate 
for  multi-domain VCANs construction. The VCAN 
initiating CANMgr has to negotiate with other CAN 
Managers. There exist two main models to organise this 
communication at management level: hub model  and 
cascade model [16][17][18][24][26]. 
A. VCAN Negotiations 
The hub model supposes that an initiator VCAN 
Manager is discussing in hub style with other managers in 
order to negotiate multi-domain CANs. With this respect, the 
CAN Manager is supposed to have inter-domain topology 
information. The advantage is that allows a complete control 
of the VCAN because the CANMng initiating the VCAN 
knows all network domains participating to this CAN. A 
drawback is that each CAN Manager should know the 
complete graph of domain candidates to participate in every 
possible VCAN, which creates a signaling overhead. 
However, the number of domains (ASes) involved in a 
VCAN communication is rather low, given the hierarchical 
47
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

tiered structure of the Internet [23]. Usually a group of 
domains of interest for a VCAN are localized in an Internet 
region, so the scalability problem is not so stringent.  
The initiator CAN Manager should discuss/negotiate 
with all other CAN Managers in order to establish the 
VCAN = {VCAN1 U VCAN2 U VCAN3 …}, where U 
represents union action. Split of the SLS parameters should 
be done at the initiator (e.g. for delay).  
Two functional components are needed: (1) inter-domain 
topology discovery protocol;  (2) overlay negotiation 
protocol for SLA/SLS negotiations between CAN Managers.  
The cascade model would be more advantageous for 
initiating CAN Manager if a chain of domains is to form the 
VCAN [16][26][30]. However, for an arbitrary mesh 
topology of the NDs composing the VCAN, and for 
multicast enabled VCAN, this model offers less efficient 
management capabilities. 
Figure 2 shows an example for hub-style signaling 
adopted in ALICANTE for a multi-domain VCAN. The 
overall infrastructure is supposed to have four core network 
domains CNDk, CDNj, CNDn, CNDm, each having a CAN 
Manager. Several Access Networks are connected to these 
domains, containing Home-Boxes or/and Content Servers 
(CS). The latter are controlled by the Content Provider (CP). 
The SP is requesting a CANMgr_k to construct a VCAN, 
spanning several domains, e.g CNDk, CNDj, CNDn, and 
CNDm. It is supposed that SP knows the edge points of this 
VCAN, i.e. the MANEs where different sets of HB are 
(currently) or will be connected.   
      The CANMgr_k determines (based on its inter-
domain topology knowledge) that the components of the 
VCANs are CNDn, CNDj, CNDm. Therefore, it negotiates 
SLSss in actions represented by 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 notations.  
The negotiations target to achieve appropriate VCAN 
capabilities from CANMgr_j CANMgr_n and respectively 
CANMgr_m. Each CANMgr has to check in its domain if 
sufficient resources are available (by negotiating with Intra-
NRM and concluding an SLS). These actions are not 
represented in Figure 2.  In a successful scenario, the multi-
domain VCAN is agreed on (logical resource reservation 
only) and then it is installed in the network upon request of 
the SP and executed by CANMGr_k (at its turn it requests 
this to CANMgr_j, CANMgr_n and CANMgr_m). Then, each 
CANMgr instructs its associated Intra-NRM to install the 
appropriate configurations in the edge MANE routers and 
interior core routers.  
B. Overlay Virtual Inter-domain Topology 
The problem leading to consideration of the inter-domain 
topology comes from the following needs: 
• 
a multi-domain VCAN should be constructed by the 
initiator CAN Manager spanning several core 
network domain CNDs; 
• 
each CND  has complete autonomy w.r.t. its network 
resources including off-line network dimensioning,  
traffic engineering (TE) and also internal routing. 
Each CND can assure QoS enabled paths towards 
some destination network prefixes, by using its own 
network layer technology like DiffServ, MPLS, etc. 
and also can control the QoS on its out links. 
Consequently, each CAN Manager associated to a 
CND will decide upon accepting or rejecting a 
proposed SLS for this domain; 
 
 
 
 
CANMgr 
n 
CNDm 
CNDn 
General MANE 
CANMgr 
m 
SP 
1.Initial VCAN request 
2.1.VCAN  
negotiation 
2.2.VCAN negotiation 
ANm1 
ANm2 
ANn1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
 
HB 
CNDk 
CANMgr 
k 
ANk2 
ANk1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
Resulting 
VCAN  
CS1 
CS2 
CNDj 
CANMgr 
j 
ANj2 
ANj1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
Traffic 
Trunks 
MANE participating  
to  VCAN1 
MANE 
2.3.VCAN negotiation 
 
 
Figure 2. Example of a multi-domain VCAN and hub model for management communication between CAN Managers
48
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
inter-domain QoS- enabled routing should be solved; 
• 
internal topological and capacities information (real 
or even in abstracted form) of a CND can be non-
public for other CNDs; 
• 
the VCAN initiator CAN Manager should determine 
which CNDs will compose a requested VCAN and 
split the connectivity requirements among these 
CNDs,  in order to prepare the negotiations 
described in the previous section. Therefore, the 
multi-domain VCANs deployment needs knowledge 
on multi-domain topology and has to solve also a 
constrained inter-domain routing problem; 
• 
the solution should be scalable, by avoiding one 
CAN manager be burdened with  computations 
which are related actually to other CND internal 
business. 
 
The ALICANTE solution is to develop a special service, 
Overlay Network Topology Service (ONTS), able to support 
multiple VCAN construction while meeting the above 
constraints. This is explained shortly below and more 
detailed in Section V. 
Note: the subsystem composed by a CAN Manager and 
its corresponding Intra-NRM will be optionally called CND 
Manager (CNDMgr). This will simplify the description of 
overlay topology concepts applied to ALICANTE (without 
considering the amount of information given by the Intra-
NRM to CAN Manager about its topology and capacities). 
Each CNDMgr has at least an abstract view of its 
network and output links towards neighbors, in a form of a 
set of virtual pipes (called Traffic Trunks). A set of such 
pipes can belong to a given QoS class. Each multiple domain 
VCAN should also belong to some QoS class and therefore 
inter-domain QoS aware routing information is necessary in 
order to construct this VCAN, i.e. to establish SLSs, when 
negotiating the multi VCAN. Usage of the standard Border 
Gateway Protocol (BGP) to provide knowledge on inter-
domain paths would require no modifications in the edge 
routers, however no QoS information is carried in BGP 
advertisements. Therefore the establishment of the SLSs 
between CANMgrs, tried on BGP-indicated routes, might 
have high probability of failure.  
A solution which better fits the ALICANTE purposes is 
to determine an inter-domain Overlay Network Topology 
(ONT) by developing a special ONT Service (ONTS), 
running at the level of CAN Managers. This is partially 
similar to those described in [21] [22], while  abstracting the 
physical network details of each CND. The ONTS delivers 
to the CAN Manager the information on the inter-domain 
graph linking different CNDs in a zone and capacities of the 
inter-domain links. Using the information on this topology 
(which abstracts the domains), the initiator CAN Manager 
can determine which domains could compose a requested 
VCAN.  Then, one can apply an inter-domain QoS-aware 
and constrained routing algorithm to find inter-domain paths 
satisfying the SLS constraints. 
Actually, the determination of the inter-domain ONT can 
be split in two parts: (1) determination of the inter-domain 
connectivity graph; (2) determination of the capacities of the 
inter-domain links. The algorithms and mechanisms to 
determine the ONT constitute the subjects of other work. 
VI. 
CAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ARCHITECTURE AT 
SERVICE PROVIDER AND CAN PROVIDER 
Figure 4 presents the proposed architecture for CAN 
Management. This is a continuation and development of the 
one presented in [11]. At the Service Manager SM@SP 
level, the CAN Network Resources Manager (CAN_RMgr) 
component performs all the actions needed to assure the 
CAN support to the SP, in order to deploy its high level 
services in unicast or multicast mode. It is responsible to 
negotiate with CANP on behalf of the SP and to perform all 
actions necessary for VCAN planning, VCAN provisioning 
and VCAN operation.  
CNMgr@CANP performs, at the CAN layer, all actions 
related to VCAN provisioning and operation. The two 
entities interact based on the SLA contract initiated by the 
SP. The technical part of an SLA contract is the Service 
Level Specification (SLS).  
Several points of view should be considered when 
defining/planning the services, planning the CAN and 
respectively when defining CAN_RMgr functionalities: the 
commercial optimization needs of the SP, CANP resources, 
CAN network engineering and implementation.  
A. CAN Management at Service Provider 
The CAN_RMgr@SP interacts with the following 
modules supposed to exist and belonging to the SM: 
Service Forecast and Planning - an offline process 
performing service predictions and their associated plans of 
deployment, considering the business as input.  
Service Deployment Policy - can contain (in a data base) 
predefined rules for service planning. This information is 
derived from the high-level business interests of the SP and 
significantly influences the planning. 
CAN_RMgr@SM contains the following functional 
blocks: CAN Planning, CAN Provisioning and CAN 
Operation and Maintenance, as main functional blocks. A 
CAN Repository data base keeps all data related to VCAN 
provisioning, installation and current status. Policies can 
intervene to guide the other blocks through the module CAN 
Deployment and Operation Policies.  
Figure 5 also shows the interfaces, defined below. Where 
possible, the interface implementation will be based on 
SOAP/Web Services, used for SOAP requests and responses. 
 
 1. CAN Planning at CAN_RMgr@SM - to - Service 
Forecast and Planning@SM at Service Life Cycle block. 
This input interface to CAN_RMgr delivers information 
from the service forecast module and from the policy block, 
to allow the high level CAN Planning.  
 
2. CAN Operation and Maintenance at CAN_RMgr@SM 
- to - Service Life Cycle block. This interface delivers the 
current status data on active CANs to the Service Life Cycle 
block.  
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3. CAN_RMgr@SM – to – CAN Manager@CANP. This 
is a multiple interface necessary for CAN_RMgr at SM@SP 
to perform the following:  
• 
request the CAN Manager VCANs, and to this aim it 
performs negotiation (SLS contracts will be 
concluded for VCAN subscription, based on a 
negotiation protocol);  
• 
command VCAN installation (invocation)  
• 
receive advertisement information about available 
VCANs constructed at the CANP’s initiative 
• 
request modification and/or termination of a VCAN:  
according to the current situation and the evolution 
of the forecast, the SP can re-negotiate the network 
resources with CANP, which will imply to 
add/modify/delete VCANs;  
• 
receive status and monitoring information about the 
active VCANs. 
B. CAN Provisioning at Service Provider 
The functional block for this is the CAN Provisioning 
Manager at SM@SP. The CANProvMng@SM has several 
main functions shortly presented below. 
It performs all sp_CANpSLS processing - subscription 
(unicast/multicast mode) in order to assure the VCAN 
transport infrastructure for the SP. For VCAN subscription, 
the CANProvMng@SM receives requests for a sp_CANpSLS 
contract dedicated to a given VCAN from CAN Planning. 
Then, it requests to the CAN Manager associated with its 
home domain, to subscribe for a new CAN. It negotiates the 
subscription and concludes an SLS denoted by: SP-
CAN_SLS-uni_sub for unicast, or SP-CAN_SLS-mc_sub for  
multicast. The results of the contract are stored in the CAN 
repository. Note that CAN subscription only means a logical 
resource reservation at the CAN layer, not real resource 
allocation and network node configuration.  
The CAN subscription action may or may not be 
successful, depending on the amount of resources demanded 
by the SP and the available resources in the network. Note 
that at its turn the CAN Manager has to negotiate the CAN 
subscription with IntraNRM, and overbooking is an option, 
depending on the SP policy. 
C. Negotiation Protocol 
This section will define the specifications for a general 
SLA/SLS negotiation service and protocol, AL-SLA/SLS-NP, 
valid for several ALICANTE usages and actor pairs. 
Negotiation protocols must be available at the interfaces: 
CANMgr – SP to establish SP-CANP SLA; CANMgr – 
CANMgr to negotiate CAN extension to other NP domains). 
Negotiation is also needed between CANP and Intra-NRM  
to negotiate resource commitments by IntraNRM. The AL-
SLA/SLS is partially a new protocol, i.e. the service 
primitives 
and 
negotiation 
styles 
are 
designed 
for 
ALICANTE purposes. This protocol will be implemented 
over Web Services framework. 
The AL-SLA/SLS-NP runs at the subscription time to 
negotiate an agreement between two parties: a customer 
(requesting the SLA/SLS) and a provider (offering the 
SLA/SLS). The negotiation can also happen in practice at 
service invocation periods, provided that subscriptions are 
immediately followed by invocations. The qualitative and 
quantitative parameters of the SLS can be specified in a 
special data structure, known as the Service Subscription 
Data Structure (SSDS). This is to be defined for different 
usages of the protocol, depending on the type of the SLS 
required. 
The AL-SLA/SLS-NP has features of a general negotiation 
protocol. It has enhanced/new features if compared to other 
negotiation protocols like SrNP (MESCAL, [18][19]) while 
being adapted to the ALICANTE environment. It is a client-
server half-duplex negotiation protocol between two entities. 
The cases considered in ALICANTE are:  
(1) Service Provider = client, CANP = server- for VCAN 
contracts 
 (2) CANP = client, Intra-NRM = server- for contracting 
the VCAN network resources of core network domain 
 (3) CANP = client, other CANP = server - for 
contracting the VCAN resources from other domains (the 
negotiating entities are CAN Managers and they might 
belong to the same CANP) 
 (4) HB = client, Service Provider = server – for 
individual contracts between HB and SP in order to access 
media services form SP.  
In a particular negotiation session, one party can only be 
a client or a server but not both at the same time. Concerning 
the reliability and security of the services offered by the AL-
SLA/SLS-NP, several choices have been considered: UDP 
fast transport, having the drawback of non-reliability, or 
reliable and secure negotiation service offered to the 
negotiation entities. Given the importance of this signaling in 
ALICANTE, a reliable and secure negotiation service has 
been adopted by implementation on top of Web services. 
The following assumptions (these can be considered also 
as detail design decisions) are valid: the parties (Negotiation 
Logic – NL modules) are the “users” of the protocol. They 
know the identity of each other; the objects under negotiation 
can be described as a document whose syntax and semantics 
is known by the NLs; the NLs know to build, extract, and 
manipulate the information in the document; the negotiation 
objective is to conclude a contract between the parties 
regarding the document content (negotiation is performed 
upon the values of the parameters in the document and not 
upon the types of these parameters); AAA processing related 
to negotiation aspects is not performed by AL-SLA/SLS-NP 
(it concerns the NL); AL-SLA/SLS-NP uses the services of a 
reliable and secure transport protocol; the AL-SLA/SLS-NP is 
transparent to the policy used by NL to make decisions on 
the negotiated objects (therefore the NL logic complexity is 
irrelevant for the negotiation protocol).  
 
D. Negotiation Functional Blocks 
AL-SLA/SLS-NP is a transactional protocol (1-to-1), 
between two negotiation service interfaces (AL-SLS-
NP/NL). Figure 3 shows the negotiation functional 
architecture. It is seen that the NL can have several active 
transactions in the same time interval. Figure 3 also presents 
the generic interfaces involved in negotiations.  
50
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
   p 
E Q oS -S L S 
Ne gotiation  
logic 
(Clien t) 
   u 
p 
A L -SL S  
pr otocol 
   u 
   p 
A L -SL S  
Protoc ol 
 
N egotiation 
logic  
(Se rver ) 
Fun ctional 
b lock s 
related to 
negotiation  
Nego tiation  
Serv ice 
 P rimitiv es 
 
P a rt y A  
P art y B  
Fu nctional 
b lock s 
related to 
negotiation  
Tran sactio n 1 
Tran sactio n 2 
W eb services 
trans port 
P a rty  C  
Tran sactio n 3 
 
Figure 3  AL-SLA/SLS negotiation architecture 
 
Note: AL-SLS is a short notation for AL-SLA/SLA-NP 
protocol. 
AL-SLA/SLS-NP is an application-layer, negotiation 
session/transaction-oriented 
protocol. 
Each 
transaction 
allows to establish/modify/delete an SLS related contract 
(agreement). It performs contract establishment/modification 
or termination session. For the negotiation itself, several 
styles may be applied:  simple two steps negotiation (one 
negotiation 
object); 
multiple 
steps 
negotiation 
(one 
negotiation object). An advanced feature could be: multiple 
steps negotiation with several negotiation objects in 
responses.  
E. CAN Management at CAN Provider 
The Functional architecture of the CAN Management 
and Control along with CAN Resource Management at 
CANP is illustrated in Figure 4. 
a) Static CAN Services Management 
The static CAN services management means that the 
VCANs containing aggregated multi-domain pipes are 
subscribed in advance (statically) to actual data transfer, 
based on SP forecasted data. The VCANs spans from CS 
locations (known) up to the regions of the access routers in 
the AN where potential HBs are located, based on a non 
frequent planning, at SP initiative; the network dimensioning 
is done infrequently in so called Resource Provisioning 
Cycles; the multicast trees are established statically  over 
multiple domains. The above functions might be policy 
based influenced. 
b) Dynamic CAN Services Management 
 
The dynamic characteristics of the CAN service 
management are related to: policy based SLS dynamic 
invocation handling; possibility of modifying the VCAN 
invocation; multiple invocation per the same subscription; 
inter-domain dynamic resource optimization; multicast trees 
dynamically adjusted at the edges; cooperation between 
adaptation and provisioning. 
 
c) CAN Manager Main Functions 
The main functions of the CAN Manager are: VCANs 
resources planning, negotiation and provisioning (at SP 
request or at its own initiative); VCANs advertisement, 
offering; VCANs  installation and exploitation. The mapping 
CANMgr – per NP domain – allows the horizontal 
architectural structuring. A single CANMgr can  control one 
or several VCANs deployed in its domain or, initiate the 
construction of a multi-domain VCAN.  
One CAN Manager (CANMgr) is associated to each core 
IP domain This per-domain mapping exhibits important 
technical and business advantages: (i) allows for a horizontal 
structuring of the architecture and creates the possibility of 
horizontal negotiations between CAN Managers; (ii) creates 
the possibility that CAN Manager SW to be an extension of 
the Intra-NRM; (iii) enables each NP to become a CAN 
Provider; (iv) limits the network area controlled by a single 
CAN Manager, thus contributing to the  scalability of the 
solution, as the management and control overhead is 
concerned. 
 
 
51
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
CAN  Provisioning 
 
SP_CANP_SLS 
CANM2SP I/F 
 
 
Service Life cycle management 
 
CAN Network Resource Manager 
Service Forecast and 
Planning 
 
CAN Manager 
@CANP  
CAN 
 Planning 
 
CAN 
Planning 
CAN  
Planning 
(Unicast) 
CAN Provisioning  
Manager (unicast) 
Service Manager @SP 
CAN  
Planning 
(Mcast) 
CAN Provisioning  
Manager (Mcast) 
Service Deployment 
Policies 
CAN 
repository 
 
CAN 
Deployment and 
Operation Policies 
CAN 
Operation 
and 
 Maintenance 
 
CAN Negotiation  
 
CAN 
 Layer 
 Mon  
CAN Advertising 
And Discovery  
CAN 
Provisioning 
CAN  
Advertisement 
                                                              SP2CANM I/F 
 
Intra domain Network Resource Manager 
CAN DB 
 
CAN Operation 
and Maintenance 
 
CAN Coordinator  
To/from other 
CAN Managers 
Inter- 
domain 
peering 
 
Figure 4. Architecture of the CAN Network Resource Manager at SP and CAN Manager at CAN layer 
 
 
d) CAN Management Layer External Interfaces 
 
• 
North (Upper) I/Fs 
CAN Provider – Service Provider: This I/F of CAN 
Manager to CAN Network Resource Manager at SP 
(component of the Service Manager) has the role to assure 
cooperation between SP and CANP in order to negotiate 
VCANs (at SP initiative) and install, maintain and exploit, 
modify, and terminate the VCANs. The second role of this 
I/F is to assure vertical communication for the cross-layer 
monitoring framework. Moreover, this I/F will support 
advanced features like VCAN advertisements made by the 
CANP to SPs, in order to offer them the existing VCAN 
resources.  
• 
Horizontal I/Fs 
CAN Manager – Home Box: this I/F has the role to 
instruct HBs how to use the VCANs and also to deliver to 
HBs network distances (based on static and dynamic 
monitored information) between different edge MANEs. 
• 
South (Lower) I/Fs 
CAN 
Manager- 
Intra-domain 
Network 
Resource 
Manager: this I/F has the role to support negotiation between 
CANP and NP related to assuring network resources for 
VCANs and to transport the messages to control the 
installation and operation of the VCANs; to exchange of 
monitoring information between the Monitoring module at 
52
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

network layer and Monitoring module at CAN layer; to 
assure the transport of flow adaptation policies from CAN 
Manager to the MANEs via Intra-NRM. 
 
f) Horizontal Interfaces between CAN Managers  
The following I/Fs are defined between the CAN 
Managers associated to different Core Network Domains: 
negotiation I/F for SLSs between the CAN Managers in 
order to extend the VCANs over multi-domains; I/F to 
exchange messages for inter-domain peering,  
 
g) CAN Manager Functional Modules 
 
• 
CAN Planning, Provisioning and Security 
o 
CAN Planning: this is the highest level decision 
block at CANMgr, determining what, when and 
where the VCANs are to be constructed and 
controls all VCAN life cycle for unicast/multicast 
VCANs. It cooperates vertically with SP and 
horizontally with other CAN Managers. Internally 
to CAN Manager, the CAN Planning instructs the 
CAN Provisioning block about VCAN negotiations 
and subsequent related actions. 
o 
CAN Provisioning: performs the lower level actions 
related to VCAN life cycle by preparing the 
individual 
SLSs 
and 
conducts 
horizontal 
negotiations with other CAN Managers and also 
with local Intra-NRM. 
o 
CAN Security: controls and performs authentication 
and authorization functions at CAN Layer 
including the relationship with SP, and manages 
the security related policy distribution. The security 
architecture and functions will not be discussed in 
this paper 
• 
Inter-domain Peering: determines the inter-domain 
topology and capacities by using an overlay 
topology service developed among the CAN 
Managers. This service   gets the Overlay Network 
Topology (ONT), in cooperation with other CAN 
Managers and then is used by the CAN Planning in 
order to determine which domains can belong to a 
given VCAN to be constructed. 
• 
CAN Operation and Maintenance (CAN_OM): 
commands the VCANs installation upon request of 
the CAN Operation and Maintenance @SP (if the 
VCAN has been ordered by SP) or from the CAN 
Provisioning (if the VCAN has been ordered by 
local CANMgr). This is called CAN invocation. The 
installation actions are implemented as commands 
given by CAN_OM to the Intra-NRM of the local 
domain and also to other 
CAN 
Managers 
(horizontally) through the path: CAN_OM –> 
CAN_Prov –> other CAN Managers. The CAN_OM 
controls the modification and termination of the 
VCAN. 
CAN_OM 
controls 
the 
Monitoring 
operations at CAN layer related to the SLSs 
associated to a given VCAN or to the discovery of 
the Network Distance when requested by the HB.  
• 
CAN Layer Monitoring: performs measurements at 
CAN layer, conforming to the instructions given by 
the CAN_OM; returns reports on traffic measured 
and stores them in the CAN DB; communicates with 
the upper layer of monitoring.  
• 
CAN Data Base: contains all data on static and 
dynamic information related to the CAN Layer. 
CAN Manager modules read and write information 
in this database which is the main component 
through which all other functional blocks interface.   
• 
Advanced functionalities: 
 
o 
CAN Policies: local policies defined at level of this 
CAN Manager will be defined and guide the 
VCAN planning and deployment.  
o 
CAN 
advertisement 
and 
discovery: 
informs 
horizontally other CAN Managers about existing 
VCANs and respectively discover other CAN 
Managers VCAN resources.  
F. Basic Signaling for VCAN Resource Provisioning 
Figure 5 shows the signaling diagram at CAN layer, in 
order to construct a multi-domain VCAN, spanning three 
core network domains CND1, 2, 3. The picture presents a 
case of successful establishment of a SLS and finally the 
installation of the VCAN in the network. This is considered 
as step 0 in a sequence of steps during VCAN cycle. The 
other steps are not presented in this paper. 
The messages exchanged are generically described 
without details on parameters. The initiator of this VCAN 
construction is SP which issues a request to CANMgr1. 
The latter determine the other CAN Managers involved, 
i.e. associated to other domains, splits the SLS in particular 
SLSs particular to each domain involved (these details are 
not shown in the diagram)  and then negotiates with them. In 
the example, CANMgr2 and CANMgr3 are dialogue 
partners for CANMgr1. Each CANMgr at its turn negotiates 
resources with its associated Intra-NRM. Finally, in a 
success scenario, the SP receives a confirmation about 
VCAN resource reservation, via VCAN_rsp_neg (ok). Later, 
at SP will the VCAN is installed in the network by the 
respective CAN Mangers and Intra-NRMs. 
G. CAN Planning at CAN Provider 
Before performing VCAN signaling with other CAN 
Managers, the VCAN initiator CAN Manager should 
perform the VCAN planning, done by the CAN Planning 
functional block. Details on the planning algorithm will be 
presented in another work. Here a summary is presented. The 
objectives of this planning are: 1. to determine the domains 
participating to a given VCAN requested by SP; 2. inter-
domain (links) resource management; 3. apply a constrained 
routing algorithm based on ONT acquired by the Initiator 
CAN Manager; 4. based on routing information, the SLS 
splitting between domains is computed. 
53
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Basic signaling diagram for VCAN establishment (multiple network domain case) 
54
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Inter-domain planning 
A summary of actions set is the following:  
1. SP issues a VCAN-0 request (this will be mapped onto a 
given QoS class), i.e. an SLS request (topology, traffic 
matrix, QoS guarantees, etc.)  
2.  The initiator CANMgr obtains from ONTS (this service 
is assured by the Inter-domain Peering block) the inter-
domain level ONT (topology graph, inter-domain link 
capacities, etc.). The ONT is sufficiently rich to cover 
the required VCAN. 
3. The initiator CANMgr determines the involved domains 
in VCAN by using the border ingress-egress point’s 
knowledge (actually MANE addresses) indicated in the 
SLS parameters  
4. The initiator CANMgr determines a contiguous inter-
domain connectivity graph (each CND is abstracted as a 
node) resulting in an extended VCAN-1. In VCAN-1 
graph, some additional transit core network domains 
need be included (it is supposed in the most simple 
version that these new core network domains added are 
also VCAN capable). Therefore a contiguous new 
VCAN-1 is defined. Optimization techniques can be 
applied in this phase. 
5. The initiator CAN Manager should make the first split of 
the initial SLS among core network domains. This 
means to produce the set of SLS parameters valid to be 
requested to each individual CND. The inputs: are: ONT 
graph, abstracting each CND (domain) by a node; QoS 
characteristics of the inter-domain links (bandwidth, 
delay); Traffic Matrix (and other QoS information) of 
the SLS proposed by SP. The outputs are the Traffic 
matrices for each CND composing the VCAN. 
In order to perform this, the Initiator CAN Manager will run 
a constrained routing (modified Dijkstra algorithm) based 
on a composite additive QoS-aware metric. This will be 
described in a future work. Finally the CAN Planning has 
determined the sets of SLS parameters to be negotiated with 
each CAN Manager of the domains participating to VCAN. 
H. Intra-domain CAN Resources Provisioning  
An essential functional aspect related to the VCAN 
mapping onto network resources in a core network domain is 
the relationship between CANMgr and Intra-NRM with 
respect to:  
(1) the style for Intra-NRM to upload information 
to CANMgr about its available resources : on demand (OD) 
or in proactive (P) style (at Intra-NRM initiative);  
(2) amount and depth of information uploaded by 
Intra-NRM on network resources (graph, capacities, etc.). 
Note that for every variant, and depending on monitoring 
information at network level the Resource Availability 
Matrix (RAM) uploaded can be adjusted by Intra-NRM to 
improve the traffic engineering performances.  
 
These variants are shortly discussed below.  
Proactive style:  At initiative of Intra-NRM, (periodically 
or event triggered) the RAM, i.e., either full connectivity 
graph and capacities or only a summary similar to ONT 
information is uploaded to CANMgr. Advantages are that the 
Intra-NRM is the most qualified to know when it is 
appropriate to deliver network information to CANMgr, e.g. 
every time when network re-dimensioning is performed. 
Also, CANMgr has at every moment all information about 
network resources. 
The disadvantage is that CANMgr can be overloaded 
with more information than it really needs at a given time; it 
may keep or discard some information, depending on its 
local policy at CANMgr level. 
On demand style:  the RAM of the Intra-NRM is 
obtained on demand of the CANMgr when it needs it, in 
order to appropriately answer SP requests. The advantages 
are that the CANMgr decides when it wants RAM 
information from Intra-NRM, and it is a possibly better 
usage of CANMgr DB space. Another plus is that Intra-
NRM is released from informing the CANMgr.  
The cons are that this approach incurs a higher delay in 
servicing the SP requests, because CANMgr should first 
acquire RAM in order to respond appropriately based on 
updated RAM information. 
In the real networks world the NPs are usually reluctant 
to disclose information on their networks (topologies, traffic 
load, etc.) to external parties. However the approach of this 
paper supposes a strong cooperation betwen the CAN 
Procvider (CANP) and Network Provider (NP) in order to 
construct the VCANs. Therefore, several degrees of “trust” 
between such entities should be analysed.   
The depth of information uploaded by the Intra-NRM to 
CAN Manager depends on the degree of trust between these 
two entities and is of course, policy determined. We might 
have several situations: 
• 
High trust (HT): Intra-NRM uploads to CANMgr its 
full connectivity graph; 
• 
Medium 
trust 
(MT): 
Intra-NRM 
uploads 
to 
CANMgr an overlay RAM based on traffic trunks 
(similar to ONT);  
• 
Low trust (LT): Intra-NRM does not upload/disclose 
any topology and resources to CANMgr, but only 
ingress-egress points Ids and Yes/No answers to a 
SLS request 
Depending on the actual routing and mapping algorithm  
(to map the matrix traffic requested for this domain), the real 
graph will be placed at the level of CAN Manger (case HT) 
or Intra-NRM (case MT or LT). 
From the architectural and also business point of view, 
the MT and LT solutions are more appropriate, in order not 
to outsource the important task of configuring the network 
elements to third parties. In such a case, the CAN Manager 
has only to decide on mapping of the Traffic Matrix onto 
TTs reported by the Intra-NRM. Decision P/OD can be an 
implementation option. The solution HT is actually one in 
which the CAN Manager functionalities are constructed as 
an additional software on top of the IntraNRM, and in such a 
case one has a single integrated entity (IntraNRM + 
55
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

CANMgr) belonging to the business actor which is now (NP 
+ CANP). 
 
VII. SCALABILITY ASPECTS OF MANAGEMENT AND 
CONTROL  
The 
ALICANTE 
system 
targets 
large 
network 
configurations. Scalability in such cases is important and is 
shortly discussed in this section, with focus on M&C. 
 
A. VCAN Planning and Provisioning 
The following features assure a good scalability of the 
architectural solution: 
• 
The full centralized solution for VCAN management 
is avoided, given that each Core Network Domain  
has associated a CAN Manager; the initiator CAN 
Manager should negotiate in hub style with other 
CAN Mangers. However, this approach does not 
create difficult scalability problems, given that the 
number of domains actually involved in a multi-
domain chain is rather small (less than 10) due to 
tiered structure of the Internet. On the other side 
these signaling are not real time ones. The advantage 
of this solution is that the initiator CAN Manager has 
always an overall image of a multi-domain VCAN 
and can respond to some SP possible complaints 
about different events. No per-flow signaling 
between CAN Managers exist in M&C. 
• 
The VCAN SP–CANP negotiation are done per 
VCAN, described in terms of aggregated traffic 
trunks 
• 
The SP negotiates its VCAN(s) with a single CAN 
Manager, irrespective if it wants a single or a multi-
domain spanned VCAN 
• 
A hierarchical overlay solution is applied for inter-
domain peering and routing, where each CAN 
Manager knows its inter-domain connections. The 
CAN Manager initiating a multi-domain VCAN is 
the coordinator of this hierarchy, without having to 
know details on each domain VCAN resources 
• 
The monitoring at CAN layer and network layer will 
be performed at an aggregated level. 
B. Multicast Management and Control 
• 
The management system described work as well for 
unicast or multicast capable VCANs. However, the 
multicast detailed management is not described in 
this paper, given that the general signaling actions 
are the same in unicast or multicast case. Multicast 
hybrid solution has been envisaged, with usage of IP 
level multicast intra-domain wherever is possible; 
• 
VCAN multicast capable, i.e., multicast aggregated 
trees can be constructed, usable by multicast sessions 
having similar QoS characteristics; 
• 
The multicast solution is combined with P2P (used 
by the HBs), thus assuring a better scalability for 
multicast distribution. 
C.  Routing and Forwarding 
In the case of multi-domain VCANs, the broadest paths 
will be selected, thus optimizing the network resource usage. 
The length of the paths can be minimized by using higher 
layer tiers domains when necessary. 
The length of the paths between HBs working in P2P 
mode, or between HBs and CSs, will be minimized by 
delivering network distances information to HBs to help the 
peering process. 
D. Management of Configurable Types of VCANs 
The amount of processing in the Data Plane affects the 
scalability of the system. In order to be flexible with respect 
to different SP needs, and not to reach a very rich granularity 
if no need for it exists, the CAN layer may offer several 
types of VCANs seen as parallel planes. The M&C can 
configure the VCANs (at request of the SP), to offer gradual 
scalability properties and QoS differentiation capabilities: 
• 
VCANs based on Meta-QoS-Classes – mostly 
scalable (lower processing tasks for the data flows) 
but with rough granularity in terms of VCAN QoS 
properties  
• 
Multi-domain VCANs based on an inter-domain 
combination of local (per-domain) QoS classes 
(LQC) – having medium scalability and higher 
degree of service/flows differentiation 
• 
Multi-domain hierarchical VCANs based on local 
QC composition, but where each domain may have 
its local QoS classes. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed an architectural solution for 
connectivity services management in Content Aware 
Networks 
for 
a 
multi-domain 
and 
multi-provider 
environment. The management is based on vertical and 
horizontal SLAs negotiated and concluded between 
providers (SP, CANP, NP), the result being a set of parallel 
VCANs offering different classes of services to multimedia 
flows, based on CAN/NAA concepts. The approach is to 
map the QoS classes on virtual data CANs, thus obtaining 
several parallel QoS planes. The system can be incrementally 
built by enhancing the edge routers functionalities with 
content awareness features. Further work is going on to 
design and implement the system in the framework of the 
FP7 
research 
project 
ALICANTE. 
A 
preliminary 
implementation and performance evaluation of the main 
network element (MANE router) supposed to be managed by 
the described framework of this papaer appeared in [20]. 
Future work is also necessary to solve the mapping of the 
overlay VCANs (as requested by SP) onto real network 
resources in a multi-domain context, while satisfying QoS 
constraints. The VCAN resources are first logically reserved; 
later when installation is requested by the SP, they will be 
really allocated in routers. 
Finally use cases (Video on demand, IPTV media 
streaming will be experimented on four testbeds (Portugal, 
Bordeaux, Bucharest, Beijing) in order to to validate the 
56
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

overall functionality. These results will be presented in 
future papers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported partially by the EC in the 
context of the ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652) and 
partially by the project POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Schönwälder, J., Fouquet, M., Dreo Rodosek,  G., and Hochstatter, 
I.C.,  “Future Internet = Content + Services + Management”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 7, Jul. 2009, pp. 27-33. 
[2] Baladrón, C., “User-Centric Future Internet and Telecommunication 
Services”,  in: G. Tselentis, et. al. (eds.), Towards the Future Internet, 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 217-226. 
[3] Turner, J. and Taylor, D., “Diversifying the Internet,” Proc. 
GLOBECOM ‘05, vol. 2, St. Louis, USA, Nov./Dec. 2005, pp. 760-
765 
[4] Anderson, T., Peterson, L., Shenker, S., and Turner, J., “Overcoming 
the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, Computer, vol. 38, no. 
4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41. 
[5] Chowdhury, N. M. and Boutaba, R., “Network Virtualization: State 
of the Art and Research Challenges”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 47, no.7,  Jul. 2009, pp. 20-26. 
[6] Kourlas, T., “The Evolution of Networks beyond IP”, IEC 
Newsletter, 
vol. 
1, 
Mar. 
2007. 
Available 
at 
http://www.iec.org/newsletter/march07_1/broadband_1.html 
(last 
accessed: Mar. 2010). 
[7] FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous  Content-Aware Network Environments”, ALICANTE, 
No248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu/ (last accessed: Dec. 2010). 
[8] Borcoci, E., Negru, D. and Timmerer, C., “A Novel Architecture for 
Multimedia Distribution based on Content-Aware Networking” Proc. 
of. CTRQ 2010, Athens, June 2010, pp. 162-168  
[9] ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall System and 
Components 
Definition 
and 
Specifications, 
http://www.ict-
alicante.eu, Sept. 2010 
[10] Borcoci, E.  and Iorga, R.,    “A Management Architecture for a 
Multi-domain Content-Aware Network” TEMU 2010, July 2010, 
Crete. 
[11] Borcoci, E., Stanciu, M., Niculescu, D., and Xilouris, G., “Quality of 
Services Assurance for Multimedia Flows based on Content-Aware 
Networking”, CTRQ2011, April 2011 - Budapest, Hungary  
[12] Zahariadis, T., Lamy-Bergot, C., Schierl, T., Grüneberg, K., Celetto, 
L., and Timmerer, C., “Content Adaptation Issues in the Future 
Internet”, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), Towards the Future Internet, 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 283-292. 
[13] Liberal, F., Fajardo, J.O., and Koumaras, H., “QoE and *-awareness 
in the Future Internet”, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), Towards the 
Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 293-302. 
[14] Baker, N., “Context-Aware Systems and Implications for Future 
Internet”, in: G. Tselentis et. al. (eds.), Towards the Future Internet, 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 335-344. 
[15] Aggarwal, V., Feldmann, A.,  “Can ISPs and P2P Users Cooperate 
for 
Improved 
Performance?”, 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 37, no. 3, Jul. 2007, pp. 29-40.  
[16] Boucadair, M. et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143 
                                                           
 
[17] Levis, P., Boucadair, M., Morrand, P., and Trimitzios, P., “The Meta-
QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS Interdomain 
Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[18] Howarth, M.P. et al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality of 
Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications Magazine, 
June 2005, pp. 129-137 
[19] MESCAL D1.2: “Initial Specification of Protocols and Algorithms 
for Inter-domain SLS Management and Traffic Engineering for QoS-
based IP Service Delivery and their Test Requirements”, January 
2004, www.mescal.org (last accessed: Dec 2010)  
[20] Niculescu, D., Stanciu, M., Vochin, M., Borcoci, E., Zotos, N., 
Implementation of a Media Aware Network Element for Content 
Aware Networks, CTRQ 2011, April  2011 - Budapest, Hungary 
[21] F. Verdi, M. F. Magalhaes, “Using Virtualization to Provide 
Interdomain QoS-enabled Routing”, Journal of Networks, April 2007, 
pp. 23-32. 
[22] Zhi Li, P. Mohapatra, “QRON: QoS-Aware Routing in Overlay 
Networks”, IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN 
COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, January  2004, pp.29-39. 
[23] W. K. Chai, N. Wang, I. Psaras G. Pavlou, C. Wang, G. García de 
Blas, F.J. Ramon Salguero, L. Liang, S. Spirou, A. Beben, E. 
Hadjioannou, “CURLING: Content-Ubiquitous Resolution and 
Delivery Infrastructure for Next-Generation Services”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, March 2011, pp.112-120. 
[24] M. Boucadair (ed) et al., AGAVE Public Deliverable “D1.1: Parallel 
Internets Framework”, September 2006, www.ist-agave.org. 
[25] 4WARD, 
“A 
clean-slate 
approach 
for 
Future 
Internet,” 
http://www.4ward-project.eu/. 
[26] ENTHRONE, End-to-End QoS through Integrated Management of 
Content, Networks and Terminals, FP6 project, available on-line: 
http://www.ist-enthrone.org/. 
[27] Open ContEnt Aware Networks (OCEAN), http://www.ict-ocean.eu/. 
[28] A. Galis et al., “Management and Service-aware Networking 
Architectures (MANA) for Future Internet Position Paper: System 
Functions, Capabilities and Requirements”, http://www.future-
internet.eu/home/future-internet-assembly/prague-may-2009 
[29] T.Ahmed, A. Asgari, A.Mehaoua, E. Borcoci, L.B Équille, K. 
Georgios “End-to-end quality of service provisioning through an 
integrated management system for multimedia content delivery” 
Computer Communications, Special Issue: Emerging Middleware for 
Next Generation Networks,  Volume 30, Issue 3, 2 February 2007, 
Pages 638-651. 
[30] Z. Wang and J. Crowcroft, “Quality-of-service routing for supporting 
multimedia applications”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1228—1234, 1996. 
 
 
 
 
 
57
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

