25
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Cooperative Internet Access Sharing in Wireless Mesh Networks 
Vision, Implementation, and Experimentation of the CARMNET Project 
 
Mariusz Glabowski, Andrzej Szwabe 
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: mariusz.glabowski@put.poznan.pl, 
andrzej.szwabe@put.poznan.pl 
Dario Gallucci, Salvatore Vanini, Silvia Giordano  
Institute for Information Systems and Networking 
University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern 
Switzerland, Manno, Switzerland 
e-mail: dario.galluci@supsi.ch, salvatore.vanini@supsi.ch,  
silvia.giordano@supsi.ch 
 
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents the vision, as well as the main 
results of the implementation and the experimentation 
performed within CARMNET – a Swiss-Polish project aimed 
at 
investigating 
“CARrier-grade 
delay-aware 
resource 
management for wireless multi-hop/Mesh NETworks”. The 
project focuses on solutions that motivate telecom operators to 
reconsider their view on user-operated IEEE 802.11-compliant 
wireless mesh networks. It is driven by the vision of networks 
operated cooperatively by telecom operators and a community 
of users. While the former may appreciate the CARMNET’s 
compliance 
with 
IP 
Multimedia 
Subsystem 
(IMS) 
infrastructure, the latter likely enjoy the pervasiveness of the 
CARMNET-based Internet access. The project aims at 
providing, both telecom operators and end users, with 
solutions that will create appropriately strong incentives – 
technological, functional and economical – for a widespread 
adoption of CARMNET-like networks within an expanding 
group of users. Project results obtained so far indicate, that 
despite the originality of the project vision, its solutions are 
applicable to the telecom operator’s infrastructure, in 
particular in Internet access sharing scenarios that become 
widespread in the recent years. 
Keywords – wireless mesh networks; wireless mesh testbeds; 
user-operated Internet access sharing; IMS; mobility. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The core idea of the CARMNET project [1], [2] is to 
make the user-provided Internet access an important 
alternative to the currently widespread 3G/4G-based mobile 
Internet access, in particular this provided in the femtocell 
scenario [3]. The main assumption of the project is that 
wireless mesh networks [4], while effectively enhanced by 
the 
introduction 
of 
advanced resource 
management 
mechanisms [5] and the compliance with the core of the 
telecom 
operators’ 
IMS-based 
Authentication, 
Authorization, Accounting (AAA) infrastructure [6], [7], 
may serve as an appropriate basis for a real-world realization 
of the core CARMNET idea.  
However, the realization of the vision of CARMNET 
networks – as operated jointly by telecom operators and an 
informal community of Internet access-sharing users – has 
raised several scientific and technological challenges that 
had not yet been investigated in a satisfactory detailed way 
[8], [9]. The scenario-driven research efforts of CARMNET 
have resulted in a set of solutions for ensuring satisfactory 
levels of reliability and sustainability of the user-provided 
Internet access sharing. The completed and the ongoing 
research is focused on algorithms for reliable servicing of 
multi-service traffic, with different packet delay tolerance, 
including algorithms related to: traffic stream classification, 
packet scheduling, buffer memory management, routing and 
nodes mobility management [10], [11]. 
Targeting the CARMNET objectives has implied the 
need for addressing several technological challenges, in 
particular those related to the compatibility with the key 
relevant standards, such as Optimized Link State Routing 
(OLSR) protocol for the reliable multi-criteria routing within 
wireless mesh networks [12], [13], [14], or relevant to IMS-
based AAA [15] technologies used by telecom operators 
[16]. Moreover, as far as the long-term sustainability of 
CARMNET is concerned, some user-centric features have 
proved to be of the key importance, as well. They correspond 
to functional aspects of a CARMNET network use, such as 
the user-perceived network utility and the user-friendliness 
of mobile applications running on smartphones that 
constitute such a network.  
The further part of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, the CARMNET research motivation is presented. 
Section III describes the central role that scenarios play in 
the project. In Section IV, selected technological solutions 
developed for CARMNET-like networks are presented. 
Section V presents the multi-testbed experimentation 
approach for evaluating project's outcomes. The summary of 
the key practical results of the CARMNET research and the 
presentation of the conclusions close the article. 
II. 
RESEARCH MOTIVATION 
Internet access sharing via customers' WiFi access points 
is a service recently deployed by several world's leading 
telecom operators, including Orange and British Telecom 
(BT). For example, in Poland such a service is offered by 
Orange as FunSpot [17]. The service known as FON [18] is 
offered in several countries by partners of BT, e.g., by Polish 
operator Netia [19].  

26
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, the attractiveness of wireless mesh networks to 
telecom operators, despite a significant research effort that 
has been put in the last decade [8], remains quite limited. The 
following issues related to the CARMNET vision may be 
recognized as potentially postponing the wide adoption of 
existing wireless networking solutions:  
 
The lack of integration between the wireless network 
resource management and the AAA mechanism of 
telecom operators IMS-compliant networks, 
 
The lack of carrier-grade systems enabling telecom 
operators to measure the usage of shared Internet 
access in wireless mesh networks,  
 
The lack of solutions enabling end users to request 
the same level of Quality of Service (QoS) 
parameters as in 3G/4G networks, 
 
The lack of integration of the wireless network 
resource management oriented on the Network 
Utility Maximization (NUM) with ‘utility-aware’ 
accounting, in particular in a scenario in which users 
are provided with ‘society-building’ incentives 
similar to those familiar to users of popular Internet 
file-sharing applications based on the Peer-to-Peer  
(P2P) protocols [20], 
 
The lack of seamless mobility support for 
multimedia services with QoS requirements [11]. 
It is worth mentioning that the scope of CARMNET 
research corresponds to the recent trend of intensive studies 
on various wireless Internet access sharing methods [21].  
Moreover, similar scientific projects have been recently 
conducted, including EU CARMEN [9]. However, to the 
best of our knowledge, all such initiatives differ from 
CARMNET in one of its core assumptions: they are based on 
the use of non-standard hardware and they are dependent on 
the access technologies. 
III. 
CARMNET SCENARIOS 
The CARMNET research methodology follows the 
approach of the user-centered scenario-based design, focused 
on functional specification of the system in correspondence 
to the user requirements and activities [22]. Firstly, 
descriptions of CARMNET application scenarios constitute 
the core of the project vision by focusing on the user-centric 
view on added-value functionalities and the user-perceived 
incentives for cooperative use of CARMNET-based 
networks – both potentially enabled by the use of 
CARMNET 
technological 
solutions. 
Secondly, 
the 
CARMNET network topology scenarios [1] have served as 
the basis for a more detailed specification of CARMNET 
research scope, and serve as a starting point for network 
topology 
definitions 
followed 
in 
multi-testbed 
experimentation-oriented activities [23]. 
There are two main CARMNET Application Scenarios. 
The first one assumes the cooperative Internet access sharing 
as being realized via CARMNET access points, while the 
second one assumes the use of CARMNET mobile nodes for 
the same purpose. Each of the scenarios includes the 'phase' 
of earning virtual currency units (called denarii) by a user 
sharing  his/her  home  network  resources  and  the 'phase' of 
 
Figure 1. The first step of the first CARMNET Application Scenario: Alice 
‘earns’ denarii by sharing her home network with Charlie. 
 
Figure 2. The second step of the first CARMNET Application Scenario: 
Alice ‘spends’ her denarii by using Bob’s home network. 
spending denarii for using the resources of a visited network. 
An example in which Alice earns denarii by sharing her 
home network with Charlie (Scenario 1) and then spends her 
denarii by using Bob’s home network (Scenario 2) is 
depicted in Figure 1 and Figure 2, respectively. 
It may be noticed that the CARMNET Scenario 1 is 
architecturally similar to scenarios of currently offered 
services, as it is based on the assumption that the core 
functions of Internet access sharing are realized by means of 
WiFi access points (appropriately equipped and configured), 
i.e., the WiFi access point is the border node of the network 
with shared resources. However, CARMNET provides a 
utility-based charging based on the application of virtual 
units of utility (called denarii) as added value [5], [7]. 
In both the basic CARMNET scenarios, the scope of the 
'utility-sensitive' traffic management [5], [24], which is 
realized in the home user's WiFi network, is naturally limited 
to the WiFi network's range. However, in the case of 
CARMNET Scenario 2, illustrated in Figure 3 and Figure 4, 
the scope of the Internet access sharing may be extended by 
means  of  CARMNET  traffic-relaying mobile  nodes.  As  a 

27
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3. The first step of the second CARMNET Application Scenario: 
Alice ‘earns’ denarii by sharing her mobile Internet access with Charlie. 
 
Figure 4. The second step of the second CARMNET Application Scenario: 
Alice ‘spends’ her denarii by using Bob’s mobile Internet access. 
result, the network coverage may be widened without 
additional investments on the telecom operator’s side [7]. 
CARMNET supports both the WiFi-mobile and the 
WiFi-WiFi traffic relaying modes. However, as WiFi 
connectivity is much more power-consuming than a mobile 
Internet access (3G or 4G access provided by a telecom 
operator), the real-world applicability of the CARMNET 
multi-hop WiFi-to-WiFi traffic relaying - as shown in Figure 
5 presenting the CARMNET multi-hop application scenario - 
is practically limited to cases in which the user has an easy 
access to a power supply, e.g., when he/she shares his/her 
mobile Internet access with drivers of other cars staying in 
the same traffic jam area. 
Currently, a typical multi-hop WiFi-to-WiFi traffic 
relaying scenario can be used by mobile operators in order to 
extend the range of their networks. However, one of the key 
problems in multi-hop wireless networks, especially in 
networks that serve heterogeneous traffic, is optimal resource 
management and routing. In order to make multi-hop 
networks attractive for telecom operators, within the CARM- 
 
Figure 5. CARMNET multi-hop application scenario. 
NET project the development of a resource management 
system and a multi-criteria routing were undertaken. 
IV. 
KEY AREAS OF CARMNET RESEARCH 
The implementation of the CARMNET vision required 
integrated studies in several research areas that are usually 
investigated independently, such as multi-criteria routing, 
wireless network resource management and integration of a 
NUM system with IMS core infrastructure aimed at 
providing SIP-Based AAA Support [6]. 
A. Multi-Criteria Routing 
Within the activities related to CARMNET project, a new 
routing protocol (based on the OLSR protocol), which allows 
for multi-criteria path selection, is proposed. The protocol is 
capable to build the routing table (at each node), including 
not only the best path but a set of paths that lead to the 
specified destination network. The paths in the set are 
selected as the subsequent shortest paths to the specified 
destination, based on one of the k-shortest paths algorithms 
[25], [26], [27]. The paths are determined according to main 
criterion, e.g., delay, and they include additional criteria 
(metrics). The additional metrics are useful in order to 
choose the best path that fulfils the criteria for a given traffic 
stream. The criteria correspond to the QoS requirements for 
all traffic classes offered in the CARMNET network. An 
example of the criteria can be delay, a number of hops, link 
reliability or link load.  Thus, the proposed QoS routing 
protocol is able to use different traffic profiles and for each 
of them proposes the best path, i.e., the path that fulfils 
recommended (for the considered traffic profile) QoS values 
in the best possible way.   
The multi-criteria routing is dedicated primarily to the 
multi-hop scenario, but it can be also used in the single-hop 
scenario, to select the best CARMNET Internet-sharing 
node. Additionally, the routing protocol introduced in the 
CARMNET system may be also used as one of the possible 
methods for mobility management: one or more of the 
criteria can be used by a mobile node to select the best path 
(next-hop node) for a traffic stream of a given class. 
B. Wireless Network Resource Management based on 
Delay-Aware Network Utility Maximization (DANUM) 
Approach 
The aim of the DANUM model is to provide an optimal 
packet scheduling policy regarding the maximisation of the 

28
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
network users’ satisfaction. It targets the maximum of the 
network utility (a sum of utility of all flows within the 
network): 


x ,d ,
U
S
r
r
r r


max


where S denotes a set of flows within the network; xr – rate 
of flow r; dr – delay of flow r; Ur – the utility function of 
flow r. In other words, DANUMS aims at solving the NUM 
problem in a delay-aware way. The relation between 
measurable flow transmission quality parameters and its 
utility is modelled by means of a utility function. Each 
function corresponds to flows of a given type or, more 
precisely, to flows with specific network requirements [5]. 
In DANUMS the utility is determined not only according 
to the flow’s throughput, but also to its end-to-end delay. 
Each flow may have a distinct utility function since it may 
prioritise 
different 
network 
performance 
parameters. 
Assigning utility functions to flows is a task of the Flow 
Classifier [10].  
It has been proven that the Max-Weight Scheduling 
(MWS) algorithm is a solution to the standard throughput-
oriented NUM problem formulation [28]. The DANUMS 
applies the MWS algorithm to virtual queue levels in order 
to determine the next flow queue to transmit a packet from. 
A virtual queue is defined as a product of flow’s packet 
backlog level and a virtual price of a single packet. Packet’s 
virtual price is a value of the derivative of a utility function 
assigned to the flow. In other words, the more utility a flow 
would gain from improving its network performance 
parameters (e.g., by lowering its delay), the higher is the 
virtual price. The virtual price plays an important role in 
packet scheduling as well as influences the cost of 
CARMNET network usage [10]. 
C. Wireless Network Resource Management Based on 
Multiservice State-Dependent Queueing Models 
Another key objective of the CARMNET project in the 
area of resource management is to elaborate a model of a 
multiservice queuing system. A careful review of the 
available literature reveals that no satisfactory models of 
multiservice queueing systems have been developed as yet. 
The proposed solutions [29], [30], [31], [32] concern a certain 
number of boundary cases only and do not provide methods 
for individual evaluation of queue parameters for individual 
classes of calls. The advantage of the proposed in 
CARMNET project model will be opportunities to evaluate 
analytically the average parameters of queues for individual 
classes of calls, which may prove to be of particular 
importance in engineering applications, especially in 
solutions concerning the analysis, dimensioning and 
optimization of mobile networks. 
Within the CARMNET project, an accurate model of a 
state-dependent queuing system with limited queue and 
state-dependent 
dynamic 
resource 
sharing 
between 
individual classes of streams was proposed. The assumption 
was that the queueing system had a server with the capacity 
C and the queue with the capacity U, expressed in AUs 
(Allocation Unit) [33], [34]. The assumption in the model 
was that the allocation unit had the value 1 bit/s, (or 1 Kbit/s, 
1 Mbit/s and so on, depending on the adopted bit rate units 
appropriate for a considered system). In the proposed 
queueing system, the number of AUs that service streams of 
class i (1≤i≤M, where M is the number of classes of offered 
streams) in the server depends on the number of streams of 
individual classes in the system at a given moment of the 
service process. This defined system can be also treated as M 
virtual queueing systems in which bit rates, allocated in the 
server to service streams of particular classes, depend on the 
number of currently serviced streams and streams placed in 
M queues (see Figure 6). 
Figure 6 shows a diagram of a queueing system to which 
two classes of traffic streams are offered. The figure shows 
two virtual queues, though, in real circumstances, there is 
only one queue for all classes of streams. This particular 
presentation of the system results from the fact that the 
resources allocated in the server to service particular classes 
depend on the total number of streams in the system, while 
they are independent of the actual order of call arrival to the 
system [33], [34]. 
 
It is proved in [34] that the distribution of the number of 
streams [p(X)]C+U currently in thus defined queueing system 
(being serviced in the server and waiting in the queue) can be 
written as follows: 
 
  





 




 



























,
:
for
1
1
,
:0
for
1
1
1
1
1
1
U
C
x X c
n
X C
A p X
C
C
x X c
n
X
A p X
n
X
p
M
i
i
i
M
i
C U
i
i
M
i
i
i
M
i
C U
i
i
X
U
C
 (2) 
where X is the state of the service process defined by the 
number of streams xi(X) of particular classes currently being 
in the system: X={x1(X), x2(X), …, xM(X)}, Ai is the traffic 
intensity of class i, defined relative to AU [33], [34], ci is the 
bit rate of a stream of class i, the nX parameter denotes the 
total number of allocation units in the system in state X, 
whereas 1i denotes one stream of class i. 
On the basis of (2) it is possible to determine all 
important averaged characteristics for streams of individual 
classes, e.g., the average value  Qi  of the number of streams  
Buffer
Server
resource 
division
A1, c1=1
A2, c2=2
 
Figure 6. Multiservice queueing system with state-dependent dynamic 
distribution of server resources. 

29
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of class i waiting in the queue can be expressed by the 
following formula: 
 




(
)
(
)
(
1 )
i
i
i
i
C U
C U
i
A
Q
x X
p X
p X
c













, 
(3) 
where Ω is the set of all states in which the queue is not 
empty: 
 
 
.
:
1





 


M
i
i
i
U
C
x X c
C
X
 
(4) 
The proposed model of the state-dependent queuing 
system with limited queue and state-dependent dynamic 
resource sharing between individual classes of streams is the 
first accurate multiservice queueing model that makes it 
possible to evaluate queues for individual classes of calls. 
Within this context, the opportunities offered by its practical 
applicability exceed the scope of the CARMNET project. 
The model can be particularly important in engineering 
applications, particularly those that are related to the 
analysis 
of 
4G 
mobile 
networks 
and 
other 
telecommunications systems that use buffers. 
 
D. Integration of Wireless Network Resource Management 
with Routing and AAA Functions 
One of the key objectives of CARMNET is to integrate 
IMS-based AAA support with the utility-oriented resource 
management for wireless mesh networks, in particular the 
one based on DANUM System (DANUMS) [6], [7]. 
DANUMS is an application-layer system providing a delay-
aware indirect flow control mechanism based on a system 
transporting virtual utility units and a packet forwarding 
component aimed at providing an approximation of Max-
Weight Scheduling (MWS) [24].  
The DANUMS is a part of an architecture (see Figure 7) 
that consists of a routing component in the form of 
Optimised Link State Routing Protocol daemon (OLSRd) 
[12], a custom SIP User Agent integrated with a Linux 
Loadable Kernel Module (LKM), a user interface (WebUI) 
and an IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) platform [16]. SIP 
User Agent is responsible for asynchronous communication 
between LKM and the IMS. The user interface is a WWW 
application that allows users to bind utility functions to 
various types of traffic. The WebUI also provides insight 
into statistics about transmitted traffic and network usage 
cost. 
The DANUMS is implemented as a Linux LKM [5] and 
has to be installed and running on all of the client devices, 
that wish to participate in the CARMNET network. The 
implementation as a kernel module gives access to low-level 
networking stack. This is a crucial ability, as DANUMS 
manages the flow of packets with respect to their delay-
aware Max-Weight Scheduling (MWS) weights [24] by 
 
 
Figure 7. Overview of CARMNET system architecture. 
 
Figure 8. A single CARMNET mobile node subsystem implemented as 
LKM [35]. 
means of custom queues and the corresponding scheduling 
system – as depicted in Figure 8. For the MWS algorithm to 
function correctly, information about queue levels is 
signalled throughout the CARMNET network by means of 
CARMNET-specific 
Layer-2 
Queue-Level 
Estimation 
(L2QE) protocol.  
Other protocols are used internally in the CARMNET 
network to measure network delay (Delay Reporting 
Protocol, DRP), exchange information about currently 
forwarded flows (Queue Reporting Protocol, QRM) and for 
exchanging information on urgency scheduling weights 
(Urgency Reporting Messages, URM). 
E. IMS-Based Support for Utility-Based Charging 
Typically, CARMNET users are the ones that do not 
have the direct and acceptably cheap access to 3G/4G 
network. It is assumed that virtual utility units, after being 
earned by users sharing their mobile Internet access with 
other users of CARMNET-based wireless networks, may be 

30
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
spent by these users (‘potentially altruistic’, i.e., risking the 
lack of a reward for sharing the Internet connection) for 
accessing mobile Internet connection shared by other users.   
The original CARMNET concept of the utility-based 
charging is based on a combination of charging per traffic 
volume and traffic volume virtualization based on the 
mechanism of explicit transfer of virtual units that has been 
proposed as the key element of the Delay-Aware NUM 
System (DANUM) framework [5]. The realization of the 
concept is supported by efforts put on the integration of the 
DANUM system with an IMS-compliant AAA system [6], 
[15]. 
The CARMNET architecture assumes extending an open 
implementation 
of 
the 
IMS 
server 
infrastructure 
(OpenIMSCore) by the SIP servlet located on the 
Application Server (AS). The communication between the 
network nodes and the IMS Server is realized with the use of 
SIP User Agent (a lean SIP client application).   
CARMNET-DANUM system has been made fully 
compatible with the interfaces of the IMS core servers [6]. 
Information on flows’ utility is signalled in the network by 
the SIP User Agent and sent to the accounting server on the 
IMS platform. Implementing a fully featured IMS server 
based on OpenIMSCore [36] eliminated the need for 
developing a core telecom infrastructure from scratch, at 
least as long it is understood as a combination of user 
management, session handling and AAA functions [15].  
F. CARMNET-XML Protocol  
According to the vision of CARMNET, the standard 
session management functionalities provided by IMS core 
servers are used in a non-typical way - for the management 
of 
user-shared 
Internet 
access 
sessions 
(so 
called 
“CARMNET 
sessions”) 
rather 
than, 
e.g., 
for 
the 
management of VoIP sessions. On the other hand, the 
standard AAA functionalities provided by IMS core are 
extended by additional CARMNET-specific features of 
utility monitoring that enable utility-based charging. These 
additional functionalities are provided in an IMS-complaint 
way, as a result of an implementation of SIP servlet and a 
special “CARMNET over SIP protocol” used for exchanging 
the information for the purpose of the utility-based charging. 
What is specific for CARMNET is that the IMS 
infrastructure is used to manage users profiles and to store 
the configuration of end-users’ utility functions.  
As shown in Figure 9 SIP protocol, as one of the basic 
constituents of the IMS architecture, has been selected for 
the CARMNET-XML protocol encapsulation [15]. On the 
server side, a SIP servlet that receives CARMNET XML 
messages has been implemented. The architecture of the IMS 
platform makes the set of CARMNET servlets easily 
extendable. The CARMNET-specific implementation of 
IMS assumes the use of a Representational State Transfer 
(REST) Web Service for the interaction between the AS and 
a CARMNET-specific user database, e.g., performed to 
update the amount of denarii ‘possessed’ by a given user. 
Functions of the CARMNET-XML protocol are illustrated in 
Figure 10. 
 
Figure 9. Integration of CARMNET system with IMS architecture [35]. 
 
 
Figure 10. Functions of CARMNET-XML Protocol [35]. 
G. Integration of Wireless Network Resource Management 
with Mobility Support  
Since DANUM uses the OLSR protocol to send DRM 
messages [24], it cannot measure the delay of flows 
endpoints that are beyond a CARMNET network. 
DANUMS can measure the delay of such flows up to the 
Internet sharing node. Similarly, the accuracy of rate 
measurement for such flows is reduced. To fix these 
problems, the DANUMS Loadable Kernel Module (LKM) 
allows injection of measurements from external sources 
through procfs interface [11]. This interface is represented in 
Linux systems as a regular file, allowing both read and write 
operations [37]. DANUM system operates on per-flow basis, 
i.e., it measures the network performance parameters for 
each flow separately. Consequently, each line of the procfs 
file corresponds to a single flow managed by DANUM. In 
addition, DANUM allows supplying information regarding 
routes as well.  
In a CARMNET network, mobility support is provided 
by the WiOptiMo [11], [38] framework. A CNAPT installed 
on any CARMNET wireless node provides mobility services 
to users who subscribed for them. It intercepts traffic flows 
associated to the mobility service and relays them to a 
SNAPT according to their requirements in terms of 
bandwidth and delay, in order to provide the desired Quality 
 

31
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of Service (QoS). Multiple SNAPTs are located on the 
Internet to manage scalability and avoid concentrating traffic 
flows in a single spot.  
WiOptiMo monitors the route between CNAPT and a 
SNAPT with a separate control traffic flow. Each CNAPT 
also periodically measures delay (one-trip time) and 
throughput (amount of received data over a time period) 
towards the different SNAPTs using this socket. The 
information gathered in the process can be passed to the 
DANUM LKM by writing it to the procfs file as flow 
measurement lines with reduced flow identifier consisting of 
source and destination IP addresses only. Implementation 
details about the format of each line can be found in [11]. 
Thanks to the procfs interface, WiOptiMo can provide 
measurements DANUM cannot perform. For example, a 
delay between a gateway and a SNAPT, measured by a 
CNAPT, can be added to the delay of flows destined to that 
SNAPT and leaving the CARMNET network through that 
gateway, in order to enhance the accuracy of measurements 
used in utility calculation. Furthermore, since a SNAPT can 
be installed on the same device of the flow endpoint or on a 
different device of the same network, the accuracy of 
measurements used by DANUM in the calculation of utility 
for flows that are outside a CARMNET network can be 
exactly estimated. A CNAPT on the source node can also 
overwrite throughput measurements for flows which it is 
responsible for, to account for losses encountered outside of 
the CARMNET network.  
The WiOptiMo framework also allows a mobile node of 
a CARMNET network to change gateway transparently (e.g., 
when node moves out of the reach of the initial gateway due 
to the mobility of the associated user), without suffering 
service disruption (mobility support). In typical use cases of 
wireless mesh networks, only Internet gateways have public 
IP addresses and use NAT to share this connection. If an 
Internet 
gateway 
changes, 
the 
already 
established 
connections will break. To avoid this, the most common 
practice is to route traffic through the old gateway, which is 
inefficient. WiOptiMo overcomes this limitation and allows 
public IP to be changed seamlessly. DANUM allows to use 
the best available route to the selected SNAPT, at all times, 
regardless of the currently selected gateway. This feature is 
implemented by DANUM without modifying the OLSR 
protocol and its implementation by introducing a “virtual” 
host entity into Topology Control OLSR messages, 
representing a connection between an Internet sharing node 
and a SNAPT as a link state information [7]. 
 
V. 
MULTI-TESTBED EXPERIMENTATION 
CARMNET solutions are being extensively evaluated in 
multiple experiments performed in several realistic testbeds, 
in particular in the ones located at CARMNET partners’ 
facilities: the wnPUT testbed [39], the Polanka-net [23] and 
the SUPSI testbed. The experimentation efforts involve the 
remote use of a large-scale wireless testbed, the DES-
Testbed. Experiments within the facilities of a public 
metropolitan WiFi operator have been performed as well [7]. 
A. wnPUT Testbed 
The wnPUT Testbed has been built mainly for the 
development and the experimentation related to carrier-grade 
resource management for heterogeneous traffic based on the 
DANUM approach [5]. The focus of this work is put on the 
core CARMNET software, such as DANUMS Loadable 
Linux Kernel Module, which requires more control over 
each node than development of applications run in the so-
called Linux userspace [37].  
The wnPUT testbed consists of a software framework for 
centralised control of the testbed, and hardware upon which 
experimental and management networks are built. The 
hardware part consists of 13 dedicated nodes allowing to 
conduct multiple uninterrupted iterations of experiments 
remotely, without additional assistance.  
Each node is connected to a Power-over-Ethernet switch, 
allowing to remotely power-cycle the node, even if built-in 
watchdog fails to detect system failure. This feature is crucial 
for 
low-level 
Linux 
kernel 
development, 
such 
as 
implementation of routing and packet scheduling modules of 
the DANUM system [40]. Nodes themselves are built upon 
ALIX platform, very similar to the one used in one of the 
largest wireless experimental networks – the DES-Testbed 
[41], [42]. 
The software framework accompanying the hardware 
part of wnPUT testbed includes online monitoring and 
graphical analysis tools that allow for the real-time graphical 
analysis of each experiment. The system consists of two core 
elements: 
 
the reader of unified experiment data, 
 
the tool for graphical visualization of the data. 
An example of the network topology observable in an 
experiment conducted in the wnPUT testbed is presented in 
Figure 11 - it has the form provided by the wnPUT Monitor. 
Plots representing changes of the key DUNUMS variables 
during one of experiments executed in the wnPUT testbed 
are shown in Figure 12. The set of the variables includes: 
 
queue level, 
 
flow rate, 
 
virtual traffic price, 
 
flow utility, 
 
flow utility change. 
 
Figure 11. A view on the topology of an exemplary network shown in the 
wnPUT Monitor. 

32
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 12. Graphs presenting the experiment results in wnPUT Monitor. 
 
 
Figure 13. Sample topology fragment, generated based on ETX metric by 
wnPUT topology monitoring tool. 
Figure 13 shows a part of wireless network topology 
generated by the wnPUT topology monitoring tool on the 
basis of the ETX metric supplied by OLSRd and monitored 
on one of the testbed nodes [40]. 
The wnPUT testbed uses an extended DES-Cript — a 
domain specific language for the testbed experimentation 
developed at Freie Universitat Berlin [43]. Instead of 
developing another experiment description, we have opted to 
use the already established DES-Cript. Thanks to DES-Cript 
being based on XML, we were able to further extend 
capabilities of the experiment description while preserving 
the ability of executing pure DES-Cript scenarios. For 
additional features, such as remote power-cycling of nodes, 
we use in-house extensions of the experiment description 
syntax. 
B. Polanka-net Testbed 
The Polanka-net testbed was designed for testing the 
modified OLSR protocol based on the proposed multi-
criteria k-shortest path algorithm [26]. The architecture of 
Polanka-net testbed is shown in Figure 14. The main part of 
the testbed consists of 12 nodes equipped with dual-core 
Intel ATOM processors. Each of them is equipped with: a 
solid state drive with the capacity of 24 GB, 4 GB of RAM 
and double core ATOM CPU (Central Processing Unit). The 
presented node's configuration allows for installing Linux in 
both "server" and "desktop" versions. The nodes are of small 
size, comparable to the dimensions of the nodes used in 
wnPUT testbed.  
The main advantage of x86 nodes with ATOM CPUs is 
reasonable computing power and the fact that the developing 
software for this kind of nodes does not require cross-
compilation. The source code can be compiled directly on 
the developer's workstation or within the node. The simplest 
solution for x86 nodes is the native compilation of the 
software at the nodes. In the case of native compilation, it is 
only required to provide the node with a source code.  
The use of the nodes that were built using x86 processors 
(hereinafter referred to as x86 nodes) facilitates the 
implementation of the software. However, such nodes are 
more expensive and consume more energy with respect to 
the nodes using Reduced Instruction Sets Computer (RISC) 
processor. This fact was taken into account when the 
Polanka-net testbed was designed. Consequently, the testbed 
allows using low-cost nodes based on RISC CPUs (RISC 
nodes in Figure 14). The concept of using low-cost nodes 
was presented in the article [23]. 
The RISC nodes, used in Polanka-net testbed, support 
OpenWRT [44]. Open WRT is a Linux distribution dedicated 
for routers. It is characterized by small hardware 
requirements, since a firmware image (including kernel but 
without WiFi support) often does not occupy more than 2 
MB of memory. One of the main advantages of the Open 
WRT is its ability to run on wide variety of processor 
architectures. This is possible owing to the fact that the 
software has an open code, which can be compiled into 
binary code designed for a specific platform.  
In order to facilitate the implementation of multi-criteria 
algorithm, a special approach was applied: new discovered 
routes are added to the system routing table via a separate 
module. This module uses Zebra protocol to communicate 
with the OLSR protocol and its path computing algorithm. 
The Zebra protocol's messages are exchanged using TCP 
connections. The extension of Zebra's functionalities allows 
us to use RISC node without implemented OLSR protocol 
software. The OLSR protocol may be supported by the 
dedicated server. Consequently, the functionality of RISC 
nodes is limited to two tasks only. The first task is related to 
forwarding IPv4 packets according to the rules written in the 
routing table. This task is performed by the Data Plane.  The 
second task is related to sending, receiving, forwarding and 
processing OLSR messages. In the proposed solution, the 
control plane OLSR server does not have direct access to the 
nodes' interfaces. In order to send or receive OLSR protocol 
messages via specified interface, the control plane OLSR 
server has to send them to the nodes, via appropriately 
modified Zebra protocol.  

33
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 14. Polanka-net Testbed. 
 
C. SUPSI Testbed 
The SUPSI testbed was designed to test the performance 
of the CARMNET mobility module based on the WiOptiMo 
framework. It contains three static (two of which are 
Internet-sharing) nodes and two wireless mobile network 
nodes. Each static node consists of an ALIX.2D2 system 
board, which supports two mini-PCI radios. We used one 
Wistron DNMA92 miniPCI card for each board, which is in 
turn connected to a two 802.11n antennas. Each board has a 
500 MHz AMD Geode LX800 processor and 256 MB DDR 
DRAM. We installed Debian Wheezy (7.0) on each node 
with Linux Kernel 3.12.6 and used driver ath9k for Wi-Fi. 
The two mobile nodes are two ASUS EeePC 900 with a 
Atheros 5008Wireless Card, a 900MHz Celeron Processor 
and 1GB DDR RAM. They run Debian Wheezy 7.0 as well, 
while the Wi-Fi driver is ath5k. 
To complete the hardware setup, we installed WiOptiMo 
SNAPT on a Dell Optiplex 760 (server), while WiOptiMo 
CNAPT was installed on a Lenovo ThinkPad T410a. Both 
machines run a Linux distribution (Ubuntu 12.04). Two of 
the static nodes (gateways) and the server are connected to 
the Internet with an Ethernet 100Mbit/s connection, while 
the rest of the nodes are participating in the mesh network. 
Both the gateways perform NAT between the mesh network 
and  the  Internet.  Optimised  Link S tate  Routing  Protocol 
 
Figure 15. SUPSI testbed. 
daemon (OLSRd, version 0.6.2) [12] runs on each node of 
the network for network path resolution. The final testbed 
architecture is illustrated in Figure 15. 
 
D. Experimental Application in a Public Wireless Network  
Experiments presented in [7] describe the case of a 
CARMNET system being integrated with an existing, real-
world public wireless network (WiFi Lugano network). As it 
has been demonstrated in the experiments, CARMNET 
solutions may be used to extend the network coverage and 
provide the unique features of network coverage extension 
and utility-aware seamless handover [7]. In particular, as 
presented in Figure 16 (depicting the network topology) and 
Figure 17, in the network coverage experiment, the nodes n1 
and n2 (featuring the CARMNET DANUMS LKM) have 
enabled a mobile user to preserve the access to the Internet 
despite being out of WiFi Lugano's range.  
The balance of virtual utility units (called denarii) 
presented in Figure 17 indicates how 'cooperation-oriented' 
each node was in sharing/using the Internet connection 
during the experiment. It may be seen that the user node, 
being the one initiating all the traffic was thus simply 
‘paying’ for it: this can be seen in its constantly dropping 
denarii balance. The virtual unit balance of node n2 oscillated 
around zero, since it was only forwarding the traffic 
originated in another node. The node n1 has been 
immediately ‘rewarded’ for sharing its Internet access 
connectivity [7]. Moreover, the nodes n1 and the user's node 
have provided the IMS Core servers with the CARMNET-
specific data indicating the fairness of the user traffic 
relaying realized by the node n2. On the basis of this data, the 
'reputation' of the node n2 may be automatically 'evaluated' 
and 'taken into account' by other nodes - not necessarily the 
same as those taking part in the session providing the data. 
 
Figure 16. Network topology in the Internet access coverage extension 
experiment. 

34
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 17. Denarii balance for the three CARMNET nodes during the 
Internet access coverage extension experiment [7]. 
VI. 
KEY PRACTICAL RESULTS 
To the authors’ knowledge, the DANUMS system 
developed in CARMNET is the first delay-aware NUM 
solution practically interoperable with widely used protocols 
such as Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP), Internet Protocol (IP), and 802.11 
Media Access Control (MAC) [11]. The system is also the 
first NUM system integrated with the core IMS 
infrastructure [6], [15] and the first one that is capable to 
effectively operate in a public wireless network [7].  
As demonstrated in experiments conducted in a physical 
testbed [15], the integration with the DANUMS (i.e., with a 
system 
responsible 
for 
wireless 
network 
resource 
management) has not compromised the performance of the 
IMS-compliant AAA functions. It may also be seen that the 
idea of developing a new protocol (i.e., CARMNET-XML 
protocol for the CARMNET specific registering and 
signalling) as an extension of SIP protocol, has proven to be 
a good choice, as far as the key user-perceived performance 
metrics are concerned [15], [35]. In particular, the addition of 
CARMNET-specific functions based on SIP communication, 
has not introduced a significant user registration delay, nor a 
significant protocol encapsulation overhead, necessary for 
the CARMNET-specific transmission quality reporting 
(allowing to maximize the network utility in a delay aware 
way) [15]. On the basis of such observations, it may be 
concluded that the proposed SIP-based approach to the 
access management and the user information exchange, 
while being compliant with the widespread IMS technology 
used in many telecom operators’ networks [35], is indeed a 
viable mean for utility-maximizing local wireless network 
management [15]. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In our opinion, CARMNET is a project worth a 
significant interest of researchers working in – so far rather 
distinct – areas of wireless mesh networking and IMS-based 
session and user management. Moreover, the practical 
importance of the project research objectives seems to be in 
line with the recent trend of deploying wireless Internet 
access sharing by commercial service providers and telecom 
operators [35]. CARMNET-like networking provides many 
benefits for service providers, e.g., increases network 
coverage without the need for extending the hardware 
infrastructure [7]. CARMNET architecture makes no 
assumptions regarding the kind of the Internet access 
connection, although naturally it is more likely to be 
deployed in a network with a fixed line Internet access, as it 
is usually cheaper and provides higher throughput than 
mobile Internet access. 
It is worth being noted that in contrast to existing 
services, the implementation of CARMNET technological 
solutions, in particular the Delay-Aware Network Utility 
Maximization framework [5], enables to share the Internet 
access within a community of users truly delay-aware and 
QoS-oriented. In particular, a visiting user may be served in 
accordance to both his/her current demands (meeting of 
which is reflected by the rate of spending of virtual currency 
units) and the access point owner's willingness to share 
his/her WiFi network and the Internet connection.  
Mainly as a result of the scenario-based design 
methodology [22] most of CARMNET solutions, although at 
a glance possibly appearing as purely technological, stay in a 
close correspondence to the project vision. In particular, a 
one-to-one correspondence appears between the delay-
dependent traffic transport utility perceived by the visiting 
user (innovatively reflecting both the average effective 
throughput and the transmission delay characteristics) and 
the rate at which virtual currency units are earned by the 
owner of the local network infrastructure. In other words, we 
assume that each user should be awarded (in terms of virtual 
currency earnings) for his/her network resources sharing, and 
that this should be done in a way reflecting the user's 
subjective experience of the network access fairness. We 
believe that this is the right way in which the owners of high-
quality and/or conveniently located network facilities may be 
motivated to share a significant part of their resources with 
many satisfied members of the CARMNET-enabled network 
access sharing community.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a grant CARMNET 
financed under the Polish-Swiss Research Programme by 
Switzerland through the Swiss Contribution to the enlarged 
European Union. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  M. Glabowski and A. Szwabe, “Carrier-grade Internet access 
sharing in wireless mesh networks: the vision of the 
CARMNET project,” Proc. The Ninth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications (AICT 2013), pp. 113-
116, 2013.  
[2]  “CARMNET project website,” [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.carmnet.eu 2014.05.30. 
[3]  V. Chandrasekhar, J. Andrew, and A. Gatherer, “Femtocell 
networks: A survey,” IEEE Comm. Magazine, vol. 46, no. 9, 
pp. 59-67, Sep. 2008.  

35
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[4]  I. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, “Wireless mesh 
networks: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 
445-487, 2005.  
[5]  A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “Delay-aware 
NUM system for wireless multi-hop networks,” Proc. 17th 
IEEE European Wireless 2011, EW2011, Vienna, 2011.  
[6]  P. Walkowiak, M. Urbanski, A. Figaj, and P. Misiorek, 
“Integration of DANUM-based carrier-grade mesh networks 
and IMS infrastructure,” Proc. Ad-hoc, Mobile, and Wireless 
Networks, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7960, pp. 
185-196, 2013.  
[7]  P. Walkowiak, R. Szalski, S. Vanini, and A. Walt, 
“Integrating CARMNET system with public wireless 
networks,” Proc. The Thirteenth International Conference on 
Networks, Nice, February 2014.  
[8]  S. Rayment and J. Bergstrom, “Achieving carrier-grade Wi-Fi 
in the 3GPP world,” Ericsson Review, 2012.  
[9]  A. Banchs et al., “CARMEN: Delivering carrier grade 
services over wireless mesh networks,” Proc. PIMRC 2008, 
Sep. 2008.  
[10]  P. Walkowiak, M. Urbanski, M. Poszwa, and R. Szalski, 
“Flow classification in delay-aware NUM-oriented wireless 
mesh networks,” Proc. The Sixth International Conference on 
Advances in Mesh Networks, Barcelona, 2013.  
[11]  S. Vanini, D. Gallucci, S. Giordano, and A. Szwabe, “A 
delay-aware NUM-driven framework with terminal-based 
mobility support for heterogeneous wireless multi-hop 
networks,” 
Proc. 
 
ICTF 
2013 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology Forum, I-scover, IEICE, 2013.  
[12]  “An ad-hoc wireless mesh routing daemon,” 2009. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.olsr.org. 2014.05.30. 
[13]  A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, A. Nowak, and J. Marchwicki, 
“Implementation of backpressure-based routing integrated 
with Max-Weight Scheduling in a wireless multi-hop 
network,” Proc. IEEE 35th Conference on Local Computer 
Networks (LCN), Oct. 2010.  
[14]  T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized Link State Routing 
Protocol (OLSR),” Internet Engineering Task Force, 2003. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3626.txt 
2014.05.30. 
[15]  P. Misiorek, P. Walkowiak, S. Karlik, and S. Vanini., “SIP-
Based AAA in delay-aware NUM-oriented wireless mesh 
networks,” Image Processing and Communications, vol. 18, 
no. 4, pp. 45-58, 2013.  
[16] H. Khartabil, A. Niemi, M. Poikselka, and G. Mayer, “The 
IMS: IP multi-media concepts and services in the mobile 
domain,” Wiley, 2004.  
[17]  “Orange 
FunSpot,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.funspot.orange.pl/ 2014.05.30. 
[18]  “Fon,” fon, [Online]. Available from: https://corp.fon.com 
2014.05.30. 
[19]  “Netia,” Netia, [Online]. Available from: http://www.netia.pl/ 
2014.05.30. 
[20]  M. Chen, M. Ponec, S. Sengupta, J. Li, and P. A. Chou, 
“Utility maximization in peer-to-peer systems,” Proc. The 
2008 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference on 
Measurement 
and 
Modeling 
of 
Computer 
Systems, 
Annapolis, MD, USA, June 02-06, 2008.  
[21]  C. Middleton and A. Potter, “Is it good to share? A case study 
of FON and Meraki approaches to broadband provision,” 
Proc. 
International 
Telecommunications 
Society 
17th 
Biennial Conference, Montreal, 2008.  
[22]  J. Carroll and R.H.J. Sprague, “Five reasons for scenario-
based Design,” Proc. The 32nd Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on Systems Sciences, 1999.  
[23]  A. Kaliszan and M. Głąbowski, “An environment for 
implementing and testing routing protocols in CARMNET 
architecture,” Proc. The The Ninth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications (AICT 2013), Rome, 
2013.  
[24]  A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “DANUM 
system for single-hop wireless mesh networks,” Proc. The 
2010 International Conference on Future Information 
Technology (ICFIT 2010), Changsha, China, Dec. 2010.  
[25]  A. Brander and M.C. Sinclair, “A comparative study of k-
shortest path algorithms,” Proc. 11th UK Performance 
Engineering Workshop, 1995.  
[26]  D. Eppstein, “Finding the k shortest paths,” SIAM Journal on 
Computing, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 652-673, 1998.  
[27]  C. Clímaco, M. Pascoal, M. Craveirinha, M. Eugénia, and V. 
Captivo, “Internet packet routing: Application of a K-quickest 
path algorithm,” European Journal of Operational Research, 
vol. 181, no. 3, pp. 1045-1054, Sep. 2007.  
[28]  A. Szwabe and P. Misiorek, “Integration of Multi-path 
Optimized Link State Protocol with Max-Weight,” Proc. 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
and 
Multimedia, Jeju Island, South Korea, 2009.  
[29]  M. de Vega Rodrigo and R. Pleich, “Validation and extension 
of the M/G/R Processor Sharing to dimension elastic traffic in 
TCP/IP networks,” Proc.  The 2nd Polish-German Teletraffic 
Symposium, Gdansk, 2002.  
[30]  J. Roberts and T. Bonald, “Internet and the Erlang Formula,” 
ACM Computer Communications Review, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 
23-30, 2012.  
[31]  T. Bonald and J. Virtamo, “A recursive formula for multirate 
systems with elastic traffic,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 9, no. 
8, pp. 753-755, 2005.  
[32]  G. Stamatelos and V. Koukoulidis, “Reservation-based 
bandwidth allocation in a radio ATM network,” IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Networking, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 420-428, 1997.  
[33]  S. Hanczewski, M. Stasiak, and J. Weissenberg, “The 
queueing model of a multiservice system with dynamic 
resource sharing for each class of calls,” Proc. Computer 
Networks, Springer, 2013, pp. 436-445. 
[34]  S. Hanczewski, M. Stasiak, and J. Weissenberg, “A queueing 
model of a multi-service system with state-dependent 
distribution of resources for each class of calls,” IEICE 
Transactions on Communications,  in press, 2014.  
[35]  R. Szalski, A. Szwabe, and P. Misiorek, “Flow utility 
estimation and signaling in a CARMNET network,” Institute 
of Control and Information Engineering, Poznan University 
of Technology, Technical Report no 657, Poznan, 2014. 
[36]  “OpenIMSCore,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.openimscore.org/. 2014.05.30. 
[37]  B. Wang, B. Wang, and Q. Xiong, “The comparison of 
communication methods between user and kernel space in 
embedded Linux,” Proc. International Conference on 
Computational Problem Solving, 2010.  
[38]  S. Giordano, D. Lenzarini, A. Puiatti, and S. Vanini, 
“WiSwitch: seamless handover between multi-provider 
networks,” Proc. WONS 2005, 2005.  
[39]  A. Nowak, P. Walkowiak, A. Szwabe, and P. Misiorek, 
“wnPUT Testbed experimentation framework,” Distributed 
Computing and Networking, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 7129, pp. 367-381, 2012.  
[40]  R. Szalski, et al. “D3.1: The report on testbed set-up and 
performance measures specification, CARMNET project 
deliverable (internal report),” 2013. 
 
 

36
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[41]  M. Gunes, F. Juraschek, B. Blywis, and J. S. Q. Mushtaq, 
“Testbed for next generation wireless network research,” 
Special Issue PIK on Mobile Ad-hoc Networks, vol. 34, no. 4, 
2009.  
[42]  “DES-Testbed,” [Online]. Available from: http://www.des-
testbed.net/ 2014.05.30. 
 
[43]  M. Gunes, F. Juraschek, B. Blywis, and W. Olaf, “DES-
CRIPT - a domain specific language for network experiment 
descriptions,” Proc. The International Conference on Next 
Generation Wireless Systems, Melbourne, 2009.  
[44]  “OpenWRT,” [Online]. Available from: https://openwrt.org/ 
2014.05.30. 
 
 

