Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks: Efficient Localization Schemes using 
SemiDefinite Programming  
 
Bo Dong and Ahmed M. Mahdy 
Department of Computing Sciences 
Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi 
Corpus Christi, TX USA 
bdong@tamucc.edu and ahmed.mahdy@tamucc.edu  
 
 
Abstract— Location awareness and distance estimation cannot 
be underestimated in wireless sensor networks especially for 
the marine environment. State-of-the-art localization research 
and approaches have been thoroughly reviewed to illustrate 
the challenges imposed by inaccurate distance measurements 
and noisy backgrounds. Compared to existing localization 
approaches, the SemiDefinite Programming approach delivers 
accurate distance measurements even in hostile backgrounds. 
In this paper, two localization schemes, namely Fixed-Position, 
and Magnified-Range, are proposed. The main idea behind the 
Fixed-Position scheme is to improve connectivity of the whole 
system. Magnified-Range is mainly based on the fact that 
anchors are special nodes that suffer less from energy 
constraints. Therefore, it is possible to magnify their radio 
range without impacting the energy consumption of the 
network. Magnified-Range differentiates between the radio 
range of anchors and regular sensor nodes. Performance 
evaluation and simulation results have shown that the 
proposed schemes offer robust localization. In fact, the 
Magnified-Range scheme improves localization accuracy by 
20%.  Future research will focus on three main challenges, 
namely 3-D simulations, hybrid localization systems, and real-
life demonstrations. 
  
Keywords-marine wireless sensor networks; underwater 
communication; localization; GPS; SemiDefinite Programming. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The majority of the earth’s surface is covered with 
water. As more research is conducted on underwater 
systems, data collection and environment monitoring 
become major components. This raises the need for an 
effective way to collect data and monitor the environment. 
Underwater wireless sensor networking offers an unmatched 
option. The characteristics of the underwater environment 
present researchers with many challenges, especially 
developing effective sensor communication and localization 
techniques. In terrestrial wireless sensor networks, the nodes 
use Radio Frequency (RF) to establish the communication 
infrastructure. In underwater environments, due to water 
absorption, RF does not deliver the same performance. 
Compared to radio waves, sound has superior 
propagation characteristics in water, making it the preferred 
technology for underwater communications. However, since 
GPS may not work in underwater environments, acoustic 
signals bring many challenges to underwater sensor 
applications that require effective localization. Hence, there 
is a need to develop novel localization schemes that work 
well in the marine environment. 
For the past few years, localization has become an 
indispensable factor of wireless sensor networks especially 
in tracking systems and environment monitoring.  For many 
WSN applications, such as habitat monitoring, it is 
necessary to describe where the critical events occur. To 
obtain the location of sensor nodes, one can equip 
lightweight GPS receivers on all sensors but this 
significantly increases network cost and may defeat the 
whole objective of a wireless sensor network. A possible 
solution is to equip a few sensors with GPS and design 
efficient algorithms to estimate the position of other sensors 
using range and bearing information between neighboring 
nodes [2] [3] [4]. However, this option will not work in such 
environments since GPS receivers cannot reliably operate in 
such conditions. Moreover, GPS is a costly solution for 
WSN localization systems. Therefore, the need for a GPS-
free localization system that can efficiently satisfy the 
underwater requirements cannot be underestimated. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, an 
introduction to acoustic underwater sensor networks is 
presented. In Section III, GPS-free localization in 
underwater WSN is discussed. Section IV describes the 
architecture of the network. Section V presents the proposed 
localization schemes and the performance evaluation. 
Section VI discusses future research directions. The paper is 
concluded in Section VII. 
 
II. 
ACOUSTIC UUNDERWATER WIRELESS SENSOR 
NETWORKS 
 
Underwater acoustic propagation depends on many 
factors that make designing an underwater wireless sensor 
network challenging. In the following, we present major 
factors that may impact the design process. 
 
a. Bandwidth: The acoustic band underwater is limited 
due to absorption; most acoustic systems operate below 
30 kHz. According to [5], no research or commercial 
system can exceed 40km × kb/s as the maximum 
attainable range ×rate product. 
186
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

b. Propagation Delay: The speed of RF is 3×108 m/s 
while the acoustic signal propagation speed in an 
underwater acoustic channel is about 1.5 ×103  m/s. 
The propagation delay in underwater is five orders of 
magnitude higher than the case with RF. The relatively 
low speed of sound causes multi-path propagation to 
stretch over time delay. It may greatly affect certain 
applications 
that 
require 
critical 
real-time 
communications.  
c. Shadow Zones: Salinity, density and temperature 
variations 
of 
the 
water 
can 
influence 
acoustic 
communication. Temporary loss of connectivity is a 
major impact. This is evident in per the following 
formula [6]: 
 
C =1449.2+ 4.6T −0.055T2 +0.00029T3 +(1.34−0.01T)(S−35)+0.016Z(1) 
   
where, C  speed of sound (m/s) 
T     temperature (deg C) 
S   salinity (practical salinity units “psu” equivalent to 
parts per thousand)  
 Z    depth (m) 
      
d. Energy: Power is a major issue for underwater 
environment due to the extreme difficulties in recharging 
such batteries. Unlike terrestrial WSN, UWSN cannot 
use solar energy to regenerate the power of the batteries. 
e. Failure: Underwater sensors are more likely to suffer 
failure due to corrosion and other natural phenomena. 
 
f. Attenuation: It is the reduction in amplitude and 
intensity of a signal. Attenuation at distance x is given as 
[7] 
             A(x) = x kax                                 (2) 
 
               
where k is a spreading factor 
            a is frequency dependent term obtained as  
 
              a =10(.α( f ))                                 (3) 
 
whereα( f ) is absorption coefficient given by Thorp’s 
expression. The formula illustrates that attenuation is 
dependent on the frequency as well as distance. 
 
A. Underwater vs.Terrestrial Wireless Sensor Networks 
Although WSN and Underwater Wireless Sensor 
Networks (UWSN) are different, mainly due to the unique 
characteristics of water, certain aspects of WSN still apply 
to UWSN. In the following, we highlight major differences 
that affect the use of WSN techniques and algorithms in the 
marine environment: 
 
a. UWSN primarily use acoustic signals while RF is the 
choice for WSN. 
b. While terrestrial sensor nodes are expected to become 
increasingly inexpensive, underwater-ready equipment 
tend to be more expensive. This is due in large to 
transceivers complexity and the increased protection 
required for the hardware. 
c. UWSN generally require more power. This is because 
UWSN use acoustic signals and usually cover larger 
geographical areas. Compared to acoustic signals, RF 
systems consume less power. 
d. The connection of an acoustic signal may be 
interrupted by special underwater situations like shadow 
zones. Due to this fact, underwater systems may need to 
compensate 
using 
more 
complicated 
recovery 
techniques. This will lead to overhead. 
e. Density: In terrestrial sensor applications, like tracking 
systems, sensors can be deployed densely. While an 
underwater sensor is more expensive than its terrestrial 
counterpart, it costs more to deploy UWSN densely. Not 
only that but it is usually more challenging to deploy a 
dense underwater network.  
 
In fact, the aforementioned differences present clues on 
the development of new generation of UWSN. It is clear 
that there is a need for new types of cost-effective sensors. 
For example, research interests on developing nano sensors 
have been growing. Moreover, the deployed network ought 
to be highly reliable, so as to avoid failure of monitoring 
missions due to failure of single or multiple sensors. New 
power control algorithms for UWSN are needed. Despite the 
fact that there is many power control algorithms for wireless 
terrestrial networks [8][9]. However, these algorithms are 
not suitable for UWSN due to the underwater channel 
characteristics 
and 
significant 
propagation 
delays. 
Additionally, novel network protocols are vitally important 
in reducing power consumption and providing reliable 
connections using sparse underwater sensors.  
 
B. Classes of Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks 
According to [10], UWSN can be roughly classified into 
two broad categories:  
 
a. Long-Term Non-Time-Critical Aquatic Monitoring 
This class of UWSN is intended for long-time 
deployment where the collected data by the sensors is not 
real time. In this case, energy consumption is critical.  
 
b. Short-Term Time-Critical Aquatic Exploration 
Compared to long-term non-time-critical UWSN, this 
class of UWSN focuses on real-time data. Therefore, how to 
ensure efficient data transfer is a major issue when 
designing protocols for this type of networks. Unlike the 
long-term class, power consumption is not as critical.  
 
187
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Reference [11] classifies UWSN into three types:  a) Static 
two-dimensional underwater acoustic sensor networks (UW-
ASNs) which are most suitable for deep (i.e. bottom of the 
ocean) monitoring, b) Static three-dimensional UW-ASNs 
which are most suitable for ocean-column monitoring, and 
c) Three dimensional networks of Autonomous Underwater 
Vehicles (AUVs).  
The main difference between the two classifications is 
the mobility aspect. In [10], long-term non-time-critical and 
short-term time-critical UWSN assume the ability of the 
sensors to move. Moreover, long-term and short-term do not 
distinguish between 2D and 3D. Obviously, there are some 
differences in protocol design. 
In static two-dimensional underwater, all the sensors are 
fixed to the bottom of the ocean. The underwater sensor 
nodes are interconnected to one or more underwater sinks 
using acoustic signals. 2D UW-ASNs are commonly 
recommended for environmental monitoring. 
Designing 
protocols 
for 
static 
three-dimensional 
underwater sensor networks, compared to the two-
dimensional one, is relatively complex. The speed and 
propagation delay of acoustic signals differ according to 
water depth. This results in different power consumption 
levels depending on the depth of the sensor node. Clearly, it 
also complicates the design of efficient routing. Another 
challenge for this class of networks is to maintain the 
respective depth of the different sensors. 
The 
three-dimensional 
networks 
of 
autonomous 
underwater vehicles may overlap with the long-term or 
short-term classes. “And one vital important design 
objective is to make them rely on local intelligence and less 
dependent on communications from online shores.” [11] 
 
C. Major Research Challenges in Uderwater Wireless 
Sensor Networks  
 
Power Consumption  
As mentioned, underwater sensors, unlike terrestrial 
sensors, cannot use solar energy to recharge their batteries. 
It is also challenging to physically replace these sensors. A 
straightforward approach to resolve this problem is to self-
generate energy using the sensors. Research on generating 
energy using current movement has been conducted in the 
last few years. Nonetheless, efficient routing protocols and 
novel communication technologies are greatly needed. 
 
Communication Link 
Underwater networks are dominated by acoustic signals 
for the aforementioned reasons. Acoustic signals bring a lot 
of challenges to the research arena, especially propagation 
delay and high error rates. Alternatives are sincerely sought. 
The search for better options is ongoing. According to [12], 
optical signals have been used successfully for sensors 
communications. 
This 
opens 
the 
door 
for 
future 
possibilities. Yet, optical signals have their own challenges 
especially with power consumption and how they compare 
to acoustic signals. 
 
Distributed Localization and Time Synchronization 
Location-awareness 
has 
become 
an 
essential 
characteristic for many of the underwater applications. For 
these systems, data without associated location information 
might be useless. Among many of the large-scale terrestrial 
WSN applications, GPS can be used to provide accurate 
locations and time synchronization. In GPS-free terrestrial 
applications, other techniques are used to calculate the 
distance. Once the distance is known, the position 
information can be calculated using algorithms such as 
SemiDefinite Programming (SDP) [13]. In UWSN, the 
position information can be calculated in the same way. 
However, it is very challenging to determine the distance 
between two sensors. GPS cannot be used since the satellite 
signal is weak for underwater.  Further discussion is found 
in the next Section. 
 
Routing Protocols 
In UWSN, protocol design is tied to energy efficiency 
especially for long-term monitoring applications. Actually, 
there are numerous terrestrial WSN energy-efficient 
protocols already developed. However, due to signal nature 
and environment factors, most of them are not feasible 
underwater. Further discussion can be found in [14]. 
 
III. 
LOCALIZATION IN UNDERWATER WIRELESS SENSOR 
NETORKS 
 
A.  GPS-free Localization Schemes 
Localization in wireless sensor networks can be 
formulated into a graph realization problem. Given a graph 
G 
= 
(V, 
E) 
and 
sets 
of 
non-negative 
weights, {d ij  :  (i, j)  ∈  E} , the goal is to compute a 
realization of G in the Euclidean space Rd for a given low 
dimension d; to place the vertices of G in Rd such that the 
Euclidean distance between every pair of adjacent vertices(i, 
j) equals (or bounded) by the prescribed weight d ij  ∈  E . 
 GPS may not be an optimal choice for underwater 
systems. Therefore, a GPS-free scheme is needed for such 
systems. The characteristics of an underwater environment 
represent the significant difference between Underwater 
Wireless Sensor Networks (UWSN) and its counterpart. The 
schemes and network protocols of terrestrial Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSN) cannot be used directly on UWSN. 
Therefore, GPS-free schemes used for terrestrial WSN 
localization applications cannot be used directly. 
Normally, localization schemes can be classified into 
two categories: range-based schemes and range-free 
schemes. Range-based schemes use range measurements to 
calculate position information. Time of Arrival (TOA) is 
used widely as a method of distance estimation using 
188
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

propagation time of different kinds of signals. “GPS is a 
most basic localization system of TOA” [15]. The 
disadvantage of GPS is that it is costly and may not be 
suitable for some applications. To use a GPS system, the 
GPS receivers require the installation of expensive and 
energy-demanding hardware to rigorously synchronize with 
at least four satellites. Nonetheless, GPS systems do not 
work in certain settings, such as indoor and underwater 
environments. This is due to the fact that satellite signals are 
not able to go through buildings and seawater.  
Another widely used range-based scheme is Time 
Difference of Arrival (TDOA). “TDOA measures range 
information using time difference between two kinds of 
signals, such as Radio Frequency (RF) and ultrasound” [16]. 
Cricket [17] is one of the existing commercial TDOA 
localization systems. Compared to TOA, TDOA does not 
need to precisely time synchronize all nodes. However, like 
TOA, it still needs expensive and power consuming 
hardware to emit two different kinds of signals. Hence, it 
may not be suitable for low-power sensor network 
applications. In addition, the average propagation distance 
of ultrasound, which is around 15-25 feet, is too short to 
satisfy large-scale applications. This brings many limitations 
to deploy a real TDOA-based application. 
To complement the TDOA and TOA schemes, Angle of 
Arrival (AOA) has been developed to provide the two 
schemes with more accurate range information [3]. The idea 
of AOA is to allow the sensor nodes to estimate the angles 
between neighbors. However, like TOA and TDOA, AOA 
still requires costly hardware to estimate the angles. It is 
clear that the majority of range-based schemes rely on 
accurate range measurements. These measurements are 
easily affected by background noise. Therefore, how to 
conquer the impacts caused by noise is currently an active 
area of research in WSN localization. 
Compared to range-based, the range-free schemes are 
more suitable for cost-effective situations. “Range-free 
estimates the location of sensor nodes either by exploiting 
the radio connectivity information among neighboring 
nodes, or by exploiting the sensing capabilities that each 
sensor node possesses” [18]. In [19], a centroid algorithm is 
proposed. Based on the number of received beacons 
broadcasted by anchors, a centroid model was established to 
calculate the positions of target sensor nodes.   
Another outstanding solution for range-free is DV-HOP 
[3]. This work uses hop-count, the average distance per hop 
at each node, to compute the approximate position for the 
sensor nodes. Other algorithms use offline hop-distance 
estimations and neighbor information exchange to improve 
the accuracy of the position results.   
Compared to the range-based scheme, the cost of 
equipment is cheaper and the physical factors have less 
impact on these algorithms. However, the results may be 
crude not reflecting the exact position information. 
Therefore, such schemes will only fit applications that do 
not require critically precise accuracy. 
B. SemiDefinite Programming and Underwater 
Localization 
The trace of a given matrix A, denoted by Trace (A), is 
the sum of the entries on the main diagonal of A. We use I, e 
and 0 to denote the identity matrix, the vector of all ones 
and the vector of all zeros, whose dimensions will be clear 
in the context. The inner product of two vectors p and q is 
denoted by p, q . The 2-norm of a vector x, denoted 
by x , is defined by
x, x . A positive SemiDefinite 
matrix X is represented by
X  0 
. 
In [20], the mathematical model of the sensor 
localization problem is described as follows. “There are n 
distinct sensor points in Rd whose localizations are to be 
determined, and other m fixed points (called anchor points) 
whose localizations are known as a1, a2,…, am. The 
Euclidean distance dij between the ith and jth sensor points 
is known if (i, j) ∈ Nx, and the distance d ik  between the ith 
sensor and kth anchor point is known if (i, k) ∈ Na. Usually, 
Nx = {(i, j) : xi − x j = dij ≤ rd}  
and Na ={(i,k) : xi − ak = d ik ≤ rd} , where rd is a 
fixed parameter called radio range. The network localization 
problem is to find vector xi ∈ Rd  for all i = 1, 2,…, n such 
that 
       
xi − x j
2 = dij
2         ∀(i, j) ∈ Nx
xi − ak
2 = d ik
2         ∀(i,k) ∈ Na
             [20] 
           
 
 
Unfortunately, this problem is, in general, hard to solve 
even for d = 1. In 2004, the relaxation model of this math 
model was represented by a standard Full SemiDefinite 
Programming (FSDP) model, which is shown in the 
following equation. For simplicity, d is set to 2. 
                    
(SDP)   minimize 0⋅ Z  
 
                    subject to 
Z(1,2),(1,2) = I2 
 
                                     
 
 
            
.0 
 
,          (  , )
 ; )
 ; )(
(
,    (  , )
)
)(  ;0
 ;0
(
2
2

Z
N
i k
d
Z
a e
e
a
N
i j
d
Z
e
e
e
e
a
ik
T
i
k
i
k
x
ij
T
j
i
j
i
∈
∀
=
•
−
−
∈
∀
=
•
−
−
   [20]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here I2 is the 2-dimensional identity matrix, 0 is a vector 
matrix of all zeros, and ei is the vector of all zeros except a 
189
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

1 at the i-th position.  If a solution Z =
I2
X
X T
Y
 
  
 
   is of 
rank 
2, 
or 
equivalently, 
Y = XT X
, 
then 
X = x1, ..., xn
[
] ∈  R2×n  is a solution to the sensor 
network localization problem. Here, Z is a (n + 2) 
symmetric matrix.  
But this model does not deal with the noise factor; 
it just gets the feasible solutions for the sensor localization 
problem. A noise factor based SDP model is proposed in 
[20].  
 
                                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using this model, even with its worst case scenario of 
inaccurate results affected by noise factor, this mathematical 
model still generates relatively accurate distance estimations 
even in a noisy background.  
However, the FSDP model requires very long time to 
resolve large-scale position problems. In this case, tracking 
applications and real-time systems are impossible to use this 
approach. Therefore, in 2006, Edge-based SemiDefinite 
Programming (ESDP) model has been developed to reduce 
time complexity of FSDP [20]. 
 
 (SDP)  minimize    0⋅ Z  
              subject to   Z(1,2),(1,2) = I2  
                             
 
 
 
        

(0; ei − e j)(0; ei − e j)T • Z = dij
2,    ∀(i, j) ∈ Nx
(−ak; ei)(−ak; ei)T • Z = d ik
2,          ∀(i, k) ∈ Na
Z(1,2,i, j),(1,2,i, j)  f  0,                           ∀(i, j) ∈ Nx  
 
The only difference between FSDP and ESDP is the last 
constraint. The last constraint of ESDP only needs every 
four by four matrix to be a SemiDefinite matrix. On the 
other hand, FSDP works with a (n + 2) by (n + 2) matrix. 
ESDP will be much faster in resolving large-scale wireless 
sensor networks. Simulation results have proved this 
conclusion [21]. 
To use SDP, two types of data need to be collected. 
They are the accurate positions of anchors and the partial 
pair-wise distance measurements between some of the 
sensor nodes and the distances between sensor and anchor 
nodes.  
SDP uses these two types of data to compute the position 
of every sensor node in the WSN. In practice, the number of 
anchors is at least three; however, more anchors can 
generate more accurate position results. Nonetheless, more 
anchors imply more cost. Therefore, how to deploy a limited 
number of anchors to generate accurate position results is a 
challenging issue in designing this localization system.  
According to [20], if all sensor nodes can connect to any 
anchor nodes, directly or indirectly, the solution for SDP 
must be bounded. Therefore, appropriate radio range should 
be adjusted depending on different situations in order to 
make sure all sensor nodes can connect to at least one 
anchor directly or indirectly. 
In [20], it is mentioned that various techniques have 
been developed to address measurement uncertainties. Most 
of these methods are based on minimizing some global error 
functions, which can be different depending on the model of 
uncertainty. According to the type of optimization model 
being formulated, the characteristics and computation 
complexity vary. “Existing algorithms have limited success, 
even for small problem sizes” [22]. Moreover, in the real 
world, all the distance measurements inevitably have noises. 
Using this noisy distance information, we cannot get 
satisfactory results. However, SDP had been proved that it 
could generate accurate results even in extremely noisy 
backgrounds. More importantly, there is no special node(s) 
in the SDP approach. Hence, even if some of the nodes were 
destroyed, the localization system will still work and 
continue to generate relatively accurate results. 
In [21], two future relaxations of SDP, NSDP and ESDP, 
have been proposed and tested. The performance of SDP 
approach and ESDP approach can be found in [13][21]. 
Further details and complete discussions on SDP can be 
found in [13][20][21]. 
C. Motivation 
Recently, marine biology research has increasing needs 
of using the position information, especially in migration and 
distribution research such as red king crabs research. Most 
research is based on ship data collection. Biologists need to 
be sailing across the area utilizing a data receiver to collect 
data. This is very expensive and has many limitations, such 
as meteorological factors. Therefore, it is more convenient, if 
the biologists can get the data onshore, significantly reducing 
the cost of research. Migration and distribution research 
belong to a long-term non-time-critical research, normally at 
least one year. The design for this kind of system needs to 
focus on low energy consumption and stable communication. 
In this paper we propose a SemiDefinite Programming 
underwater localization system, which provides biologists 
with a convenient and cheaper way to collect data in marine 
research. 

min  eij + fik
∑
s.t.  eij ≥ (0; ei−ej)(0; ei−ej)T•Z − dij
2,        ∀(i, j)∈Nx
       eij ≥ dij
2 − (0; ei −ej)(0; ei−ej)T•Z,        ∀(i, j)∈Nx
       fik≥ (−ak; ei)(−ak; ei)T•Z − d ik
2,               
∀(i, k)∈Na 
       fik≥d ik
2 − (−ak; ei)(−ak; ei)T•Z,                 
∀(i, k)∈Na
       Z(1:2,1:2) = I2
       Z f  0,                                                            
∀(i,j)∈Nx
190
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

IV. 
NETWORK ARCHITECTURE   
 
It is needed to collect anchors’ position coordinates and 
the partial pair-wise distance measurements between the 
nodes for the proper operation of SDP-based localization 
systems. Partial pair-wise distances include the distances 
between sensors, and distances between anchors and 
sensors. SDP uses the collected data to compute the position 
of every sensor node. According to [13], three factors 
impact the accuracy of results from the SDP approach. The 
factors are the number of anchors, connectivity (number of 
reachable sensors in a sensor acoustic range), and 
background noise. More anchors, large connectivity and less 
noise lead to better accuracy and accurate position results. 
Among these three factors, it is possible to control the first 
two factors, but it is challenging to deal with the noise 
factor. Despite the performance gain, increasing the number 
of anchors and improving connectivity increase the cost of 
the system. Therefore, a balance between the result accuracy 
and cost needs to be weighed carefully. 
The design of UWSN architecture needs to address three 
key problems to satisfy the requirements of SDP. First, how 
do anchor nodes get their position coordinates? This issue is 
a common challenge to a wide array of UWSN applications.  
Second is how to calculate pair-wise accurate distances 
between sensor nodes. Third is how to improve the 
connectivity of the system. The solution to the first problem 
is floating sensors. These nodes float on the water surface 
and have the ability to communicate using radio frequency 
(RF) and acoustic signals. These sensors may be utilized as 
anchor 
nodes. 
RF 
can 
be 
used 
for 
above-water 
communications including exchanging GPS information 
with other floating/anchor nodes and onshore base stations. 
The acoustic signal is used for communicating to the 
underwater sensor nodes. Therefore, floating sensors may 
act as sink nodes.  
To resolve the second problem, round trip propagation 
of data packets is used to measure the distance between two 
sensor nodes. When underwater sensors are activated, they 
send distance-measure packets. If a neighbor within acoustic 
signal range gets the data packet, this neighbor sends a reply 
packet to the original sender node. The reply includes an 
arrival time stamp for the distance-measure packet. Also, it 
includes the depth, temperature and salinity data of the 
neighbor nodes. Then the data package is sent by the 
original sensor node to floating sensor nodes. During this 
process, the original sensor node adds its own depth, 
temperature and salinity data to the package. Finally, the 
collected data can be relayed to a base station for further 
distance calculations. The depth, temperature and salinity 
information is used to calculate the speed of the acoustic 
signal. Round-Trip Time is the total time from sending the 
distance-measure packet to receiving a reply. Therefore, the 
distance between a sensor node and its neighbor can be 
calculated as speed of sound * Round-Trip-Time / 2. 
However, there are underwater factors that can affect the 
round trip measurement consistency. Therefore, multiple 
group measurements are to be collected before transmitting 
to the floating sensor node. Standard deviation should be 
used to justify whether those samples in the group are 
accurate. If not, next group measurements will be tested 
until the smallest standard deviation group is found. 
As stated earlier, connectivity is a major factor in 
achieving high accuracy. However, in certain applications 
such as tracking king crabs, there is no guarantee for enough 
sensors surrounding a target node to provide strong 
connectivity. Therefore, another type of sensors may be 
used for such systems; Fixed-Position scheme. The main 
idea is to improve connectivity of the whole system. 
Compared to other sensors, fixed-position nodes will not 
move with the target. Although the name is “fixed,” it does 
not mean they are anchored at a certain position. In real 
applications, they can move within a certain area which will 
be defined in advance. They are deployed to evenly cover 
the monitored area and measure temperature, depth and 
salinity for calculating the speed of the acoustic signal. 
However, if the applications need to monitor the area in 
addition to tracking the target, those transmitter nodes are 
equipped with necessary sensors to measure other 
environment phenomena. The design of Fixed-Position 
scheme provides other benefits. Most importantly, it leads to 
a reduction in power consumption for all sensor nodes. This 
is because node connectivity must be above a certain level 
to guarantee the accuracy of position results. If the system 
does not have these transmitters, it should increase the 
power of acoustic signal to improve coverage range. In this 
case, all sensors will be subject to extra power consumption 
in order to complete the task.  
The straightforward solution, to increase connectivity, is 
to increase all sensors’ acoustic range. However, as 
mentioned above, this will lead to highly increased power 
consumption. Thus, it will reduce the system’s lifetime. 
Since the power of floating anchors can be recharged, it is 
possible to only magnify the anchors’ acoustic signal range 
(i.e. Magnified-Range Scheme). In this case, all regular 
sensor nodes will have the opportunity to connect to anchors 
directly or indirectly. Hence, magnified anchors’ signal 
range will improve the probability to achieve more accurate 
results. A network architecture is illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
V. 
SIMULATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
All simulations are based on a 2-D domain and all tests 
are solved by SeDuMi 1.1 of MatLab2007b on a MacBook 
Pro laptop with 2.16GHz Intel Core 2 Duo CPU, 2 GB 667 
Mhz DDR2 Memory. In this simulation, we randomly 
generate the true position of all sensor locations in a square 
of 1 by 1.  
To prove that the three factors, namely anchor number, 
connectivity and noise factor, significantly affect position 
results reported by the SDP approach, numerous simulations 
have been performed in [13][20][21][23]. The purpose of 
our simulation is to show that our proposed schemes are 
effective and achieve accurate localization. Moreover, issues 
in regard to how to deploy anchors in real applications will 
be discussed. 
 
191
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Network Architecture. 
A.   Error Estimations 
In these simulations, three methods are used to estimate 
errors namely a) Error, b) Root Mean Square Deviation 
(RMSD) and c) Individual Trace. These errors often occur 
in real applications either due to the lack of information or 
the presence of noise, and are often difficult to detect since 
the true locations of sensors are unknown. 
• 
Error: It is the distance between each pair of true 
position and estimate position. In these simulation 
settings and unlike real-life applications, it is 
possible to compare the true and estimate positions.  
 
• 
Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD): It 
measures the accuracy of the estimated positions {xi 
: I = 1, …, n}. The formula is shown below. This 
method cannot be used in real-life applications since 
the true positions of the sensor nodes are unknown. 
This metric is only useful for simulation purposes. 
Lower RMSD means the global error is smaller.  
RMSD  =  1
n
x i  −  xi
2
i=1
n
∑
 
  
 
  
1/ 2
  
 
(4)    
               where,  n is number of target sensor nodes 
       x i is the true position of ith sensor nodes 
xi is the estimated position of ith sensor 
nodes.    
• 
Individual Trace: When relaxing to the SDP 
model, change Y  =  X
T X  to Y  f  X
T X .  This is 
equivalent to 

Z  =  
I
X
X
T
Y
 
  
 
   f  0. Thus, Y − X
T X 
represents the co-variance matrix of xi, i = 1, …, n. 
Individual trace Yii − x i
2,Which is also the variance 
of 
x i
. This helps detecting possible distance 
measure errors, and defect sensors in real 
application [13]. 
 
In the following, two kinds of chart are illustrated; 
position simulation charts and error estimation charts, 
respectively. In position simulation charts, the red squares 
indicate the position of anchors. The green circles present 
the true position of target sensor nodes. The blue asterisks 
show the estimated position of the target sensor nodes. The 
blue lines between green circles and blue asterisks represent 
the distance between true positions and estimated positions. 
In error estimation charts, the red squares represent the 
individual trace. The blue circles refer to errors. 
 
B. Fixed-Position Scheme Simulation 
Purpose: To test the Fixed-Position theory.  
Analysis: Figure 2 shows the estimated results using 3 
anchors, 30 sensor nodes and signal range of 0.3. It is clear 
that the results are very inaccurate. Instead of using a larger 
signal range to increase connectivity, we deploy 10 more 
sensor nodes in the area. The results are shown in Figure 3. 
Compared to Figure 2, the estimated results are much more 
accurate. The results in Figure 3 show a reduction in the 
global error from 0.162 to 0.039.  
192
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
                         
 
 
Figure 2. Fixed-Position Simulation 1 (RMSD = 0.162) 
Condition: Anchor Number = 3; Sensor Number = 30; Acoustic Range = 
0.3 
                         
 
Figure 3. Fixed-Position Simulation 2 (RMSD = 0.039) 
Condition: Anchor Number = 3; Sensor Number = 40; Acoustic Range = 
0.3 
 
C.   Magnified-Range Scheme Simulation 
Purpose: to test the performance of magnified-range 
theory. 
Analysis: The difference between this simulation and 
the previous one is that the noise factor is set to 0.05. This is 
why the overall accuracy is lower than the results in Figure 
3. The simulation in Figure 4 uses the same signal range for 
both; sensor nodes and anchors. While the simulation in 
Figure 5 uses 0.3 for the sensor signal range and 0.5 as 
anchor signal range. The simulation results show that the 
configuration in Figure 5 with magnified signal range 
improves the accuracy by around 20% compared to Figure 
4.  
 
  
Figure 4. Magnified-Range Simulation (RMSD = 0.124) 
Condition: Anchor Number= 4; Senor Number = 50; Noise Factor = 0.05; 
Senor Signal Range = 0.3 
193
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

          
 
 
Figure 5. Magnified-Range Simulation (RMSD = 0.098) 
Condition: Anchor Number = 4; Senor Number = 50; Noise Factor = 0.05; 
Anchor Signal Range = 0.3 and 0.5 
 
VI. 
FUTURE WORK 
The simulations are currently based on 2-D environment 
to test the performance of our proposed schemes. Real 
applications may require 3-D environments. Therefore, our 
next research step is to focus on 3-D simulations. Moreover, 
the following challenges will be further investigated. 
First, how to get more accurate distances between sensor 
nodes? Due to the limitations of acoustic signals and unique 
characteristics of underwater environments, it is very hard to 
compute the accurate distance. However, if it is possible to 
provide more accurate distance using other measurement 
schemes, it guarantees a better performance for the SDP 
approach. Moreover, this will allow the use of other 
localization schemes, especially some terrestrial range-
based localization scheme. 
Second, energy-efficient routing protocols are needed in 
such settings. Underwater routing protocols are relatively a 
new field. The unique features of acoustic propagation and 
noise make most of terrestrial WSN routing protocols not 
suitable for UWSN. Therefore, we plan to investigate the 
design of energy-efficient routing protocols that fit the 
marine 
environment 
especially 
in 
discovering 
the 
neighboring nodes within signal range. 
Third is combining other localization approaches with 
SDP. There are many localization schemes that may lead to 
a better performance if combined with SDP. Therefore, we 
plan to research existing approaches to find a possible way 
to combine with our SDP-based schemes. This will 
probably lead to a hybrid localization scheme. The new 
system should generate better results and should address 
more marine applications and research problems. 
Fourth, real-life experiments will be conducted. We plan 
to use commercial underwater transmitters to test our 
architecture design and schemes. Real-life demonstrations 
are most likely to reveal insights on improving the design 
and performance of the system. In fact, we are gathering 
more information on water current, attacks from sea 
creatures and other natural factors. This should help design 
a more robust underwater localization system. 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Compared 
to 
other 
localization 
algorithms, 
the 
SemiDefinite Programming (SDP) approach is proved to 
deliver accurate results even in noisy backgrounds. In this 
paper, we propose a design for underwater localization 
systems using SemiDefinite Programming. The objective is 
to provide marine scientists with a cost-effective and 
efficient way for conducting relevant research. Two designs, 
Fixed-Position and Magnified-Range, are proposed. Both 
schemes have shown better accuracy and performance, 
according to simulation results, over conventional networks. 
Future research directions are discussed in this paper.  
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported, in part, by an NSF CRI grant 
and a Texas Research Development Fund grant. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Dong, and A.M. Mahdy, “GPS-Free Localization Schemes 
for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, 
Systems, Services and Technologies, 2009, pp. 244-248. 
[2] Y. Shang, W. Ruml, Y. Zhang, and M.P.J. Fromherz, 
“Localization from Mere Connectivity,” Proc. of ACM MobiHoc, 
Annapolis, MD, 2003, pp. 201- 212. 
[3] D. Niculescu, and B. Nath, “Ad Hoc Positioning System (APS) 
Using AOA,” Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, San Francisco, 
CA, USA, 2003. 
[4] A. Savvides, C.C. Han, and M. Srivastava, “Dynamic fine-
grained localization in ad hoc networks of sensors,” Proceedings of 
MobiCom, 2001. 
[5] D.B. Kifoyle, and A.B. Baggeroer, “The State of the Art in 
Underwater Acoustic Telemetry,” IEEE Journal on Oceanic 
Engineering, OE-25, No. 5, 2000, pp. 4-27. 
[6] P.C. Etter, “Underwater Acoustic Modeling, Principles, 
Techniques and Application,.” 2nd edition, E&FN Spon, 1996. 
[7] L. Berkhovskikh, and Y. Lysanov, “Fundamentals of Ocean 
Acoustics,” Springer, 1982. 
[8] J. Proakis, J. Rice, E. Sozer, and M. Stojanovic, “Shallow water 
acoustic networks,” Encyclopedia of Telecommunications,  John 
Wiley and Sons, 2003. 
[9] V.O. Knudsen, R.S. Alford, J.W. Emling, “Digital 
Communications,” Journal of Marine Research, (7-12):410, 1948. 
[10] J.H., Cui, J. Kong, M. Gerla, and S. Zhou, “The Challenges of 
Building Scalable Mobile Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks 
for Aquatic Applications,” IEEE Network, (0890-8044), 2006, pp. 
12-17. 
194
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

[11] I.F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili, and T. Melodia, “Underwater 
Acoustic Sensor Networks: Research Challenges,” Elsevier Ad 
Hoc Networks, Vol. 3, No. 3, 2005, pp. 257-279. 
[12] I. Vasilescu, K. Kotay, and D. Rus, “Krill: An Exploration in 
Underwater Sensor Networks,” Proceedings of the Second IEEE 
Workshop on Embedded Networked Sensors, 2005, pp. 151-152. 
[13] P. Biswas, and Y.Y. Ye, “Semidefinite programming for ad 
hoc wireless sensor network localization,” Proceedings of the third 
international symposium on Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks, 2004, pp. 46-54. 
[14] B. Dong, and A.M. Mahdy, “A Survey of Underwater 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” Journal of Computing Sciences in 
Colleges, Electronic Issue, 2008. 
[15] B.H. Wellenhoff, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, “Global 
Positions System: Theory and Practice,” Fourth Edition. Springer 
Verlag, 1997. 
[16] P. Bahl, and V. Padmanabhan, “RADAR: An In-Building RF-
based User Location and Tracking System”, Proceedings of IEEE 
INFOCOM, 2000, pp. 775-784. 
[17] CrossBow, Available from www.xbow.com (last visited June 
2010). 
[18] R. Stoleru, T. He, and J.A. Stankovic, “Secure Localization 
and Time synchronization for Wireless Sensor and Ad Hoc 
Networks,” Springer, 2007. 
[19] N. Bulusu, and D. Estrin, “GPS-less Low Cost Outdoor 
Localization 
for 
Very 
Small 
Devices” 
IEEE 
Personal 
Communications Magazine, 7(5), pp. 28-34. 
[20] P. Biswas, C. Liang, C. Wang, Y.Y. Ye, “Semidefinite 
programming based algorithms for sensor network localization”, 
ACM New York, NY, USA, May 2006, pp.188- 220. 
[21] Z. Wang, S. Zheng, Y.Y. Ye, and S. Boyd, “Further 
Relaxations of the Semidefinite Programming Approach to Sensor 
Network Localization,” SIAM Journal on Optimization, Vol 19, 
Issue 2, 2006, pp. 655-673. 
[22] J.J. More, and Z. Wu, “Global continuation for distance 
geometry problems,” SIAM Journal on Optimization, Vol 7, Issue 
3, 1997, pp. 814-836. 
[23] A.M.-C. So and Y. Ye, “Theory of semidefinite programming 
relaxation for sensor network localization”, Proceedings of the 
sixteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, 
2005, pp. 405-414. 
195
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

