367
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Using BGP to Reduce Power Consumption in Core
and Edge Networks: A Metric-Based Approach
Shankar Raman∗, Balaji Venkat†, and Gaurav Raina†
India-UK Advanced Technology Centre of Excellence in Next Generation Networks
∗Department of Computer Science and Engineering, †Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India
Email: mjsraman@cse.iitm.ac.in, balajivenkat@tenet.res.in, gaurav@ee.iitm.ac.in
Abstract—Power reduction methods at the device and the
network levels in the Internet continue to attract attention.
At the device level, power reduction is usually achieved by
using low-power consuming devices or by switching off unused
components. At the network level; re-engineering, reconﬁguring,
and re-routing of data packets can help in reducing power
consumption. In this paper, we present a metric-based approach
to route data packets through a low-power path from a source
to a destination at the level of Autonomous Systems (AS). We
propose that the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) exchange a
new attribute; namely, consumed-power to available-bandwidth of
an AS with neighbouring AS. Using this proposed metric, the AS
Border Routers can readily identify the low-power path from a
source to a destination. We propose appropriate modiﬁcations to
the BGPs path selection algorithm to include the low-power path
criteria. We consider the effects that the proposed approach has
on two parameters: (a) power reduction achieved as compared
to the shortest path routing, and (b) the increase in path length
from source to destination. The increase in the number of hops
would be a consequence of re-routing through low-power AS.
Simulations show that there could be signiﬁcant gains in power
reduction, if an increase in the number of hops is acceptable.
Our work suggests that this trade off merits consideration as the
power consumption of an AS is signiﬁcant.
Index Terms—Autonomous Systems, Border Gateway Protocol,
Low-power Paths, Trafﬁc Engineering.
I. INTRODUCTION
Power reduction methods that aim to reduce energy con-
sumption of the Internet have evoked much interest. In [1],
a metric-based method for reducing the power consumption
of the core and edge networks was proposed. This power
reduction problem assumes signiﬁcance as estimates predict
a 300% increase, when access speeds move from 10 Mbps
to 100 Mbps [2]. Numerous approaches have been proposed
to reduce the power consumption ranging from designing
low-power routers and switches, to optimizing the network
topology using trafﬁc engineering approaches [3].
Low-power router and switch design aim at reducing the
power consumed by hardware components such as transmis-
sion link, lookup tables and memory. In [4], it is shown that the
link power consumption can vary by 20 Watts from the base
power, between idle and trafﬁc scenarios. Hence, the authors
suggest fully utilizing the line-card. The idea is that operating
at full throughput will lead to less power per bit. Therefore,
larger packet lengths will consume lower power.
The two important components that have received attention
for high power consumption are static and dynamic RAM-
based buffers (SRAM, DRAM) and Ternary Content Ad-
dressable Memories (TCAM). A 40 Gb/s line card would
require more than 300 SRAM chips and consume 2.5 kW [5].
Some variants of TCAMs have been proposed for high speed
lines with reduced power consumption [6]. But these schemes
cannot scale forever. For some modeling work associated with
buffer sizes, which can also lead to a reduction in power at the
router architecture level, see [7], [8], and references therein.
At the Internet level, creating a topology that allows route
adaptation, capacity scaling and power-aware service rate
tuning, will reduce power consumption. In [9], a subset of
IP router interfaces are put to sleep, using an Energy Aware
Routing (EAR) after calculating shortest path trees of the
network from each router. Such a technique is useful in setting
up paths within an Autonomous System (AS). In [10], the
authors provide a way to introduce hardware standby primi-
tives and apply trafﬁc engineering methods to coordinate and
reduce power consumption under given network operational
constraints. Power savings while switching from 1 Gbps to
100 Mbps is approximately 4 Watts and from 100 Mbps to 10
Mbps around 0.1 Watts. Hence, instead of operating at 1 Gbps
the link speed could be reduced to a lower bandwidth under
certain conditions for reduced power consumption. A detailed
review on energy efﬁciency of the Internet is given in [11].
Multilayer trafﬁc engineering based methods make use of
parameters such as resource usage, bandwidth, throughput
and Quality of Service (QoS) measures, for power reduction.
In [12], an approach for reducing intra-AS power consumption
for optical networks using Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm
is proposed. The input assumes the existence of a network
topology for constructing an auxiliary graph. This topology
is easy to obtain for an intra-AS scenario. Trafﬁc is then re-
routed through the low-power optimized links.
The following issues exist in power reduction schemes
today.
a A common method for reducing power consumption
in the Internet is to switch unused devices and links
to sleep state. Data packets are then routed through
the functional links. This method is very localized and
does not consider the power increase in the adjacent
device that carries the extra trafﬁc. Further this solution

368
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
is dependent on the underlying technology used by the
devices. Also service level agreements between Internet
Service Providers (ISPs) may be such that switching off
the links may not be permissible.
b Power reduction schemes should not operate in isolation.
They must be hierarchical so that they are applicable at
various Internet hierarchies such as within the enterprise,
or AS, and between AS. Further, there must not be
any large variation in the algorithms implemented at
the various levels of hierarchy. If multiple schemes are
implemented at various levels of the hierarchy, then a
way to coordinate these schemes become essential.
c Distributed solutions for power reduction have been used
in adhoc wireless networks [13]. Such schemes may not
be extensible to large networks such as the Internet.
Further any proposed scheme must be extensible to
multicast networks as well and not be limited to unicast.
Some of these drawbacks were addressed in our ear-
lier scheme which was applicable for Multi-Protocol Label
Switching (MPLS)-based networks [1]. MPLS label switched
paths that traverse multiple AS carry trafﬁc from a head-end
to a tail-end AS, use Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) for
exchanging routing and topology related information. In [1],
the low-power path was detected by identifying the topology
of the Internet. This topology at the AS level was obtained
using the method presented in [14], where one of the attributes
of BGP, AS-PATH-INFO, was used. The Constrained Shortest
Path First algorithm (CSPF) uses this AS level topology with
consumed-power to available-bandwidth (PWR) metric as a
constraint, to determine the low-power path from the head-end
to the tail-end. The PWR metric can be exchanged among the
collaborating AS using BGP. It was shown that explicit routing
can be achieved between the head and tail-ends through the
low-power paths connecting the AS using inter-AS Trafﬁc
Engineered Label Switched Path (TE-LSP) that span multiple
AS. However, this method has communication overhead in
order to setup the path. These overheads occur in the form of
information exchange between the entities in the network.
In order to avoid this, we propose modiﬁcations to the BGP
path selection algorithm. This reduces the communication
overhead associated with respect to setting up of the path.
We introduce a new path selection rule to ensure that routing
paths are established based on PWR metric by BGP rather
than using inter-AS TE LSP. Simulations show that the PWR
metric-based algorithms can lead to a power reduction which is
as high as 70% over the conventional CSPF hop based variant.
The power reduction obtained depends on the connectivity
of the topology as well as the PWR metric distribution.
There could be up to a 50% increase in the number of hops
when compared with the shortest path algorithm. It has been
suggested that for Internet Protocol (IP)-based networks such
increase in hops may not have much impact in performance
at the application layers [4].
The rest of the paper is organized in the following manner.
In Section II, an overview of the BGP routing protocol as
well as the inter-AS TE-LSP based algorithm is presented.
Section III addresses ways to reduce the communication time
complexity by proposing a method for establishing low-power
paths using BGP path selection. Simulations are discussed in
Section IV. In Section V, a brief discussion on the implementa-
tion and emulation using OpenFlow and Quagga is presented.
A discussion on the comparison with our previously proposed
implementation is presented in Section VI. We outline our
contributions and highlight avenues for future research in
Section VII.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we present an introduction to the BGP
protocol and the inter-AS TE-LSP based method for inter-AS
power reduction.
A. Border Gateway Protocol
BGP [15] performs routing between multiple AS by ex-
changing routing and reachability information with other sys-
tems implementing BGP. BGP installs routing tables using
a path selection algorithm. Routing information exchanges
happen between multiple AS. This is classiﬁed under Exte-
rior Border Gateway Protocol (eBGP). Internal BGP (iBGP)
peering is used between the border routers in an AS and if
necessary, between the core routers as well. Internal BGP
expects a mesh topology. As such a network topology can
become unmanageable due to scalability, route reﬂectors that
re-advertise only the best path information is used to convey
information to other iBGP routers.
BGP’s routing decision is based on various static and
dynamic parameters. Some examples for static parameters
that affect routing decisions include multi-exit discrimina-
tor (MED) and local preference (LOCAL PREF) values.
Routing through oldest paths and AS-Path lengths are some
examples for dynamic parameters. For a detailed discussion
refer to [16], [17].
B. Inter-AS TE LSP power reduction using BGP
In our previous work, we presented a methodology for
addressing the power reduction problem in the core and edge
networks using BGP. The methodology was divided into four
parts:
1) constructing the topology of the AS by a device,
2) assigning the PWR metric to the links connecting the
AS,
3) calculating the low-power paths in the AS topology, and
4) establishing the path from source to the destination using
trafﬁc-engineering techniques.
We now brieﬂy review the algorithms and discuss the compu-
tation and communication time complexity issues.
1) Constructing the network topology using BGP strands:
The inter-AS topology can be modeled as a directed graph
G = (V, E, f) where the vertices (V ) are mapped to AS
and the edges (E) map the link that connect the neighboring
AS. The direction (f) on the edge, represents the data ﬂow
from the head-end to the tail-end AS. To obtain the inter-AS
topology, we use the approach from [14]. In this approach

369
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a sub-graph of the Internet topology, can be obtained by
collecting several preﬁx updates in BGP. This is illustrated
in Figure 1 which shows the different graph strands of an AS
recorded from the BGP packets.
Each vertex in this graph is assigned a weight according
to the PWR metric of the AS, as seen from an AS Border
Router (ASBR). Since there can be more than one ASBR
associated with an AS, a vertex can have more than one PWR
metric. Note that the ASBRs act as an entry point to the
AS. Each of the PWR metrics for a vertex are assigned to
the ingress links of the ASBRs. Figure 2 shows the merged
strands forming the topology sub-graph where the weight of
the vertices are mapped to the ingress edges. A reference AS
level topology derived from 100 strands of AS-PATH-INFO
received by an AS had 46 nodes with 15% connectivity in
the topology. We deﬁne connectivity as a percentage of links
present in the topology when compared with a complete graph
of N nodes, which is N(N−1)
2
.
2) PWR metric calculation: The numerator of the PWR
metric is calculated for the AS at each ingress ASBR.
We obtain the summation of power consumed at the major
Provider (P) and Provider Edge (PE) routers within an AS.
These can be obtained by using any of the intra-AS power
calculation technique. The idea is to obtain the consumed-
power of the AS which is the averaged consumed-power for
all the routers within an AS. This value is divided by the
maximum available-bandwidth at each of the ASBRs egress
link. This step is necessary as the requested bandwidth for
any path from the head-end to the tail-end using the ASBR is
limited by the available-bandwidth in the ASBRs egress links.
Note that Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) can
also be used to extract this power information [18] ofﬂine.
The highest available bandwidth amongst the ASBRs egress
links is used as the denominator in the PWR metric com-
putation. Once the requested bandwidth is available, then
consumed power plays a major role in determining the path
from the source to the destination. PWR metric is used as a
mapping function for each of the ingress link of the ASBR of
an AS. This metric is then advertised to the other neighboring
AS through the control plane using BGP extensions. BGP
ensures that the information is percolated to other AS. On
the receipt of these PWR metrics by the AS at far-end of
the Internet, the overall AS level topology can be constructed.
Note that this view of the Internet is available with each of the
routers without using any other complex discovery mechanism.
Some sample link weights shown in Figure 2 are obtained by
using such a mapping function on the ingress links.
3) Low-power path detection: The algorithm consists of
two sub-algorithms: each one executed by the ASBRs and
the Path Computation Elements (PCEs) in the network in
their respective AS. PCEs have been proposed by the Internet
Engineering Task Force for path computation activities. We
can use the existing PCE architecture for our algorithm. The
algorithms for the ASBRs and PCEs are given as Algorithm 1
and Algorithm 2, respectively.
In Algorithm 1, parallel process 1 (steps 4 − 10) is used
Algorithm 1 ASBR low-power path algorithm
Require: Weighted Topology Graph T=(AS, E, f)
1: Begin
2: /* As part of Interior Gateway Protocol-Trafﬁc Engineer-
ing */
3: Trigger exchange of available bandwidth on bandwidth
change, to the AS internal neighbors;
4: BEGIN PARALLEL PROCESS 1
5: while PWR metric changes do
6:
Assign the PWR metric to the Ingress links;
7:
Exchange the PWR metric with its external neighbors;
8:
Exchange the PWR metric with AS’s (internal) ASBRs;
9: end while
10: END PARALLEL PROCESS 1
11: BEGIN PARALLEL PROCESS 2
12: while RSVP packets arrive do
13:
Send and Receive TE-LSP reservations in the explicit
path;
14:
Update routing table with labels for TE-LSP;
15: end while
16: END PARALLEL PROCESS 2
17: End
to exchange the PWR metric information. Parallel process 2
(steps 11 − 16) handles the TE-LSPs. Algorithm 2 calculates
the low-power path from the head-end to the tail-end and sends
this path information to the head-end AS.
Algorithm 2 PCE low-power path algorithm
Require: Weighted Topology Graph T=(AS, E, f)
Require: Source and Destination for inter-AS TE LSP with
sufﬁcient bandwidth
1: Begin
2: Calculate the shortest paths from the head-end to the tail-
end using CSPF with PWR as a metric;
3: if no path available then
4:
Signal error;
5: end if
6: if path exists then
7:
Send explicit path to head-end to construct path;
8: end if
9: Continue passively listening to BGP updates to update
T=(AS, E, f);
10: End
4) Path establishment: Using the PWR metric the low-
power path is obtained by applying the CSPF algorithm.
For example, in Figure 2, the path (A, B, D, G, H, X) is
power efﬁcient as the summation of the PWR metric in this
path is minimum when compared with other paths in the
graph topology. Of course, the routing choice will depend
on the reservation of the bandwidth on this path. If available
bandwidth exists to setup a TE-LSP, then the explicit path

370
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A
B
D
D
G
H
G
E
X
C
B
H
X
B
E
X
0.2
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.03
0.2
0.03
0.5
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.05
0.5
0.5
0.5
Fig. 1.
Strands obtained from BGP updates, vertices A, B, C, D and G are the
head-end AS; D, H and X are the tail-end AS. The vertex weights represent
the PWR metric of an AS, and the link direction shows the next AS hop. ASBRs
present the topology to the PCE.
B
A
D
G
H
C
E
X
0.05
0.1
0.03
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Fig. 2.
Strands combined to get the Internet topology. The PWR metric is
mapped to the ingress link of the ASBR. CSPF algorithm is run on this topology
to detect the low-power path by the PCE.
is established. The Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP)
adheres to its usual operation and tries to setup a path.
If bandwidth is not available in the low-power path thus
calculated, then we fall back to the conventional shortest
paths, provided there is available-bandwidth. The low-power
path algorithm given as Algorithm 2 is executed by the PCE.
Algorithm 1 prepares the topology and feeds it as input to the
PCE as a weighted topology graph.
C. Time complexity
In protocol related algorithms two issues are of interest
namely: communication and computation time complexity.
1) Communication time complexity: The communication
time complexity involved in the algorithm includes
• monitoring the BGP packets to discover the topology
based on AS-PATH-INFO attribute,
• exchanging PWR metric between the neighboring AS,
and
• using inter-AS TE LSP to construct the path from the
head-end to the tail-end AS.
Monitoring the BGP packets takes O(1), a constant time.
Exchanging PWR metric between the neighbors occurs in a
distributed manner and hence takes O(1), a constant time. The
construction of the path takes O(N) where N is the diameter
of the network topology. Hence, the computational complexity
is O(N).
2) Computational time complexity: The algorithm for form-
ing the topology from AS strands is dominated by the number
of links. In the case of dense connectivity the computational
time complexity is O(|V | + |E|) ≈ O(|E|), where |E| is
the number of edges and |V | is the number of nodes or
vertices. The computational time complexity of the low-power
path algorithm is dominated by the Dijkstra’s algorithm. In
this case, instead of hops or any other metric we use the
PWR metric in the Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm. Hence,
the computational time complexity is bounded by Dijkstra’s
shortest path algorithm which is O(|E| log |V |).
The algorithm discussed above can be implemented “of-
ﬂine”. The topology information could be extracted by passive
monitoring, PWR metric information can be obtained using
SNMP, and the low-power path can be calculated using a
separate ofﬂine system. The paths can then be established by
installing routing tables remotely. This ofﬂine implementation
has certain drawbacks. We list the drawbacks and some
possible solutions to overcome them.
1) Using the CSPF algorithm to calculate the route from
source to destination could be time consuming for large
networks. But the topology is dynamically updated and
hence the computation of the shortest path can be
triggered based on need.
2) The topology information obtained using the BGP
strands might be incomplete. For a detailed discussion
on completeness of Internet topology using BGP refer
to [19], [20]. In addition to the BGP based algorithm,
any other algorithm such as SNMP based Topology
discovery could also be used to enhance connectivity
as well as discover new nodes. But this increases the
communication time complexity.
3) The PCEs usually use modiﬁed Dijkstra’s shortest path
algorithm and not a distributed algorithm. The algorithm
can be speeded up using the graph-labeling method
discussed in [1].
4) The algorithm uses RSVP and inter-AS TE LSP to es-
tablish the path which leads to communication overhead.
As we can see, too many information exchanges happen to
implement the low-power path selection process. It would be
of interest to see whether we could reduce the communication
time complexity issues. Note that the computational time
complexity is still bounded by the shortest path algorithm. In
the next section, we explain the BGP path selection algorithm
which overcome these issues.
III. BGP LOW-POWER PATH SELECTION
Before we study the proposed changes to the BGP based
path selection algorithm, we will review the current algorithm

371
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
discussed in [16]. These algorithms are executed by the
ASBRs and the core routers.
A. BGP path selection
In the BGP algorithm [15], each entity exchanges the
best route to a given destination with other connected enti-
ties. Therefore, the BGP protocol is effectively a distributive
method for generating routing information and there is no need
to explicitly discover the topology. Of course this means that
the information obtained from the neighboring entities must be
reliable which is the case in the Internet. Such a distributed
BGP algorithm exchanges preﬁxes and their next hops after
going through the best path selection steps. Hence, there is a
need to compare and choose the best route to add to the IP
routing table which is used for routing the data packets. For
this process to take effect, BGP uses about thirteen different
rules to choose the path [16], [17]. We add the PWR metric-
based low-power path selection as another rule.
The algorithm works as follows: BGP assigns the ﬁrst valid
path as the current best path based on the paths it received
from the neighboring entities. BGP then compares the best
path with the next path in the list, until BGP reaches the end
of the list of valid paths. The rules that are used to determine
the best path are given brieﬂy in Algorithm 3.
There are some exception conditions in some of the steps;
for details refer [16]. We now modify the BGP path selection
algorithm functionality by including the low-power path PWR
metric-based calculation. This involves adding Algorithm 1 as
a subroutine to the BGP path selection criteria after line 4 and
expanding line 5 of Algorithm 3, where we select the shortest
path only if a low-power path is not available. The following
conditions are considered in the PWR metric-based low-power
path selection (see Algorithm 4).
1) If the PWR metric is not available for a link, we drop
all paths using the link (steps 20 − 22).
2) If the PWR metric-based detection is not enabled in even
a single entity that uses BGP we do not execute this
algorithm (steps 5 − 6).
3) If there is only one AS PATH then we skip applying this
algorithm (default action).
4) If there are multiple paths to the tail-end then we choose
the one with the least sum of PWR metric to the tail-end
(step 14).
5) If multiple path exists with the same PWR sum, then
we choose all the paths and give it to the path selection
algorithm (steps 13 − 18).
6) If there are no PWR metric-based paths we fall back to
the shortest path algorithm (default action).
The detailed changes are given as Algorithm 4. Algorithm
3 is now complete with the inclusion of the low-power path
selection process using the PWR metric.
Note that this method involves changes to the BGP path
selection algorithm and hence all the devices involved in ex-
changing BGP routes must implement this method. Therefore,
this method cannot be implemented ofﬂine. We will refer to
this as “online” implementation.
Algorithm 3 Abridged BGP algorithm
Require: Topology information related with BGP
1: Begin
2: Prefer the path with the highest WEIGHT a locally
conﬁgured parameter for a router.
3: Prefer the path with the highest LOCAL PREF value, a
value conﬁgured for local preference.
4: Prefer the path that was locally originated via a network
or aggregate BGP subcommand or through redistribution
from an Interior Gateway Protocol.
5: Prefer the path with the shortest AS PATH, the shortest
path from source to destination.
6: Prefer the path with the lowest origin type (Exterior
Gateway Protocol paths preferred over Interior Gateway
Protocol paths).
7: Prefer the path with the lowest multi-exit discriminator
(MED). This parameter is used when there are multiple
paths to a destination.
8: Prefer external BGP over internal BGP paths.
9: if bestpath is selected then
10:
go to MULTIPATH;
11: end if
12: Prefer the path with the lowest IGP metric to the BGP
next hop.
13: MULTIPATH: Determine if multiple paths require instal-
lation in the routing table for BGP Multipath.
14: if best path selected then
15:
exit with the best path.
16: end if
17: When both paths are external, prefer the path that was
received ﬁrst (the oldest path).
18: Prefer the route that comes from the BGP router with the
lowest router ID.
19: If the originator or router ID is the same for multiple paths,
prefer the path with the minimum cluster list length. The
router ID is the highest IP address on the router, with
preference given to loopback addresses.
20: Prefer the path that comes from the lowest neighbor
address.
21: End
B. Time complexity
We now discuss the communication and computational
complexity of the proposed algorithm.
1) Communication time complexity: Topology discovery is
not needed in this algorithm as BGP exchanges best routes
with the neighboring entities. This removes the need for using
TE-LSPs to establish the path from the head-end to the tail-end
AS as well. Of course, trafﬁc engineering techniques can still
be enforced. There is no additional communication overhead
other than the addition of a new BGP attribute to the BGP
protocol. Therefore, the total communication complexity is
bounded by a constant, O(1).

372
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Algorithm 4 Modiﬁed BGP path selection algorithm
Require: BGP path selection algorithm
1: Begin
2: if ROUTER is conﬁgured with BGP then
3:
Execute Step 2, 3 and 4 of Algorithm 3
4: end if
5: if there is no PWR metric-based path selection then
6:
Goto Step 5 of Algorithm 3;
7: else
8:
if (there are multiple AS PATHS) AND (PWR metrics)
then
9:
Calculate the sum of PWRs in the paths.
10:
else
11:
Ignore paths that have no PWR metrics.
12:
end if
13:
if there exists multiple sum of PWRs as there is more
than one path then
14:
Choose the AS PATHS with the least PWR metric
sum.
15:
if multiple least PWR metric sum are equal then
16:
Choose all the AS PATHS;
17:
Goto Step 6 of Algorithm 3;
18:
end if
19:
else
20:
if
there exist no PWR SUM because of exclusion
then
21:
Goto Step 5 of Algorithm 3;
22:
end if
23:
end if
24: end if
25: Goto Step 6 of Algorithm 3;
26: End
2) Computational time complexity: The computational time
complexity of the BGP path selection algorithm is bounded
by the calculation of the path with the smallest sum of PWR
metric, if multiple paths exist. In the worst case, we might
have to apply Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm with PWR
metric on the topology learned by the ASBRs. Therefore,
the computational time complexity is still bounded by that of
Dijkstra’s algorithm which is O(|E| log |V |), with |E| and |V |
representing the number of edges and nodes, respectively. By
using the proposed algorithm, we overcome the draw backs of
the inter-AS TE-LSP based low-power path algorithm. Note
that the path selection is done by the ASBR and there is also
no need for the use of PCE in this method.
We conducted simulations using the ofﬂine PWR based
method to study the possible power reduction.
IV. SIMULATIONS
The simulations involved creating various graph topologies
for a given connectivity. For large values of vertices V GNU
scientiﬁc library based simulation was performed [21]. We
assumed a uniform link distribution between the nodes. Uni-
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS AND THEIR VALUES
Parameter
Value
Topology size
100, 10000, 1million nodes
Connectivity
25 − 95%, step size 5%
Low-power nodes
Uniform, Exponential (λ = 0.25)
Network types
100 topologies for each connectivity
form distribution was used to ensure that there were minimal
number of disconnected components under low connectivity.
On this topology, PWR metric values based on uniform
and exponential distribution were assigned to the links. The
experiments were repeated for different set of values of
distributions. We considered about 100 topologies for each
connectivity ranging from 20% to 90%. Any graph topology
that was disconnected was dropped from the study. We used
the Dijkstra’s algorithm for ﬁnding the low-power as well as
shortest paths. The simulation parameters are given in Table I.
Two important parameters were monitored: the increase in
the number of hops and the comparative power reduction
possible by opting for the low-power path algorithm. For
each source-destination pair in the topology, we compared
the power reduction obtained by using low-power paths with
that of the conventional hop based shortest path metric.
The PWR metric can vary dynamically over a time period
which also means that the low-power paths can vary for a
given connectivity. Therefore, we also monitored the power-
reduction and hop variations for a connectivity of 70%. The
graphs presented are for node size 100. For 70% connectivity
we show 30 randomly chosen sample topology out of the 100
topologies that were used.
A. Uniform distribution of PWR metric
The graphs shown in Figure 3 for uniform distribution of
PWR metric depicts the power reduction and hop increase
for various connectivity size. We see that the minimum power
reduction that can be achieve is around 10% and this increases
almost linearly with connectivity. The hops can also increase
by up to 50%. High values of power reduction were possible as
there are equal number of links with high and low PWR metric
under this distribution. It can be seen that the average number
of hops increases with more connectivity. This is because more
low-power links also increase under such circumstance and the
algorithm prefers routing through such low-power links.
B. Exponential distribution of PWR metric
In this case, the topology had more low-power links. From
Figure 4, it can be seen that the average power reduction as
well as hop increase could be as high as 65%. This is possible
as the network topology is biased towards low-power links.
The hops also increase as the proposed method tries to use
all the low-power links for establishing routing information.
The simulations for the two distributions establish that the
algorithm uses low-power paths to route data packets. It should
be noted that the PWR metric uses the power consumption of

373
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
20
40
60
80
100
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
80
60
40
20
0
Power Reduction (%)
Connectivity (%)
Hop Increase (%)
Hops
Power
Fig. 3.
Uniform distribution of power links
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
20
40
60
80
100
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
80
60
40
20
0
Power Reduction (%)
Connectivity (%)
Hop Increase (%)
Hops
Power
Fig. 4.
Exponential distribution of power links
the AS. Even though the simulations can be considered very
optimistic, typically AS consume Mega-Watts of power [22],
[23]. Therefore, even a 1% reduction in power of an AS can
result in signiﬁcant savings for ISPs.
These results also suggest that after a particular value of
connectivity size, increase in hops does not return much beneﬁt
with respect to power reduction. Therefore, it is interesting to
study the behavior of the algorithm under a given connectivity
value. Such a study will help to understand the dynamics of
the network. Note that the PWR metric will also ﬂuctuate over
time and hence the paths can dynamically change.
C. Role of connectivity
We ﬁxed a connectivity of 70% and studied the network for
power reduction and hop increase using both the distributions
(see Figures 5, 6). Results indicate that the graph topology
plays a major role in power reduction. For both the distri-
butions, the power reduction as well as increase in hops is
bounded by a range which is dictated by the connectivity. The
PWR metric will vary over a period of time. Therefore, the
algorithm also reschedules the routing information based on
the low-power values. Each trial can even be considered as
the network topology at a time instant. The average power
reduction remained quite high in both the cases.
We now discuss some implementation issues of the pro-
posed online algorithm.
V. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we present notes on feasibility of implemen-
tation in a live network. We also brieﬂy discuss implementa-
tion work based on OpenFlow [24] for ofﬂine implementation
and Quagga [25] based online implementation.
A. Feasibility of implementation
First, the requested bandwidth should be available on the
low-power path. This can be taken care using TE methods.
Second, there is a reliable ﬂooding process that gets triggered
when updates about the change in PWR metric arise. We
propose addition of some attributes with no change to the
protocol implementation. There may be a time lag when the
far ends of the Internet receive the attribute and the time it
originated. This cannot be avoided as with other attributes
and metrics. In MPLS-TE, when the TE metrics are modiﬁed,
there is a reliable ﬂooding process within an Interior Gateway
Protocol (IGP). Such triggered updates apply to the PWR
metric as well. The proposed PWR metric is advertised to
the neighboring AS and the information percolated to all the
AS, in a AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC attribute. This attribute
is discussed in the Appendix. The frequency of the updates
for this attribute should be ﬁxed to avoid network ﬂooding.
The AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC for each ASBR is cal-
culated, and advertised as the PWR metric for the AS. This
AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC is ﬁlled into an appropriate tran-
sitive non-discretionary attribute and inserted into a unique
vector for a set of preﬁxes advertised from the AS. Such
advertised preﬁxes may have originated from the AS or be
the transit preﬁxes. The ﬁlled vector is sent to the ASBR of
the neighboring AS, and later propagated to all the ASBRs.
If the elements denoting AS in a vector of AS-PATH-INFO
is not the same as the ones that need to be advertised in a
AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC, then a suitable subset of AS-
PATH-POWER-METRIC is identiﬁed and sent in the BGP
updates. A vector of size 1 also can be employed if the AS in
question is the only one for which PWR metric has changed
in the originating AS.
The power consumed by each router may ﬂuctuate over
short time intervals. This can occur if the data packets are re-
routed. In this case a low-power path might start consuming
higher power and advertise a higher PWR metric. It is possible
that the routes can ﬂap due to PWR metric changes. In
order to dampen these ﬂuctuations, power can be measured
when falling within suitable intervals as opposed to a discrete
quantity. This method of power measurement reduces the
frequency of triggered updates from the routers due to power
change. This can sometimes affect the network performance.
This situation must also be addressed while using PWR metric-

374
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sample Trials
Power Reduction (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sample Trials
Hop Increase (%)
Fig. 5.
Power reduction and hop increase for uniform distribution of power values with 70% connectivity.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sample Trials
Power Reduction (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sample Trials
Hop Increase (%)
Fig. 6.
Power reduction and hop increase for exponential distribution of power values with 70% connectivity.
based methods in the network.
Multiple ASBRs advertising differing PWR metric can lead
to AS that have low PWR metric through an ingress link and
not through other. Consider the case of multiple ASBRs that
belong to the same AS, advertising differing PWR metrics.
This could lead to power values that belong to different classes
with intervening classes in between. These advertised PWR
metrics could lead to one ASBR being preferred over the other
thus taking a different path from head-end to tail- end. This
also entails that there may be multiple paths to the AS through
these different ASBRs. As an example, consider Figure 7
which shows a set of strands that derive a topology as in
Figure 8. Here, D is reachable via two paths but the PWR
metrics differ. This illustrates the case where the better metric
wins out. The average power consumed would not have an
effect but the bandwidth available on these ASBR egress links
would deﬁnitely inﬂuence the path.
B. OpenFlow implementation
Since we did not have access to a live network, we emulate
the algorithms using a simple ofﬂine implementation based on
OpenFlow [24]. OpenFlow was designed to run experimental
protocols on the campus network for research purposes. Many
of the vendor devices support OpenFlow as a part of their
capability. The control ﬂow part of the router/switch is handled
by a OpenFlow controller while the data path still resides at
A
B
D
A
C
E
D
D
X
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.2
Fig. 7.
Example of strands where more than one PWR metric is advertised
by D.
A
B
D
X
C
E
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.02
0.2
Fig. 8.
Low-power path derived using the algorithm that uses low value
ingress link but through the same AS.
the router. OpenFlow devices and the OpenFlow controller
communicate with each other using OpenFlow protocol [24].
In our implementation, the router/switch are treated as Au-
tonomous Systems. These devices present information about

375
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
their consumed-power to the centralized controller. To simplify
the implementation, we assume that enough bandwidth is
available at these routers. This is a realistic assumption as
enough bandwidth is usually available in the core routers.
The centralized controller determines the topology of the
network based on the connectivity information obtained from
the routers. Using this topology as well as the consumed-power
information, the centralized controller updates the routing
tables so that data packets traverse through low-power paths.
C. Quagga based implementation
As a part of online implementation strategy, Quagga based
implementation is studied [25]. The BGP daemon is modiﬁed
and routes are formulated based on the low-power path criteria.
The power information is obtained through the use of an
experimental MIB included in the Quagga based Linux routers.
At a later stage we plan to incorporate the AS-POWER-PATH-
METRIC discussed earlier.
VI. DISCUSSION
In this section, we ﬁrst compare the ofﬂine and the online
approaches. We then outline Quality of Service (QoS) aspects
that need to be considered to compensate for any increase in
the number of hops when low-power paths are chosen.
A. Comparison of ofﬂine and online approaches
In the ofﬂine approach, TE-LSPs are needed to establish
the path between the source and the destination. In contrast,
in the online approach, separate TE based label switching can
be completely avoided. The routing table is generated using the
BGP algorithm itself and hence the overhead for establishing
the paths is reduced considerably. To incorporate the online
approach the BGP path selection algorithm has to be modiﬁed
in all the core and edge routers implementing this scheme. The
online approach is considerably faster than the ofﬂine approach
with a trade off in the implementation complexity.
B. Latency in the network
Finding low-power paths in the graph topology might lead
to an increase in the number of hops between a source and a
destination. An increase in the number of hops could lead to an
increase in queuing and propagation delay. Propagation delay
is unavoidable as it depends on the transmission medium.
Queuing delay is introduced rather naturally due to the store
and forward design of Internet routers and also as a conse-
quence of the design of the ﬂow control methods implemented
in transport protocols. Latency is a key QoS metric, and
thus minimising end-to-end delay is an important network
engineering task. To compound the problem, router buffers are
currently sized based on an out-dated bandwidth-delay product
rule which was intended to maintain full link utilisation.
There are two options to reduce queuing delays: either reduce
the buffer sizes dramatically [7], or make judicious use of
feedback, from queues, to design better queue management
policies [8]. A low-latency network thus improves QoS and
could possibly enable the deployment of power saving meth-
ods which might require an increase in the number of end-to-
end hops. Internet QoS is an area of active research among
the communication networks community.
VII. OUTLOOK
We propose a method, which employs a collaborative ap-
proach between AS, to reduce power consumption by using
the Consumed-Power to Available-Bandwidth (PWR) metric.
A. Contributions
In our previous work [1], the AS topology was represented
as a graph using the strands obtained from the AS-PATH-
INFO attribute of the BGP updates. The CSPF algorithm
was run on this topology by using the PWR metric as an
additional constraint. The PWR metric is advertised through
the ingress links of the ASBRs associated with AS using BGP
updates. Inter-AS Trafﬁc Engineering Label Switched Paths
were used to route the data packets from the head-end to the
tail-end. As using CSPF can be time consuming a heuristic
algorithm to derive the low-power paths using graph-labelling
was proposed. The communication time complexity associated
with information exchanges in this method is high.
In order to reduce this complexity, in this paper we proposed
that the BGP path selection algorithm be used to determine
the low-power consuming paths between AS using the PWR
metric. To study the performance and viability of using PWR
metric-based methods, we conducted simulations on various
topologies with different PWR metric distributions. The dis-
tributions used were the uniform and exponential distributions,
and the results were especially encouraging: there was a
substantial gain in power reduction where the tradeoff was
an increase in the number of hops. We also brieﬂy discussed
emulating these schemes with OpenFlow and Quagga based
BGP. Given the current power consumed by the AS, reduction
in power savings could be rather beneﬁcial to the ISPs.
B. Avenues for future work
The methods proposed in this paper assume that the PWR
metric information is reliable. An erroneous metric informa-
tion can be a cause of concern. However, ISPs usually have
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) for carrying trafﬁc. One
method is to link up each ISP with a power application level
gateway to ensure that proper metrics are advertised. This
could be mandated at least amongst the cooperating ISPs.
It would be of interest to study whether the conceptual
methods used at inter-AS level can be employed to inter-
Area based topology. It is also natural to extend the study for
multicast trafﬁc. It would certainly be interesting to perform an
evaluation of the proposed methods on a range of topologies
and PWR metric distributions. Our work focused on the core
and access networks that use BGP as the routing protocol. A
study on extending these methods to other access networks
implementing wireless connections would be useful. We have
not considered the role of different trafﬁc distributions on

376
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
power consumption. A practical study could be conducted on
a live AS topology.
It has recently been highlighted that queuing delay in
the Internet is on the rise [26]. The proposed scheme for
power reduction would lead to an increase in the number
of hops. Thus signiﬁcant queuing delays at each hop would
negatively impact QoS if the number of hops, between source
and destination, are increased. Given the potential beneﬁts
for power reduction it would be imperative to investigate
the design of queue management schemes to ensure a low
latency network. Some work in this direction has already been
started [8].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Shankar Raman would like to acknowledge the support by
BT Public Limited (UK) under the BT IITM PhD Fellow-
ship award. Balaji Venkat and Gaurav Raina would like to
acknowledge the UK EPSRC Digital Economy Programme
and the Government of India Department of Science and
Technology (DST) for funding given to the IU-ATC. We thank
Prof. Kamakoti for allowing the use the RISE lab facilities
for our simulations. We appreciate the helpful suggestions by
Fabrice Saffre and Hanno Hildmann on the presentation.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Raman, B. Venkat, and G. Raina, Reducing power consumption using
the Border Gateway Protocol,
Proc. of the Second International
Conference on Smart Grids, Green communications and IT Energy-aware
Technologies, Energy 2012, March 2012, pp. 83–89, ISBN: 978-1-61208-
189-2.
[2] J. Baliga, K. Hinton, and R. S. Tucker, Energy consumption of the
Internet,
Proc. of joint International Conference on Optical Internet,
June 2007, pp. 1–3, doi: 10.1109/COINACOFT.2007.4519173.
[3] A. P. Bianzino, C. Chaudet, D. Rossi, and J. Rougier, A survey of green
networking research,
IEEE Communications and Surveys Tutorials,
preprint, 2011, pp. 1–18, doi: 10.1109/SURV.2011.113010.00106.
[4] J. Chabarek, J. Sommers, P. Bardford, C. Estan, D. Tsiang, and S. Wright,
Power awareness in network design and routing,
Proc. of the
IEEE INFOCOM 2008, April 2008, pp. 457–465, doi: 10.1109/INFO-
COM.2008.93.
[5] G. Appenzeller, Sizing router buffers,
Doctoral Thesis, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, 2005.
[6] W. Lu and S. Sahni, Low-power TCAMs for very large forwarding tables,
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computer Networks, vol. 18, no. 3, June
2010, pp. 948–959, doi: 10.1109/TNET.2009.2034143.
[7] G. Raina, D. Towsley, and D. Wischik, Part II: control theory for buffer
sizing,
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communications Review, vol. 35,
no. 3, July 2005, pp. 79–82, doi: 10.1145/1070873.1070885.
[8] S. Raman, S. Jain, and G. Raina, Feedback, transport layer protocols
and buffer sizing,
Proc. of the Eleventh International Conference on
Networks, February 2012, pp. 125–131, ISBN:978-1-61208-183-0.
[9] A. Cianfrani, V. Eramo, M. Listanti, and M. Polverini, An OSPF enhance-
ment for energy saving in IP networks,
Computer Communications
Workshops, Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM 2011, April 2011, pp. 325–
330, doi: 10.1109/INFCOMW.2011.5928832.
[10] R. Bolla, R. Bruschi, A. Cianfrani, and M. Listani, Enabling backbone
networks to sleep,
IEEE Network, vol. 25, no. 2, March/April 2011,
pp. 26–31, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2011.5730525.
[11] R. Bolla, R. Bruschi, F. Davoli, and F. Cucchietti, Energy efﬁciency
in the future Internet: A survey of existing approaches and trends in
energy-aware ﬁxed network infrastructures,
IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 13, no. 2, second quarter 2011, pp. 223–244,
doi: 10.1109/SURV.2011.071410.00073.
[12] M. Xia, M. Tornatore, Y. Zhang, P. Chowdhury, C. Martel, and
B. Mukherjee, Greening the optical backbone network: A trafﬁc en-
gineering approach,
IEEE ICC Proceedings, May 2010, pp. 1–5,
doi: 10.1109/ICC.2010.5502228.
[13] G. Y. Li et.al., Energy-efﬁcient wireless communications: tutorial, sur-
vey, and open issues,
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 6,
2011, pp. 28–35, doi: 10.1109/MWC.2011.6108331.
[14] B. Venkat, A. V. Rajagopalan, and B. Bhikkaji, Constructing disjoint
and partially disjoint InterAS TE-LSPs,
USPTO Patent 7751318, Cisco
Systems, 2010.
[15] Y. Rekhter and T. Li,A border gateway protocol 4 (BGP-4). http://tools.
ietf.org/html/rfc4271. [Accessed: December 6, 2012].
[16] BGP path selection algorithm, http://www.cisco.com/en/US/tech/tk365/
technologies tech note09186a0080094431.shtml, last accessed [Decem-
ber 6, 2012].
[17] BGP
path
selection
algorithm,
http://www.juniper.
net/techpubs/en US/junos11.4/topics/reference/general/
routing-ptotocols-address-representation.html, last accessed [December
6, 2012].
[18] F. Blanquicet and K. Christensen, Managing energy use in a net-
work with a new SNMP power state MIB,
IEEE Confer-
ence on Local Computer Networks, October 2008, pp. 509–511,
doi: 10.1109/LCN.2008.4664214.
[19] H. Chang, R. Govindan, S. Jamin, S. J. Shenker, and W. Will-
inger,
Towards
capturing
representative
AS-level
Internet
topolo-
gies,
Computer Networks, vol. 44, April 2004, pp. 737–755,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2003.03.001.
[20] R. Oliveira, D. Pei, W. Willinger, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang, The
(in)completeness of the observed Internet AS-level structure,
IEEE/ACM
transactions on Networks, vol. 18, no. 1, February 2010, pp. 109-122,
doi: 10.1109/TNET.2009.2020798.
[21] M. Galassi et.al., GNU Scientiﬁc Library Reference Manual, 3rd Edition,
ISBN: 0954612078,
http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/manual/html
node/, last accessed [December 6, 2012].
[22] K. Hinton, J. Baliga, M. Z. Feng, R. W. A. Ayre, and R. S. Tucker
Power consumption and energy efﬁciency in the internet,
IEEE
Network,
vol.
25,
no.
2,
March-April
2011,
pp.
6–12,
doi:
10.1109/MNET.2011.5730522.
[23] A. P. Bianzino, L. Chiaraviglio, M. Mellia, and J. L. Rougier,
GRiDA: Green distributed algorithm for energy-efﬁcient IP backbone
networks,
Computer Networks, vol. 56, no. 14, 2012, pp. 3219–3232,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2012.06.011.
[24] N. McKeown, OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus networks,
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 38, no. 2,
2008, pp. 69–74.
[25] O. Bonaventure, Software tools for networking,
IEEE Network, vol. 18,
no. 6, 2004, pp. 4–5.
[26] K. Nichols and V. Jacobson, Controlling queue delay,
Com-
munications
of
the
ACM,
vol.
55,
no.
7,
2012,
pp.
42–50,
doi: doi.acm.org/10.1145/2209249.2209264.
APPENDIX
The proposed AS-POWER-PATH-METRIC attribute is
shown in Figure 9. Since the updates can be triggered quite
frequently, sequence numbers are needed. The rest of the ﬁelds
are needed to exchange the PWR information and are self-
explanatory.
Own 32 Bit AS Number
PWR Ratio for the AS
Advertising ASBR’s IP router ID
64 bit sequence number for  restarts, aging
and comparison of current PWR ratio
32 bits
Seven 32-bit
words
Other 32 Bit AS Number
Peer ASBR’s IP router ID
Fig. 9.
AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC PDU

