37
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
MAC Protocols and Mobility Management Module
for Healthcare Applications Using Wireless Sensor
Networks
Muhsin Atto and Chris Guy
University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom
{kp003919, c.g.guy}@reading.ac.uk
Abstract— Using Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) in health-
care systems has had a lot of attention in recent years. In much
of this research tasks like sensor data processing, health states
decision making and emergency message sending are done by a
remote server. Many patients with lots of sensor data consume
a great deal of communication resources, bring a burden to
the remote server and delay the decision time and notiﬁcation
time. A healthcare application for elderly people using WSN
has been simulated in this paper. A WSN designed for the
proposed healthcare application needs efﬁcient Medium Access
Control (MAC) and routing protocols to provide a guarantee
for the reliability of the data delivered from the patients to
the medical centre. Based on these requirements, the GinMAC
protocol including a mobility module has been chosen, to provide
the required performance such as reliability for data delivery and
energy saving. Simulation results show that this modiﬁcation to
GinMAC can offer the required performance for the proposed
healthcare application.
Keywords—WSN;Healthcare Applications; GinMAC; Mobil-
ity; Castalia.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have been widely used
in a variety of applications dealing with monitoring, such as
healthcare monitoring, environment monitoring, ﬁre detection
and so on. A WSN is composed of tiny, battery powered
devices, called sensor nodes. The design and implementation
of WSNs face several challenges, mainly due to the limited
resources and limited capabilities of sensor nodes, such as
power and storage. To accomplish their task, sensor nodes
are required to communicate with each other and act as
intermediate nodes to forward data on behalf of others so that
this data can reach the sink, which is responsible for taking
the required decision. Different applications using WSNs have
different requirements so no generic results can be used [1],
[2].
The initial applications supported by WSNs were mostly in
environment monitoring, such as temperature monitoring for
a speciﬁc area, house alarms, and so on. The main objectives
in such applications only involved simple data processing.
Energy consumption needed to be considered for speciﬁc
applications, so little attention was taken on data delivery and
reliability related issues such as in [1], [3].
WSNs have been extended and their designs have been
advanced to support more complex applications, such as
security, military, ﬁre detection and health care related issues.
In these applications, data delivery and reliability must be
taken as important parameters in addition to energy efﬁciency,
because data must be collected from the sources of events and
be forwarded to the sink in real time with high reliability,
otherwise the application may not fulﬁl its purpose [4].
In this paper, an implementation of GinMAC [1] including
a proposed mobility management module is described and
simulated for a healthcare application, where energy saving,
delay and reliability for end to end data delivery over multi
hop WSNs needs to be considered. Some scenarios are given
to simulate GinMAC for the proposed healthcare application,
where mobility of nodes and reliability of the data are big
issues.
The rest of the paper is structured as follow. Related work
and motivations for the paper are given in Sections II and
III, respectively. The implementation of GinMAC for both
static and mobility applications are described in Section IV.
The proposed healthcare application is described in Section V.
Simulation scenarios and the required parameters with ﬁgures
showing the results for GinMAC implementation for the
proposed applications are given in Section VI. The simulation
results and some discussion is in Section VII. A conclusion
and proposals for future work are presented in Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
Wireless Sensor Networks consist of a set of nodes where
each node has a number of sensors with the capability of
collecting data about events and sending them back to a
Base Station (BS). In order to ensure the successful operation
of WSNs, efﬁcient MAC and routing protocols need to be
designed. The MAC protocol in a WSN controls the accessing
of channels in a network, so the highest number of nodes
can share the communication capability, without affecting the
integrity of the data delivered to the indicated destination.
Due to the wireless communication and insufﬁcient resources
and hard challenges in WSN, an efﬁcient MAC protocol is
one of the most important factors that needs to be considered
before designing any applications, to enhance the life time and
improve the performance of the proposed applications [5], [6].

38
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. MAC Protocols for WSNs
Designing a MAC protocol for WSN is not a simple
task, due to the challenging application environments and
restrictions, such as energy constraints, latency, data delivery,
self-conﬁguration, self-organization and many other challenges
in such networks [2]. The main aims of designing MAC
protocols are reducing consumed energy, decreasing delay and
increasing the reliability of such networks. A major motivation
for this work is to design MAC protocols for WSN applications
where energy saving, data delivery and latency from node to
node in multi hops WSN networks need to be guaranteed.
In a wireless sensor network, major energy waste can occur
for several reasons, as described in [2], [7], [8]. The ﬁrst and
most important source of consuming energy in WSN is idle
listening; this happens when a node is listening to an idle
channel to share the medium, and it thinks there is a possibility
of receiving or sending packets.
The second reason for the consumption of energy is col-
lisions, due to a high number of sensor nodes deployed in
a small area and a large number of control packets. The
third reason for wasting energy is overhearing; overhearing
occurs when a node listens or overhears a packet, thinking
it may be the intended receiver, however, in fact the packet
is not for that particular node. Some most important design
factors for protocols in WSN that need to be considered while
designing and deploying energy efﬁcient MAC protocols for
any applications are the following: network topology, type of
antenna and clustering related issues [2].
In general, MAC protocols can be divided into two types,
which are Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) protocols
and contention based protocols. Each of them has advantages
and disadvantages. Schedule based protocols have no collision
related problems and are energy efﬁcient protocols, however,
scalability in a very dynamic WSN is a big problem for such
protocols. Contention based protocols have better performance
in terms of scalability in distributed WSNs, however, collisions
are a big problem for such protocols.
1) Schedule Based MAC Protocols: In WSNs, to allow
sensors to gain access to the shared wireless medium in a
cooperative manner, schedule-based MAC protocols have been
proposed that regulate access to resources according to a
schedule to avoid contention among nodes. Depending upon
the medium access technique, the resources could be a time
slot, a frequency band or a Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA) code. The main aim of schedule-base MAC protocols
is to achieve a high degree of energy conservation to prolong
the lifetime of the network. Most of the schedule-based MAC
protocols for WSNs use a variant of a TDMA scheme whereby
the time available is divided into slots. Using this scheme, a
logical frame of N contiguous slots is formed and this logical
frame repeats itself in cycles over time. Each sensor node is
assigned a set of speciﬁc time slots per frame and this set
constitutes the schedule according to which the sensor node
gains access to the medium and has the right to transmit or
receive. This schedule can be either ﬁxed, or constructed on
demand, on a per frame basis, by the base-station to reﬂect
the current requirements of sensor nodes and trafﬁc pattern.
The nodes must also satisfy the interference constraint, which
says that no nodes within two hops of each other may use the
same slot [9].
This two hop constraint is needed to avoid the hidden
node problem when there is chance this could happen. Energy
conservation is achieved by using an on and off mechanism for
the sensor radio transceiver [10]. According to the schedule of
each sensor node, a sensor alternates between two modes of
operation: active mode and sleep mode. A sensor is in active
mode when it is its turn to use the assigned time slots within
the logical frame to transmit and receive data frames. Outside
these sensor assigned time slots, it moves into sleep mode by
switching off its radio transceiver.
2)
Contention Based MAC Protocols: Contention based
MAC protocols are also known as Carrier Sense Multi-
ple Access/Collision Avoidance based protocols (CSMA/CA).
These protocols do not pre-allocate resources to individual
sensors. Instead, they employ an on-demand channel access
mechanism and in this way share a single radio channel
among the contending nodes. Simultaneous attempts to access
the communications medium, however, results in a collision.
Effectively, these protocols try to minimize rather than com-
pletely avoid the occurrence of collisions. Traditional networks
use Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) as a medium
access mechanism. However, CSMA/CA mechanism gives
poor performance in WSNs due to two unique problems: the
hidden node problem and the exposed node problem. The
hidden node problem is where node A is transmitting to node
B and node C, which is out of coverage of A will sense the
channel as idle and start packet transmission to node B as
well. Consequently, the two packets will collide at node B. In
this case CSMA/CA fails to foresee this collision [11]. In the
proposed real time applications the main aim is to save energy
and improve reliability so a schedule based MAC protocol has
been chosen.
B. Design Issues and Challenges for WSN
Due to the limitations and design restrictions of WSN, such
as wireless communication and resource limitations, the design
of protocols has many challenges, new proposed protocols
need to consider these restrictions during their designing and
deploying phases. To meet these restrictions, the following
important factors and design issues need to be considered for
new protocols [3] and [12].
Data Delivery Models: A WSN is an application spe-
ciﬁc network, so data delivery models need to be designed
according to the given application. Some applications need
to deliver data from sensor nodes directly toward the sink
over a single hop away from the sink, while the others send
data over multiple hops between source nodes and a sink. So
data delivery models will impact the performance of the new
proposed protocols.
Operating Environment: WSNs can be used for different
kinds of applications and each of these applications will

39
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
have a speciﬁc requirement. For instance, a WSN used for
environment monitoring needs to have speciﬁc protocols that
can deal with the speciﬁc challenges. Moreover, WSNs used
in real-time related applications need to have efﬁcient proto-
cols in order to provide the required performance for these
applications.
Energy Saving: Due to the limited power capacity associ-
ated with each node in a WSN, newly designed protocols must
take power consumption related issues as their most important
objective. Each node must consume as little power as possible
in order to extend the lifetime of the whole network, therefore,
the trade-off between energy consumption and data delivery
in the WSN are hot topics in recent research studies. Energy
can be saved by letting nodes go to sleep when there is no
data to sent and received.
Connectivity: Pre-established connections between each
pair of nodes in the WSN deﬁne the connectivity of the
network. WSNs may be densely deployed in an interest area,
and there will probably be cases where this connection will
have failed and be disconnected. This can happen when some
nodes leave the network or die and this means that the
topology of the WSN may change very frequently. Therefore,
mobility may need to be considered in new proposed protocols.
Hardware Constraints: Typically, nodes in WSN are
equipped with small amounts of resources, such as memory,
processing capability and power. However, in some applica-
tions protocols there is a need to store a large amount of data
before forwarding it to the next hop. Because of the limited
available memory at each node, that node may not be able to
store all the data in its local memory. Hence some techniques
need to be designed to reduce the overﬂow of the data at each
node in the network.
Low Node Cost: As a WSN may consist of hundreds or
even thousands of nodes, the cost of each individual node must
be as low as possible as this will reduce the cost of the whole
network.
Scalability and Adaptation: Since the number of nodes in
the network may be large and the communication links are
prone to fail, and nodes have the ability to join or leave the
network, the new protocols need to be scalable and to be able
to adapt to any size of network.
Self-Conﬁguring: After nodes are deployed, they need
to be able to organize themselves in order to be able to
communicate, and when some nodes die and the topology has
been changed, it should be possible for them to re-conﬁgure
themselves without user interaction.
Security and Privacy: Due to the wireless communication
between sensors in WSN, it is possible that data may be
listened to by unauthorised nodes. Hence the requirements
for security and privacy of data needs to be considered when
designing applications using WSNs.
Quality of Service (QoS) support: Some applications in
WSNs may need to deliver data with speciﬁc QoS require-
ments, for example, delivering data at a required time with
bounded latency and reliability. In the proposed healthcare
application, the reliability of the delivered data is the most
important factor, which needs to be considered. In the fol-
lowing sections, most of the MAC protocols proposed in the
literature will be debated when some of the above challenges
are considered for the proposed application.
C. Proposed MAC protocols for WSN
Some of the recently proposed MAC protocols such as [7],
[2] are discussed in term of their suitability for real time
applications, such as military, ﬁre detection or health care
related applications. A real time application deals with a hard
deadline, so energy is not the only the consideration for the
MAC protocol designs. Data delivery and reliability must also
be taken into account before designing and deploying the
proposed applications. Details of such MAC protocols, with
their advantages and disadvantages in terms of energy saving,
delay and reliability for data delivery over multi-hops WSNs
are discussed in the following sections.
1) Sensor-MAC (S-MAC): This MAC protocol [7] has been
designed mainly for WSNs, with energy efﬁciency as its
primary goal. The traditional MAC protocols are not suitable
to be used for WSN; they are designed for systems that
power on most of the time, because nodes can be powered
by recharges, so there is no power limitation. However, nodes
in WSN need to be turned off as much as possible to enhance
the lifetime of the entire network. S-MAC is based on the
802.15 IEEE standards; it uses the same techniques to share
the medium. The S-MAC protocol reduces energy wasting
from idle listening, collisions and overhead, using low duty
cycle operations for all nodes in a multi hop WSN. It reduces
the energy used by nodes in their idle listening time, by putting
nodes in sleep mode when there is no need to be active and
there is no data to sent and received at the current time.
S-MAC lets nodes periodically sleep, which decreases used
energy, but increases end to end delay, because the sender
needs to wait until the receiver wakes up to receive the data.
In order to reduce this delay, S-MAC uses a new technique
called adaptive listen, which lets nodes adaptively go to sleep
in their listening time when no communications occur, and
hence this will reduce long active idle times. In a WSN there
may be cases where some nodes have more data than others to
send or receive. In such cases, S-MAC uses a message passing
technique to divide the long messages into small packets and
transmits them in a burst, to avoid having to retransmit a long
message again, in the case of failed delivery. Most of the
proposed MAC protocols discussed in this paper are based on
the S-MAC. Each of these protocols tries to solve problems
associated with S-MAC.
S-MAC Techniques for Energy saving and Reducing Delay:
• Duty cycle scheme in multi-hop WSN that reduces energy
consumption by nodes in their idle listening time.
• Adaptive listening technique, which greatly reduces the
delay occurred during periodic sleeping.
• Using message passing to reduce the energy usage and
delay caused by retransmitting after long message failed
delivery

40
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Using Network Allocation Vector (NAV) with RTS and
CTS to avoid collision and hidden terminal related prob-
lems, when several nodes at the same time need to
communicate.
• S-MAC let nodes interfering with each other go to sleep
to avoid overhearing, and this saves some energy as well.
• Schedule sleep synchronization, this technique is used by
each node in the WSN to organize its schedule table with
its neighbours.
Choosing and Maintaining Sleep Scheduling Tables in S-
MAC: Each node in the WSN needs to organize and exchange
its schedule time with its immediate neighbours before starting
to communicate in its allowed time period. There is a schedule
table stored at each node in the WSN, including the schedule
of its own and for all of its neighbours. Each node in the
WSN uses the following cases when obtaining its schedule
tables from the network. More details can be found in [2] and
[7].
• Each node waits for a ﬁxed time before broadcasting its
schedule table to its neighbours. If it does not receive
any schedule from its neighbours, it will broadcast its
own schedule table.
• If the node hears another schedule before announcing its
own schedule, it uses the new one and simply discards
its own.
• In the case where a node hears different schedule tables
from different nodes, there are two possible ways to deal
with this case. The ﬁrst way is if the node does not have
any neighbours, it simply discards its own schedule and
follows the new one, while the second way is if the
node has already received schedule adaptation from its
neighbours, it updates its own table with the new received
schedule tables and then broadcasts its own schedule
table.
Advantages:
• Using the duty cycling concept, S-MAC saves energy for
nodes in WSN.
• Using the adaptive listening concept, S-MAC reduces
delays associated with unnecessary waiting times for
sleep periods and hence reduces energy consumption.
• Good scalability and topology management.
Disadvantages:
• Fixed period sleeping and waking up is not suitable for
real time applications as this may cause huge delays in
multi hop networks.
• Does not provide reliability for end to end data delivery.
• S-MAC lets nodes that are interfering go to sleep, and this
can cause problems when a path later on goes through
one of these nodes, which shows that S-MAC does not
support cross layer concepts.
• Due to the need to establish a sleep/wakeup schedule for
each node in a WSN, there is an overhead, which will
decrease the throughput for data delivery.
• The end to end delay is increased meaning that this
protocol can not be applied for real time applications
without improvement.
2) Medium Access Control with a Dynamic Duty Cycle
(DSMAC): DSMAC [8] has been proposed with the aim of
reducing energy wastage and decreasing the delay associated
with S-MAC, using a dynamic duty cycle. It achieves a
good trade off between energy saving and delay. DSMAC
dynamically changes the state of the nodes, for instance,
from active to sleep depending on the trafﬁc conditions and
level of consumed energy and current delay, without any
predeﬁned information. This will save energy and decrease
delays associated with S-MAC in an efﬁcient way.
DSMAC uses a synchronizing tables techniques to organize
the scheduling time for nodes in the network, to let them
know when they need to be asleep or to be active. Each node
in the WSN maintains its own schedule table like S-MAC,
from already received SYNC packets from its immediate
neighbours, then follows and broadcasts its schedule table
to its neighbours. In addition, DSMAC keeps a track of
an average of energy consumption and latency delay, using
scheduling operations related information. DSMAC estimates
the current trafﬁc load and then changes cycle dynamically if
needed.
Advantages:
• Saving energy using dynamic multiple duty cycling im-
proves S-MAC.
• Decreasing the delays the associated with S-MAC from
node to node using wakeup and sleep, changing modes
dynamically, depending on the current trafﬁc load and
level of the consumed energy.
• Increasing throughput when trafﬁc is high compared with
S-MAC.
• Good scalability.
Disadvantages:
• Does not provide reliability for end to end data delivery.
• DSMAC lets nodes that are interfering go to sleep, and
this can cause problems when the path goes through one
of these nodes. This shows that DSMAC does not support
cross layer concepts.
• The need for the dynamic SYNC announcement for each
node in the WSN and storing the average of consumed
energy and delay, causes an overhead and this will
decrease throughput.
• The end to end delay is increased, so DSMAC is not
suitable to be used for the proposed application without
improvement.
3) An adaptivity Energy -Efﬁcient and Low latency MAC for
Data gathering (D-MAC): In WSN most application trafﬁc is
represented as a directed tree related topology, which enables
the applications to collect data from multiple source nodes,
and send to a single sink. In this case, the sink node will be
the root and the sensor nodes will be the children. This type of
topology can control the trafﬁc in the network compared with
ﬂat topologies. Nodes in the selected path can communicate
with each other to solve the interfering problems in S-MAC.
DMAC is designed to reduce energy and latency associated

41
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with S-MAC, more details can be found [2] and [13].
As mentioned before, S-MAC lets nodes that are interfering
go to sleep, this will not allow nodes that are two hops away
from the current node notify ongoing trafﬁc, and this will
introduce extra delay in the case where some of these nodes
are selected later on in the path. Therefore, this will cause
data forwarding interruption related problems. To solve this
problem, D-MAC [13] has been proposed; DMAC utilises
a sleep schedule of each node, which is dependent of its
depth in the tree. D-MAC adaptively changes the cycle for
the nodes according to the current trafﬁc load in a similar
way to DSMAC.
D-MAC uses data prediction techniques for data gathering
from source nodes toward the sink, in case the trafﬁc is low
and the aggregated amount of data needed to be forwarded at
intermediate nodes is high. This can be raised when the current
duty cycle is unable to handle this transmission. Hence data
prediction related approaches will let nodes be active as long
as needed. Furthermore, D-MAC uses a More to Send (MTS)
technique for the nodes in the multi paths to remain active
when one node fails to send a packet to its parent.
Advantages:
• Energy saving using duty cycling technique
• Decreasing delay associated with S-MAC using data
gathering and prediction techniques.
• Increasing throughput when trafﬁc is high compared with
S-MAC.
• Solving data forwarding interruption problems.
• Delay end to end decreased.
Disadvantages:
• Does not provide reliability for end to end data delivery.
• Suffers from overhead due to having extra SYNC an-
nouncement for each level of the trafﬁc, to predict the
nodes, which need to be active in WSN later on.
• Does not support cross layer.
• If data needs to be collected from arbitrary nodes, D-
MAC may face problems.
• The end to end delay is not guaranteed.
4) Routing Enhanced Duty Cycle MAC (RMAC): RMAC
[14] is a MAC protocol that supports a cross layer approach.
This protocol has been designed to provide energy efﬁciency
and to reduce delays associated with previous protocols such
as S-MAC, DSMAC and D-MAC. RMAC lets nodes in the
expected path from source nodes to the sink to go to sleep and
intelligently wake up when they need to send or receive data in
multi-hop networks. In addition, RMAC achieves signiﬁcant
improvement for the end to end data delivery in a single cycle
in multi hops, as it reduces the contention period much more
efﬁciently than S-MAC. Furthermore, RMAC sends a control
frame along the path to inform the nodes in the selected path
of trafﬁc before the actual data packet is transmitted.
Advantages:
• RMAC saves energy using single duty cycling technique
• Increases throughput where trafﬁc is high, compared to
S-MAC.
• Supports a cross layer approach.
• End to end delay is decreased.
Disadvantages:
• Does not provide a guarantee for delay and reliability
for end to end data delivery, which means that it is not
suitable to be used for the proposed applications.
5) Q-MAC: Data collection for applications in WSN can be
divided into three types; event-detection based applications,
periodic-sensed-based applications and query-based applica-
tions. Each of these applications has its own techniques to
deal with collecting data from one or more sensor nodes
and sending to the sink. Various MAC protocols have been
proposed for each type, with the aim of energy and delay
efﬁciency for the indicated applications [15].
Query-based applications are types of applications where
users put their request for data into a query and send this to
the speciﬁc part of the area where sensor nodes are deployed.
These types of applications can improve minimum end to
end delay latency with efﬁcient energy usage. When there
are no queries in the network, all nodes will save energy by
turning off their radios. However, when a query is initiated
by a user and it has been sent to the network, scheduling and
SYNCH related packets will be broadcast automatically to deal
with data communication, depending on the locations of the
speciﬁed nodes in the query. This will enhance the lifetime of
the network, because only part of the network will deal with
this data communication, and nodes in the rest of the network
will be sleeping.
The main objectives of the Q-MAC [15] protocol are (1)re-
duce end to end delay by informing the intermediate nodes
in advance about ongoing trafﬁc using dynamic scheduling,
(2) enhance the lifetime of the entire network by activating
only the nodes that need to deal with data communication,
which are predeﬁned in the query. Simulation results in [15]
concluded that Q-MAC improves latency 80% over S-MAC.
Advantages:
• Q-MAC saves energy using query based techniques.
• Increases throughput when trafﬁc is high, compared to
S-MAC.
• End to end delay is decreased using queries based tech-
niques.
• Supports multiple destinations.
Disadvantages:
• Does not provide reliability for end to end data delivery.
• Does not support cross layer.
• End to end delay not guaranteed, and so it is not the right
protocol to be used for real time applications.
6) PEDAMACS: PEDAMACS [16] is a MAC protocol
based on TDMA, the aim of this protocol is to save energy
and to reduce end to end delay for multi hops in WSN.
PEDAMACS provides the extension of single hop TDMA
to be used in multi-hops TDMA. It uses a high power
transmission Access Point (AP) to synchronize the scheduling
information of the nodes using one hop away nodes. This
means that this protocol needs to use different transmissions

42
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to collect data and organizes scheduling information among
sensor nodes. It requires an AP which can reach any node in
the network which has unlimited amounts of energy. It is the
root of the deployed network.
PEDAMACS depends on topology discovery information to
organize the nodes using different phases: topology learning,
topology collection, scheduling and adjustment. PEDAMACS
uses three different transmission ranges: largest transmission,
lowest transmission and medium transmission ranges. The AP
uses the largest transmission range to broadcast the topology
and scheduling information to the network. Sensor nodes
use lowest transmission to collect data in the network, and
medium transmission is used to discover local topology related
information.
PEDAMACS phases
PEDAMAC uses the following
phases to broadcast the required information to collect data
between nodes in the network [16]:
Topology Learning Phase: The AP uses this phase to
broadcast topology learning coordination packets to all sensor
nodes or other nodes in the network, to organize the scheduling
related issues. The topology learning packet contains two time
slots, which represent the current, and next times. The current
time is for sensor nodes to set their scheduling according to
this time, and the next time is the time when nodes need to
stop their transmission and wait for the AP to receive a new
current and next times. After sensor nodes receive their current
and next time, the AP needs to broadcast a tree construction
packet. Nodes receive this packet according to their neighbours
depth path to the AP. After the tree topology is constructed,
nodes need to broadcast their updated scheduling information
to the whole network.
Topology Collection Phase: After the AP broadcasts its
topology learning phase, topology collection packets need
to be broadcast in the next time slot and then each node
organizes its local topology using the information in the
topology collecting packet. Then they listen to their parents
and transmit their local topology using lowest transmission
range. In this phase, nodes use CSMA to listen to their parents
and to receive next and current times from receiving topology
packets.
Scheduling Phase: In order to organize the scheduling
tables for all nodes in the network, the AP broadcasts the
scheduling packets based on its knowledge of the complete
network topology, to set the schedule tables for each node in
the network. Each scheduling packet contains the current and
next time as in the previous phases, to let nodes organize their
times and later on to divide their times into slots depending
on the data transmission requirements of each node in the
network.
Adjustment Phase: PEDAMACS uses this phase at the end
of scheduling phase to complete the topology of the network
and to add any other required modiﬁcations, such as mobility
of nodes and adding new nodes and so on, depending on the
given application. The AP broadcasts an adjustment packet to
spread the rest of the information using current and next times
as done in the above phases using medium transmission range.
Nodes need to access this packet to ﬁnd how to organize their
scheduling times with given current and next slot times. The
adjustment packet also includes information to let nodes have
access to the next adjustment packet, and to send it to the AP
in the next time period. This will allow all nodes to be able
to reach the AP.
Advantages:
• Energy saving for sending and receiving data in the
network.
• Throughput increasing when trafﬁc is high, compared to
S-MAC.
• End to end delay guaranteed
• Supports cross layer, such as routing protocols.
Disadvantages:
• No reliability provided, this means that this protocol is
not suitable to be used for the proposed application when
reliability needs to be guaranteed.
7) E2RMAC: In general, Contention-based MAC protocols
have been preferred for WSN over TDMA, because of the need
for TDMA synchronization and the unsuitability of TDMA for
distributed and dynamically changed topology of the WSN.
Most of the proposed contention based MAC protocols for
the WSN use adaptive duty cycling protocols and wake up on
demand duty cycling techniques, in which different channels
with different powers are used to deal with data transmission.
E2RMAC [17] is a protocol based on Contention techniques,
but which allows for CDMA operations. Its aim is to provide
energy efﬁciency, reliability and bounded latency for data
delivery from source nodes to the sink. E2RMAC performs
wakeup duty cycling to achieve its goals.
Basic Operations for E2RMAC
• When nodes need to send or receive data, they need to
send wakeup tones to the network to wake up the nodes
that are expected to share the data communication, after
waiting a random time.
• Secondly, all neighbours of the current sender that hear
the wake up tone, put their radios into high power mode,
to be ready for the data transmission.
• Thirdly, the sender sends a ﬁlter packet, which contains
the address of the intended destination, and switches its
radio to sleep mode, then the receiver receives the ﬁlter
packet and keeps its radio in the high power mode and
makes other neighbours put their radios into sleep mode.
• Finally, the sender sends the data packet to the destination
and goes to sleep, then the receiver receives the data,
sends back an ACK to the sender and goes to sleep.
• If packets are successfully received by intermediate
nodes, they will forward these received packets to the
next hop without waiting for back off time, which will
reduce overall delay.
Advantages:
• Energy saving using duty cycling techniques.
• Throughput increasing when trafﬁc is high, compared to
S-MAC.

43
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Supports cross layer and solves the problem of data
forwarding interruption using routing techniques.
Disadvantages:
• Overhearing may occur, when sender hears an ACK from
some intermediate node and it thinks it is the intended
receiver.
• E2RMAC uses wake up, ﬁlter packet and then data packet
to transfer data from source to the sink, which may
increase end to end delay in large networks.
• End to end reliability for data delivery is not guaranteed
and hence this protocol can not be applied for real
time applications when reliability and delay need to be
guaranteed.
8) QoSMAC protocol: Quality of Services (QoS) in WSN
is to guarantee some speciﬁc parameters, which need to
be considered when designing for a given application. The
QoSMAC [18] protocol is based on TDMA, which can handle
routing with medium access. The topology that is used in this
protocol is a tree, so in this protocol, nodes need to organize
themselves as a tree, where the root is the sink and the leaves
are nodes. Data collecting and processing are done among the
sensor nodes and go up toward the sink. The services that this
protocol aim to achieve are providing guarantees for node to
node delay and reliability for the data delivery between source
nodes to the base station (sink).
Advantages:
• Energy saving using duty cycling technique
• End to end delay decreases compared to S-MAC.
• Throughput increases when trafﬁc is high, compared to
S-MAC.
• Solves the problem of data forwarding interruption using
routing techniques.
• Delay and reliability node to node guaranteed
Disadvantages:
• If data needs to be collected from arbitrary nodes, QoS-
MAC may face problems.
• The maximum number of nodes is small, so it is not
suitable for large WSN networks.
• Delay and reliability end to end are not guaranteed, so this
protocol can not be applied for the proposed application
where reliability is one of the most important parameters,
which needs to be considered.
9) GinMAC: GinMAC [19] is the ﬁrst MAC protocol
that has been proposed to consider reliability for the data
delivery in time critical related operations. GinMAC is a tree
based MAC protocol and uses different techniques to achieve
its goals, such as reliability and timely delivered data, by
considering the topology of the environment, which must be
known at the deployment phase before running the application.
Examples of applications that GinMAC can support are real
time applications in WSN, such as ﬁre detection, military,
health care related applications, with relatively small number
of nodes.
GinMAC is a TDMA based MAC protocol, using low duty
cycling to save energy for nodes when they have nothing to
send and receive. We conclude that this MAC protocol is
the best for energy consumption related issues over the pre
discussed MAC protocols in this paper. In order to achieve this
performance, GinMAC must be ﬂexible in case the topology
changes. In addition, GinMAC must be adaptable for adding
or subtracting nodes from or into the network [20], [21].
GinMAC uses three features to deal with data delivery;
Off-Line Dimensioning, Exclusive TDMA and Delay Conﬁrm
Reliability Control. Off-Line Dimensioning is used to divide
the frames into three slots, which are basic, additional, and
unused slots. The Basic slot is used for forwarding one
message toward the sink within frame size F. The Additional
slot is used to improve transmission reliability, and the unused
slot is for improving low duty cycling to save energy. GinMAC
uses these techniques and slots to improve energy consumption
and reliability for data delivered from source nodes toward the
sink.
Advantages:
• Energy saving for sending and receiving data in the WSN,
using TDMA based techniques
• Throughput increases when trafﬁc is high compared to
S-MAC.
• Supports a cross layer approach.
• Supports real time communications.
• End to end timely data delivery and reliability guaranteed,
so it is a good start point MAC protocol to be used for
the proposed healthcare application with small number of
nodes in the WSN.
Disadvantages:
• Supports small number of nodes; the maximum allowed
number of nodes is 25.
III.
MOTIVATIONS
Most of the recently proposed protocols for WSNs consider
either energy saving or reliability for the target applications,
none of them have considered both performance metrics at
the same time [2]. However, some applications may need
to guarantee both energy saving and reliability at the same
time, otherwise the applications will not fulﬁl their purpose.
Therefore, in order to provide this, new and very efﬁcient
Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols need to be designed.
Previous works showed that GinMAC is the only protocol,
which can be used for real-time applications to provide the
required performances as shown in [4]. The motivations for
this paper are the following:
• Design MAC protocols for the proposed healthcare appli-
cation where the required energy saving, reliability and
delay for data delivery need to be considered.
• Design mobility management modules for the proposed
healthcare application.
• Adapt GinMAC to add new features to improve its appli-
cability to real-time applications which require mobility,
such as healthcare applications as described in [22].
• Simulate a GinMAC implementation including the pro-
posed mobility management module given in [1] for the
proposed healthcare application.

44
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. MAC PROTOCOLS FOR REAL-TIME APPLICATIONS
It was concluded in [4] that GinMAC is a possible MAC
protocol for use in real-time applications, where reliability,
energy saving and delay can be guaranteed. Challenges and
requirements that need to be considered before designing any
MAC protocols for such applications are also described in
the same paper. The implementation of GinMAC including a
mobility management module is described in this section.
A. Implementation of GinMAC for Real-time Applications
GinMAC [23] is a TDMA based MAC protocol, so energy
saving and reliability with bounded delay can be achieved.
However, an efﬁcient synchronization and slot allocation al-
gorithm needs to be designed in order to allocate the required
slot time for each node in the network and let the radio of the
nodes be turned on only in the allocated time. In this case,
each node needs enough slots of time to transmit data toward
a sink, including control messages, such as messages for slots
permission, mobility and topology control related messages.
GinMAC has been modiﬁed to add new features to improve
its applicability to applications, which require mobility, such
as healthcare applications. The GinMAC implementation in
[23] does not support mobility while this one does. Topology
management and time synchronization for GinMAC in this
implementation are described below.
1) Slot allocations in GinMAC: GinMAC is a TDMA based
protocol and assumes that data is forwarded hop by hop toward
a sink using a tree based topology, consisting of n nodes. Time
in GinMAC is divided into a ﬁxed length called Epoch E, each
E is subdivided by n*k time slots so that each node allocates
k slots for transmitting data toward its parent until it reaches a
sink. Each node is assigned k exclusive slots with four different
types; basic slots (TX,RX) for data transmitting and receiving,
additional slots (RTX,RRX) for re transmitting, broadcast slots
(BROD) for topology control between nodes in the network
and unused slots (U) for saving energy (if any). More details
about how these slots are used can be found in Figure 1.
Additional slots are used only for retransmission to achieve
the required reliability of the target applications. These slots
are used even in the case when no data is available for
transmission, as described in [19]. Unused slots are used for
saving energy when data cannot be delivered using basic and
additional slots. This implementation for GinMAC does not
contain unused slots, but they may be used in the future for
increasing the lifetime of the network. Broadcasting slots are
used for topology control. Slots for each node need to be
allocated according to the deﬁned topology so that the required
performance can be achieved.
2) GinMAC Topology Control Management: GinMAC is a
tree based WSN topology so that each node transmits its data
toward a sink in its allocated slots and sleeps for the rest of the
time. The current static topology that is proposed is a WSN
with 13 nodes with static slot allocation, each node has enough
slots of time to transmit all data from its children and its own,
including control messages toward a sink. GinMAC supports
mobility for leaf nodes and this will require the design of
new topology control and management algorithms to provide
connectivity between static and mobile nodes in the network.
It is assumed that the BS has adequate power to reach all nodes
in the network using down-link slots. However, the sensor
nodes cannot always do this because of their limited power
supply.
A node added to the network must determine in which
slots it must become active before it can transmit or receive
data. After a node is switched on, it must ﬁrst ensure time
synchronization with the rest of the nodes in the network. Both
control and data messages transmitted in the network can be
used to obtain time synchronization. The node continuously
listens to overhear a packet from the sink. After overhearing
one message, the node knows when the GinMAC frame starts
as each message carries information about the slot in which it
was transmitted.
As a next step, the node must ﬁnd its position in the
topology, which must stay within the deﬁned topology en-
velope. For this purpose, the new node listens for packets in
all slots. Transmitted data packets from a sink use a header
ﬁeld in which a node that is ready for transmission can ﬁnd
its information and then according to this information start
and stop data transmission toward its parent. A node may
be conﬁgured with a list of valid nodes or clusters that it
is allowed to attach to when mobility is supported. This
might be necessary to ensure that a node will only attempt
to join the network using known good links, as determined by
measurements before the deployment to provide the required
performance.
3) Synchronization Messages for GinMAC: At the start of
each frame, the sink needs to broadcast a synchronization
packet which is denoted as SYNCH into the network. This
packet holds the start time, end time and slot numbers for each
node in the network. When nodes receive a SYNCH packet
from the network, they will extract their information from the
SYNCH packet and then discard it. In this case, CSMA is
used by the sink to synchronize nodes in the network and
nodes use TDMA to transmit their data to their parents. After
nodes receive their slot information from the sink, they need to
ask permission for data transmission from their parents. Then,
after slots related information has been received by a node, it
has to handshake with its parent and then can start to transmit
data. After a node uses its allocated slots, it can go to sleep
and wake up at the same time in the next frame. Each node in
this case will access the channel using their unique start time,
so this will avoid any chance of collision with transmissions
from other nodes in the network.
GinMAC lets nodes and their parents be active at the same
time so that data can be transmitted between them. This time
synchronization algorithm is good enough to deliver packets
with the required performances for the applications described
in Section VI.
The core idea behind this GinMAC implementation is to
let nodes sleep as much as possible without effecting data
delivery and required maximum delay, and this can only be
done using a TDMA based technique. The static topology is

45
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
BROD
RX
RRTX
BROD
D
TX
TX
RTX
BROD
U
RTX
BROD
U
RX
RRX
BROD
U
TX
RTX
RX
RRX
BROD
U
Sink
B
C
C
 B 
D
Sink
Fig. 1.
Slot allocations and Synchronizations for nodes using GinMAC.
designed to let nodes have enough slots to transmit their data
and in the rest of the frame go to sleep. The slot allocation
and synchronization for GinMAC can be found in the Figure
1.
B. Mobility for Real-time Applications Using GinMAC
A new challenge is posed when mobility needs to be
considered in a WSN. In this case topology control, resource
management and performance control need to be designed to
provide good connectivity between static and mobile nodes in
the network and provide the required performance. Mobility
and topology control for critical applications using WSNs
are described in [24], [25], [26]. The proposed mobility
management module in this paper follows the same messages
and concepts as in the above papers.
1) Mobility Management Module for GinMAC: There may
be cases when moving from one location to another in the
network effects the connectivity of the network and then
reconﬁguration algorithms are needed. In order to support
mobility for real-time applications, control messages, which
need to be transferred between static and mobile nodes to ﬁnd
a better attachment have been deﬁned. Some of the possible
control messages are Advertisement (ADV), join (JOIN), and
join acknowledgement ( JOIN ACK) messages. Static nodes
are formed into Clusters.
When nodes in a cluster switch on their radios, they need
to send ADV to the network and then wait some time. When
mobile nodes receive these ADV messages they will ask to
join the network. When a static node receives JOIN messages
from the mobile nodes they will send back a JOIN ACK
message to let the mobile node know that request to join has
been accepted. So using these control messages connectivity
between mobile nodes and cluster nodes will be established.
In the proposed application only leaf nodes are allowed to be
mobile nodes and all other nodes are part of a ﬁxed cluster.
The mobility module lets nodes move across a line between
mobile nodes and a sink.
Mobile nodes may have more than one cluster they could
join, so they have to decide which cluster will be selected
for transferring data toward their parents. In this GinMAC
implementation, the cluster with maximum Receiver Signal
Strength Indicator (RSSI) is considered the best one to be
selected for the new attachment. Cluster nodes send ADV
including available positions over time and when mobile nodes
receive ADV, they compare the RSSI from their current parents
to the received RSSI from the current ADV messages. In the
case that a new cluster has a better RSSI, mobile nodes need to
leave their current parents and attach to this new cluster, which
is included in the currently received ADV message. When a
new attachment is selected then a join request needs to be sent
to that cluster. Upon receiving the JOIN request from a mobile
node, JOIN ACK needs to be sent by the selected clusters.
Slots in the each frame need to be updated according to
the new attachments. Mobile nodes need to release the ﬁrst
tree position after it is attached to the second tree address,
so in this case slots allocated for the new clusters need to be
increased and slots allocated for the old clusters need to be
decreased. A new algorithm for updating slots is needed for
GinMAC to balance allocated slots for nodes according to the
different attachments. A new algorithm has been designed to
update channel allocation according to new movements and
changes in the topology of the network.
2) Move Detection in GinMAC: There are some cases
when nodes can move without being detected. For instance,
clusters may be unaware of leaving mobile nodes and then
will keep space in the channel for that particular node. This
will consume more energy and reduce the reliability of the
network. There may be cases when clusters are not available
for attachment any more without letting mobile nodes know.
So an additional two control messages for this new mobility
module for the proposed MAC protocol have been used,
which are denoted by KEEPALIVE and NODEALIVE. The
KEEPALIVE control message is used by clusters to let its
currently attached mobile nodes know that this cluster is still
available and NODEALIVE message is used by mobile nodes
to let their attached clusters know that they are still available
for attachment. Mobile nodes wait for a speciﬁc interval to
receive messages from the attached clusters, if they do not
receive anything during that interval, a NODEALIVE message
needs to be sent, to let a cluster know that they still want to
use that cluster. If no reply is received then mobile nodes need
to search for a new address to make a new attachment.
V. A PROPOSED HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
Because of the fast growing numbers of people aged over
80 years old, the cost of medical care is increasing day by day.
Recent advances in technology have led to the development
of small, intelligent, wearable sensors capable of remotely
performing critical health monitoring tasks, and then trans-
mitting the patient’s data back to health care centres over
the wireless medium. Such health monitoring platforms aim
to continuously monitor mobile patients needing permanent
surveillance. However, to set up such platforms several issues
along the communication chain need to be resolved [27].
The healthcare ﬁeld is always looking for more efﬁcient
ways to provide patients with the best and most comfortable
care possible. Providing proper monitoring can be expensive

46
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
for their family and may force them to move from their homes
because living alone will be too much of a risk of their health.
It has been assumed, such as in [22], that a WSN could be
used to monitor and treat patients remotely, based on data
collecting from the body of the patients.
One way to approach this task is to use an application to
monitor the health of patients that allow caregiver or relatives
to keep watch on the patients health status with much lower
cost and without forcing them to move their patients into
a unfamiliar environments such as hospitals. Furthermore,
these applications can be helpful to the elderly people who
suffer from poor memory problems by providing them with
advanced features such as helping them to take medicine,
locating important objects in their homes and so on [28].
In this paper, an application based on the prototype given
in [22] has been used to monitor the healthcare of the patients
remotely in their homes where mobility and reliability are
the biggest issues. There is a large amount of data to be
managed in the proposed application, therefore, an efﬁcient
MAC protocol needs to be designed in order to provide the
required performance by the proposed application.
Based on the above criteria, the proposed MAC protocol and
mobility module given in [1] is used to provide the required
performance for this healthcare application. Some simulations
have been performed to evaluate the performance of the
proposed MAC protocol. Energy saving, delay, reliability and
mobility are considered as the most important QoS parameters
in this application.
A. Structure of the Proposed Application
The proposed healthcare system consists of four different
parts as elaborated in [22] and shown in Figure 2. The ﬁrst part
is the home monitoring part where sensor nodes are probed to
get multiple sets of data or behaviours, activities, health status
using a Body Sensor Network (BSN), and living environment
information via a Home Sensor Network (HSN). The HSN is
distributed in living room, bedroom, kitchen, bathroom and
corridor, to collect the required data. BSN and HSN sensors
need to be attached to the body of the patients and to the
environment that these patients are living in, without effecting
their daily activities.
The second part is the decision part, which is the most
important function in the proposed application, because the
performance of the whole application depends of the decision
made by this part. This part depends on the data received
at the BS using both BSN and HSN. The required medical
decisions need to be given depending on the data collecting
from home, data from body of the patients and the previous
status. Hence, the BS is responsible for collecting data from
both the HSN and BSN and forwarding to the Health Centre
(HC) or caregivers (doctors and relatives). Therefore, the BS
needs to be smart enough to deal with data collecting from
different parts of the network and to send to the medical centre,
which will take the required decisions.
The third part involves care-givers, including doctors or
nurses in the hospital and possibly relatives. These are respon-
Fig. 2.
Structure of the proposed Healthcare Application [22].
sible for dealing with the medical report messages (normal
or alarm messages), that are sent to them. In the proposed
application there should be the possibility for relatives to check
the elder’s current health status through online web pages
using some sort of authentication techniques.
The fourth part is Public Communication Network (PCN)
including Internet, GSM/GPRS, Ethernet, and WI-FI. PCN
delivers generated messages from BS to care givers to do the
required operations.
B. WSN in the Healthcare System
The ﬁrst part of the proposed healthcare system using WSNs
is deployed in a home to monitor and collect data from the
home and body of the patients. Each patient is monitored by a
WSN divided into two sub networks, which are a BSN and a
HSN. A Base Station receives data from both BSN and HSN
and then gives commands to the corresponding network.
1) Design of Body Sensor Networks (BSNs) for the pro-
posed Healthcare Application: Sensors for each BSN need
to be deployed according to the physical diseases that the
system is aimed at monitoring, for example heart rate sensors.
More about physical processes and their issues can be found
in Section V-D. In the proposed healthcare application only
one physical medical parameter is considered for monitoring,
which is body temperature. So, the BSN consists of one
sensor attached to the body of the patient, data that represents
temperature needs to be collected from this sensor and then
combined with the sensors in the environment that these

47
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patients are living in, such as kitchen, living rooms and so on,
and ﬁnally sent back to the BS, to take any required medical
decisions.
If the proposed application needs to be used for more than
one disease, then the BSN needs to be modiﬁed to sense data
from all parts of the body and send back to a sink. In this
Body Area Network (BAN), with several nodes, each node
deals with one disease. The biggest challenges in this case is
how to combine the BAN with the wider WSN and to combine
this with data from the environments that these patients are
living in.
In order to provide a comfortable system that in which
does not effect the patients daily activities, there will be a lot
of challenges, which need to be considered, such as size of
sensors that need to be attached on the body of the patients.
Each sensor needs to be as small as possible so that it can
easily be attached to the body of the patients without affecting
their daily activities, whilst still providing the required quality
of service and performance.
2) Design of Home Sensor Networks for the Proposed
Healthcare Application: HSNs in the WSNs for each patient
needs to be designed to monitor the environment that a patient
is living in. In this case, each room will have a number of
sensors to measure the data needs to be collected and must
cooperate with BSNs when the patient is in that room. The
collected data then needs to be forwarded to the BS to take
the required decisions. An efﬁcient mobility module needs to
be designed to provide the required connection between BSNs
and HSNs when patients are moving from one room to another.
3) Design of Base Station for the Proposed Healthcare Ap-
plication: As mentioned before, data from each patient needs
to be collected and forwarded to the BS before transferring
to the caregivers. Hence, in the proposed application, the BS
becomes the core of the healthcare system. Thus, the proposed
healthcare application needs a smart BS to deal with data
collection from patients, for instance dealing with patient’s
activities, their behaviours, dealing with the required reports,
such as normal and emergency alarms and so on.
In this application, each patient needs to be registered under
at least one doctor in the medical centre so that all reports
related to this patient can be forwarded to his or her caregivers.
In addition, each patient needs to have at least one other
contact in case there is an emergency. Therefore, a BS needs
to include a data base to store information about all patients
in the system including their close relatives and doctors such
as names, addresses, phone numbers and so on.
Regular (not emergency) reports about the health status of
patients need to be sent to their relatives over time. One way
for providing reports for patients to their relatives is using
personal web pages for each patient subject to some required
authentication process. Two types of reports are provided
in the proposed application; regular and healthcare reports.
Regular reports record the health status for each patient over
time during the application, while health reports show what
medical operations and other necessary care needs to be
carried out by relatives or doctors within a given time frame.
C. Data Communication in the Proposed Healthcare Applica-
tion
Based on the required criteria for the proposed healthcare
application given in this paper, a GinMAC implementation
given in [1] has been used to provide the required perfor-
mance such as energy saving, delay, reliability and mobility.
Some simulation results and conclusions will be given about
GinMAC for the proposed healthcare system to demonstrate
that GinMAC is a suitable MAC to be used for this application.
D. Designing Physical Process for the Proposed Healthcare
Application
Nodes in the simulated system can be fed by the physical
process being monitored using three different cases, the ﬁrst
case is feeding nodes with static data. The second case
is feeding nodes with different data based on the different
sources, where each source can change in time and space.
The third case is using a trace ﬁle, where nodes are assigned
from the trace ﬁle. The simulation parameters used in Castalia
determines the physical process at a certain time using the
equation given in [29].
VI. SIMULATING GINMAC FOR THE PROPOSED
HEALTHCARE APPLICATION
The GinMAC protocol is compared with Time out MAC
(TMAC) [30] in terms of performing the required performance
for the proposed application. Reliability is considered to be
the most important factor, which needs to be guaranteed for
this application, but energy consumption, delay and mobility
also are measured. A simple scenario, where the number of
nodes is low, has been simulated using GinMAC, including
the proposed mobility module with different parameters. More
details about the simulation parameters and scenarios are given
below.
A. Simulation Scenarios and Parameters
Castalia has been used in this work, because of its capabili-
ties for simulating protocols for WSNs based on the real data,
as shown in [29]. Both MAC protocols were simulated ac-
cording to the application requirements given in the following
sections, using different sensing intervals. We deﬁne sensing
interval by Ii = one packets per i second, so as it can be seen
from the graphs in our simulation results that I1 means nodes
sense environment and send data using one packet per second,
I2 means nodes sense and send data using one packet per 2
seconds and so on. More details about the topology of the
deployed WSN in the proposed healthcare application, MAC
protocols and other parameters can be found in Table I.
B. Simulation Application and Measurements
A simple scenario for the proposed healthcare application
where all nodes send data towards a sink using different
sensing intervals is used.
1) Reliability: Reliability is considered to be the percentage
of packets successfully delivered from source nodes to the
sink.

48
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Paremeter
Value
MAC Protocols
GinMAC and TMAC
Network Dimensions(in meters)
90 X 90
Distance Between pair of nodes
25 meters
Simulation Duration
10 minutes
Measurement Metrics
Life time, delay and reliability
Number of Nodes
13
Sensing Intervals (packet per second(s))
1,2,5,10
mobility speed(meters in seconds)
5
mobility interval(in minutes)
1
Advertisement interval (in seconds)
15
MaxLatency (in seconds)
10
MaxColumns
6
Initial Energy(in Joules)
18720
Real Radio
CC2420
2) Energy Saving and Lifetime: The lifetime of the net-
work is the maximum days that a WSN can survive, whilst
spending energy at a given rate. Let total consumed energy by
each node be denoted by C joules, initial energy by E joules
and current simulation time by T seconds, then the lifetime of
given MAC protocols for each node in the network has been
calculated as follow:
LifeTime(n)(indays) = ((E/C) ∗ T)/86400
(1)
where 86400 is number of seconds in each day and (E/T) is
an average of consumed energy in a second by node n. In this
way, the life time of the entire network is assumed to be an
average of the lifetime for all nodes in the network. It has been
assumed that nodes in the proposed healthcare application can
be recharged every week.
3) Delay Calculation: Delay is deﬁned as the difference
between the time when each packet is sent from its source
node to the time when the same packet is received by its
ﬁnal destination. Delay in real-time applications needs to be
measured to ensure that all data is delivered within a bounded
delay, i.e., each packet that is delivered after this delay is
considered to be lost and will be ignored. All data needs to
be collected from the source nodes and then delivered to the
sink within a minimum delay.
C. Simulation for Static and Mobility Scenarios
GinMAC and TMAC have been simulated with different
sensing intervals as shown in each graph. The WSN topology
and the results graphs from running simulation for both static
and mobility scenarios are shown below.
VII. SIMULATION RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
Simulation results and discussion for both static and mo-
bility scenarios using GinMAC and TMAC including the
proposed mobility module are described below.
1)
Packets Delivery and Reliability: It is shown in Figure
4 that GinMAC can offer the applications requirements in
term of reliability (as deﬁned in Section VI) using various
sensing intervals. GinMAC delivers more than 0.99 of packets
 
 
Sink(0)
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
4
3
2
5
1
Fig. 3.
Topology of the WSN in our simulation.
CastaliaResults -i 130925-103653.txt -s recep -p | CastaliaPlot -o p.pdf -s histogram --xtitle Sensing Intervals --ytitle An average of Reliability f
Fig. 4.
Performances in term of Reliability using TMAC and GinMAC for
Static scenario using different sensing intervals, see Section VI-A.
CastaliaResults -i 130925-103653.txt -s life -p | CastaliaPlot -o l.pdf -s histogram --xtitle Sensing Intervals --ytitle An average of Life time,(in da
Fig. 5.
Performances in term of life time of the nodes in networks using
GinMAC and TMAC for Static scenario using different sensing intervals, see
Section VI-A.

49
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
CastaliaResults -i 130930-134356.txt -s Application -p | CastaliaPlot -o lat.pdf -s histogram --xtitle Latency, in ms --ytitle An average of Received Packets at Sink(BS) --xrotate 45
Fig. 6.
Latency for delivered packets using TMAC and GinMAC for Static
scenario using different sensing intervals, see Section VI-A.
CastaliaResults -i 130925-105457.txt -s recep -p | CastaliaPlot -o rel.pdf -s histogram --xtitle Scenarios --ytitle An average of Reliability for Data Delivery --yrange 0.95:1.0
Fig. 7.
Performances in term of Reliability using both mobility and static
scenarios for GinMAC using different sensing intervals, see Section VI-A.
CastaliaResults -i 130925-105457.txt -s life -p | CastaliaPlot -o life.pdf --xtitle Scenarios -s histogram --ytitle An average of Life time,(in days) --yrange 7.5:8 -l left --colors green,red,blue
Fig. 8.
Life time of the nodes in the network using both mobility and static
scenarios for GinMAC using different sensing intervals, see Section VI-A.
CastaliaResults -i m2.txt -s Application Latency -p -f GINMAC | CastaliaPlot -o latency_Mobilie.pdf --xtitle Latency,in ms --ytitle An average of Received
Fig. 9.
Latency for delivered packets using both mobility and static scenarios
for GinMAC using different sensing intervals, see Section VI-A.
from source nodes to a sink at given sensing intervals. This
performance is due to the fact that GinMAC implements static
TDMA schedules to allocate the required slots for nodes in the
network and based on this, collision is reduced and reliability
for delivered data is optimized. It can be said that GinMAC
can be used for the proposed applications when the reliability
is the biggest issue. However, TMAC cannot offer a reliability
of more than 0.97 in both high and low sensing intervals using
the same parameters.
GinMAC cannot offer reliability of more than 0.99 for
sensing intervals more than 1 packets per second and if it
is needed to increase this reliability for such sensing intervals,
the number of slots for nodes in the static topology may be
increased. But, GinMAC performs better than TMAC in both
high and low sensing intervals as shown in the Figure 4.
2) Energy Saving and Lifetime: Figure 5 shows the average
life time of the nodes in the network using GinMAC and
TMAC using different sensing intervals. It can be seen that
GinMAC cannot perform better than TMAC in terms of energy
saving and life time of the entire network in all given sensing
intervals, however, its performance is enough to be used in
the proposed application. This is expected to be so, because of
the adaptive related techniques for TMAC, which let nodes be
active only when they have data to sent or received. GinMAC
lets nodes be active even when they do not have data and hence
consumes more energy. A WSN using GinMAC can survive
more than 7 days at low sensing intervals and around 8 days
at high sensing intervals as shown in Figure 5. This implies
that GinMAC can be used for the proposed application when
energy needs to be considered using a low number of nodes
and high sensing intervals.
3)
Delay for Data Delivery: Delay for delivered data
using the proposed protocols in the proposed application is
measured using MaxLatency and MaxColumns parameters.
The MaxLatency parameter deﬁnes the bounded latency that
all packets need to be delivered, which represents the threshold

50
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
for latency in the proposed applications. The MaxColumns
parameter deﬁnes the number of columns to be used for
measuring the latency for given MAC protocols. Initial values
for these parameters are given in Table I, different values
can be selected based on the requirement of the proposed
application. Any delivered packets after the last column are
considered to be lost and may be discarded. GinMAC does
not perform better than TMAC in term of latency as shown
in the Figure 6, however, this performance is good enough to
be used for the proposed applications.
According to the results from Figure 6, most of the packets
(which is about more than 0.98 of received packets) are re-
ceived within the ﬁrst 5 seconds at high sensing intervals, and
the rest of packets are received within 10 seconds. Based on
this and latency related parameters given in Table I, GinMAC
delivers all packets within the required latency threshold value
(MaxLatency). The reason behind this performance is that
GinMAC implements static routes for delivering data based
on static TDMA schedules between nodes and a sink and then
delay for delivered data is reduced.
A. Results from the Proposed Mobility Scenario
The Mobility module for GinMAC considers the RSSI, re-
maining energy and short distance to select a better attachment.
Based on this and as shown in Figures 7 and 8 show that
GinMAC offers nearly the same reliability and lifetime for
both static and mobility scenarios. However, mobile nodes
consume a bit more energy than the static nodes as shown
in the same ﬁgures, this is due to an extra overhead from the
control messages from mobile nodes used by the proposed
mobility module. Figure 9 shows that latency is the same
as in the static topology and the required delay performance
is unaffected using the mobility module. This implies that
the proposed mobility module provides the good connectivity
between nodes compared to the static scenario
B.
Final Results
To conclude above results, reliability and energy saving are
the most important performance criteria, which need to be
guaranteed in the proposed healthcare application given in this
paper, GinMAC achieves a very good performance in term of
both reliability and energy saving using both mobile and static
applications as shown above. This concludes that GinMAC
can be used for the proposed application when the number of
nodes is low.
VIII. CONCLUSION
An implementation of GinMAC including a proposed mo-
bility module for a healthcare application where data needs to
be collected from the body of patients and sent to a medical
centre has been described in this paper. It has been shown
that GinMAC can be used for the target application where the
number of nodes is low. A mobility module has been designed
and simulated for GinMAC for the proposed application. The
results from the mobility module have also shown that this
GinMAC implementation will give the same performance in
both mobile and static scenarios. GinMAC assumes that all
non mobile nodes have static routes toward their parents in
advance and these routes cannot be changed. Based on this,
GinMAC cannot provide the required routing for the proposed
application when number of nodes is high or some nodes have
died. Therefore, efﬁcient routing protocols will also need to
be designed to cooperate with GinMAC in order to provide
the required routing and extend the life time of the network
for the proposed application.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr James Brown from
the University of Lancaster in UK, for his help for providing
the basic ideas about the GinMAC and its speciﬁcation. The
authors would also like to thanks Dr Athanssions Boulis for
information about Castalia simulator which helped a lot.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Atto and C. Guy, “Wireless sensor networks: MAC protocols
and mobility management module for real-time applications,” in The
Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
(ICWMC 2013), Nice,France, July 2013, pp. 1 – 6.
[2] P. Suriyachai, U. Roedig, and A. Scott, “A survey of mac protocols for
mission-critical applications in wireless sensor networks,” Communica-
tions Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 240 – 264, 2012.
[3] X.-S. Yi, P.-J. Jiang, X.-W. Wang, and S.-C. Zhang, “Survey of energy-
saving protocols in wireless sensor networks,” in First International
Conference on Robot, Vision and Signal Processing (RVSP), 2011, Nov.
2011, pp. 208 –211.
[4] M. Atto and C. G. Guy, “Wireless sensor networks: MAC protocols and
real time applications,” in The 13th Annual Post Graduate Symposium on
the Convergence of Telecommunications, Networking and Broadcasting
(PGNet2012), Liverpool, UK, United Kingdom, June 2012, pp. 1 – 6.
[5] J. Lotf, M. Hosseinzadeh, and R. Alguliev, “Hierarchical routing in
wireless sensor networks: a survey,” in 2nd International Conference
on Computer Engineering and Technology (ICCET), 2010, vol. 3, 2010,
pp. V3–650–V3–654.
[6] J. Al-Karaki and A. Kamal, “Routing techniques in wireless sensor
networks: a survey,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 6 – 28, Dec. 2004.
[7] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “Medium access control with
coordinated adaptive sleeping for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 493 – 506, June 2004.
[8] P. Lin, C. Qiao, and X. Wang, “Medium access control with a dynamic
duty cycle for sensor networks,” in Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference, 2004. WCNC. 2004 IEEE, vol. 3, March 2004,
pp. 1534 – 1539 Vol.3.
[9] X. Zhuang, Y. Yang, and W. Ding, “A tdma-based protocol and im-
plementation for avoiding inter-cluster interference of wireless sensor
network,” in IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology
(ICIT), 2009, pp. 1–6.
[10] M. Thoppian, S. Venkatesan, and R. Prakash, “Csma-based mac protocol
for cognitive radio networks,” in IEEE International Symposium on a
World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM), 2007,
pp. 1–8.
[11] C. Antonopoulos, A. Prayati, F. Kerasiotis, and G. Papadopoulos,
“Csma-mac performance evaluation for wsn applications,” in Third
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications,
2009. SENSORCOMM ’09., 2009, pp. 13–18.
[12] S. Pal, D. Bhattacharyya, G. Tomar, and T. Kim, “Wireless sensor
networks and its routing protocols: A comparative study,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Intelligence and Communication
Networks (CICN), Nov. 2010, pp. 314 –319.
[13] G. Lu, B. Krishnamachari, and C. Raghavendra, “An adaptive energy-
efﬁcient and low-latency mac for data gathering in wireless sensor
networks,” in 18th International in Parallel and Distributed Processing
Symposium, 2004., 2004, pp. 224–232.

51
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[14] S. Du, A. Saha, and D. Johnson, “Rmac: A routing-enhanced duty-cycle
mac protocol for wireless sensor networks,” in INFOCOM 2007. 26th
IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE,
2007, pp. 1478 –1486.
[15] N. Vasanthi and S. Annadurai, “Energy efﬁcient sleep schedule for
achieving minimum latency in query based sensor networks,” in IEEE
International Conference on Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous, and Trust-
worthy Computing, 2006., vol. 2, June 2006, pp. 214 –219.
[16] S. Ergen and P. Varaiya, “Pedamacs: power efﬁcient and delay aware
medium access protocol for sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 7, July 2006.
[17] V. Jain, R. Biswas, and D. P. Agrawal, “Energy-efﬁcient and reliable
medium access in sensor networks,” in IEEE International Symposium
on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks, 2007.
WoWMoM 2007., June 2007, pp. 1 – 8.
[18] J. Lotf and S. Ghazani, “Overview on routing protocols in wireless
sensor networks,” in 2nd International Conference on Computer En-
gineering and Technology (ICCET), 2010, vol. 3, April 2010, pp. 610 –
614.
[19] P. Suriyachai, J. Brown, and U. Roedig, “Time-critical data delivery
in wireless sensor networks,” in 6th IEEE International Conference on
Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS 10).
IEEE, June
2010, pp. 216–229.
[20] T. O’Donovan, J. Brown, U. Roedig, C. Sreenan, J. do O, A. Dunkels,
A. Klein, J. Sa Silva, V. Vassiliou, and L. Wolf, “Ginseng: Performance
control in wireless sensor networks,” in 7th Annual IEEE Communica-
tions Society Conference on Sensor Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications
and Networks (SECON), June 2010, pp. 1 –3.
[21] W.-B. Pottner, H. Seidel, J. Brown, U. Roedig, and L. Wolf, “Construct-
ing schedules for time-critical data delivery in wireless sensor networks,”
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks (TOSN), due to August 2014,
vol. 10, no. 3, August 2014.
[22] H. Huo, Y. Xu, H. Yan, S. Mubeen, and H. Zhang, “An elderly
health care system using wireless sensor networks at home,” in Third
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
(SENSORCOMM), June 2009, pp. 158 –163.
[23] J. Brown and U. Roedig, “Demo abstract: Ginlite - a mac protocol
for real-time sensor networks,” in In Proceedings of 9th European
Conference on Wireless Sensor Networks (EWSN’12), Feb 2012.
[24] Z. Zinonos, R. Silva, V. Vassiliou, and J. Silva, “Mobility solutions for
wireless sensor and actuator networks with performance guarantees,” in
18th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), May 2011,
pp. 406 –411.
[25] Z. Zinonos and V. Vassiliou, “Inter-mobility support in controlled
6lowpan networks,” in IEEE Globecom 2010 Workshop on Ubiquitous
Computing and Networks (UbiCoNet2010), Miami, Florida, USA, Dec
2010, pp. 1718–1723.
[26] R. Silva, Z. Zinonos, J. Sa Silva, and V. Vassiliou, “Mobility in
wsns for critical applications,” in IEEE Symposium on Computers and
Communications (ISCC), July 2011, pp. 451 –456.
[27] Y. Zatout, “Using wireless technologies for healthcare monitoring at
home: A survey,” in IEEE 14th International Conference on e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom), 2012, pp. 383–386.
[28] S. Khan, A. Khan, P. Nabil, and A. Alrajeh, Wireless Sensor Networks:
Current, Status and Future Trends.
France: CRC Press, Taylor and
France Group, November 2012.
[29] A. Boulis, “Castalia simulator: A simulator for wireless sensor networks
and body area networks,” in http://castalia.npc.nicta.com.au, NICTA,
[retrieved: May, 2014], March 2011, pp. 1 – 120.
[30] Y. Tselishchev, A. Boulis, and L. Libman, “Experiences and lessons from
implementing a wireless sensor network mac protocol in the castalia
simulator,” in Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), 2010 IEEE, April 2010, pp. 1 –6.

