324
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Cognitive Handoff  
Holistic Vision, Reference Framework, Model-driven Methodology and Taxonomy of Scenarios  
 
Francisco A. González-Horta, Rogerio A. 
Enríquez-Caldera, Juan M. Ramírez-Cortés, Jorge 
Martínez-Carballido 
Department of Electronics 
INAOE 
Tonantzintla, Puebla, México 
e-mail: fglez@inaoep.mx, rogerio@inaoep.mx, 
jmram@inaoep.mx, jmc@inaoep.mx 
 
Eldamira Buenfil-Alpuche 
Faculty of Engineering 
Polytechnic University of Guerrero State, UPEG 
Taxco, Guerrero, Mexico  
e-mail: eldamira@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— Current handoffs are not designed to achieve 
multiple desirable features simultaneously. This weakness has 
resulted in handoff schemes that are seamless but not adaptive, 
or adaptive but not secure, or secure but not autonomous, or 
autonomous but not correct, etc. To face this limitation, in this 
paper we envision and develop a new kind of handoff system, 
which is context-aware in the sense that uses information from 
its external and internal environment: a cognitive handoff. 
Thus, the resulting cognitive handoff can attain multiple 
purposes simultaneously through trading-off multi-criteria and 
based on a variety of policies. We also discuss the difficulties of 
developing cognitive handoffs and propose a new model-driven 
methodology for their systematic development. The theoretical 
framework of this methodology is the holistic approach, the 
functional decomposition method, the model-based design 
paradigm, and the theory of design as scientific problem-
solving. We applied the proposed methodology and obtained 
the following results: (i) a correspondence between handoff 
purposes and quantitative environment information, (ii) a 
novel taxonomy of handoff mobility scenarios, and (iii) an 
original state-based model representing the functional 
behavior of the handoff process. 
Keywords- Cognitive handoff; handoff methodology; handoff 
scenarios 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A 
handoff 
is 
intended 
to 
preserve 
the 
user 
communications while different kinds of transitions occur in 
the network connection. Thus, a handoff is the process of 
transferring communications among radio channels, base 
stations, IP networks, service providers, mobile terminals, 
or any feasible combination of these elements [1]. 
Significant desirable handoff features mentioned in the 
review of the literature [2] are: seamless [3], adaptive [4], 
autonomous [5], secure [6], and correct [7]; however, many 
others can be found in the vast literature of handoffs: 
transparent, reliable, flexible, robust, balanced, immune, 
fast, soft, smooth, lossless, efficient, proactive, predictive, 
reactive, QoS-based, power-based, location-aided, time-
adaptive, intelligent, generic, etc. Despite the rich variety of 
desirable handoff features the resulting handoffs they are 
not enough to face the challenges of the future Internet [8], 
[9], [10], [11] and two important problems remain unsolved:  
i) how can be combined different desirable features into a 
single handoff process so that it can achieve many purposes 
simultaneously? And ii) how to define every desirable 
feature so that ambiguity and subjectivity can be reduced? 
 
This gap in knowledge about handoffs has produced a 
number of single-purpose schemes that successfully achieve 
one attractive feature but completely ignore others; e.g., 
seamless handoffs with poorly or null adaptation to handoff 
scenarios or technologies [12]; adaptive handoffs that do not 
consider any security goal [4]; secure handoffs that ignore 
user autonomy [6]; etc. Also, there is a growing confusion 
in literature about similar features; e.g., accurate-correct, 
fast-timely, smooth-seamless, robust-reliable, etc. In order 
to reduce misuse and ambiguity of these attributes is 
convenient to associate a qualitative property (purpose) and 
quantitative measures (objectives and goals) to each 
desirable feature. By doing so, we can qualify and quantify 
their performance individually or in comparison with others. 
 
The development of handoffs achieving multiple 
desirable features has been “delayed” by the research 
community itself, despite it was advised since 1997 by 
Tripathi [8], because many authors preferred to focus on 
understanding and controlling very specific handoff 
scenarios (reductionist approach) instead of managing 
complex and generic handoff scenarios (holistic approach). 
However, recent handoff schemes, like the ones proposed 
by Altaf in 2008 [9] for secure-seamless-soft handovers, or 
Cardenas in 2008 [10] for fast-seamless handoffs, or 
Singhrova in 2009 [11] for seamless-adaptive handoffs, 
show a tendency towards cognitive handoffs. 
 
Major contributions of this paper include: 
 
1) A new holistic vision of handoffs. 
 Many handoff solutions follow a reductionist approach; i.e., 
they achieve one desirable feature, use a small amount of 
handoff criteria, and work only in very specific scenarios. 
Although these simplistic solutions provide understanding 
and control of particular situations, we have seen how they 

325
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
quickly become special cases of more general models. Thus, 
we claim that the handoff problem for the future Internet 
requires holistic solutions, achieving multiple desirable 
features, using a diversity of context information, and 
adapting to any handoff scenario. 
 
2) A reference framework for cognitive handoffs. 
We propose a new kind of handoff that is multipurpose, 
multi-criteria, context-aware, self-aware, policy-based, and 
trades-off multiple conflicting objectives to reach its 
intended goals. This paper provides the conceptual model 
and its first level of functional decomposition. 
 
3) A model-driven methodology to develop cognitive 
handoffs. 
This methodology allows to systematically develop 
cognitive handoffs using a comprehensive model-based 
framework. The proposed methodology is founded on a 
synthesis 
of 
holism, 
reductionism, 
functional 
decomposition, model-based design, and scientific problem-
solving theory. As a result of deploying our methodology, 
we present a clear correspondence among cognitive handoff 
purposes and handoff environment information. 
 
Besides, in order to test the resulting cognitive handoff 
when applying such methodology with the parameters 
associated to, and for a given scenario, we develop the 
following contributions: 
 
4) A taxonomy of handoff mobility scenario. 
This taxonomy gives a classification of handoff scenarios by 
considering 
all 
feasible 
combinations 
of 
several 
communication dimensions involved. 
 
5) An original state-based model of the handoff process. 
This state based model is represented by five-state diagram, 
which describes the control handoff process and the way all 
different stages are being coordinated before, during, and 
after the handoff. 
 
The paper is organized in sections that correspond to the 
previously described contributions and therefore it starts in 
Section II with a distinction between Single-purpose and 
multi-purpose handoffs. Section III presents the holistic 
vision for the conceptualization of cognitive handoffs. 
Section IV presents our cognitive handoff reference 
framework and its specific characteristics. Section V 
describes the ad hoc model-driven methodology that we are 
using for developing cognitive handoffs. This section 
discusses the difficulties for developing cognitive handoffs 
and provides an overview of theoretical framework setting 
the basis of our methodology. Section VI shows the first 
results we obtained from applying the methodology. These 
results include: (a) the correlation between context data and 
desirable handoff features through the definition of handoff 
purposes, objectives, and goals; (b) the taxonomy of handoff 
scenarios derived from combining all the possible transition 
elements involved in handoffs; and, (c) a cognitive handoff 
state-based model that describes a general behavior of the 
control handoff process. Section VII presents a basic 
discussion on the applicability of preliminary results. 
Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper with a summary of 
contributions and future work. 
II.  SINGLE-PURPOSE VS MULTI-PURPOSE HANDOFFS 
Dr. Nishith D. Tripathi in his outstanding thesis work 
published in 1997 [12] probably was the first author in 
considering a handoff that can simultaneously achieve many 
desirable features. His inspiring work served for many years 
as a basis for developing high performance handoffs; 
however, the complexities of handoff scenarios from 1997 
to present days have changed significantly. For instance, the 
handoff 
concept 
changed 
from 
simple 
lower-layer 
transitions between base stations and channels to more 
elaborated 
cross-layer 
transitions 
among 
networks, 
providers, and terminals. The limited scope of Tripathi’s 
handoff concept has brought in consequence that his 
algorithms and models become today special cases of more 
general models. Holism is relevant in this way to provide a 
long-term solution for the handoff problem. Another author 
who describes several desirable handoff features is Nasser et 
al. [13] in 2006. Both, Tripathy and Nasser, described 
various desirable features, but they did not make any 
difference among features, purposes, objectives, and goals. 
A handoff model needs a clear distinction to such former 
concepts. 
 
The holistic vision to the handoff problem has also been 
studied by Dr. Mika Ylianttila in his exceptional thesis work 
[14] published in 2005. He presented a holistic system 
architecture based on issues involved in mobility 
management areas (e.g., mobility scenarios, handoff 
strategies, handoff control, handoff algorithms, handoff 
procedures, 
mobility 
protocols, 
mobility 
parameters, 
performance measures, and handoff metrics). The work of 
Ylianttila improved the architecture of handoff issues that 
Pahlavan [15] published in 2000. However, these 
architectures have some drawbacks: i) they did not include 
the context management problem in their models; ii) they 
did not mention the tradeoffs that handoffs should consider 
in a multi-objective scenario; and iii) their architectures are 
based on types of issues and not in the functionality aspects 
of the handoff process. 
 
Besides the above related work, we use two criteria to 
classify handoff schemes that are approaching to cognitive 
handoffs: the number of desirable features they achieve and 
the amount of context information they use. Handoff 
schemes, like the ones proposed by So [16] and Zhang [17], 
achieve only one desirable feature using limited context 
information; they provide seamless handoffs between 
particular network technologies and specific mobility 
scenarios. The schemes proposed by Siddiqui [18] and 
Hasswa [19] use broad context information, but they are 
focused only in one feature (seamlessness). 

326
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Conversely, the solutions proposed by Sethom [6] and 
Tuladhar [20] provide seamless and secure handoffs on a 
variety of handoff scenarios because they use broad context. 
The schemes proposed by Singhrova [4] and Chen [21] 
achieve seamless and adaptive mobility, but they cannot 
adapt to any handoff scenario because they use limited 
context. Finally, the scheme proposed by Altaf [22] 
achieves seamless, secure, soft, and adaptive handoffs, but 
just between WiMAX and 3G networks because they use 
limited context. 
 
The information the handoff process uses for making 
decisions, has been increasing as we want to deploy more 
intelligent handoff systems. Handoffs for the first generation 
wireless networks were called single-criterion, because they 
were mainly based on signal-strength or few criteria taken 
from the access network dimension. At the second 
generation, the need for improving the effectiveness of 
handoffs led to include more information to this process. 
Handoffs for 2G networks were known as multi-criteria. 
They included many criteria from distinct dimensions, but 
not from all dimensions; e.g., they might consider the 
battery load from the terminal dimension and the user speed 
from the mobility dimension, but ignore the fees from the 
service provider. 
 
 At the beginning of 3G networks, several handoff 
schemes were deployed using information or criteria from 
the entire external handoff environment, and they were 
called context-aware handoffs. In 2003, Prehofer et al. [23], 
defined a context-management architecture for addressing 
the problem of collecting, compiling, and distributing 
handoff context information. This remarkable work started a 
new stage in the development of handoffs. Part of this 
architecture was used by Pawar et al. [24] in 2008 for 
developing context-aware handoffs applied to mobile 
patient monitoring. 
 
At the dawn of 4G networks, a new type of handoff 
solutions, called self-aware, started to use a variety of 
handoff 
performance 
parameters 
from 
its 
internal 
environment to self-adapt its behavior according to different 
performance goals. For the future networks, environment-
aware handoffs, using information from both, the external 
and internal environment, will be deployed. 
 
Despite these recent advances in context-management 
architectures and applications, the lack of a clear 
relationship between handoff context information and 
handoff desirable features is adding unnecessary complexity 
to the process of handoff. The handoff decision making 
process should be oriented to accomplish more than just one 
desirable feature. Therefore, we consider that in difference 
with current handoff schemes, a cognitive handoff is aware 
of its external and internal environment and optimally 
achieves multiple desirable features simultaneously. 
 
Considering the tendency on handoff research, it will be 
common to observe in the near future a new generation of 
handoffs that can achieve many desirable features using 
broad handoff context information. In current literature, 
none architecture, model, or algorithm is reported to have 
this property. 
 
Regarding the related work of standardization bodies, 
like the IEEE 802.21 and the IETF MIPSHOP, we observed 
that they are focusing in seamless heterogeneous handoffs; 
they are not taking into account the vast diversity of 
desirable features that handoffs could have. The IEEE 
802.21 workgroup has approved three task groups to face 
very particular handoff scenarios: the IEEE 802.21a for 
security extensions to media independent handovers, the 
IEEE 802.21b for handovers with downlink only 
technologies, and the IEEE 802.21c for optimized single 
radio handovers. We believe they are following a 
reductionist approach, but they lack the holistic vision of 
cognitive handoffs. Emmelman [25] discusses ongoing 
activities and scopes of these standardization bodies. 
III. 
THE COGNITIVE HANDOFF HOLISTIC VISION  
First of all, we will describe in a holistic manner the 
vision of cognitive handoffs. 
A. Origin of Single-Purpose Handoffs   
The thoughtful study of handoffs started in the early 
1990s with the first generation (1G) cellular networks (e.g., 
AMPS 
[26]). 
These 
networks 
provided 
seamless 
conversations while the mobile phone switched between 
channels and base stations. The decision to perform a 
handoff was made only on a signal strength basis, but the 
handoff execution should be imperceptible to users. For this 
reason, the AMPS system required that the handoff gap be 
no more than 100 ms to avoid the possibility of dropping a 
syllable of speech [26]. These traditional handoffs are single-
purpose/single-criterion or seamless/signal strength. 
B. Major Challenges in the Future Internet  
1) Multidimensional Heterogeneity: A major trend in 
future communication systems is the coexistence of multiple 
dimensions of heterogeneity integrated into a seamless, 
universal, 
uniform, 
ubiquitous, 
and 
general-purpose 
network. This future Internet will be seamless if it hides 
heterogeneity to users, universal if it can be used by anyone 
with any terminal, uniform if it is an all-IP network, 
ubiquitous if it is available anywhere and anytime, and 
general-purpose if it can provide any service. We divide 
heterogeneity into five dimensions as illustrated in Fig. 1 
and explained in the next paragraphs. The arrows going 
down from the service provider dimension to the user 
mobility dimension depict two different handoff scenarios 
created by instantiating objects in each dimension. 
 
a) Diversity on service providers and operators: 
Offer different classes of services, billing models, security 
policies, and connection prices. They deploy different 

327
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
wireless technologies around the world and make roaming 
agreements and alliances with other providers and operators.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Multidimensional heterogeneity in the future Internet. 
b) Diversity on service providers and operators: 
Offer different classes of services, billing models, security 
policies, and connection prices. They deploy different 
wireless technologies around the world and make roaming 
agreements and alliances with other providers and operators.  
c) Variety of applications and services: Intend to 
fulfill the distinct ways of human communication; e.g., 
voice, video, data, images, text, music, TV, telephony, etc. 
d) Several access network technologies: Include 
wired and wireless access technologies [21]; e.g., Ethernet, 
Bluetooth, WiMAX, WiFi, UMTS, MBWA, IMT-2000, 
GPRS, GSM, EDGE, LTE/SAE, DVB-HS, etc. They differ 
in terms of electrical properties, signaling, coding, 
frequencies, coverage, bandwidth, QoS guarantees, mobility 
management, media access methods, packet formats, etc. 
e) Plethora of mobile user terminals: Users can be 
humans, machines, or sensors. Terminals for machines are 
integrated parts of machines. Sensor terminals collect 
information from networked sensors [27]. Terminals for 
humans are mobile and multimode, equipped with 
telecommunication capabilities and different saving energy 
characteristics; they change its factor form from those 
looked like computers (laptops, netbooks) to those looked 
like cell phones (PDAs, smartphones). 
f) Numerous 
user 
mobility 
states: 
Network 
terminals can be located anywhere – in space, on the 
ground, under the ground, above water, underwater, and 
they can be fixed in a geographic position or moving at any 
speed – pedestrian, vehicular, ultrasonic [27]. 
 
Nowadays, 
no 
handoff 
solution 
exists, 
which 
comprehensively addresses the entire scale of heterogeneity. 
Moreover, multidimensional heterogeneity has three main 
attributes: is inevitable, is the source of great amounts of 
context information, and produces an infinite number of 
handoff scenarios. 
 
2) Ubiquitous Connectivity: It enables connectivity for 
anyone or anything, at any time, from anywhere. A myriad 
of wireless access technologies are spread across the entire 
world overlapping one another but avoiding interferences 
among them. Two requirements for ubiquitous connectivity 
are: 
a) to develop scalable architectures to integrate any 
number of wireless systems from different service providers 
[28] and 
b) to develop smart multimode mobile terminals 
able to access any wireless technology [29]. 
 
3)  Cognitive Mobility: It allows roaming mechanisms 
where the user is always connected to the best available 
network, with the smaller number of handoffs, service 
disruptions, user interventions, security threats, and the 
greater number of handoff scenarios. 
 
C. External and Internal Handoff Environment 
We envision a cognitive handoff as a process that is both 
context-aware and self-aware. This implicates to make the 
handoff process aware of its external and internal 
environment. We borrowed the term ‘cognitive’ from Dr. 
Dixit vision of cognitive networking [30]. He defines 
cognitive networking as an intelligent communication 
system that is aware of its environment, both external and 
internal, and acts adaptively and autonomously to attain its 
intended goals. We believe cognitive handoffs not only 
should behave adaptively or autonomously to attain its 
intended goals, but also seamlessly, securely, and correctly. 
 
On one hand, the external environment is directly related 
with all the external entities that provide a source of context 
information to the handoff process. These entities are users, 
terminals, applications, networks, and providers; a cognitive 
handoff should adapt to any kind of these entities. These 
entities maintain a strong cyclic relationship as follows: 
users interact with terminals, terminals run applications, 
applications exchange data through networks, networks are 
managed by providers, and providers subscribe users. The 
cyclic relationship of external entities suggests that all 
external context information emanates just from these five 
basic entities and no more; hence, if we ignore information 
of any of these entities, the handoff process will not adapt 
properly to all the scenarios. Therefore, a cognitive handoff 
should consider all the five entities. 
 
On the other hand, the internal environment is another 
source of context and it is directly related with the behavior 
or performance of handoffs. This behavior directly depends 
on the desirable features of handoff. Next, we identified and 
describe five major desirable features, which are considered 
highly significant for the current and future scenarios. 
D. Multiple Desirable Features of Handoff 
1) Seamlessness: It means to preserve the user 
communications before, during, and after the handoff thus 

328
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reducing service degradation or interruption. Service 
degradation may be due to a continuous reduction in link 
quality, network quality, handoff quality, QoS guarantees, 
and energy savings. Service interruption may be due to 
excessive degradations or a “break before make” approach. 
 
2) Autonomy: This desirable feature is closely related to 
seamlessness. A handoff is autonomous, automatic, or 
autonomic when no user interventions are required during a 
handoff in progress. However, this does not mean that user 
interventions are not required in handoffs. It is good that 
users participate in the handoff configuration process by 
defining their preferences, priorities, or necessities; but, it is 
convenient that users can perform this activity offline to 
prevent any distraction during online communications. 
 
3) Security: We say a handoff is secure if not new 
threats appear along the handoff process and security 
signaling traffic does not overload the network and degrades 
the communication services. This is a very challenging task, 
but if optimization techniques are used together with our 
model it could be shown that by minimizing handoff 
latency, authentication latency, and signaling overload, the 
risk of new threats appearance may be reduced. 
 
4) Correctness: A handoff is correct if it keeps the user 
always connected to the best available network with the 
smaller number of handoffs; this is similar to the 
Gustaffson’s vision of ABC defined in [31]. We consider 
that the best network is the one that is sufficiently better and 
consistently better. Furthermore, correctness can bring other 
additional features to the handoff process: 
 
 Beneficial: if quality of communications, user 
expectations, or terminal power conditions get improved 
after handoff. 
 Timely: if handoff is executed just in time; i.e., 
right after target is properly selected and before 
degradations or interruptions occur. 
 Selective: if it properly chooses the best network 
among all the available networks. 
 Necessary: if it is initiated because of one 
imperative or opportunist reason.  
 Efficient: if it selects the most appropriate method, 
protocol, or handoff strategy, according to the types of: 
handoff in progress, user mobility, and application. 
 
These handoff attributes derived from correctness, take 
special relevance during the decision-making phase, where 
it must be decided why, where, how, who, and when to 
trigger a handoff. 
 
5) Adaptability: An adaptable handoff should be 
successful across any handoff scenario. A handoff is 
successful if it achieves a balance of every desirable feature 
at a minimum level of user satisfaction. 
 
E.  Structure of Handoff Context Information 
 The 
handoff 
context 
information 
is 
extensive, 
heterogeneous, distributed, and dynamic. It supports the 
whole operation of the handoff process and the achievement 
of multiple desirable features. Therefore, such context 
information should be arranged in a clear structure. Table I  
and Table II show the structure of handoff context 
information according to a pair of criteria: the source of 
context and the class of information respectively. The 
sources of context originated in the external handoff 
environment support context-awareness while the one 
originated in the internal environment (the handoff process 
itself) will provide self-awareness. 
TABLE I.  
STRUCTURE FOR SOURCE OF CONTEXT INFORMATION 
User context: This context allows users to customize the handoff 
according to their own needs, habits, and preferences. It includes: user 
preferences, user priorities, user profiles, user history, etc. 
Terminal context: Allows the deployment of QoS-aware handoffs, 
power-based handoffs, and location-aided handoffs: 
(a) Link quality: Received signal strength (RSS), signal to noise ratio 
(SNR), signal to interference ratio (SIR), signal to noise and 
interference ratio (SNIR), bit error rate (BER), block error rate (BLER), 
co-channel interference (CCI), carrier to interference rario (CIR), etc. 
(b) Power management: Battery type (BT), battery load (BL), energy-
consumption rate (ECR), transmit power in current (TPC), transmit 
power in target (TPT), power budget (PB), etc. 
(c) Geographic mobility: Velocity (Vel), distance to a base station 
(Dist), location (Loc), direction (MDir), coverage area (GCA), etc. 
Application context: This context includes the QoS requirements of 
active applications: Lost packets (LP), delayed packets (DP), corrupted 
packets (CP), duplicated packets (DuP), data transfer rate (DTR-
goodput), packet jitter (PJ), out-of-order delivery (OOD), application 
type (AppT), etc. The consideration of these QoS parameters makes 
provisions for application-aware handoffs. 
Network context: This context is needed to avoid selecting congested 
networks (befor handoff), to monitor service continuity (during 
handoff), and to assess the handoff success by measuring network 
conditions (after handoff): Network bandwidth (NBW), network load 
(NL), network delay (ND), network jitter (NJ), network throughput 
(NT), network maximum transmission unit (NMTU), etc. 
Provider context: Connection fees, billing models, roaming agreements, 
coverage area maps, security management (AAA), types of services 
(data, voice, video), provider preferences, and provider priorities. A 
negotiation model may be required to equate the differences between 
service providers, network operators, and mobile users. 
Handoff performance context: Call blocking (CB), call dropping (CD), 
handoff blocking (HOB), handoff rate (HOR), handoff latency (HOL), 
decision latency (DLat), execution latency (ExLat), evaluation latency 
(EvLat), handoff type (HOType), elapsed time since last handoff 
(ETSLH), interruptions rate (IR), interruption latency (IL), degradations 
rate (DR), degradation latency (DL), degradation intensity (DI), utility 
function (UF), signaling overload (SO), security signaling overload 
(SSO), improvement rate (ImpR), application improvement rate 
(AppImpR), user improvement rate (UsrImpR), terminal improvement 
rate (TermImpR), successful handoff rate (SHOR), imperative handoff 
rate (IHOR), opportunist handoff rate (OHOR), dwell time in the best 
(DTIB), authentication latency (AL), detected attacks rate (DAR), 
online user interventions rate (OUIR), tardy handoff rate (THOR), 
premature handoff rate (PHOR), etc.his context allows users to 
customize the handoff according to their own needs, habits, and 
preferences. It includes: user preferences, user priorities, user profiles, 
user history, etc. 

329
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE II.  
STRUCTURE FOR  CLASS OF INFORMATION 
Handoff 
criteria: 
Network 
discovery, 
decision-making, 
and 
performance evaluation. Some examples of handoff criteria include 
variables or parameters from the external/internal environment such as 
RSS, NL, BL, LP, HOL, Vel, connection price, etc. 
Handoff metrics:  Mathematical models used to measure several 
significant tasks of the handoff process; for instance, the quality of 
links, the quality of communications, the quality of different networks, 
the quality and quantity of handoffs, the quality of different providers, 
the achievement of user preferences, the power budget of a mobile 
terminal, the geographic mobility of a user, etc. Handoff metrics may 
combine a variety of handoff criteria and help any specific handoff 
algorithm to make optimal decisions. 
Performance measures: Set of handoff metrics that are used to quantify 
performance 
of 
communications, 
performance 
of 
networks, 
performance of handoffs, and to evaluate the degree of achieving a 
handoff objective. 
Handoff policies: Users and providers define a series of policies to the 
handoff operation. Policies define and specify rules for making handoff 
decisions in any particular situation; for instance, what to do if the link 
quality drops below a level required for an acceptable service. User and 
provider may have different views of the handoff process; provider may 
be interested in QoS while user in connection charges. Both points of 
view must be consistently integrated into a single handoff policy 
management database. 
Handoff constraints: Conditions that must be satisfied in a particular 
handoff scenario and used to control the handoff operation by keeping 
performance parameters within specific limits. For instance, for a 
seamless handoff process, the delay has to be kept within certain 
boundaries; for real-time applications a delay of 50 ms could be 
acceptable, whereas non-real-time applications might accept delays as 
long as 3-10 sec [11]. 
Handoff configuration: Defines preferences, priorities, and other 
configuration parameters required to customize the handoff operation. 
Typically, the configuration information is organized in a handoff 
profile linked to a particular user, provider, and terminal and should be 
initially performed offline either by the user, the provider, both or an 
auto-configuration setup. But, depending on the type of handoff 
algorithm, different configuration parameters may be required to be 
initialized, e.g., thresholds, timers, hysteresis, weights, etc. 
F. 
Cognitive Handoff Reference Framework 
Once we have established and justified the necessity for 
developing a new handoff system, we present our reference 
framework based on the statement that “a cognitive handoff 
should intend to achieve multiple desirable features and be 
aware of its entire environment by using information 
coming from multiple context domains”. Fig. 2 depicts this 
basic idea by interconnecting multiple desirable features 
with multiple context domains that we already explained 
separately in III.D and III.E.  
 
The purpose of this model is to help people debate and 
discuss about the complexity of cognitive handoffs. Thus, 
topics of discussion would be related to level of complexity, 
correlation among desired features and context data, and the 
possibility of establishing handoffs as a multi-objective 
optimization problem as well as to give specifications for 
practical implementations. Used in this way this model is 
not intended for predicting, designing, or implementing 
cognitive handoffs, but for understanding and explaining 
such  difficult and complex process. 
 
Figure 2.  Cognitive handoff conceptual model. The desired features to 
achieve determine the context data to use and vice versa. 
All the above issues have not been addressed in the 
handoff literature; therefore, in effect, the purpose of this 
conceptual model is being achieved.  Models like the one we 
present here are validated by credibility, and credibility 
comes from the way in, which the cognitive maps are built 
and the clarity it represents most of the opinion’s experts 
[32]. In the next section we provide some advances towards 
the development of cognitive handoffs. 
IV. 
COGNITIVE HANDOFF AT WORK 
A. Cognitive Handoff and Complex Systems 
Cognitive handoffs are complex adaptive systems 
because: (1) they exhibit a complicated hierarchical 
structure (e.g., a power saving system is part of a network 
discovery system, which is part of a handoff system, which 
is part of a mobility system, which is part of a wireless 
communication system, and so on, but also a power saving 
system is part of the decision system, which is part of the 
handoff system, and so on); (2) the whole cognitive handoff 
system achieves purposes that are not purposes of the parts 
(e.g., a cognitive handoff purpose is to maintain the 
continuity of services, but this purpose is not defined in any 
of the parts or subsystems of the cognitive handoff system); 
and, (3) the handoff environment is dynamic and therefore 
adaptability is a desired handoff feature. 
 
B. Correlating Desired Features and Context Data 
With respect on whether all previously described context 
data are necessary to describe limitations on the model; one 
has to realize that the usage of certain context parameters 
depends on the desirable features being implemented and 
the context data available in a moment will allow to 
accomplish or not a particular desired feature. Thus, we 
need to state a correct relationship or dependence between 
each desirable handoff feature and the subset of context data 
necessary to be accomplished. We made a correlation 
between desired features and context data by transforming 
desired features into purposes, purposes into objectives, 

330
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
objectives into goals, and goals into context data. This 
correlation will be shown in Section VI.  
C. Advances for a Practical Implementation 
The cognitive handoff system, represented in Fig. 2 by 
the oval in the middle, can be expanded into several sub-
systems by using a functional decomposition approach [33].  
 
 
Fig. 3 shows the main functional sub-systems for 
cognitive handoffs represented in ovals: handoff control 
algorithm, network discovery, handoff decisions, handoff 
execution, handoff evaluation, and handoff context 
information management. We briefly describe them: 
 
 
Handoff Control Algorithm: This is the main director 
of the handoff procedure. The entity, which implements the 
control algorithm is called Handoff Control Entity (HCE). 
There should be one HCE in every user terminal and also 
there may be many others distributed across the network 
infrastructure. HCEs are agents that cooperate and compete 
to take a particular handoff to succeed. 
 
Network Discovery: This is the system for detecting and 
discovering available access networks. An available 
network is a reachable and authorized network considered 
for an eventual handoff. 
 
Handoff Decisions: The handoff decisions system is 
intended to answer the questions of why, when, where, how,  
and who should trigger the handoff. Typically, this system 
has focused only in where and when to handoff [34]. The 
holistic vision extends the scope of handoff decisions. 
 Handoff Execution: This system is intended to change 
the physical and logical connection from one network to 
another, from one provider to another, or from one terminal 
to another. This change requires the most effective method, 
protocol, or strategy according to the current handoff 
scenario. The MIPSHOP group at IETF and the IEEE 
802.21 standard are creating tools for implementing media-
independent handoffs since 2003. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Functional decomposition model. The desired features 
provide purposes, objectives, and goals to achieve, while context domains 
provide the information needed to attain such goals. 
 
Handoff Evaluation: This system measures the 
achievement of every desirable handoff feature and decides 
whether the executed handoff was successful or not. The 
evaluation results should be delivered after the handoff 
execution but within strict time constraints, thus this task is 
proactively distributed along the handoff process. 
 
Handoff Context Information Management: This 
system is intended to collect the distributed handoff context 
data, transform the data in information, and redistribute this 
information to the HCEs, which are responsible for making 
handoff decisions and control. 
 
Discovery, decisions, execution, and evaluation systems 
can be viewed as sequential stages of the handoff process; 
however, the context manager is a background process, 
which permanently supplies the handoff control entities with 
fresh information about the handoff environment. 
 
D. Cognitive Handoff Performance Measures 
The performance evaluation of cognitive handoffs 
requires a performance metric for each handoff purpose and 
a graphical representation to visualize multivariate data 
[35]. These metrics combine mathematically several 
performance measures that are associated to every handoff 
purpose. It is possible that metrics can normalize 
heterogeneous data into a single value representing the 
performance of each handoff purpose. Moreover, metrics 
can also be designed as utility functions so that greater 
values are better and all values are on the same scale. 
 
 Fig. 4 exemplifies a radar graph comparing the 
performance of multiple handoff purposes simultaneously. 
We say that if all measures are within a boundary circle of 
acceptable quality, then the cognitive handoff is successful, 
otherwise the handoff is defective and outliers should be 
corrected. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Radar graph comparing the objective functions of multiple 
handoff purposes simultaneously. 
 
 

331
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Formulating the Cognitive Handoff as a MOP 
Let F  be the set of desirable handoff features and C  be 
the set of context data. We say that a context variable 
i
v  C
 is correlated with a desired feature f
 F
 if and 
only if a change on the value of 
iv  impacts on the purpose 
of f . For instance, some changes on the value of SNR may 
degrade or improve the link quality and impact on the 
purpose of seamlessness that is to maintain the continuity of 
services; thus, we say that SNR is correlated with 
seamlessness. 
 
Let 
f
V  be the set of correlated variables with f , where 
i
fV
C
v 

. We say that 
iv  is positively correlated with 
f  if and only if increments on the value of 
iv produce 
improvements on the purpose of f  and, decrements on 
iv  
produce degradations on the purpose of f . For instance, 
increments on SNR improve the link quality, which 
improves the service continuity of seamlessness, and 
conversely, decrements on SNR degrade the link quality, 
which degrades the service continuity of seamlessness. 
Therefore, SNR is positively correlated with seamlessness. 
 
SNR  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
SNR  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
 
We say that 
iv is negatively correlated with f if and 
only if increments on the value of 
iv produce degradations 
on the purpose of f and, decrements on 
iv produce 
improvements on the purpose of f
. For example, 
increments on BER degrade the link quality, which degrades 
the service continuity of seamlessness, and conversely, 
decrements on BER improve the link quality, which 
improves the service continuity of seamlessness. Therefore, 
BER is negatively correlated with seamlessness. 
 
BER  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
BER  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
 
The set 
Vf
is partitioned in two subsets 
f
V  and 
f
V   
where 
f
V   is the set of variables positively correlated 
with f and, 
f
V   is the set of variables negatively correlated 
with f . 
 
Furthermore, every 
iv may have associated a weight 
iw  
depending of its priority where 
iw [0,1]
and
 iw 1
. 
Let V represent the vector of variables 
1
( , 2
,...,
m )
v v
v
V 
, 
then the objective function for the desired handoff feature 
f is defined by 
 








( )
log
log
i
i
i
i
D
k
w
v
k
w
v








V
 
(1) 
where k  is a scaling factor so that small changes on the 
context variables reflect big changes on 
( )
D V , 
iv and 
iv are positively and negatively correlated variables of f .  
 
 
In general, the objective function is such that 
( ) :
m
D

 
V
and is a utility function that we want to 
maximize because, when desirable features get higher, they 
represent that they get at the best. 
 
Thus, considering K
different objective functions 
i ( )
D V that we want to maximize simultaneously where 
some of them may be in conflict, the multi-objective 
optimization problem (MOP) can be stated as the problem 
of 
 
Maximize 

1
2
( ),
( ),...,
k ( )
D
D
D
V
V
V
               (2) 
                    constrain to 
L
U


V
V
V , 
 
where 
L
V and 
U
V represent the vectors of lower and upper 
values of the tolerance range for each variable. 
 
F. Tradeoffs between Conflicting Objectives 
A cognitive handoff is designed to achieve multiple 
purposes, objectives, and goals simultaneously. In the space 
of handoff objectives, we can distinguish between those 
with complementary nature and those with competitive 
nature. Complementary objectives can be simultaneously 
optimized without any conflict between them, but 
competing objectives cannot be simultaneously optimized, 
unless we find compromised solutions, largely known as the 
tradeoff surface, Pareto-optimal solutions, or non-dominated 
solutions [36]. We describe several tradeoffs to consider in a 
multi-objective handoff scheme: 
 
a) 
(Max. DTIB and Min. HOR): There is a tradeoff 
between maximizing the time to stay always best 
connected (DTIB) and minimizing the number of 
handoffs (HOR). The conflict arises because in a 
dynamic environment the best network is changing 
frequently and stochastically; thus, to maximize DTIB is 
necessary to make frequent handoffs as soon as a new 
best is available. This increase in the number of handoffs 
creates a conflict with minimizing HOR. 
 
b) 
(Min. DLat and Max. SHOR): This tradeoff is 
between minimizing the handoff decisions latency 
(DLat) and maximizing the number of successful 
handoffs (SHOR). The conflict emerges because the less 
time elapsed to make decisions will necessary lead to 
reduce the number of successful handoffs. For example, 
in case of imperative handoffs, DLat is reduced but this 
may lead to select an incorrect target because the 
selection time is also reduced. 
 

332
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
c) 
(Max. Sizeof-ContextInfo and Min SO): This is a 
tradeoff between minimizing the handoff signaling 
overload (SO) and maximizing the amount of handoff 
context information to be managed by the handoff 
control entities. The conflict arises because broad 
handoff information is required to attain multiple 
desirable features, but this will increase the amount of 
signaling traffic in the network. 
 
d) 
(User 
and 
Provider 
Preferences): 
Several 
conflicts may appear due to differences between 
provider and user preferences. For instance, providers 
may prefer networks within its own administrative 
domain while users may prefer networks with lower 
charges even if they are owned by other service 
providers; users may prefer a Mobile Controlled 
Handoff (MCHO) while providers may prefer Network 
Controlled Handoffs (NCHO). Conflicts like these 
require a balance between different interests. Handoff 
protocols like Mobile Assisted Handoff (MAHO) and 
Network Assisted Handoff (NAHO) try to balance the 
handoff control [9]. 
V. 
MODEL-DRIVEN METHODOLOGY FOR DEVELOPING 
COGNITIVE HANDOFFS 
Next, we are going to describe the methodology to 
develop cognitive handoffs. 
A. 
Difficulties for Developing Cognitive Handoff 
The simple idea of achieving multiple purposes 
simultaneously is challenging even for humans. Moreover, 
if the intended purposes represent opposing situations, 
which all of them are desired, then even humans need a way 
to balance the different purposes in conflict; e.g., the 
conflict between doing the job accurately and doing it 
quickly. 
In 
optimization 
theory, 
multi-objective 
optimization states that improvements to a single purpose 
can be made as long as the change that made that purpose 
better off does not make any other purpose worse off. This 
is called a Pareto improvement. When no further Pareto 
improvements can be made, then the solution is called 
Pareto optimal [36]. 
 
Typically, a decision-maker chooses one optimal 
solution according to his preference. Therefore, the first 
difficulty in developing cognitive handoffs arises because 
there are many purposes, objectives, and goals all of them in 
conflict that need to be tradeoff. 
 
A second significant difficulty emerges when numerous 
sources of environment information need to be considered 
to achieve the desired multiple purposes. Six sources of 
context we consider include: user, terminal, network, 
provider, application, and handoff process. Such sources 
produce context data that need to be collected, transformed, 
and distributed at the different handoff control entities 
(HCEs). The challenge is how to manage large amounts of 
unsorted high-dimensional data that have very complicated 
structures and at the same time reducing the signaling traffic 
overload produced by this task. 
 
The last significant difficulty is originated by the 
different transition elements involved in the handoff 
process. These elements include radio channels, base 
stations, IP networks, service providers, user terminals, and 
all the feasible combinations. This variety of elements 
produces a large amount of scenarios that need to be 
considered for an adaptive handoff scheme. 
 
B. 
Theoretical Background 
First, we state the basis for establishing our 
methodology. 
 
1) Holism and Reductionism: Holism and reductionism 
are two complementary and opposing approaches for 
analyzing complex systems [37]. They represent different 
views of the relationship between the whole and the parts. 
Holism states that parts cannot explain the whole, the whole 
states the behavior of parts; i.e., it is necessary to understand 
how the entire handoff system determines the behavior of its 
components. Conversely, reductionism states that parts can 
explain the whole, then the behavior of parts determine the 
behavior of the whole. We have seen how reductionist 
handoff schemes achieve its goals in specific scenarios but 
they quickly become special cases of more general models. 
Holistic models are more complex models that pretend to 
consider all the individual parts and to understand the 
purposes of the whole. 
 
2) Model-based Design: The model-driven paradigm 
has emerged as one of the best ways to confront complex 
systems. As it was clearly expressed by Dr. Hoffman [38], 
models can capture both the structure of the system 
(architecture) and behavior (dynamism). Model-based 
systems engineering [39] helps to address complexity by 
raising the level of abstraction, enabling developers to view 
system models from many perspectives and different levels 
of detail while ensuring that the system is consistent. The 
Systems Modeling Language (SysML) [38,39] is becoming 
an accepted standard for modeling in the systems 
engineering domain. Using SysML for modeling helps to 
reduce ambiguity in models. In fact, models can now show 
the dynamic behavior of systems, including how they 
transition between states and how the system behaves 
overall. 
 
3) Functional Decomposition: refers to the process of 
resolving a functional relationship into its constituent parts 
in such a way that the original function can be reconstructed 
from those parts by function composition. The process of 
decomposition [40] is undertaken for the purpose of gaining 
insight into the constituent components. 
 
4) Design as Scientific Problem-Solving: In his 
inspiring paper, Braha [41] showed the similitude between 
the systems design process and the solving-problem process. 

333
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Therefore, we developed his foundation and proposed a 
methodology establishing a general procedure that starts 
with a problem statement and ends up with the solution 
deployment. This theory views the problem statement as the 
initial state and then, by searching through a state-space, 
reaches a goal state representing the solution. 
C. 
Design and Development Procedure 
The steps involved in a form of top-down procedure are:  
 
1) Stating the problem: Develop a handoff procedure 
that can optimally achieve multiple desirable features 
simultaneously. 
The 
handoff 
procedure 
should 
be 
implemented for operating in real scenarios with multiple 
dimensions of heterogeneity. Then, as part of the problem: 
 
 a) Identify and analyze the required system functions: 
Study the desirable handoff features that need to be 
implemented and determine the purpose, objectives, and 
goals associated to every feature. Associate a clear and 
single purpose to every desirable feature. Decompose 
each purpose into one or more objectives by identifying 
the performance parameters that help to quantify the 
achievement of every purpose. In the same way, divide 
every objective into one or more specific handoff goals, 
using optimization values and handoff context data and 
 
 b) Determine the needed handoff context information: 
Establish 
what 
handoff 
criteria, 
handoff 
metrics, 
performance 
measures, 
handoff 
policies, 
handoff 
constraints, and handoff scenarios are needed to achieve 
every desired purpose. Study the availability, locality, 
dynamicity, structure, and complexity of the variables, 
policies, and constraints to use. 
 
2) Design a subsystem structure or model-based 
framework: State a cognitive handoff conceptual model, i.e., 
identify all external context information as well as all 
internal context information with the highest abstraction 
level. Whilst internal data constitutes self-awareness, 
external data constitutes context-awareness of the handoff 
process. Then, using functional decomposition divide up the 
conceptual model into a number of sub-models. Every sub-
model corresponds to a particular sub-problem that 
functionally is part of the whole handoff problem. The 
structure of the system may be represented with a hierarchy 
of models or framework enclosing the parts of the whole 
system organized through functional relations. Models in 
this framework describe the system behavior in an accurate 
and unambiguous way if one uses a finite set of states and a 
set of transition functions, thus to ease this part: Identify the 
associated system states and phases. These dynamic models 
can be formally represented using finite automata, Petri 
nets, timed automata, etc. [42]. The states or phases of the 
handoff process should describe a general behaviour rather 
than specific details of particular sub-models. 
 
3) Execute the models: Execution of models allows 
verification and validation of such models. This is the 
difference between just drawing pictures and making 
pictures “live” as it was pointed out by Hoffmann in [38]. 
However, verification and validation should not be 
confused. Model verification means to test if the model 
satisfies its intended purposes or specifications. Model 
validation tests if the model provides consistent outcomes 
that are accurate representations of the real world. We use 
three strategies for these tasks: simulation, prototyping, and 
analysis. Whatever the strategy we choose, model testing or 
model checking [43] requires the use of a formal notation; 
e.g., modelling languages for simulation, mathematic and 
logic for analysis, and programming languages or 
middleware for model prototype implementation. If a model 
cannot be properly validated or verified, then it must be 
redesigned within the framework. 
 
4) Implementation stages: Once all the models in the 
framework have been individually tested, the design 
problem now reflects a well-structured solution. A detailed 
design can now be generated considering the entire 
framework of models. This whole system design should be 
implemented in a whole system prototype. The final 
prototype is ready to be tested in-situ; should any failure 
occur during testing, then a review of the conceptual model 
or any sub-model in the framework should be performed. 
 
5) Solution deployment: The cognitive handoff solution 
is ready to operate on a real handoff environment. The 
solution system (cognitive handoff) provides a simultaneous 
acomplishment of the multiple purposes defined by the 
handoff problem. Each purpose should be associated to 
quantitative objective functions to measure the degree in, 
which every handoff purpose was achieved. 
VI. 
APPLYING THE MODEL-DRIVEN METHODOLOGY  
Now, we are going to apply the previously proposed 
methodology to develop cognitive handoffs. 
A. 
Purposes, Objectives, Goals, and Context Data 
The 
handoff 
context 
information 
is 
extensive, 
heterogeneous, distributed, and dynamic. It supports the 
whole operation of the handoff process and the achievement 
of multiple desirable features. From the external and internal 
vision of the handoff environment, we have identified five 
external sources of context information (creating context-
awareness) and one internal source, which is the handoff 
process itself (creating self-awareness): 
 
1) User context: This context includes the user 
preferences, user priorities, user profiles, and user history 
and it is used to respond to user needs, habits, and 
preferences. 
 
2) Terminal context: This context domain includes the 
following evaluating parameters: (i) Link quality: Received 
Signal Strength (RSS), Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), 
Signal-to-Noise-and-Interference Ratio (SNIR), Bit Error 
Rate (BER), Block Error Rate (BLER), Signal-to-
Interference Ratio (SIR), Co-Channel Interference (CCI), 

334
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Carrier-to-Interference Ratio (CIR), etc.; (ii) Power 
management: Battery Type (BT), Battery Load (BL), 
Energy-Consumption Rate (ECR), Transmit Power in 
Current (TPC), Transmit Power in Target (TPT), and Power 
Budget (PB); (iii) Geographic mobility: Terminal Velocity 
(Vel), Distance from a Base Station (Dist), Geographic 
Location (Loc), Moving Direction (MDir), and Geographic 
Coverage Area (GCA). All these evaluating parameters 
allow the deployment of QoS-aware handoffs, power-based 
handoffs, and location-aided handoffs. 
 
3) Application context: It includes the QoS requirements 
of running applications; Lost Packets (LP), Delayed Packets 
(DP), Corrupted Packets (CP), Duplicated Packets (DuP), 
Data Transfer Rate (DTR- goodput), Packet Jitter (PJ), Out-
of-Order Delivery (OOD), Application Type (AppT). 
 
4) Network context: This information is necessary to 
select among networks (before handoff), to monitor service 
continuity (during handoff), and to measure network 
conditions (after handoff) thus they are: Network Bandwidth 
(NBW), Network Load (NL), Network Delay (ND), 
Network Jitter (NJ), Network Throughput (NT), Network 
Maximum Transmission Unit (NMTU).  
 
5) Provider context: Information about connection fees, 
billing models, roaming agreements, coverage area maps, 
security management (AAA), types of services (data, voice, 
video), provider preferences, and provider priorities.  
 
6) Handoff performance context: This information 
forms the self-aware part of our cognitive model and 
allowing evaluation of its performance. Call Blocking (CB), 
Call Dropping (CD), Handoff Blocking (HOB), Handoff 
Rate (HOR), Handoff Latency (HOL), Decisions Latency 
(DLat), Execution Latency (ExLat), Evaluation Latency 
(EvLat), Handoff Type (HOType), Elapsed Time Since Last 
Handoff (ETSLH), Interruptions Rate (IR), Interruption 
Latency (IL), Degradations Rate (DR), Degradations 
Latency (DL), Degradations Intensity (DI), Utility Function 
(UF), Signaling Overload (SO), Security Signaling 
Overload (SSO), Improvement Rate (ImpR), Application 
Improvement Rate (AppImpR), User Improvement Rate 
(UsrImpR), Terminal Improvement Rate (TermImpR), 
Successful Handoff Rate (SHOR), Imperative Handoff Rate 
(IHOR), Opportunist Handoff Rate (OHOR), Dwell Time In 
the Best (DTIB), Authentication Latency (AL), Detected 
Attacks Rate (DAR), Online User Interventions Rate 
(OUIR), Tardy Handoff Rate (THOR), and Premature 
Handoff Rate (PHOR). 
 
Once we have identified the context data from all the 
context sources and the desired handoff features that we 
wish to implement, then, we assign a qualitative purpose to 
every desired feature and, a set of quantitative objectives 
and goals to every handoff purpose. Tables III and IV 
summarize such previous description. 
 
TABLE III.  
DESIRED FEATURES, PURPOSES, OBJECTIVES, AND GOALS 
Desired 
Handoff 
Features 
      Qualitative               Quantitative 
Purposes 
Objectives 
Goals 
Seamlessness 
Maintain continuity 
of services or 
preserve user 
communications 
Reduce DR, 
DL, DI, IR, 
IL 
Minimize (BER, 
BLER, CCI, 
NL,ND, NJ, LP, 
DP, CP, DuP, PJ, 
TPC, TPT, ECR, 
CB, CD, HOB, 
HOL) 
Maximize (RSS, 
SNR, SNIR, SIR, 
CIR, NBW, NT, 
NMTU, DTR, BL, 
ETSLH) 
Autonomy 
Preserve handoff 
operation 
independent of 
users 
Reduce 
OUIR 
Maintain (IL < 
app.Timeout) 
Security 
Maintain a constant 
level of security 
along the handoff 
Reduce 
SSO, DAR 
Minimize (AL, 
SO, HOL) 
Maintain (High 
Encryption) 
Correctness 
Keep user always 
connected to the 
best network with 
minimal handoffs 
Reduce 
HOR 
Increase 
DTIB 
Minimize (HOR) 
Maximize (DTIB) 
Adaptability 
Keep success of all 
handoff objectives 
across any scenario 
Multi-
objective 
optimal 
balance 
Increase 
SHOR 
Keep every 
desirable feature 
within its success 
range. Maximize 
(SHOR) 
TABLE IV.  
OTHER DESIRED PROPERTIES OF COGNITIVE HANDOFFS 
Desired 
Handoff 
Features 
   Qualitative                            Quantitative 
Purposes 
Objectives 
Goals 
Necessary 
Prevent 
unnecessary 
handoffs 
Start HO only if it 
is imperative or 
opportunist 
Maint. HOR = 
IHOR + OHOR 
Imperative if 
(UFcurr<Thinf) 
Opportunist if 
(UFcurr>Thsup) 
UFtarget is SuffB 
& ConB 
Selective 
Avoid 
selecting the 
wrong target 
Verify target is 
consistently better 
(ConB) and 
sufficiently better 
(SuffB) 
SuffB: UFtarget > 
(UFcurr + ∆) 
ConB: SuffB is 
maintained for SP 
time 
Efficient 
Operate 
quickly and 
well-organized 
to decide how 
to perform the 
handoff (HO) 
Select the best 
method, protocol, 
or strategy 
according to the 
HOType, AppType, 
and Mobility state. 
Reduce DLat, 
ExLat, EvLat 
Define HO 
policies or 
conditions for 
choosing MIP, 
SIP, MAHO, 
NAHO, or other 
protocols 
Beneficial 
Augment 
benefits to 
applications, 
users, and 
terminals after 
handoff 
Have a better UF 
after HO or a 
maximum 
improvement rate 
(UFnew/UFold) 
ImpR >> 1 
Maximize 
(AppImpR, 
UsrImpR, 
TermImpR) 
Timely 
Initiate a HO 
not tardy and 
not 
prematurely 
Reduce THOR and 
PHOR 
Maintain (DLat 
within its tolerance 
range) 

335
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
These tables represent a relevant preliminary result of 
the applicability of cognitive handoff methodology. On one 
hand, they help to reduce the ambiguity and confusion on 
the usability of similar handoff features because every 
desirable handoff feature is defined in qualitative terms 
(purpose) and quantitative terms (objectives and goals). On 
the other hand, they help to correlate context data with 
desirable features. For instance, from Table III, we observe 
that RSS is correlated with seamlessness, IL with autonomy, 
AL with security, etc. This correlation is intended to select 
the context data that is needed to support every handoff 
purpose. 
 
B. 
Taxonomy of Handoff Mobility Scenarios  
A second significant result obtained from the proposed 
model-driven methodology is a new taxonomy of handoff 
mobility scenarios derived from combining all the possible 
transition elements involved in handoffs; i.e., channels, 
cells, networks, providers, and terminals. This taxonomy 
depicts all different kinds of handoffs that are possible in 
real networks. 
 
Nowadays, 
no 
handoff 
solution 
exists, 
which 
comprehensively addresses the entire scale of heterogeneity. 
Multidimensional heterogeneity is the reason for the large 
number of handoff scenarios. If we define a handoff 
scenario as an array (d1, d2 …, dn) where di is an instance of 
Di the ith dimension of heterogeneity and there are |Di| 
different ways to instantiate the ith dimension, then by the 
multiplication principle there will be |D1|×|D2|×…×|Dn| 
possible handoff scenarios. However, for the user mobility 
dimension, the array (location, velocity, direction) may have 
distinct values at any instant along the path with infinite 
paths crossing the network; therefore, the number of 
possible mobility scenarios is infinite. Despite of such 
infinite scenarios, it is important to make a classification of 
handoffs according to the elements involved during the 
transition. 
 
The complexity and treatment for a handoff depend on 
the type of transition that is occurring. A handoff will 
require of services from distinct OSI model layers 
depending on the elements involved in the transition. For 
example, a handoff between channels of the same cell is a 
layer 1 handoff; a handoff between cells (base stations) is a 
layer 2 handoff, it is homogeneous if cells use the same 
wireless technology, otherwise is heterogeneous; a handoff 
between IP networks is a layer 3 handoff; a handoff from 
one provider to another or between user terminals will 
demand the services of layers 4-7.  
 
Fig. 5 depicts the hierarchical structure of a mobile 
Internet in a four-layer design (core, distribution, access, 
and mobile). We will use this figure to explain a handoff 
hierarchy that involves channels, cells, networks, providers, 
and terminals. 
 
The mobile Internet is divided into independent 
administrative units called Autonomous Systems (AS). An 
AS is a network administrated by a single organization or 
person. The Internet is a network of autonomous systems.  
 
Fig. 5 presents two autonomous systems called ISP1 and 
ISP2 for two distinct service providers. Every ISP uses a 
very high-speed core network where main servers are 
located. Providers divide their distribution networks, 
physically and logically, into a number of IP networks, 
subnets, or VLANs (Virtual LANs), where the types of 
services and users are separated. Each IP Net includes a 
group of base stations (BS) or access points with the same 
or different wireless access technology. Base stations get 
distributed across a geographic area to offer mobile 
communication services. Each base station controls a cell 
that may have a group of channels to distribute among the 
associated terminals or a single channel that is shared 
among several associated terminals.  
 
In Fig. 5, BS2 illustrates a layer 1 handoff when the 
mobile terminal (MT) changes its connection between 
channels ch1 and ch2 without changing of BS, IP Net, ISP, 
or MT. A layer 2 handoff is illustrated between BS1-BS2, 
BS3-BS4, BS5-BS6, and BS7-BS8. Note that layer 2 
handoff changes from one channel to another and from one 
base station to another, but keeps the same IP Net, ISP, and 
MT; however, if the cells involved are heterogeneous, then 
the handoff is vertical, otherwise is horizontal. A layer 3 
handoff is depicted in BS2-BS3 and BS6-BS7. Note that 
layer 3 handoff changes from one channel to another, from 
one cell to another, and from one IP network to another, but 
preserves the same provider and the same terminal; the layer 
3 handoff may be heterogeneous, like in BS2-BS3, or 
homogeneous, like in BS6-BS7. We represent a layer 4-7 
handoff, 
in 
BS4-BS5, 
when 
MT 
changes 
its 
communications from on channel to another, from one cell 
to another, from one IP Net to another, and from one ISP to 
another, but the user keeps the same terminal. 
 
The encryption schemes and data representation formats 
change from one provider to another, thus higher layer 
services are required. Inside the cell for BS5 we depict a 
handoff between terminals where the user transfers the 
whole session (current state of running applications) from 
terminal MT-A to terminal MT-B. Handoffs between 
terminals can be done for terminals within the same cell or 
different cells, within the same IP network or different IP 
networks, within the same provider or different providers. 
The terminal handoff depicted in BS5 keeps the same cell, 
same IP Net, and same ISP. 
 

336
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.  
Hierarchy of handoff mobility scenarios. Different 
overlay sizes for macro, micro, pico, and femto cells. 
 
Fig. 6 presents a process diagram that generates the 
complete taxonomy of handoffs by following the different 
paths from the upper node to the lower nodes. 
 Every handoff type in this taxonomy should be 
complemented or further classified according to many other 
criteria by using the handoff classification tree of Nasser et 
al in [44]. 
C. 
Cognitive Handoff State-Based Model 
By applying the second step of the model-driven 
methodology, design a subsystem structure, we created a 
cognitive 
handoff 
conceptual 
model 
and 
its 
first 
decomposition model both illustrated and discussed in 
Section III. Following the reductionist approach, we now 
focus on a major component of the handoff system, the 
cognitive handoff control system. At this stage, we designed 
a state-based model whose purpose is to understand the 
general behavior that should have the handoff control 
system. Thus, this model represents our third main result 
obtained from following the methodology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Generation process for handoff taxonomy. There are 15 types of 
feasible handoffs that can be implemented in real wireless overlay 
networks. The 1Fh is not a handoff. 
 
Fig. 7 shows a five-state diagram modeling a general 
control handoff process. The states are: (1) Disconnection, 
(2) Initiation, (3) Preparation, (4) Execution, and (5) 
Evaluation. This model describes a generic control handoff 
system coordinating the stages before, during, and after the 
handoff. 
 
We describe each state briefly: 
 
1) Disconnection: is the initial state and one of the two 
final states. Here, the terminal is disconnected but 
discovering available networks. The process will stay here 
while there are no available networks. 
 
2) Initiation: in this state the terminal is connected to 
the best available network and communications flow 
normally. This is another final state. The process stays here 
while there are no reasons (imperative or opportunistic [45]) 
to prepare for a handoff. If current connection breaks and no 
other network is available, then the process goes back to the 
disconnection state. 
 
3) Preparation: as soon as a better network appears, the 
process changes to the preparation state. Here is where 
properly the handoff begins. This state decides why, where, 
how, who, and when to trigger the handoff. The handoff in 
progress can be rolled back to initiation if current link 
becomes again the best one. 
 
4) Execution: once a control entity decides to trigger a 
handoff, there is no way to rollback; the handoff will be 
performed. This state knows the current and destination 
networks, the active application to be affected, and the 
strategy or method to use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  
A handoff control model. This state diagram shows a reactive 
and deterministic behavior of cognitive handoffs. 
 

337
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
5) Evaluation: once the link switch is made, the control 
entity enters the evaluation state. This state recombines the 
measures for every objective function taken before and 
during the handoff, with new samples taken after the 
handoff to determine its successfulness. The evaluation 
latency is adjusted to a stabilization period [46].text edit has 
been completed, the paper is ready for the template. 
Duplicate the template file by using the Save As command, 
and use the naming convention prescribed by your 
conference for the name of your paper. In this newly created 
file, highlight all of the contents and import your prepared 
text file. You are now ready to style your paper.  
VII. DISCUSSION 
In this research, we have shown a new methodology to 
systematically develop cognitive handoffs, which are 
expected to be in operation in the mobility scenarios of the 
future Internet. Such methodology is based on a sound 
theoretical framework including: methods for analyzing 
complex systems, the model-based systems engineering, the 
functional decomposition approach, and the scientific 
problem-solving theory. There are five stages in the 
proposed methodology: 1) state the problem, 2) design a 
model-based framework, 3) execute the models, 4) 
implement a prototype, and 5) deploy the solution. Thus, we 
have presented three main results obtained from applying the 
first two stages of the methodology: i) a cascade relationship 
of desired features, purposes, objectives, goals, and context 
data; ii) a taxonomy of handoff mobility scenarios; and iii) a 
generic state-based model for a cognitive handoff control 
system. 
 
 Furthermore, there are some other issues that require 
detailed discussion: (a) the complexity of a cognitive handoff 
system, (b) the evaluation of cognitive handoff models, and 
(c) the implementation of cognitive handoffs. 
A. 
Cognitive Handoff  Complexity 
In Section III we showed two main properties of complex 
systems that are also present in cognitive handoffs: the 
hierarchic structure of systems and the property of 
emergence. Now, in this section we provide other reasons of 
why cognitive handoffs are complex software systems: (1) 
Cognitive handoffs exhibit a rich set of behaviors: reactive, 
proactive, deterministic, non-deterministic, context-aware, 
self-aware, etc.; behavior is determined by the particular 
desirable features associated to handoffs. (2) Cognitive 
handoffs can be stated as multi-objective optimization 
problems. (3) Cognitive handoffs are driven by events in the 
physical world; e.g., the user mobility, the user preferences, 
the provider services, the coverage areas, etc. (4) Cognitive 
handoffs maintain the integrity of hundreds or thousands of 
records of information while allowing concurrent updates 
and queries. (5) Context information is extensive, 
heterogeneous, dynamic, and distributed. (6) Cognitive 
handoffs control real-world entities, such as the switching of 
data flows through a large set of available networks, 
providers, and terminals. (7) Handoff management has a 
long-life span; handoffs will exist in all future wireless 
networks. (8) Handoff management is a key issue for 
wireless industry and standardization bodies. Grady Booch 
in [46] provides further discussion on the attributes of 
complex software systems. 
B. 
Evaluation of Cognitive Handoff Methodology and 
Models 
Now, as a result of applying our proposed methodology, 
one gets a set of models that are different in purpose 
(intentions), usability (applicability), notation (language), 
and abstraction (hierarchy). 
 Methodology and each model must be evaluated, either 
by quantitative evaluation, which comprises the definition 
of criteria and metrics intended to measure one specific 
property  or,  conversely by a qualitative evaluation, which 
is related to credibility that comes from the way in, which 
the cognitive maps are built and the clarity it represents the 
opinion’s of most experts [48]. 
In relation to a qualitative evaluation of the 
methodology, one requires to think on the stages proposed 
by the development process, the kind of activities to 
accomplish in each stage, the strength of its theoretical 
basis, the kind of lifecycle in the development process, etc. 
Meanwhile, corresponding quantitative evaluation, metrics 
should be applied to all asociated parametres in the stages of 
the process. 
 
With respect to evaluate models, we made a clear 
distinction in Section II.C between verification and 
validation. The verification tests if the model satisfies its 
purpose, whilst  validation tests if the model outcomes are 
representations of reality. During the development process 
of a new system, special purpose models are built to support 
the understanding that goes on during the development and 
no hard data emerge from such models, thus, they can only 
be verified, but not validated.  
 
It is worth to notice that in this paper, we deal with a 
specific kind of model belonging to those known as soft 
models [48]. Soft models are intended to understand rather 
than to predict and therefore verification is the way to 
qualitatively evaluate such models. Specifically, the 
theoretical framework in Section IIB has solid and proven 
bases. 
C. 
Cognitive Handoff Implementation 
We envision the implementation of cognitive handoffs as 
a network of distributed agents cooperating and competing to 
take any type of handoff to success. We distinguish between 
agents for controlling the handoff process (HCEs) and agents 
for managing the handoff context data (CMAs). The CMAs 
are responsible for recollecting the context data and updating 
the handoff information base at the HCEs. CMAs are located 
in user terminals and distributed in different layers of the 
network infrastructure. HCEs are located also in every user 
terminal and at the network access layer; HCEs perform a 
handoff control process like the one depicted in Fig. 3. Thus, 
let us develop the state-based model as follows. 
 

338
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A dynamic ordered list of available networks (ANL) is 
organized from best to worst, according to the value of 
desirability calculated for every network. The desirability 
metric is a utility function combining a broad set of network 
selection criteria. The best network is the one with highest 
desirability. The value of desirability for the nth network, 
named 
n ( )
D V
, may have a geometric or stochastic 
distribution depending on the dynamic nature of context 
variables used as selection criteria, and arranged in a criteria 
vector 


1
, 2
,...,
m
v v
v
V 
. We use Equation (1) to represent a 
general mathematical model for the desirability function: 
 








( )
log
log
n
i
i
j
j
D
k
w
v
k
w
v








V
 (3) 
 
The set of decision variables 

1
, 2
,..,
m
v v
v
 fetched for the 
nth available network is partitioned in two subsets: 
iV   and 
j
V  ; where 
iV   is the set of criteria that contribute to the 
desirability (e.g., NBW and NT) and 
j
V   is the set of 
variables that contribute to the undesirability (e.g., NL and 
ND). 
iw  and 
j
w  are weights corresponding to each variable 
such that 

lw  0,1
, 
 lw 1
 and k .is a scaling factor so 
that small changes in the context variables reflect big 
changes in 
n ( )
D V . 
 
For geometric distributions, a proactive handoff strategy 
may anticipate handoff decisions and for stochastic 
distributions a reactive handoff strategy with thresholds, 
hysteresis 
margins, 
and 
dwell-timers 
may 
prevent 
unnecessary 
handoffs. 
The 
control 
handoff 
process 
illustrated in Fig. 3 shows a reactive and deterministic 
procedure; reactive, because the process starts the 
preparation for a handoff until another network with higher 
desirability is present and, deterministic, because it is always 
possible to determine the current state of the process within 
one of five states. 
 
Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 depict geometric distributions of 
desirability with different handoff strategies. Fig. 8 shows a 
proactive strategy where the handoff preparation starts 
before the target network improves the current connection. 
Fig. 9 shows a reactive strategy where handoff preparation 
starts after the target network has improved the current 
connection. 
 
The darken line over the desirability functions illustrate 
the current connection. The performance parameters PREP, 
EXEC, EVAL, and VHO depict the latencies for the 
different stages: preparation, execution, and evaluation. 
Configuration parameters include ∆ (hysteresis margin), 
desirability threshold (Thsup, Thinf), and dwell-timer (SP). 
Relative Desirability measures are (∆Rs), which are equal to 
|Dcurr  Dbest|. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  A proactive handoff strategy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  A reactive handoff strategy. 
 
The available network list (ANL) is a data structure 
located at the HCEs, but continuously updated by the CMAs. 
When the ANL is empty, the terminal goes to the 
disconnection state (State 1) and stays there while such list is 
empty. CMAs are continuously discovering new networks 
and ordering the list from the highest desirable networks to 
the lowest desired networks. 
 
The change from disconnection state to initiation state 
(State 2) occurs as soon as new networks are available. The 
HCE selects the best available network from the list and 
connects the terminal to it. The State 2 is the Always Best 
Connected state because the terminal will stay connected to 
the best network as long as no other available network 
improves the current connection. 
 
The change from initiation to preparation (State 3) occurs 
when a new network is improving or has improved the 
current network. Handoff decisions, in State 3, start by 
identifying a reason to begin the preparation for a handoff 
(why). Next, selecting the target network (where). Then, 
deciding what strategy, method, or protocol to choose (how). 
Then, deciding what HCE will be responsible to trigger the 
handoff (who), and finally, deciding the best moment to 
trigger the handoff (when). The chosen handoff strategy, 

339
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
method, or protocol depends on the current handoff scenario 
(as those depicted in Fig. 5) and the type of handoff in 
progress (as those illustrated in Fig. 6). 
 
The decision to trigger a handoff in one terminal changes 
the control process from preparation to execution (State 4). 
The trigger handoff decision activates a procedure to change 
the data flows of an application from one access network to 
another, within specific handoff and time constraints. The 
switching mechanism takes a time EXEC to complete. 
 
Once the switching process is completed, the HCE enters 
to the evaluation state (State 5). This is an important stage of 
feedback to the handoff control process. At this stage, the 
HCE has a constrained period of time to decide to accept or 
reject the recently executed handoff. One condition for 
handoff success occurs if the new current connection is the 
best available connection, but others include measuring the 
objective functions, associated to every handoff purpose, and 
if all these measures are within a boundary region of 
acceptable quality, then the cognitive handoff is successful, 
otherwise it is defective and outliers should be corrected. 
 
VIII. MODEL RESULTS  
So far we have described a challenging handoff 
optimization problem and we have created a series of 
models to study the problem. Moreover, we proposed both: 
a computational model that offers a heuristic solution to the 
problem and a methodology to implement cognitive 
handoffs. Therefore, now we are interested in a simulation 
instrument that can help us to validate the behavior of a 
given specific handoff algorithm over a variety of handoff 
scenarios based on time, space, or both and measure 
particular performance quantities. To this end, we created a 
Relative Desirability Handoff Algorithm with hysteresis, 
dwell-timers, and two thresholds in order to make a terminal 
stay most of the time on the best network, while it performs 
the fewer number of handoffs on most handoff scenarios.  
 
Fig. 10 shows an example that considers our particular 
cognitive handoff algorithm and a user defined valid 
handoff scenario. The handoff scenario consists of two 
networks, one that changes abruptly and rapidly and another 
that changes smoothly and slowly. Lower and upper 
thresholds are defined within the visual area, 
1
L    and 
U  4
, separating the graphics into three handoff regions.  
 
The bottom thick line depicts the current network passing 
through 
different 
handoff 
states: 
initiation 
(black), 
preparation (blue), evaluation (pink), disconnection and 
execution (red). 
 
 
Figure 10.  Visual outputs of handoff simulator with additional visual aids  
 
Each test in the virtual .instrument displays graphically 
the behavior of the handoff algorithm and yields handoff 
performance data which, are collected in a structured file. 
The handoff collected data include handoff performance 
measures and the handoff scenario. 
 
We design a nondeterministic experiment for collecting 
representative samples of input handoff scenarios which, 
will be used to test our proposed algorithm. The algorithm 
performs a cognitive handoff from the current network to 
the best candidate network in order to stay in the best 
available connection most of the time; i.e., increase DTiB. 
Simultaneously, this algorithm tries to perform the fewer 
number of handoffs because each handoff entails some 
overload to communications; i.e., decrease nEHO. However, 
these tasks are in conflict, they cannot be improved 
simultaneously. As a result, this algorithm makes a balance 
between increasing DTiB and decreasing nEHO. The way of 
doing this balance is by delaying the execution of a handoff 
until it becomes really necessary, i.e., until the candidate 
network becomes sufficiently and consistently better.  
 
This algorithm obtains three performance measures (rTiB, 
rEHO, rBHO) which, are associated to the particular 
handoff scenario under analysis. Values for rTiB  50% or 
rEHO  50% are considered good or acceptable results. 
 
In this experiment, we ask three users to define at their 
own will several statistically valid scenarios User “A” made 
32 trials, user “B” 84, and user “C” 133, which, gives a total 
sample size of 249 tested scenarios. 
 

340
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Since for each input scenario, the instrument records and 
measures three handoff performance parameters: rTiB, 
rEHO, and rBHO, then the space of handoff results will be 
composed of data obtained from each test. By observing the 
distribution of sample data within the space of results, we 
may compute the degree of achievement of each 
performance goal. 
 
Fig. 11 shows a scatter diagram of 133 random sample 
points obtained by user “C”. The graphic presents 17 
samples in the space for very good results and very good 
balance which, represent a percentage of 12.78%. It includes 
95 (17+78) samples in the space for good results and good 
balance, which represent the 71.43% of the sample size; 
and, 121 (17+78+26) samples in the space for good results 
which, represent a hit rate of 90.98%. The diagram also 
illustrates 12 sample points located in the space for bad 
results, representing a 9.02%. The random experiment of 
133 samples meets all the percentage goals: for good results 
(90.98% > 90%), for good results and good balance 
(71.43% > 50%), and for very good results and very good 
balance (12.78% > 10%). 
 
Table V presents a summarization of results taken from 
the testing experiment of the handoff instrument. This table 
compares the percentages of sample points falling in each 
region of handoff results with the different random samples 
obtained from the experiments. It can be seen that the hit 
rates in all testing cases meet the handoff performance 
goals. 
 
The handoff simulation instrument produced, in average, 
a rate of “good” results above 90% or a rate of “bad” results 
below 10%, a rate of “good” results and “good” balance 
above 50%, and a rate of “very good” results and “very 
good” balance above 10%. 
 
 
Figure 11.    Scatter diagram for rTiB vs. rEHO 133 observations made by 
user “C”. 
 
TABLE V  SUMMARY OF TEST RESULTS USING THE HANDOFF INSTRUMENT 
 
   Scenarios 
 
Results 
user A 
32 
user B 
84 
user C 
133 
All 
users 
249 
Perfor-
mance 
Goals 
Very good 
results & 
very good 
balance 
34.48% 
14.29% 
12.78% 
16.06% 
> 10% 
Good results 
& good 
balance 
87.5% 
54.76% 
71.43% 
71.43% 
> 50% 
Good results 
90.63% 
92.86% 
90.98% 
91.57% 
> 90% 
Bad results 
9.37% 
7.14% 
9.02% 
8.43% 
< 10% 
 
 
Therefore, all these results provide evidence that support 
the correctness of our proposed algorithm based on our 
cognitive handoff model and methodology as well the 
usefulness of the taxonomy to properly define scenarios. 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Handoffs are an integral component of any mobile-
wireless network from past, present, and future. Handoffs 
are transitions that change the data flows from one entity to 
another, where these entities may be radio channels, base 
stations, IP networks, service providers, and user terminals. 
The handoff process should exhibit several desirable 
features beyond seamlessness and should consider more 
context information beyond the signal strength. This is a 
common requirement to face the handoff scenarios of the 
future Internet. 
 
The existing handoff schemes are not able to achieve a 
variety of attractive features and managing arbitrary 
amounts of context information. Therefore, we proposed a 
conceptual model to create handoffs of this kind. We 
characterized a cognitive handoff to be multipurpose, multi-
criteria, context-aware, self-aware, and policy-based. 
 
We claimed that our cognitive handoff model is holistic 
because it considers all the transition entities that may be 
involved in handoffs, all the external and internal sources of 
context, and considers many significant desirable features. 
 
Using a functional decomposition approach, we divided 
the functional behavior of a cognitive handoff into six 
general modules: control algorithm, network discovery, 
handoff decisions, handoff execution, handoff evaluation, 
and context management. Each module has assigned a 
purpose to every feature and decomposed each purpose into 
objectives and goals. We applied the cognitive handoff 
model to define its performance parameters and significant 
tradeoffs between conflicting objectives. 
 

341
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
We proposed a new model-driven methodology for 
developing cognitive handoffs. We applied the proposed 
methodology and obtained a clear relationship between 
handoff purposes and handoff context information, a new 
taxonomy of handoff scenarios, and an original state-based 
model of a generic control handoff process. 
 
We continue developing and integrating the models 
generated by the cognitive handoff methodology. A future 
work is to organize such models in a comprehensive 
framework of models representing the functional issues for 
the whole cognitive handoff process. Further work is needed 
to study the availability, locality, dynamicity, structure, and 
complexity of variables, metrics, polices, and constraints 
involved in cognitive handoffs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
F.A. González-Horta is a PhD candidate at INAOE 
Puebla, Mexico, and thanks the financial support received 
from CONACYT Mexico through the doctoral scholarship 
58024. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. A. González-Horta, R.A. Enríquez-Caldera, J. M. 
Ramírez-Cortés, J. Martínez-Carballido and E. Buenfil-
Alpuche, “Towards a cognitive handoff for the future 
Internet: Model-driven methodology and taxonomy of 
scenarios” 2nd International Conference on Advanced 
Cognitive Technologies and Applications, COGNITIVE 
2010, Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 2010. 
[2] 
F. A. González-Horta, R. A. Enríquez-Caldera, J. M. 
Ramírez-Cortés, J. Martínez-Carballido, and E. Buenfil-
Alpuche, “Towards a cognitive handoff for the future 
Internet: a holistic vision,” 2nd International Conference on 
Advanced 
Cognitive 
Technologies 
and 
Applications, 
COGNITIVE 2010, Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 2010 
[3] 
M. Satyanarayanan, M. A. Kozuch, C. J. Helfrich, and D. R. 
O’Hallaron, “Towards seamless mobility on pervasive 
hardware” Pervasive and Mobile Computing 1, Elsevier, pp. 
157-189, 2005.  
[4] 
A. Singhrova and N. Prakash, “Adaptive Vertical Handoff 
Decision Algorithm for Wireless Heterogeneous Networks” 
11th IEEE Intl. Conf. on High Performance Computing and 
Communications, pp. 476-481, 2009. 
[5] 
J. M. Kang, H. T. Ju, and J. W. K. Hong, “Towards 
Autonomic Handover Decisions Management in 4G 
Networks” A. Helmy et al. (Eds.): MMNS 2006, LNCS 
4267, IFIP, pp. 145-157, 2006. 
[6] 
K. Sethom, H. Afifi, and G. Pujolle, “Secure and Seamless 
Mobility Support in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks” 
Proc. IEEE Globecom, pp. 3403-3407, 2005. 
[7] 
K.D. Wong and D.C. Cox, “A Pattern Recognition System 
for Handoff Algorithms” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications 18 (7), pp. 1301-1312, July 2000. 
 
[8] 
N. D. Tripathi, “Generic adaptive handoff algorithms using 
fuzzy logic and neural networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, August 
21, 1997. 
[9] 
A. Altaf, F. Iqbal, and M. Y. Javed, “S3H: A secure, 
seamless and soft handover between WiMAX and 3G 
networks,” Intl. Conf. on Convergence and Hybrid 
Information Technology, pp. 530-534, 2008. 
[10] L. R. Cardenas, M. Boutabia, and H. Afifi, “An 
infrastructure-based 
approach 
for 
fast 
and 
seamless 
handover,” The Third International Conference on Digital 
Telecommunications, pp. 105-109, 2008. 
[11] A. Singhrova and N. Prakash, “Adaptive vertical handoff  
decision algorithm for wireless heterogeneous networks,” 
11th IEEE Intl. Conf. on High Performance Computing and 
Communications, pp. 476-481, 2009. 
 
[12] N. D. Tripathi, “Generic Adaptive Handoff Algorithms 
Using Fuzzy Logic and Neural Networks” Ph.D. dissertation, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, August 
21, 1997. 
[13] N. Nasser, A. Hasswa, and H. Hassanein, “Handoffs in 
Fourth 
Generation 
Heterogeneous 
Networks” 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, pp. 96-103, October 2006. 
[14] M. Ylianttila, “Vertical Handoff and Mobility – System 
Architecture and Transition Analysis” Ph.D. dissertation, 
Faculty of Technology, Dept. of Electrical and Information 
Engineering, University of Oulu, Finland, May 6, 2005. 
[15] K. Pahlavan, P. Krishnamurthy, A. Hatami, M. Ylianttila, J. 
P. Makela, R. Pichna,  and J. Vallström, “Handoff in Hybrid 
Mobile Data Networks” IEEE Personal Communications, 
pp. 34-47, April 2000. 
[16] J. W. So, “Vertical Handoff in Integrated CDMA and 
WLAN Systems” International Journal of Electronics and 
Communications (AEÜ) 62, Elsevier, pp. 478-482, 2008. 
[17] Z. Zhang and A. Boukerche, “A Novel Mobility 
Management Scheme for IEEE 802.11-based Wireless Mesh 
Networks” Intl. Conf. on Parallel Processing, pp. 73-78, 
2008. 
[18] F. Siddiqui and S. Zeadally, “Mobility Management across 
Hybrid Wireless Networks: Trends and Challenges” 
Computer Communications 29, Elsevier, pp. 1363-1385, 
2006. 
[19] A. Hasswa, N. Nasser, and H. Hassanein, “Generic Vertical 
Handoff Decision Function for Heterogeneous Wireless 
Networks” IEEE, 2005. 
[20] S. R. Tuladhar, C. E. Caicedo, and J. B. D. Joshi, “Inter-
Domain 
Authentication 
for 
Seamless 
Roaming 
in 
Heterogeneous Wireless Networks” IEEE Computer Society, 
pp. 249-255, 2008. 
[21] W. T. Chen, J. C. Liu, and H. K. Huang, “An Adaptive 
Scheme for Vertical Handoff in Wireless Overlay Networks” 
Proc. 10th Intl. Conf. on Parallel and Distribution Systems, 
2004. 
[22] A. Altaf, F. Iqbal, and M. Y. Javed, “S3H: A Secure, 
Seamless and Soft Handover between WiMAX and 3G 
Networks” Intl. Conf. on Convergence and Hybrid 
Information Technology, pp. 530-534, 2008. 
[23] C. Prehofer, N. Nafisi, and Q. Wei, “A framework for 
context-aware handover decisions,” The 14th IEEE 2003 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communication Proceedings, PIMRC 2003, pp. 2794-
2798, vol. 3, 7-10 Sept. 2003. 
[24] P. Pawar, B. J. van Beijnum, M. van Sinderen, A. Aggarwal, 
P. Maret, and F. De Clercq, “Performance evaluation of the 
context-aware handover mechanism for the nomadic mobile 
services 
in 
remote 
patient 
monitoring,” 
Computer 

342
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Communications, Volume 31,  Issue 16, pp. 3831-3842, 
Elsevier, October 25,2008. 
[25] M. Emmelmann, S. Wiethoelter, A. Koepsel, C. Kappler, and 
A. Wolisz, “Moving toward seamless mobility: state of the 
art and emerging aspects in standardization bodies” Wireless 
Pers Commun 43, Springer, pp. 803-816, 2007. 
[26] B. A. Black, P. S. Dipiazza, B. A. Ferguson, D. R. Voltmer, 
F. C. Berry, “Introduction to Wireless Systems” Ch. 4, 
Prentice Hall, 1st Edition, pp. 125-140, May 2008. 
[27] J. L. Salina and P. Salina, “Next Generation Networks: 
Perspectives and Potentials” John Wiley & Sons, England, 
2007. 
[28] S. Mohanty and J. Xie, “Performance Analysis of a Novel 
Architecture to Integrate Heterogeneous Wireless Systems” 
Computer Networks 51, Elsevier, pp. 1095-1105, 2007. 
[29] P. Koch and R. Prasad, “The Universal Handset” IEEE 
Spectrum, vol. 6 num. 4 International, pp. 32-37, April 2009. 
[30] Q. H. Mahmoud (Edt), “Cognitive Networks: Towards Self-
Aware Networks” Foreword 2: S. Dixit, J. Wiley & Sons, 
2007. 
[31] E. Gustaffson and A. Jonsson, “Always Best Connected: 3G 
Mobile Network Technologies and Experiences” IEEE 
Wireless Communications, pp. 49-55, February 2003. 
[32] M. Pidd (Edt), “Systems Modelling: Theory and Practice,” 
John Wiley & Sons, England, pp. 1-42, 2004. 
[33] O. Maimon and L. Rokach, “Decomposition Methodology 
for Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: Theory and 
Applications” Series in Machine Perception Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 61, World Scientific Pub., London, 2005. 
[34] Q. Song and A. Jamalipour, “A Time-Adaptive Vertical 
Handoff Decision Scheme in Wireless Overlay Networks” 
17th Annual Intl. Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and 
Mobile Radio Commun, PIMRC’06, 2006. 
[35] J. Heer, M. Bostock, and V. Ogievetsky, “A Tour Through 
the Visualization Zoo” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, 
no. 6, pp. 59-67, June 2010. 
[36] J. Branke, K. Deb, K. Miettinen, and R. Slowinski (Eds.), 
“Multiobjective Optimization: Interactive and Evolutionary 
Approaches” Springer, Germany, 2008.  
[37] V. V. Raman, “Reductionism and holism: two sides of the 
perception of reality,” The Global Spiral, an e-publication of 
Metanexus Institute, published on July 15, 2005. URL: 
http://www.metanexus.net/magazine/tabid/68/id/9338/Defaul
t.aspx, retrieved on September 4, 2010. 
[38] H. P. Hoffman, C. Sibbald, and J. Chard, “Systems 
engineering: the foundation for success in complex systems 
development,” IBM Corporation (white paper), Software 
Group, December 2009, pp. 1-11. 
[39] D. M. Buede, The Engineering Design of Systems: Models 
and Methods, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, USA, 2009. 
[40] O. Maimon, and L. Rokach, Decomposition Methodology 
for Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: Theory and 
Applications, Series in Machine Perception Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 61, World Scientific Publishing Co., 
London, 2005. 
[41] D. Braha, and O. Maimon, “The design process: properties, 
paradigms, and structure,” IEEE Trans. On System, Man, 
and Cybernetics – Part A: Systems and Humans, 27(2), 
March 1997, pp. 146-166. 
[42] P. A. Fishwick (Ed.), Handbook of Dynamic System 
Modeling, Chapman & Hall /CRC, USA, 2007. 
[43] C. Baier and J.P. Katoen, Principles of Model Checking, The 
MIT Press, USA, 2008. 
[44] N. Nasser, A. Hasswa, and H. Hassanein, “Handoffs in 
fourth 
generation 
heterogeneous 
networks” 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, pp. 96-103, October 2006. 
[45] W. Zhang, J. Jaehnert, and K. Dolzer, “Design and 
evaluation of of a handover decision strategy for 4th 
generation mobile networks,” The 57th Semiannual Vehicular 
Technology Conference, VTC 2003, Jeju, Korea, 2003. 
[46] H. J. Wang, R. H. Katz, and J. Giese, “Policy-enabled 
handoffs across heterogeneous wireless networks,” WMCSA 
99, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 1999. 
[47] G. Booch, R. A. Maksimchuk, M. W. Engle, B. J. Young, J. 
Conallen, and K. A. Houston. Object-Oriented Analysis and 
Design with Applications, Third Edition, Addison-Wesley, 
Chap. 1, 2007. 
[48] M. Pidd (Ed.), Systems Modelling: Theory and Practice, 
John Wiley & Sons, England, pp. 1-42, 2004.  
 
 
 

