Exploiting Multimedia Frame Semantics and MAC-layer Enhancements for QoS 
Provisioning in IEEE 802.11e Congested Networks 
 
Anastasios Politis 
Dept. of Applied Informatics 
University of Macedonia 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
anpol@uom.gr 
 
Ioannis Mavridis  
Dept. of Applied Informatics 
University of Macedonia  
Thessaloniki, Greece 
mavridis@uom.gr 
 
Athanasios Manitsaris   
Dept. of Applied Informatics 
University of Macedonia  
Thessaloniki, Greece 
manits@uom.gr
 
Abstract—Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) supporting 
modern streaming multimedia applications constitute a very 
challenging and rapidly changing field of research. Towards 
implementing effective multimedia wireless networks, the 
IEEE has published the “state of the art” IEEE 802.11e 
standard, which introduced a QoS-aware MAC-layer along 
with a series of efficiency enhancements. However, it has been 
proven inadequate in handling multimedia traffic optimally in 
periods of congestion. For the efficient support of multimedia 
applications in high load situations, numerous mechanisms 
have emerged, most of them focusing on altering the static 
nature of resource allocation specified in IEEE 802.11e. 
Nevertheless, traffic characteristics must be taken into 
consideration in order to achieve the highest gains. In this 
paper, an application-aware MAC-layer mechanism is 
developed that exploits multimedia frame semantics and 
existing MAC-layer enhancements to adequately cope with 
high congestion situations in IEEE 802.11e infrastructure 
networks. The proposed algorithm makes use of existing 
acknowledgment policies and adaptive resource allocation 
techniques depending on multimedia frame significance. The 
effectiveness of the algorithm is proven by means of 
simulations, where its functionality is evaluated and compared 
with other existing schemes. 
Keywords- WLANs, Multimedia, IEEE 802.11e, QoS, MAC-layer 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) have been 
established as one of the preferred network technologies by 
the majority of electronic equipment users. At the same time, 
networked multimedia applications have penetrated the 
market with a tremendous success. Hence, the combination 
of multimedia applications and WLANs has been an 
extremely interesting research topic for the networking 
scientific community. The ultimate goal is to design WLANs 
in a way to support efficiently the incorporated multimedia 
traffic. 
In an attempt to address this challenge, the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has released a 
series of amendments, improving the functionality of the 
initial ΙΕΕΕ 802.11 WLAN standard [2]. The majority of 
these amendments focused on signal modulation techniques, 
in an attempt to provide high data rates at the physical (PHY) 
layer (IEEE 802.11a/b/g) [3], [4], [5]. However, it was soon 
discovered that MAC layer enhancements were also needed 
in order to efficiently utilize the available bandwidth. 
Furthermore, since multimedia applications demand certain 
and strict Quality of Service (QoS) levels, it is required that 
the IEEE 802.11 MAC layer is capable of traffic 
differentiation.  
To this direction, several new mechanisms demonstrated 
an increased efficiency in multimedia applications support in 
WLANs, by providing prioritized access to different traffic 
flows and/or reducing MAC layer overhead [6], [7], [8]. Yet, 
the final act to these research efforts for providing 
multimedia support in WLANs, was the standardization of 
the IEEE 802.11e amendment by the IEEE Standards 
Committee [9]. Most of the enhancements provided by this 
standard are also included in the recently released IEEE 
802.11n standard [10].  
IEEE 802.11e specified a QoS-aware MAC layer 
protocol capable of service differentiation together with a 
series of MAC layer enhancements. According to the 
specification, a new coordinating function is introduced, 
namely the Hybrid Coordination Function (HCF). Two 
access methods are defined under HCF: the Enhanced 
Distributed Channel Access (EDCA) and the HCF 
Controlled Channel Access (HCCA). EDCA provides 
service differentiation and thus prioritized access to the 
wireless medium while HCCA is an enhanced version of 
legacy PCF (Point Coordination Function) with improved 
QoS features. Unfortunately, both HCCA and PCF 
mechanisms are rarely implemented in wireless networking 
products [11]. Therefore, our main concern focuses on the 
EDCA distributed channel access method. 
Older and recent research studies revealed that EDCA 
functionality lacks adequate multimedia support in high load 
conditions in wireless infrastructure networks [1], [12]. This 
outcome is produced by a very common and critical issue 
present in these topologies, namely the downlink/uplink 
asymmetry problem. This phenomenon refers to the fact that, 
in general, downlink traffic (traffic destined to wireless 
stations) is, typically, considerably larger than the traffic 
destined to the wired network. In turn, the Access Point 
(called QAP in IEEE 802.11e terminology) becomes 
overcrowded and highly congested suffering from large 
queuing delays, buffer overflows and low throughput [1]. 
This has an immediate effect on QoS levels of the downlink 
multimedia flows. This phenomenon is mainly due to the 
static nature of resource allocation defined by the IEEE 
802.11e standard. 
176
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In order to alleviate this problem, numerous solutions 
exist in the scientific bibliography, focusing on altering the 
static assignment of network resources to multimedia flows 
at the IEEE 802.11e MAC layer. However, as also noted in 
[13], such a layered approach to the QoS issue in multimedia 
networks leads to a simple and independent implementation, 
often achieving a suboptimal multimedia performance. The 
solution is the use of cross-layer techniques in order to 
achieve the highest possible efficiency. Roughly speaking, 
cross-layer design refers to protocol design by actively 
exploiting the dependence between protocol layers to obtain 
performance gains [14]. 
In this paper, following the work presented in [1], we 
confront the QoS degradation issue in congested IEEE 
802.11e infrastructure networks by designing an application-
aware MAC-layer mechanism, which exploits application 
level information in order to select the appropriate handling 
of the multimedia traffic at the MAC layer. The proposed 
mechanism is centralized and placed at the most congested 
node in the network (QAP) and its effectiveness is proven by 
means of simulation. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 
II, 
a thorough overview of the EDCA and the 
acknowledgment policies defined in IEEE 802.11e is 
provided. In Section III, a performance comparison between 
the new acknowledgment schemes and the standard positive 
acknowledgment mechanism is given. This comparative 
study will aid the analysis and explanation of the proposed 
mechanism. Section IV identifies the primary reason for 
congestion in infrastructure WLANs. An overview of 
multimedia traffic characteristics and the quality metrics for 
voice and video applications is provided in Section V. 
Related work is outlined in Section VI, and our proposed 
semantic-aware MAC-layer mechanism is described in 
Section VII. Simulations results are discussed in Section 
VIII. The paper is concluded in Section IX with the final 
remarks. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF THE EDCA ACCESS METHOD 
The EDCA mechanism defined by IEEE 802.11e is a 
modified DCF scheme designed to provide differentiated and 
distributed channel access. The service differentiation is 
distinguished between 8 different User Priorities (UPs), from 
0 to 7, with 7 having the highest priority. Each frame from 
the higher layer arrives at MAC layer with a specific UP 
which is marked, afterwards, to its MAC header. An 802.11e 
STA (called QSTA), shall implement four Access Categories 
(ACs), from 0 to 3, with 3 having the highest priority. Hence 
a QSTA has four MAC queues, where each queue 
corresponds to an AC. Each AC is an enhanced variant of 
DCF and each frame is mapped to an AC according to its UP 
value as shown in Table I. The relative prioritization is 
described in the IEEE 802.1D specification [15]. 
The key feature of EDCA is that for each AC a different 
set of MAC parameters are assigned in order to achieve 
service differentiation. An AC uses AIFS[AC], CWmin[AC] 
and CWmax[AC] instead of DIFS, CWmin and CWmax defined 
by legacy DCF. AIFS is the new Arbitration Inter-Frame 
Space introduced by IEEE 802.11e and is given by: 
TABLE I.  
UP TO AC MAPPING 
UP 
802.1D Traffic Type 
(Acronym) 
AC  
(AC Number) 
IEEE 802.11e 
Designation 
1 
Background (BK) 
AC_BK (0) 
Background (BK) 
2 
Spare (-) 
AC_BK (0) 
Background (BK) 
0 
Best Effort (BE) 
AC_BE (1) 
Best Effort (BE) 
3 
Excellent Effort (EE) 
AC_BE (1) 
Best Effort (BE) 
4 
Controlled Load (CL) 
AC_VI (2) 
Video (VI) 
5 
Video (VI) 
AC_VI (2) 
Video (VI) 
6 
Voice (VO) 
AC_VO (3) 
Voice (VO) 
7 
Network Control (NC) 
AC_VO (3) 
Voice (VO) 
 
SIFS
slot
T
AIFSN[ AC ] T
AIFS[ AC]



 
(1) 
AIFSN[AC] is a positive integer. The lower the value of 
AIFS[AC] the greater the priority for the contenting AC. 
Moreover, the value of the backoff timer for each AC is 
chosen randomly with a uniform distribution in the range 
[0,CW[AC]]. This gives the flexibility to ACs with higher 
priority to select a smaller contention window. In the case of 
simultaneous expiration of the backoff timers of two or 
more ACs belonging to the same QSTA, a virtual collision 
handler is responsible to grand access to the AC with the 
highest priority.  
Another feature introduced by 802.11e is the concept of 
Transmission Opportunity (TXOP). This is defined as the 
interval of time in which a QSTA, after winning contention, 
has the right to initiate multiple frame transmissions, as long 
as the total transmission time does not exceed a limit called 
TXOP limit. This procedure is called Contention Free Burst 
(CFB) and is optional for a QSTA to utilize it. There is a set 
of default values specified by the IEEE 802.11e standard for 
the TXOP limit under the EDCA access mechanism. These 
values depend on the AC type and on the underlying 
physical layer and are depicted in Table II. The table reveals 
the prioritized access given on multimedia applications 
(video and voice) which use smaller values of AIFSN, 
CWmin and CWmax. Furthermore, the TXOP limit values 
provide multimedia applications with the CFB feature 
whereas background and best effort traffic are allowed to 
transmit single data frames before they re-enter the 
contention phase. 
TABLE II.  
EDCA RELATED DEFAULT PARAMETER VALUES 
AC 
CWmin 
CWmax 
AIFSN 
TXOP limit (μs) 
802.11 
802.11b 
802.11a
802.11g 
BK 
CWmin 
CWmax 
7 
0 
0 
BE 
CWmin 
CWmax 
3 
0 
0 
VI 
(CWmin+1)/2–1 
CWmin 
2 
6016 
3008 
VO 
(CWmin+1)/4–1 (CWmin+1)/2–1 
2 
3264 
1504 
 
By allowing multiple frame transmissions after winning 
a contention, CFB reduces the number of backoff periods 
177
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and the number of RTS/CTS frames exchanged, thus 
resulting in lower overhead. A CFB transmission chronicle 
is depicted in Fig. 1. 
DATA
ACK
DATA
ACK
DATA
ACK
TSIFS
TSIFS
TSIFS
TSIFS
TSIFS
Backoff & RTS/CTS 
Exchange
TXOP limit
time
 
Figure 1.  CFB timing structure. 
It is a straightforward conclusion that assigning large 
values to TXOP limit will allow higher throughput and 
lower delays to a specific AC. As Table II depicts, the 
default TXOP limit values are statically assigned. 
Nonetheless, the IEEE 802.11e standard permits dynamic 
allocation of TXOP limit values.  
Towards reducing the MAC layer overhead even further, 
IEEE 802.11e introduced two new acknowledgment policies 
besides the default DATA-ACK handshake. The standard 
acknowledgment policy has the disadvantage that a QSTA 
has to wait a significant amount of time before continuing 
with the transmission of the rest of its buffered frames. As 
depicted in Fig.1 each frame is required to be individually 
acknowledged before the QSTA may proceed with the next 
frame in its sequence. Hence, the actual subsequent data 
frame transmission commences not before the passing of 
2TSIFSTACK period of time. Accumulating all these waiting 
periods, the final amount of time dedicated to the exchange 
of control frames (ACK) may occupy a significant portion 
of the available TXOP limit assigned to the QSTA, 
depending on the ACK and data frame sizes as well as the 
SIFS period (which is PHY dependent). Suppose that a 
station has n data frames buffered and gained control of the 
channel. If their transmission times do not exceed the TXOP 
limit, then the total CFB transmission time can be expressed 
as follows: 


ACK
SIFS
n
i
DATA
std
CFB
nT
T
n
T
T
i





1
2
1
 
(2) 
In order for a QSTA to fully utilize the available TXOP 
limit, the Block Acknowledgment (BA) and the No 
Acknowledgment (NoACK) policies are defined under the 
IEEE 802.11e standard. These acknowledgment policies 
combined with the CFB feature may drastically improve 
channel utilization and MAC efficiency.  
A. Block Acknowledgment Policy 
The Block Acknowledgment scheme improves the MAC 
layer efficiency by aggregating multiple acknowledgments 
into a single frame. In this way, the control overhead 
imposed by the standard acknowledgment policy is reduced. 
The use of the BA mechanism is optional and is a subject of 
negotiation between the sender and receiver.  
After gaining control of the channel, the sender may 
request the usage of the BA policy by transmitting an 
ADDBA (Add Block Acknowledgment) request frame to 
the receiver, who must acknowledge its reception. The 
receiver may accept or reject the proposal by issuing an 
ADDBA response 
frame. After acknowledging the 
response, the sender may proceed with a different 
acknowledgment policy if a rejection was indicated. In the 
case of a successful agreement between the sender and 
receiver regarding the usage of the BA policy, the sender 
will proceed with the transmission of its buffered frames in 
a CFB manner, without violating the assigned TXOP limit. 
Upon 
reception, 
the 
receiver 
shall 
not 
produce 
acknowledgment frames, until the reception of a Block 
ACK request (BAR) frame indicating the ending of the 
frame 
burst 
and 
the 
request 
of 
an 
aggregated 
acknowledgment frame by the sender. Afterwards, the 
receiver initiates the transmission of a Block ACK frame 
(BA) destined to the sender, indicating which frames were 
received correctly. At this moment, the receiver has two 
options: initiate an immediate Block ACK or a delayed 
Block ACK. The former option is suitable for low latency 
applications, while the latter is used by applications that 
tolerate moderate latency. 
If the Block ACK frame indicates unacknowledged data 
frames, the sender shall retransmit the lost frames in this or 
a later TXOP. Otherwise, the BA mechanism is terminated 
from 
the 
sender 
with 
a 
DELBA 
(Delete 
Block 
Acknowledgment) frame which must be acknowledged by 
the receiver. Moreover, after a timeout of inactivity, the BA 
agreement may be torn down automatically.  
According to IEEE 802.11e, the use of the BA policy is 
permitted if the following conditions are satisfied: 
  A protective mechanism is used (such as HCCA or 
RTS/CTS) in order to reduce the possibility of other 
stations transmitting during the TXOP. If no 
protective mechanism is used, then the first frame of 
the burst should be acknowledged individually to 
help the other stations to update their Network 
Allocation Vectors accordingly. 
 
The sender may not transmit more frames than the 
receiver has indicated to be able to buffer.   
 
All frame transmissions are limited by the TXOP. 
However, the sender may split frames using this 
mechanism across several TXOPs.  
Assuming that, the receiver has successfully accepted 
the BA scheme, the Block ACK is immediate, the RTS/CTS 
protection mechanism is used and all frame exchanges are 
within the TXOP limit, then the timing of the BA procedure 
can be modeled as in Fig. 2.   
DATA
DATA
BAR
DATA
BA
TSIFS
TSIFS
TSIFS
TSIFS
Backoff & RTS/CTS 
Exchange
TXOP limit
time
DATA
TSIFS
 
Figure 2.  CFB timing structure with BA policy. 
If a station transmits n data frames using the BA 
mechanism, the total CFB time is given by: 
SIFS
n
i
DATA
BA
BAR
BA
CFB
T
n
T
T
T
T
i
)
(
1
1







 
(3) 
178
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The overhead of individually acknowledging each frame 
in the sequence is replaced by the BAR and BA frames 
exchange after concluding the data frames transmission. 
Furthermore, for a large number of data frames the SIFS 
periods are almost halved compared to the standard 
acknowledgment policy.  
B. No Acknowledgment Policy 
The concept of NoACK policy is fairly simple: for every 
data frame received, the receiver does not produce an 
acknowledgment packet, thus the overhead imposed by the 
acknowledgment frames is completely eliminated. The 
benefit of exploiting the NoACK policy on packet delay is 
straightforward. However, in this way the MAC-level 
recovery mechanism is suppressed and the reliability of the 
traffic is reduced due to the probability of lost frames from 
interference, collisions or time-varying channel conditions. 
To cope with that, the IEEE 802.11e standard proposes that 
a protective mechanism is used (such as HCCA or 
RTS/CTS) to reduce the probability of another QSTA 
transmitting during the TXOP. Similarly to the paradigm 
given in Fig. 2, the total CFB time consumed to transmit n 
data frames with the NoACK policy may be written as: 

 SIFS
n
i
DATA
NoACK
CFB
T
n
T
T
i
1
1




 
(4) 
Eq. 4 shows the great overhead cost reduction but at the 
expense of reduced reliability. Hence, the NoACK policy 
resembles a UDP-like behavior at the MAC layer. 
III. 
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF IEEE 802.11E 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT POLICIES 
In order to facilitate the description and analysis of the 
proposed mechanism in this paper, this section provides a 
simple comparative study of the Standard (StdACK), BA and 
NoACK 
acknowledgment 
policies. 
The 
efficiency 
improvement of the new acknowledgment schemes defined 
under IEEE 802.11e is calculated in terms of total CFB 
transmission time and compared to the CFB transmission 
time obtained when using the StdACK policy. 
More specifically, a comparison of total CFB times is 
provided containing different number of equally-sized data 
frames for various payloads, using Equations 2, 3 and 4. In 
order to accomplish that, we need to specify the values of 
TDATA, TACK, TSIFS, TBAR and TBA. TSIFS is a constant time 
period and its value depends on the underlying physical 
technology. Every data and control (ACK, BAR and BA) 
frame is charged with a physical and MAC overhead. The 
physical overhead, TPHY, is constant and comprised by a 
PLCP preamble and a PLCP header. The MAC overhead is 
frame type dependant and consists of the MAC header and 
the FCS field. Depending on the physical layer used, the 
physical overhead has different sizes. For example, in 
802.11b the overhead is 192 μs (when using the long 
preamble) while in 802.11g the overhead is reduced to 20 
μs. The MAC overhead for frames carrying data depends on 
whether the transmission is directed in the same Basic 
Service Set or in the Extended Service Set, to or from 
Access Points etc.  
The physical layer divides data from the MAC layer into 
a series of symbols for transmission. Each symbol encodes a 
certain number of bits, LSYM, depending on the transmission 
rate selected and then it is transmitted at a prescribed 
symbol rate, 1/TSYM. Hence generalizing, TDATA, TACK, TBAR 
and TBA may be derived from the following equation: 
SIGNAL
SYM
SYM
MPDU
PHY
T
T
L
L
T
T










8
 
(5) 
LMPDU is the size of the MAC Protocol Data Unit 
(MPDU) measured in bytes and is composed by the payload, 
p, (or MAC Service Data Unit – MSDU) and the MAC 
overhead (LMAC) and can be expressed as LMPDULMACp. 
TSIGNAL is an additional time extension for encoding 
purposes, applicable only to IEEE 802.11g PHYs. 
A. Assumptions 
In 
this 
comparative 
study 
the 
IEEE 
802.11g 
specification was assumed as the underlying physical layer. 
IEEE 802.11g specifies actually four physical layers defined 
as Extended Rate Physicals (ERP’s) [5]. These layers make 
use of the DSSS, OFDM or both modulation methods in 
order to provide IEEE 802.11a data rates in the 2.4 GHz 
band and backward compatibility with legacy IEEE 802.11b 
systems. For this study, the so called ERP-OFDM physical 
layer was assumed which is used when all stations in a BSS 
are IEEE 802.11g compliant. Table III summarizes the 
physical characteristics for the ERP-OFDM PHY, operating 
at 54Mbps. 
TABLE III.  
IEEE 802.11G PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
TPHY 
20 μs 
TSYM 
4 μs 
LSYM 
216 bits 
TSIFS 
10 μs 
TSIGNAL 
6 μs 
TABLE IV.  
MPDU SIZES FOR DATA AND CONTROL FRAMES 
Type of Frame 
LMPDU=LMAC+p 
No. of OFDM Symbols 
Data 
28+128 Bytes 
6 
28+512 Bytes 
20 
28+1024 Bytes 
40 
28+1500 Bytes 
57 
ACK 
14 Bytes 
1 
BAR 
24 Bytes 
1 
BA 
152 Bytes 
6 
 
Regarding the size of the LMPDU, Table IV summarizes 
the different sizes for data and control frames. Furthermore, 
the table reveals the number of OFDM symbols for each 
frame to be transmitted at the rate of 54 Mbps. LMAC for the 
data frame is always 28 Bytes, as long as the frame is 
directed to a station belonging at the same BSS [2]. Four 
179
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

values are assumed as payload size in data frames, namely 
128, 512, 1024 and 1500 Bytes. All LMPDU sizes for control 
frames are taken from [2] and [9].  
Furthermore, the following series of assumptions are 
made in order to simplify the comparative study: 
 
The channel is error-free, meaning that all frames 
are received correctly. 
 
There are no collisions present.  
 
Regarding the BA scheme, the immediate BA 
mechanism is used. 
 
No protective mechanism such as RTS/CTS, CTS-
to-self or HCCA is used. 
 
Packets are not fragmented.  
 
A CFB is comprised of equal-sized data frames. 
B. Results and Analysis 
The relative improvement of the total CFB transmission 
time was used as a measure for comparing the different 
acknowledgment policies and is defined as the improvement 
of CFB transmission time achieved by the BA and NoACK 
mechanisms relative to the CFB transmission time 
experienced by the usage of the StdACK policy. This metric 
was obtained from Equations 2, 3 and 4 which were verified 
via simulations with the OPNET simulation tool [16]. Fig. 3 
displays the relative improvement obtained by increasing 
the number of equally-sized frames, n, in CFB for different 
payload sizes, p. The solid lines are the values obtained by 
simulations. It must be noted that the default TXOP limit 
values during simulations were adjusted accordingly, in 
order to include the different number of frames in the CFB. 
A first comment on the displayed outcome may be the 
observed improvement reduction of both BA and NoACK 
schemes as payload size increases. This is an expectable 
finding since larger data frames exhibit large transmission 
delays and thus the control frames exchange in the StdACK 
policy occupies a smaller percentage of the total CFB 
transmission time, thus reducing its margin between the 
CFB times of BA and NoACK policies. 
Another observation from the depicted graphs is the 
negative improvement achieved by the BA policy on all four 
cases for n≤2. This is also an expected result since the BA 
mechanism uses a large-sized control frame (Block ACK 
frame) for data acknowledgment. For a small number of 
data frames this BA frame increases the total CFB 
transmission time of the BA policy.  
As an overall results conclusion, it can be stated that 
using the BA and NoACK policies for large frames does not 
provide significant performance improvement, 
while 
exploiting these mechanisms for applications with small and 
constant-sized data frames (such as VoIP applications) leads 
to a significant lessening of CFB transmission times. This 
reduction of CFB transmission times of an AC enables the 
queue to transmit more frames in the remaining portion of 
the TXOP limit or release the channel sooner for another 
competing AC to capture it, thus achieving greater intra and 
inter-AC efficiency.   
 
 
              (a) 
 
 
 (b) 
 
 
              (c) 
 
 
(d) 
Figure 3.  Relative Improvement of BA and NoACK policies for payload 
sizes (a) 128 Bytes, (b) 512 Bytes, (c) 1024 Bytes and (d) 1500 Bytes. 
IV. 
DOWNLINK/UPLINK ASYMMETRY 
One very common and critical issue in infrastructure 
WLANs is the downlink/uplink asymmetry. This refers to 
the fact that the downlink traffic (traffic transmitted from 
the Access Point to the QSTAs) is in most cases 
considerably larger than the uplink traffic (traffic 
transmitted from QSTAs to the Access Point). An AC in an 
Access Point (QAP) which serves all downlink traffic 
receives the same access priority with the AC in a QSTA 
which serves the uplink traffic. This leads to unfairness 
problem in which the QAP ACs suffer from large queuing 
delays, buffer overflows and low throughput [1], [12].    
Since QAP accumulates all downlink traffic, there must 
be a centralized mechanism to allocate dynamically the 
needed channel resources to ACs in the QAP. A way to 
allocate these resources is to adapt the TXOP limit of the 
ACs in the QAP depending on their queue size. This method 
has been proven to be extremely beneficial in terms of 
channel efficiency and application performance. However, 
also noted by [17], little work has been done in the literature 
regarding VBR video traffic (such as streaming video) 
which exhibits time varying characteristics. 
V. 
MULTIMEDIA TRAFFIC CHARACTERISTICS 
This 
section 
summarizes 
the 
multimedia 
traffic 
characteristics. We focus on VoIP and MPEG streaming 
video, since they exhibit an increased popularity on both 
real applications and network related studies. The most 
frequently used quality metrics of these applications are also 
described. 
A. VoIP 
The traditional voice encoder is the G.711, which uses 
Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) to generate 8 bits samples 
per 125 μs, and leads to a minimum bandwidth requirement 
of 64 Kbps for each traffic flow. New voice encoding 
180
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

schemes have been implemented in order to drastically 
reduce bandwidth reduction, but at the cost of additional 
coding delay. Popular techniques include the G.729A and 
G.723.1 codecs. G.729A [18] is one of the most commonly 
used codecs in VoIP applications, due to its lower 
bandwidth 
requirements 
(8 
Kbps) 
and 
acceptable 
complexity. Unless silence compression techniques are 
used, VoIP codecs typically produce constant bit rate 
streams with low frame sizes (≤160 Bytes). 
The voice applications requirements are stringent. Their 
demand for assured quality real-time communication 
restricts the maximum tolerable one-way delay to 100 – 150 
ms. Furthermore, the jitter imposed by the network must 
remain at low values (maximum 50 ms). These strict delay 
requirements lead to the need of QoS provision by the 
underlying network. 
The most popular performance metric of VoIP 
applications used in multimedia networking studies is the 
Mean Opinion Score (MOS) [19]. According to this method, 
the perception quality of a VoIP call is determined by a 
single numerical value from 1 to 5, with 1 representing the 
lowest and 5 the highest quality. Table V presents typical 
MOS values for implementations of G.711, G.729A, and 
G.723.1 codecs. 
TABLE V.  
MOS VALUES OF G.711, G.729A AND G.723.1 CODECS 
Codec 
Data Rate 
Frame Size 
MOS 
G.711 
64 Kbps 
160 Bytes 
4.3 
G.729A 
8 Kbps 
20 Bytes 
3.7 
G.723.1 
5.3 Kbps 
20 Bytes 
3.62 
  
From Table V, the existence of a trade-off between 
lowering the required data rate and the perceived quality 
becomes obvious. Data rate reduction requires higher 
complexity algorithms which, in turn, produce a lower 
quality outcome. 
B. Streaming Video 
The main principle of MPEG encoding is inter- and 
intraframe coding. It distinguishes between three frame 
types, namely I, P and B-frames. I-frames are completely 
intra-coded, P-frames are predicted from previous I or P-
frames, and B-frames depend on both previous I or P-frames 
and forward I or P-frames. Frames are arranged in so-called 
Group of Pictures (GoP). The sequence of frames from a 
given I-frame up to and including the frame preceding the 
next I-frame forms one GoP. A GoP pattern is determined by 
the total number of frames, N, comprising it and the number 
of B-frames, M, enclosed by successive P-frames. Thus the 
notation GNBM is used to symbolize the GoP pattern of a 
video sequence. Typical GoP patterns include: G6B2, G9B2, 
G12B2 and G15B2, depending on the required video quality 
[20]. Fig. 4 depicts a G9B2 GoP pattern and the forward and 
backward references that exist between the frame types. 
I-frames contain by far the most information, thus they 
exhibit the lowest compression ratios. By exploiting 
temporal 
redundancies, 
P-frames 
achieve 
higher 
compression rates than I-frames. Since B-frames are 
predicted from both previous and following frames they are 
appointed as the frames with the highest compression ratios. 
In contrast with VoIP applications, MPEG video frames 
are distinguished by their semantics. I-frames are identified 
as the most significant frame type, since their absence will 
render a GoP completely undecodable. On the other hand, B-
frames are not needed for the decoding of any other frame, 
thus they are appointed with the lowest significance. P-
frames have a variable significance. There is a distinction 
between the semantics of P-frames, rooting from their 
relative position in a GoP sequence. Considering the GoP 
presented in Fig. 4, a possible loss on the first P-frame in the 
sequence will have a negative chain effect on 89% of the 
GoP. Similarly, losing the second P-frame will influence the 
decoding process of 55% of the GoP. The P-frames 
significance becomes even higher when scalable video is 
considered, where both I and P-frames are needed to provide 
a basic video quality [21]. 
 
 
Figure 4.  MPEG GoP coding structure. 
The standard method for assessing the perceived video 
quality is to calculate the Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) 
between the original (transmitted) and the received (possibly 
distorted) image. It is a differential metric which is 
determined image-wise and yields a quality indicator for 
each received image of the video sequence. Symbolizing 
with f the original image, with f the distorted image and 
assuming an m×n image size, the PSNR is determined as: 







MSE
MAX
log
PSNR
10
20
 
(6) 















1
0
1
0
2
1
m
i
n
j
j,i
f
j,i
f
m n
MSE
 
(7) 
MAX is the maximum possible value of a pixel (255 for 
an 8 bit pixel). MSE is the Mean Square Error and calculates 
the difference between each pixel of the original and 
distorted picture. Typical values for video compression lies 
between 30 to 50 dB with higher values preferred over lower 
ones. 
VI. 
RELATED WORK 
There is a growing research literature on semantic-aware 
QoS provisioning in WLANs supporting multimedia traffic. 
The most related to our work are briefly reviewed in this 
section.  
Forward reference 
 I 
 B 
 B 
 P 
 B 
 B 
 P 
 B 
 B 
 I 
Backward reference 
Next GoP 
181
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In [22], Ksentini et al. propose a QoS cross-layer 
architecture based on both application and MAC layer 
features for improving H.264 video transmission over IEEE 
802.11e networks. The mechanism relies on a data 
partitioning technique at the application layer and an 
appropriate QoS mapping at the IEEE 802.11e MAC layer. 
More specifically, the authors map the application layer 
video generated slices to appropriate ACs at the MAC layer 
according to their significance. AC_VO, AC_VI and AC_BE 
are used for this purpose while AC_BK is left for serving all 
other traffic. Furthermore, the retry count parameter at the 
MAC layer is exploited to unequally protect the high priority 
information against lower significance frames. 
The semantic-aware mechanism presented in [23], 
follows a similar approach for MPEG-4 video transmission 
in IEEE 802.11e networks. This scheme introduced a single-
video multilevel queue by assigning I-frames to AC_VO, P-
frames to AC_VI, B-frames to AC_BE and non-video 
frames to AC_BK. 
In [24], the authors follow a different approach on cross-
layer design for H.264 video traffic transmission. At first, 
they determine the significance of a video frame by using a 
method called first order estimation. According to this 
method, the PSNR of all packets in the video sequence is 
determined by intentionally dropping selected frames. Thus, 
a frame is more important when its PSNR value is lower. 
Afterwards, the packets are placed to ACs in the MAC layer 
according to the access waiting time of an AC and its 
priority. Hence, the AC with the lowest waiting time is 
selected for serving a particular video packet. 
In [25], Goel and Sarkar propose a mechanism that 
resides in the interface between LLC and MAC layers to 
provide QoS for streaming video traffic. The essence of this 
scheme is to mark I-frames of a video sequence as the Most 
Valuable Video Packet (MVVP) and en-queue these frames 
to a higher priority queue called Video Friendly Queue 
(VFQ) in the interface between LLC and MAC layers. Other 
frames are en-queued in the so-called Interface Queue (IFQ) 
and receive FIFO treatment. Whenever frames need to be 
send to the MAC layer the VFQ receives priority against 
IFQ. In this way, preferential treatment is provided to MVVP 
frames ensuring that they get highest priority which 
minimizes delay.  
In [26], a dynamic mapping algorithm of MPEG-4 video 
frames is proposed. According to this algorithm, the video 
frames are allocated to ACs according to their significance 
and network load. When the size of AC_VI reaches a certain 
threshold, the newly arrived frame is mapped to a lower 
priority AC (AC_BK or AC_BE). The choice of the AC is 
determined by the frame significance. 
It is clear that the entire semantic-aware mechanisms 
presented, exploit a mapping technique to allocate video 
frames to ACs either statically [22], [23], [25] or 
dynamically [24], [26]. However, with the exception of [26], 
they disregard the QoS issues of VoIP traffic by allocating 
voice frames to ACs with lower priority or mixing them with 
video traffic. 
Furthermore, MAC-layer mechanisms, such as dynamic 
TXOP limit tuning and acknowledgment policies, are left 
completely unexploited. The usage of MAC-layer strategies 
may improve the system efficiency, and thus multimedia 
application performance, dramatically. 
VII. THE PROPOSED SCHEME 
Extending the work presented in [1], we propose a 
semantic-aware MAC-layer mechanism that falls into the 
cross-layer mechanisms category. The proposed scheme 
exploits multimedia frame semantics to decide an 
appropriate MAC-layer strategy for handling these frames. 
The mechanism is centralized and intends to improve EDCA 
performance at the QAP in times of congestion. 
Furthermore, only the functionality of multimedia ACs is 
affected, leaving the rest of the ACs (AC_BK and AC_BE) 
uninfluenced.  
The essence of the proposed algorithm is to map 
multimedia frames into AC_VI or AC_VO according to their 
significance. To this direction, two categories of multimedia 
frames are introduced: High Priority Multimedia Frames 
(HPMF) and Low Priority Multimedia Frames (LPMF). I 
and P video frames are indicated as high significance frames 
and tagged as HPMFs, while B-frames and voice packets as 
LPMFs. Every category is linked to a specific AC: HPMF to 
AC_VO and LPMF to AC_VI. Such a distinction among the 
multimedia frames can easily be accomplished by 
manipulating the UP of the multimedia frame: 
 
If UP of packet i  (4, 5, 6) 
{ 
 
If UP of packet i = 4||5 && packet_type  (I, P) 
 
 
UP of packet i  6 
 
ElseIf UP of packet i = 6 
 
 
UP of packet i  4 
} 
 
At this point, the appropriate MAC-layer strategy must 
be selected for both AC_VI and AC_VO. HPMFs belonging 
to AC_VO, are treated with the maximum protection by 
using the standard acknowledgment policy. However, 
regarding the high sizes of these frames, we apply a TXOP 
limit adaptation algorithm, ensuring the periodical relaxation 
of this queue. 
The TXOP limit adaptation algorithm for the AC_VO 
traffic class is calculated every Service Interval (SI) which is 
defined as the time between the start of two subsequent 
TXOPs. At the beginning of the SI the actual queue length is 
calculated and the average frame size of all packets 
contained is determined. Then the TXOP limit is computed 
as the time needed to successfully transmit the en-queued 
frames: 
N Tframe
limit
TXOP
×
=
_
 
(8) 
where N is the number of frames contained in the AC_VO 
queue at the start of the SI and Tframe the successful frame 
transmission time with the average payload size L. The 
Tframe is computed as: 
SIFS
ACK
L
frame
(r) T
T (r) T
T



 
(9) 
where TL(r) and TACK(r) are the transmission times of the 
data and acknowledgment frames respectively for a specific 
182
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

PHY data rate r and accounting PHY and MAC overhead. 
TSIFS is the Short Inter-frame Space. Eq. 9 does not contain 
any contention waiting periods (AIFS and backoff time) 
since at the start of the SI the contention is already won by 
the AC_VO. 
Regarding the AC_VI queue, which holds all the LPMF 
frames, we propose that no TXOP limit adaptation takes 
place, in order to keep complexity as low as possible. 
However, taking into consideration the low significance of 
B-frames, the loss tolerance of voice frames and the low 
sizes of the LPMFs (compared to HPMFs), we propose the 
usage of the NoACK scheme as the acknowledgment policy 
of this queue. By doing so, we aim at the reduction of the 
transmission times of LPMFs (as described in Section III) at 
the cost of an increased loss probability. Nevertheless, in 
congested networks the usage of this policy is beneficial in 
retaining medium quality voice calls, as noted in [27]. 
Furthermore, the loss of B-frames is acceptable, to a certain 
degree, since their absence will not significantly reduce the 
video quality. 
VIII. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS 
In order to evaluate the proposed algorithm the OPNET 
network simulator was used [16]. In this section we provide 
a description of the simulation scenarios after which the 
results that were obtained are analyzed and explained. 
A. Setup 
We considered an infrastructure IEEE 802.11e network 
with a QAP and four QSTAs in the QBSS. Eight G.729A 
(20-Bytes frames transmitted every 20ms) encoded VoIP 
streams (UP6) were traversing the network: four in the 
downlink direction and four in the uplink direction. Four 
MPEG-4 streaming video flows (UP4) were destined to the 
QSTAs from the wireline network. Finally, two HTTP 
connections (UP0) were representing best effort traffic. 
The real video trace “Highway”, available from [28], was 
used as the transmitted video sequence. The trace was 
encoded in MPEG-4 CIF (Common Intermediate Format) 
with a GoP pattern G9B2 (IBBPBBPBB), 2000 frames, 
frame rate of 30 frames per second and 67 seconds duration. 
The video sequence exhibits a mean bit rate of 0.41 Mbps 
and a peak bit rate of 1.89 Mbps.  
The wireless channel was assumed to be error-free, 
hence no packets were lost due to fading effects. The PHY 
data rate was set to 11 Mbps. There were three simulation 
scenarios: the first scenario applies standard EDCA default 
values as depicted in Table II, the second applies an 
implementation of a cross-layer mechanism similar to [25] 
(named Cross), and the third scenario implements the 
modified version of EDCA according to the proposed 
algorithm. The Cross implementation allocates I-frames to 
AC_VO, while all other multimedia frames (P, B video 
frames and voice frames) are served by the lower priority 
AC_VI. 
All scenarios had a total simulation time of 120 sec. The 
starting times of each application with respect to the starting 
time of simulation run are depicted in Table VI. 
TABLE VI.  
APPLICATION TIMING CHARACTERISTICS   
Application 
Start Time 
(sec) 
Stop Time  
(sec) 
Duration 
(sec) 
VoIP 
5 
105 
100 
Video 
Streaming 
15 
80 
65 
HTTP 
7 
End of Simulation 
113 
 
As depicted in Table VI, for 65 seconds all applications 
coexist in the network, creating a highly congested period at 
the QAP. 
To compare the EDCA performance obtained by all 
three scenarios, four performance metrics were considered: 
overall network application-level throughput (goodput), 
overall network application-level end-to-end delay, average 
PSNR for video streaming and MOS for VoIP applications.  
B. Simulation Results and Analysis 
Fig. 5 shows the overall network application-level 
throughput (goodput) in packets/sec for both VoIP and 
video 
streaming 
applications. 
The 
video 
streaming 
application enjoys a large improvement in throughput 
performance as show casted in Fig. 5(a). The overall 
goodput is almost leveled at 120 packets/sec (for all four 
video streams) while both the standard EDCA and the 
implemented Cross-layer scheme exhibit a significant 
performance degradation due to congestion at the QAP. As 
far as VoIP goodput is concerned (Fig. 5(b)), looking 
carefully at the graph one can observe that during the 
presence of the four video flows, VoIP performance for 
standard EDCA and Cross exhibits large oscillations while 
the proposed algorithm produces a smoother graph. 
Analyzing the overall application level end-to-end delay, 
Fig. 6(a) and (b) reveal a significant improvement on the 
packet delay that both multimedia applications receive. 
Specifically, the VoIP application, that has strict delay 
requirements, receives better QoS by applying the proposed 
algorithm. Video packet delay oscillates well below the 
delay produced by the other schemes as depicted in Fig. 
6(a). 
Finally, all the benefits of applying the proposed 
algorithm are revealed from Fig. 7(a) and (b), where the 
average PSNR of streaming video and the MOS values for 
VoIP applications are plotted. The majority of PSNR values 
are well above 35 dB, indicating an excellent quality of the 
received video streams. Regarding the VoIP applications, 
both the EDCA and the Cross schemes are outperformed by 
the proposed algorithm with acceptable MOS values for 
downstream calls. 
As an overall simulation results conclusion, it can be 
stated that the proposed algorithm clearly produces a 
significant 
EDCA 
performance 
improvement. 
The 
exploitation of the multimedia packet semantics combined 
183
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with the appropriate MAC-layer enhancements is capable of 
dealing with high congestion periods in infrastructure IEEE 
802.11e WLANs. 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper addresses the challenge of transporting 
multimedia traffic over IEEE 802.11e congested WLANs. 
The multimedia frame semantics are exploited to select an 
appropriate MAC-layer strategy. A TXOP limit adaptation 
scheme is used together with acknowledgment policies in 
order to relax the ACs in the congested QAP, and at the 
same time protect high significance multimedia frames. The 
proposed semantic-aware algorithm is proven extremely 
beneficial in terms of application level throughput, end-to-
end delay and QoS metrics for video and voice applications. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Politis, I. Mavridis and A. Manitsaris, “Enhancing Multimedia 
Traffic Performance in IEEE 802.11e Networks”, in Proc. of the Sixth 
International Conference in Wireless and Mobile Communications 
(ICWMC 2010), IEEE Press, Valencia, Spain, pp. 125-130, 
September 2010. 
[2] ISO/IEC and IEEE Std., “Part11: Wireless LAN Medium Access 
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications”, 1999. 
[3] IEEE Std. 802.11a, “High-Speed Physical Layer in the 5 GHz Band”, 
1999. 
[4] IEEE Std. 802.11b, “Higher-Speed Physical Layer (PHY) Extension 
in the 2.4 GHz Band”, 1999.  
[5] IEEE Std. 802.11g, “Further Higher-Speed Physical Layer Extension 
in the 2.4 GHz Band”, 2003. 
[6] F. Cali, M. Conti, and E. Gregori, “IEEE 802.11 Protocol: Design and 
Performance Evaluation of an Adaptive Backoff Mechanism”, IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 
1776–1784, 2000. 
[7] N. Vaidya, P. Bahl, and S. Gupta, “Distributed Fair Scheduling in a 
Wireless LAN”, in Proc. Sixth Annual International Conference on 
Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM), Boston, MA, pp. 
167-178, 2000. 
[8] J. Sobrinho and A. Krishnakumar, “Quality-of-Service in Ad hoc 
Carrier Sense Multiple Access Networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected 
Areas in Communications, Vol. 17, No. 8, pp. 1353–1368, 1999. 
[9] IEEE Std. 802.11e, “Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications, Amendment 8: 
Medium Access Control (MAC) Quality of Service Enhancements”, 
2005. 
[10] IEEE Std. 802.11n, “Enhancements for Higher Throughput”, 2009. 
[11] M. M. Rashid, E. Hossain, V. K. Bhargava, “Controlled Channel 
Access Scheduling for Guaranteed QoS in 802.11e-Based WLANs”, 
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 7, No.4, pp. 
1287-1297, 2008. 
[12] A. Andreadis and R. Zambon, “QoS Enhancement for Multimedia 
Traffics with Dynamic TXOPlimit in IEEE 802.11e”, in Proc. of the 
18th IEEE International Symposium in Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications (PIMRC 07), Athens, Greece, pp. 16-22, 
2007. 
[13] Μ. van der Schaar and D. Sai Shankar, “Cross-layer wireless 
multimedia transmission: Challenges, principles and new paradigms”, 
IEEE wireless Communications, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 50- 58, 2005. 
[14] C. Bouras, A. Gkamas and G. Kioumourtzis, “Challenges in Cross 
Layer Adaptation for Multimedia Transmission”, in Proc. of the 
IADIS 
International 
Conference 
Wireless 
Applications 
and 
Computing 2007, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 129 – 133, 2007. 
[15] IEEE Std 802.1D “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area 
Networks: Media Access Control (MAC) Bridges”, Revised version, 
2004. 
[16] OPNET Technologies  Inc., http://www.opnet.com, accessed 
13/1/2011. 
[17] H. Liu and Y. Zhao, “Adaptive EDCA Algorithm Using Video 
Prediction for Multimedia IEEE 802.11e WLAN”, in Proc. of the 2nd 
International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications 
(ICWMC), Bucharest, Romania, 2006. 
[18] ITU-T Annex A to Recommendation G.729, “Coding of Speech at 8 
Kbit/s using Conjugate Structure Algebraic-Code-Excited Linear 
Prediction (CS-CELP)”, November 1996. 
[19] ITU-T 
Recommendation 
P.800, 
“Methods 
for 
subjective 
determination of transmission quality”, 1996. 
[20] A. Lazaris, P. Koutsakis and M. Paterakis, “A new model for video 
traffic originating from multiplexed MPEG-4 videoconference 
streams”, Performance Evaluation, Vol. 65, No. 1, pp. 51-70, 2008. 
[21] P. Seeling, M. Reisslein and B. Kulapala, “Network Performance 
Evaluation Using Frame Size and Quality Traces of Single-Layer and 
Two-Layer Video: A Tutorial”, IEEE Communications Surveys and 
Tutorials, Vol.6, No.2, pp. 58-78, Third Quarter 2004. 
[22] A. Ksentini, M. Naimi and A. Gueroui, “Toward an improvement of 
H.264 video transmission over IEEE 802.11e through a cross-layer 
architecture”, IEEE Commun. Mag., Vol. 44, No. 1, pp.107-114, 
January 2006. 
[23] A. M. Jama, S. Issa and O. O. Khalifa, “Performance evaluation of 
MPEG-4 video transmission over IEEE 802.11e”, IJCNS, Vol. 2, No. 
5, pp. 11-15, May 2010. 
[24] C.-H. Mai, Y.-C. Huang and H.-Y. Wei, “Cross-Layer Adaptive 
H.264/AVC Streaming over IEEE 802.11e Experimental Testbed”, in 
Proc. of the 71st IEEE Conference on Vehicular Technology (VTC 
2010), Taipei, Taiwan, May 2010. 
[25] R. Goel and M. Sarkar, “Enhancing QoS of streaming videos over 
WLANs”, in Proc. of IAENG WCECS ’08, Berkeley, California, 
2008. 
[26] C.-H. Ke, C.-H. Lin, C.-K. Shieh, N. Chilamkurti and S. Zeadally, "A 
Novel Cross-Layer Architecture for MPEG-4 Video Stream over 
IEEE 802.11e Wireless Network", in Special Issue of International 
Journal of Telecommunications Systems (SPRINGER), Vol. 42, No. 
3-4, December 2009. 
[27] J. Barcelo, B. Bellalta, A. Sfairopoulou, C. Cano, M. Oliver, “No Ack 
in IEEE 802.11e single-hop ad-hoc VoIP networks”, in Proc. of 
MED-HOC-NET ‘08, Mallorca, Spain, 2008. 
[28] Video Traces Research Group, http://trace.eas.asu.edu/, accessed 
13/1/2011. 
184
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Overal network application-level throughput (goodput): (a) Video, (b) VoIP. 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 6.  Overall network application-level end-to-end delay: (a) Video, (b) VoIP . 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  QoS metrics: (a) Average PSNR, (b) Average MOS. 
 
185
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

