198
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Capacity Evaluation of a New Scheduler with Call Admission Control to Fixed
WiMAX Networks with Delay Bound Guarantee
Eden Ricardo Dosciatti
GETIC-NATEC-UTFPR
Federal University of Technology
Pato Branco - Parana - Brazil
Email: edenrd@utfpr.edu.br
Walter Godoy Junior
NATEC-CPGEI-UTFPR
Federal University of Technology
Curitiba - Parana - Brazil
Email: godoy@utfpr.edu.br
Augusto Foronda
DAELN-NATEC-UTFPR
Federal University of Technology
Curitiba - Parana - Brazil
Email: foronda@utfpr.edu.br
Abstract—IEEE 802.16, also known as WiMAX, is a solution
for mobile and ﬁxed access to broadband networks, currently
in development by the Working Group of the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers - IEEE. The WiMAX
Working Group focuses on the development of a standard
for wireless broadband metropolitan area networks, whose
main goal is to allow high-speed access to data, video and
voice services. As a wireless broadband technology, WiMAX
networks implement Quality of Service (QoS) mechanisms as
a crucial element to satisfy users’ demands for high data rates.
QoS mechanisms and bandwidth allocation are covered by
IEEE 802.16 standard. However, the exact details of scheduling
and call admission control management, which guarantee QoS
as required by multimedia applications, are left unspeciﬁed by
the standard. In fact, the standard supports scheduling only
for ﬁxed-size real-time service ﬂows. The choice of a scheduling
algorithm for WiMAX systems is of major importance. A
efﬁcient, robust and fair WiMAX scheduling algorithm is still
an open issue. Based on these facts, a new scheduler with call
admission control with delay bound guarantee was proposed.
The new scheduler calculates an optimal time frame, which
allows the number of stations allocated in the system to be
maximized and manages the delays required by each user.
Properties of this algorithm are investigated both theoretically
and through simulations. The results show that an upper bound
on the delay can be achieved for a large range of network loads,
with bandwidth optimization.
Keywords-IEEE
802.16;
WiMAX;
QoS;
Latency-Rate;
scheduling; time frame; call admission control.
I. INTRODUCTION
The deployment of high-speed Internet access is often
cited as an open challenge for the second decade of
this century. Also known as broadband Internet, it is
effective in reducing physical barriers to the transmission of
information, as well as transaction costs, and is fundamental
in fostering competitiveness. However, providing wired
access to broadband Internet is costly and sometimes
infeasible, since the investment needed to deploy cabling
throughout a region often outweighs the service provider’s
ﬁnancial gains. One of the possible solutions in reducing the
costs of deploying broadband access in areas where such
infrastructure is not present is to use wireless technologies,
which require no cabling and reduce both implementation
time and cost [2].
This was one of the motivations behind the development
by
the
IEEE
(Institute
of
Electrical
and
Electronics
Engineers) of the 802.16 standard for wireless access [3],
also known as Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave
Access (WiMAX). It is an emerging technology for
next-generation wireless networks, which provides supports
for a large number of both mobile and nomadic (ﬁxed)
users distributed over a wide geographic area. Furthermore,
this technology provides strict QoS (Quality of Service)
guarantees for data, voice and video applications [4].
As a service provider, WiMAX creates new alternatives
for
applications
such
as
telephony,
TV
broadcasts,
broadband
Internet
access
for
residential
users,
and
commercial,
industrial
and
university
centers.
The
development
of
this
new
market
niche
represents
a
revolution
for
telecommunications
companies
and
interconnection equipment manufacturers [5]. Moreover,
WiMAX enables broadband connection for areas, which are
inaccessible or lacking in infrastructure, since it requires
no complex physical installations of cable connections and
traditional technologies [6].
Motivated by the growing need for ubiquitous, high-speed
network access, wireless technology is an option to provide
a cost-effective solution that may be deployed quickly and
easily, providing high bandwidth connectivity in the last
mile. However, despite its many advantages, such as low
deployment and maintenance costs, ease of conﬁguration,
and device mobility, there are challenges that must be
overcome in order to further advance its widespread use.
The increasing deployment of wireless infrastructure enables
a variety of new applications that require ﬂexible, but
also robust, support by the network, such as multimedia
applications including video streaming and VoIP (Voice over
Internet Protocol), which demand real-time data delivery [7].
To this purpose, the IEEE 802.16 standard introduces a set
of mechanisms, such as service classes and several coding
and modulation schemes that adapt themselves according
to channel conditions. However, the standard leaves certain

199
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
issues pertaining to network resource management and
scheduling algorithms open.
This paper presents a new scheduler with admission
control of connections to a WiMAX Base Station (BS). We
develop an analytical model based on Latency-Rate (LR)
server theory [8], which an ideal frame size, called the Time
Frame (TF), is estimated, with guaranteed delays for each
user. At the same time, the number of stations allocated
in the system is maximized. In this procedure, framing
overhead generated by the MAC (Medium Access Control)
and PHY (Physical) layers was taken into account when
calculating the length of each time slot. After developing
this model, a set of simulations is presented for constant
bit rate (CBR) and variable bit rate (VBR) streams, with
performance comparisons between situations with different
delays and different TFs. The results show that an upper
limit on the delay may be achieved for a wide range of
network loads, thus optimizing bandwidth.
The paper is an extension to [1] and is structured as
follows. In Section II, related research is described. In
Section III, a brief description of the IEEE 802.16 standard
is presented. Our analytical model for packet scheduling is
proposed and explained in Section IV. Evaluation of the
capacity of the new scheduler with Call Admission Control
(CAC) is shown in Section V. Conclusions are presented in
Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Several scheduling algorithms and QoS architectures for
Broadband Wireless Access (BWA) have been proposed
in the literature [9-15], since the standard only speciﬁes
signaling mechanisms and no speciﬁc scheduling and
admission control algorithms. However, many of these
solutions only address the implementation or addition of
a new QoS architecture to the IEEE 802.16 standard. A
scheduling algorithm decides the next packet to be served
on the queue and is one of the mechanisms responsible for
distributing bandwidth among several streams (by assigning
each ﬂow the bandwidth that was required and available). In
these proposals [9-15], there are often no analytical models
for ensuring maximum delay and maximizing the number
of SSs (Subscriber Stations) allocated in the system, which
are represented accurately by certain performance metrics,
such as the delay, of the medium access protocol.
In [9], a packet scheduler for IEEE 802.16 uplink channels
based on a hierarchical queue structure is proposed. A
simulation model is developed to evaluate the performance
of the proposed scheduler. However, despite presenting
simulation results, the authors overlooked the fact that the
complexity of implementing this solution is not hierarchical,
and do not deﬁne clearly how requests for bandwidth are
made.
In [10], the authors propose a QoS architecture to be built
into the IEEE 802.16 MAC sublayer, which signiﬁcantly
impacts system performance, but do not present an algorithm
that makes efﬁcient use of bandwidth.
In [11], the authors present a simulation study of the
IEEE 802.16 MAC protocol operating with an OFDM
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) air interface
and full-duplex stations. System performance is evaluated
under different trafﬁc scenarios, by varying the values of a
set of relevant system parameters. Regarding data trafﬁc,
it was observed that the overhead due to the physical
transmission of preambles increases with the number of
stations.
In [12], a polling-based MAC protocol is presented
along with an analytical model to evaluate its performance,
considering a system where the BS issues probes in every
frame to determine bandwidth requirements for each node.
The authors developed closed-form analytical expressions
for cases in which stations are polled at the beginning or at
the end of uplink subframes. It is not possible to know how
the model may be developed to provide delay guarantees.
In [13], the proposal is of a QoS architecture in which the
scheduler is based on packet lifetime for each type of ﬂow.
The process of data communication between BS and SS is
considered from the start, that is, connection and negotiation
of trafﬁc parameters such as bandwidth and delay. The
proposal features an architecture deﬁned in well-structured
blocks, which may make data ﬂows and architecture actions
inaccurate. However, despite presenting simulation results,
the work neglects performance by not adequately addressing
the functional blocks of the proposed architecture and by not
specifying clearly how lifetime is calculated for each packet.
In [14], the scheduling algorithm handles trafﬁc with Best
Effort (BE), and it is concluded that there exists considerable
difﬁculty in estimating the amount of bandwidth required
due to dynamic changes in trafﬁc transmission rate. The
purpose of this algorithm is to ensure fairness in bandwidth
allocation among BE ﬂows and full bandwidth usage. The
system measures the transmission rate for each ﬂow and
allocates bandwidth based on the average transmission rate.
Finally, in [15] the author presents a well-established
architecture for QoS in the IEEE 802.16 MAC layer.
The subject of this work is the component responsible
for allocating uplink bandwidth to each SS, although the
decision is taken based on the following aspects: the
bandwidth required by each SS for uplink data transmission,
periodic bandwidth needs for UGS ﬂows in SSs and
the bandwidth required for making requests for additional
bandwidth.
Considering the limitations exposed above, these works
form the basis of a generic architecture, which can be
extended and specialized. However, in these studies, the
focus is in achieving QoS guarantees, with no concerns for
maximizing the number of allocated users in the network.
This paper presents a scheduler with admission control
of connections to the WiMAX BS. We developed an

200
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
analytical model based on Latency-Rate (LR) server theory
[8], which an ideal frame size called Time Frame (TF)
was estimated, with guaranteed delays for each user and
maximization of the number of allocated stations in the
system. A set of simulations is presented with constant
bit rate (CBR) and variable bit rate (VBR) streams and
performance comparisons are made for different delays and
different TFs. The results show that an upper bound on the
delay may be achieved for a large range of network loads
with bandwidth optimization.
A. Latency-Rate Servers
Providing quality of service (QoS) guarantees in a packet
network requires the use of trafﬁc scheduling algorithms in
the routers. The function of a scheduling algorithm is to
select, for each outgoing link of the router, the packet to be
transmitted next cycle from the available packets belonging
to the sessions sharing the output link.
Since networks are unlikely to be homogeneous in the
type of scheduling algorithms employed by the individual
routers, a general model for the analysis of scheduling
algorithms will be a valuable tool in the design and analysis
of such networks.
In work [8] was developed a model to study the behavior
of the worst-case of individual sessions in a network of
schedulers where the schedulers may employ a broad range
of scheduling algorithms. This approach allows to calculate
tight bounds on the end-to-end delay of individual sessions
and the buffer sizes needed to support them in an arbitrary
network of schedulers. The basic approach consists in
deﬁning a general class of schedulers, called Latency-Rate
servers [8], or simply LR servers. The theory of LR servers
provides a means to describe the worst-case behavior of a
broad range of scheduling algorithms in a simple and elegant
manner. This theory is based on the concept of a busy period
of a session, a period of time during which the average
arrival rate of the session remains at or above its reserved
rate ri. For a scheduling algorithm to belong to the LR class,
it is only required that the average rate of service offered by
the scheduler to a busy session, over every interval starting
at time θ from beginning of the busy period, is at least equal
to its reserved rate. The parameter θ is called latency of the
scheduler.
The behavior of an LR scheduler is determined by two
parameters: the latency (θ) and the allocated rate (ri). The
latency of LR server may be seen as the worst-case delay
seen by the ﬁrst packet of the busy period of a session,
which is a packet arriving when the queue is empty session.
The latency of a particular scheduling algorithm may depend
on its internal parameters, its transmission rate on the
outgoing link, and the allocated rates of various sessions.
However, the maximum end-to-end delay experienced by a
packet in a network of schedulers can be calculated from
only the latencies of the individual schedulers on the path
of the session, and the trafﬁc parameters of the session
that generated the packet. Since the maximum delay in
a scheduler increases directly in proportion to its latency,
the model brings out the signiﬁcance of using low-latency
schedulers to achieve low end-to-end delays. Likewise,
upper bounds on the queue size and burstiness of individual
sessions at any point within the network can be obtained
directly from the latencies of the schedulers.
III. THE IEEE 802.16 STANDARD
The basic topology of a IEEE 802.16 network includes
two entities that participate in the wireless link: Base
Stations (BS) and Subscriber Stations (SS), as shown in
Figure 1 [16].
The BS is the central node, responsible for coordinating
communication and providing connectivity to SSs. BSs are
kept in towers distributed so as to optimize network coverage
area, and are connected to each other by a backhaul network,
which allows SSs to access external networks or exchange
information between themselves.
Networks based on the IEEE 802.16 standard can be
structured in two schemes. In PMP (Point-to-multipoint)
networks, all communication between SSs and other SSs
or external networks takes place through a central BS node.
Thus, trafﬁc ﬂows only between SSs and the BS (see Figure
1). In Mesh mode, SSs communicate with each other without
the need for intermediary nodes; that is, trafﬁc can be
routed directly through SSs. Thus, all stations are peers,
which can act as routers and forward packets to neighboring
nodes [17]. This article only considers the PMP topology,
since it is implemented by ﬁrst-generation WiMAX devices,
Figure 1.
IEEE 802.16 Network Architecture

201
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and also due to the strong trend towards its adoption by
Internet providers because it allows them to control network
parameters in a centralized manner, without the need to
recall all subscriber stations [5].
Although
it
is
referred
to
as
ﬁxed
pattern,
IEEE
802.16 allows stations to provide customers with low-speed
mobility. A feature missing in this pattern and that justiﬁes
its designation as ﬁxed is the possibility of performing
handoffs/handovers, which allow a client station to switch
to another base station without losing connectivity. In this
case, subscriber stations are instead called mobile stations.
The functionality of handoff/handover was included in the
IEEE 802.16 standard in early 2006 with the publication of
the IEEE 802.16e [18], which quickly received the name of
"IEEE 802.16 mobile".
WiMAX technology can reach a theoretical maximum
distance of 50 km [19]. Data transmission rates can vary
from 50 to 150 Mbps, depending on channel frequency band
width and modulation type [20]. Communication between a
BS and SSs occurs in two different channels: uplink (UL)
channel, which is directed from SSs to the BS, and downlink
(DL) channel, which is directed from the BS to SSs. DL
data is transmitted by broadcasting, while in UL access to
the medium is multiplexed. UL and DL transmissions can be
operated in different frequencies using Frequency Division
Duplexing (FDD) mode or at different times using Time
Division Duplexing (TDD) mode.
In TDD, the channel is segmented in ﬁxed-size time slots.
Each frame is divided into two subframes: a DL subframe
and an UL subframe. The duration of each subframe is
dynamically controlled by the BS; that is, although a frame
has a ﬁxed size, the fraction of it assigned to DL and
UL is variable, which means that the bandwidth allocated
for each of them is adaptive. Each subframe consists of a
number of time slots, and thus both the SSs and the BS
must be synchronized and transmit the data at predetermined
intervals. The division of TDD frames between DL and UL
is a system feature controlled by the MAC layer. Figure
2 [10] shows the structure of a TDD frame. In this paper,
the system was operated in TDD mode with the OFDM
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) air interface,
as determined by the standard [3].
IV. ANALYSIS OF THE ANALYTICAL MODEL
A minimum acceptable performance level should be
sought throughout the development of any system, be it
computer-related or not. This requires a measure or gauge
of performance in these systems. To accomplish this, there
exist design tools that provide the analyst with different
metrics and measures. Within this scope, some related
system characteristics are proposed and discussed in this
article. To accomplish this, this section presents an analytical
model of the new scheduler and an analytical description of
its call admission control facility.
Figure 2.
IEEE 802.16 Frame Structure
A. System Description
Figure 3 [21] illustrates a wireless network operating
the newly proposed scheduler with connection admission
control, which is based on a modiﬁed LR scheduler [8] and
uses the token bucket algorithm.
The basic approach consists on the token bucket limiting
input trafﬁc and the LR scheduler providing rate allocation
for each user. Then, if the rate allocated by the LR scheduler
is larger than the token bucket rate, the maximum delay may
be calculated.
A scheduler that provides guaranteed bandwidth can
be modeled as an LR scheduler. The behavior of an LR
scheduler is determined by two parameters for each session
i: latency θi and allocated rate ri. The latency θi of
the scheduler may be seen as the worst-case delay and
depends on network resource allocation parameters. In the
new scheduler with call admission control, the latency θi
is a TF period, which is the time needed to transmit a
Figure 3.
Wireless Network with New Scheduler

202
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
maximum-size packet and separation gaps (TTG and RTG)
of DL and UL subframes. In the new scheduler, considering
the delay for transmitting the ﬁrst packet, the latency θi is
given by
θi = TT T G + TRT G + TDL + TUL + Lmax,i
R
(1)
where TT T G and TRT G are the DL and UL subframe gap
durations, TDL and TUL are the DL and UL subframe
durations, Lmax,i is the maximum packet size and R is the
outgoing link capacity.
Now, we show how the allocated rate ri for each session
i may be determined, and how to optimize TF in order to
increase the number of connections accommodated.
B. CAC Description
An LR scheduler can provide a bounded delay if input
trafﬁc is shaped by a token bucket. A token bucket [2]
is a non-negative counter, which accumulates tokens at a
constant rate ρi until the counter reaches its capacity σi.
The rate of incoming packets (ρi) is constant because the
parameters of the token bucket, for all three types of trafﬁc,
that will be used for performance evaluation are constant,
i.e., audio will be 64 kb/s, VBR video will be 500 kb/s, and
MPEG4 video will be 4100 kb/s. Packets from session i can
be released into the queue only after removing the required
number of tokens from the token bucket. In an LR scheduler,
if the token bucket is empty, arriving packets are dropped;
however, our model ensures that there will always be tokens
in the bucket and that no packets are dropped, as described
in Section IV. If the token bucket is full, a maximum burst
of σi packets can be sent to the queue. When the ﬂow is idle
or running at a lower rate as the token size reaches the upper
bound σi, accumulation of tokens will be suspended until the
arrival of the next packet. We assume that the session starts
out with a full bucket of tokens. In our model, we consider
IEEE 802.16 standard overhead for each packet. Then, as
we will show below, the token bucket size will decrease by
both packet size and overhead.
The application using session i declares the maximum
packet size Lmax,i and requires maximum allowable delay
Dmax,i, which are used by the WiMAX scheduler to
calculate the service rate for each session so as to guarantee
the required delay and optimize the number of stations in the
network. Incoming trafﬁc Ai(t) from session i(i = 1, ..., N)
passes through a token bucket inside the user terminal during
the time interval (0, t).
This passage of data trafﬁc by the token bucket is
bounded by
Ai(t) ≤ σi + ρit
(2)
where σi is the bucket size and ρi is the bucket rate.
Then, the packet is queued in the station until it is
transmitted via the wireless medium. Queue delay is
measured as the time interval between the receipt of the last
bit of a packet and its transmission. In the new scheduler
with call admission control, queuing delay depends on
token bucket parameters, network latency and allocated
rate. In [8] and [22], it is shown that if input trafﬁc Ai(t)
is shaped by a token bucket and the scheduler allocates a
service rate ri, then an LR scheduler can provide a bounded
maximum delay Di:
Di ≤ σi
ri
+ θi − Lmax,i
ri
(3)
where σi is the token bucket size, ri is the service rate, θi
is the scheduler latency, Lmax,i
ri
is the maximum size of a
package and, σi
ri + θi − Lmax,i
ri
is the bound on the delay,
Dbound.
Equation (3) is an improved bound on the delay for LR
schedulers. Thus, the token bucket rate plus the overhead
transmission rate must be smaller than the service rate to
provide a bound on the delay. The upper bound Dbound
should be smaller than or equal to the maximum allowable
delay:
σi
ri
+ θi − Lmax,i
ri
≤ Dmax,i
(4)
Therefore, three different delays are deﬁned. The ﬁrst is
the maximum delay Di, the second is the upper bound on
the delay Dbound and the third is the required maximum
allowable delay Dmax,i. The relation between them is
Di ≤ Dbound ≤ Dmax,i.
So, the delay constraint condition of the new scheduler is
(σ′
i − L′
max,i)TF
r′
iTF − ∆R + L′
max,i
+ TF +
+ L′
max,i
R
+ TT T G + TRT G ≤ Dmax,i
(5)
where
σ′
i
is
the
token
bucket
size
with
overhead,
L′
max,i is the maximum size of a packet with overhead
(preamble+pad), TF is the time frame, r′
i is the rate
allocated by the server with overhead, R is the outgoing
link capacity, TT T G is the gap between downlink and uplink
subframes, TRT G is the gap between uplink and downlink
subframes, Dmax,i is the maximum allowable delay and
∆ is the sum of initial ranging and BW request, which
is the uplink subframe overhead and whose value will
be discussed when evaluating performance. Physical rate,
maximum packet size and token bucket size are parameters
declared by the application. However, TF and total allocated
service rate must satisfy Equation (5).

203
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4.
Frame structure with TDD allocation formulas of Equation (5)
Figure 4 shows a frame structure with TDD allocation
formulas as described by Equation (5).
The second delay constraint condition to TF and service
rate is that the token bucket rate plus the rate to transmit
overhead and a maximum-sized packet must be smaller
than the service rate to place a bound on delay. Thus, the
second constraint condition is
ρi + ∆R + L′
max,i
TF
≤ r′
i
(6)
where ρi is the bucket rate, ∆ is the uplink subframe
overhead, R is the outgoing link capacity, L′
max,i is the
maximum packet size with overhead, TF is the time frame
and r′
i is the rate allocated by the service with overhead.
Previous schedulers do not provide any mechanisms to
estimate the TF needed to place a bound on delay or to
maximize the number of stations, because each application
requires a TF without the use of criteria to calculate the time
assigned to each user. However, TF estimation is important
because of a tradeoff. A small TF reduces maximum delay,
but increases overhead at the same time. On the other
hand, a large TF decreases overhead, but increases delay.
Therefore, we must calculate the optimal TF to allocate
the maximum number of users under both constraints. The
maximum number of users is achieved when the service rate
for each user is the minimum needed to guarantee the bound
on the delay, Dbound.
To ﬁnd the maximum number of users in each frame,
we solve a problem of non-linear optimization. Solving
non-linear problems is characterized by not having a single
algorithm for solving their problems. The biggest difﬁculty
with this approach is the uncertainty that the solution to this
problem is really the best, and this is a fact inherent in the
non-linear nature of the problem, whereas its great advantage
is the scope, that is, once the mathematical model developed
the problem, with its objective function and its constraints,
usually no simpliﬁcation is needed in terms of formulation.
So, in this work, nonlinear optimization makes use
of search techniques using numerical information given
in an iterative process, generating better solutions in the
optimization process. These techniques allow us to use
numerical methods to solve problems when there is no
known analytical solution.
In the speciﬁc case of this work, an approach step-by-step
was used, where a small initial value for the TF is
determined, in this case, the value of 2.5 ms (lower reference
value for the TF according to 802.16 standard [3]). After,
the value of r′
i is calculated and the process is repeated
with a certain step length, in this case, 0.5 ms, until the
minimum value of r′
i is found, satisfying the constraints of
Equations (5) and (6). The value of the step length can be
determined randomly by the limit of 20 ms (maximum value
of a frame in accordance with 802.16 standard [3]) and there
will always be a solution because at every step the two
constraints of Equations (5) and (6) will be confronted in
order to verify that the minimum value r′
i found.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
To analyze the IEEE 802.16 MAC protocol behavior with
respect to the new scheduler with call admission control,
this section presents numerical results obtained with the
analytical model proposed in the previous section. Then,
with a simulation tool, the proposed analytical model is
validated by showing that the bound on the maximum
delay is guaranteed. In this section, two types of delays
are treated: required delay, in which the user requires the
maximum delay, and the guaranteed maximum delay, which
is calculated with the analytical model.
A. Calculation of Optimal Time Frame
In this paper, the duration of downlink subframes is ﬁxed
at 1% of the TF because our interest is only in the uplink
subframe. In the simulation, after ﬁnding the optimal number
of SSs per frame for each trafﬁc ﬂow, the header value of
the uplink subframe is calculated at a rate of 10% of the
value of an OFDM symbol [2].
All PHY and MAC layer parameters used in simulation
are summarized in Table I.
Performance of the new scheduler with call admission
Table I
PHY and MAC parameters
Parameter
Value
Bandwidth
20 MHz
OFDM Symbol Duration
13,89 µs
Delay
5, 10, 15 and 20 ms
∆ (Initial Ranging and BW Request) =
125,10 µs
9 OFDM Symbols
TTG + RTG = 1 OFDM Symbol
13,89 µs
UL Subframe (preamble + pad) =
1,39 µs
10% OFDM Symbol
Physical Rate
70 Mbps
DL Subframe
1% TF

204
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table II
Token bucket parameters
Audio
VBR video
MPEG4 video
Token Size (bits)
3000
18000
10000
Token Rate (kb/s)
64
500
4100
control is evaluated as the delay requested by the user and
assigned stations. Station allocation results, in the system
with an optimal TF, limited by the delay requested by the
user, are described in sequence. The ﬁrst step is deﬁning
token bucket parameters, which are estimated according to
the characteristics of incoming trafﬁc and are listed on Table
II. It’s worth noting that the details about the trafﬁc must be
known in advance. This is normal for various applications
such as audio, CBR and video on demand.
Thus, the optimal TF value is estimated according to the
PHY and MAC layer’s parameters (see Table I), token bucket
parameters (see Table II), required maximum allowable
delay, physical rate and maximum packet size. With all
parameters deﬁned, and with the constraints set by Equations
(5) and (6), described in Section IV-B, we use a step-by-step
approach, starting with a small TF of 2.5 ms, calculating r′
i
and repeating this process every 0.5 ms until the minimum
r′
i that satisﬁes both equations is found. The graph in Figure
5 shows the optimal TF value, for four delay values required
by users (5, 10, 15 and 20 ms):
• For a requested delay of 5 ms, the optimal TF is 3 ms.
• For a requested delay of 10 ms, the optimal TF is 6.5
ms.
• For a requested delay of 15 ms, the optimal TF is
10.5ms.
• For a requested delay of 20 ms, the optimal TF is 15
ms.
Figure 5.
Optimal TF
Figure 6 shows the number of SSs assigned to each trafﬁc
type in each frame, through of the optimal TF calculated.
The result shows the maximum number of SSs assigned to
each range of optimal TF values for each trafﬁc type. It
should be noted that three trafﬁc types were used: audio
trafﬁc, VBR video trafﬁc and MPEG4 video trafﬁc. For the
simulation, the allocation of users is performed by trafﬁc
type; i.e., only one trafﬁc at a time will be transmitted within
each frame.
As
an
example,
Figure
6d
shows
that
when
the
user-requested delay is of 20 ms, an optimal TF of 15 ms
is calculated and 50 users can be allocated for audio trafﬁc,
or 30 users for VBR video trafﬁc, or 13 users for MPEG4
video trafﬁc.
Two important observations from Figure 6d should be
highlighted:
1) With a requested delay of 20 ms, we cannot choose
a TF of less than 15 ms, since the restrictions placed
by Equation (5) (which regards delay) and Equation
(6) (which regards the token bucket) are not respected
and thus no bandwidth allocation guarantees exist.
2) We also cannot choose a TF greater than 15 ms, even
though it complies with Equations (5) and (6) with
respect to guaranteed bandwidth, because there will
be a decrease in the number of users allocated to each
trafﬁc ﬂow due to increasing delay.
Thus, it is evident that since the IEEE 802.16 standard
does not specify an ideal time frame (TF) duration, this
approach becomes advantageous because, in addition to
meeting the restrictions of the analytical model, it optimizes
the allocation of users on the system. The same philosophy
holds true for other delay values of 5, 10 and 15 ms.
B. Comparison of User Allocation and Optimal Time Frame
In this work, an optimal TF was reached, so that the
number of SSs in the network may be optimized and a
maximum delay may be guaranteed. To make a comparison
of the results in this work, Figure 7 shows that, for an audio
trafﬁc and a requested delay of 15 ms, an optimal TF of
10.5 ms is obtained and 41 users can be allocated. When
compared to other randomly-chosen TFs, it may be observed
that the optimal TF yields a greater number of users. Thus,
when an user requests a delay guarantee, an optimal TF is
calculated in order to allocate the largest number of users in
a given trafﬁc ﬂow, as seen in the example in Figure 7. It
may be noticed, then, that choosing a non-optimal TF will
lead to a decreased number of allocated SSs. Therefore, the
new scheduler with call admission control proposed herein
maximizes the number of SSs in place and ensures an upper
bound on maximum delay, as discussed below.
C. Guaranteed Maximum Delay
In this article, only UL trafﬁc is considered. To test
the new scheduler’s performance, we have carried out

205
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6.
Number of subscriber stations for all delay required
simulations of an IEEE 802.16 network consisting of a BS
that communicates with eighteen SSs, with one trafﬁc ﬂow
Figure 7.
Users assigned as a function of TF, for audio trafﬁc
type by SS and the destination of all ﬂows being the BS, as
shown in Figure 8. In this topology, six SSs transmit on-off
CBR audio trafﬁc (64 kb/s), six transmit CBR MPEG4 video
Figure 8.
Simulation scenario

206
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table III
Description of trafﬁc types
Arrival
Packet
Sending
Node
Application
Period
Size
Rate
(ms)
(max) (B)
(kb/s) (mean)
1 → 6
Audio
4.7
160
64
7 → 12
VBR video
26
1024
≈ 200
13 → 18
MPEG4 video
2
800
3200
trafﬁc (3.2 Mb/s) and six transmit VBR video trafﬁc. Table
III summarizes the different types of trafﬁc used in this
simulation.
In Section V-D we have the algorithm of the simulator
and its source code, developed in C programming language
[23]
In Figure 9, with an optimal TF of 3 ms and an
user-requested delay of 5 ms, the average guaranteed
maximum delay for audio trafﬁc is 1.50 ms. For VBR video
trafﬁc, whose packet rate is variable, the average maximum
delay is 1.97 ms. For MPEG4 video trafﬁc, the average
maximum delay is 2.00 ms. Data that supports the stated
maximum guaranteed delay values is listed in the tables
below, which relate the number of packets read in each
simulation to the resulting guaranteed maximum delay. A
number of simulations were run for each type of trafﬁc
to keep results from varying too widely. Our choice of six
simulations for each case produced values with noticeably
little variation. After running simulations for each optimal
TF and each trafﬁc type, averages of resulting guaranteed
maximum delays were taken and the graph of Figure 9 was
constructed.
Figure 9.
Guaranteed Maximum Delay
Table IV
Algorithm to compute the delay
Step 1
(initialization): Initialize the variables of total packet and
time frame.
Step 2
(perform): While the total number of packets is smaller the
number of packets in the system and the time frame is than
smaller than the number of packets in the system, do: a.
calculate the size of the package. b. calculate the time frame.
Step 3
(testing): If time frame is greater than the packet size,
calculate the packet delay and the total delay, Else increment
the time frame.
Step 4
(results): calculate the average delay and print the result on
the screen.
D. Pseudocode of the Algorithm Simulator
In this section, we describe the structure of the simulator
and the pseudocode of the simulator. The C programming
language [23] was used to build the simulator that calculates
the guaranteed maximum delay. In Table IV, is shown
the pseudocode algorithm of the simulator to calculate
the guaranteed maximum delay. This algorithm uses the
parameters of Table III in Section V-C.
After reading the ﬁle with the amount of packets, variables
that calculate the packet size and time frame, are used to
perform the calculation of the delay of each packet, and if
the value of packet size calculated is greater than the value
of time frame calculated, there was a delay and it will be
stored in variables to calculate the delay of each packet and
total delay. In the end, the average delay is calculated and
print the results on the screen.
This code is generic and is used to calculate the delay of
all trafﬁc used in this work.
The tables below show the result of using the simulation
algorithm with the three trafﬁc types used, namely audio,
VBR video and MPEG4 video.
Table V shows the results of audio trafﬁc simulations.
Table VI shows the results of VBR video trafﬁc simulations,
whose packet rate is variable. Table VII shows the results
of MPEG4 video trafﬁc simulations.
Table V
Audio Trafﬁc
Delay by the user
5 ms
10 ms
15 ms
20 ms
Optimal TF
3 ms
6.5 ms
10.5 ms
15 ms
Packages read
Guaranteed Maximum Delay
amount
(ms)
1000
1.48
3.23
5.24
7.49
3000
1.49
3.24
5.24
7.50
5000
1.49
3.25
5.25
7.50
10000
1.50
3.25
5.25
7.50
30000
1.50
3.25
5.28
7.50
50000
1.50
3.35
5.29
7.51
Mean
1.50
3.25
5.26
7.50
Standard Deviation
0.00816
0.00837
0.02137
0.00632

207
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table VI
VBR Video Trafﬁc
Delay by the user
5 ms
10 ms
15 ms
20 ms
Optimal TF
3 ms
6.5 ms
10.5 ms
15 ms
Packages read
Guaranteed Maximum Delay
amount
(ms)
2176
2.06
3.48
5.50
7.98
1358
1.94
3.52
5.45
7.96
1177
1.97
3.48
5.59
8.07
1226
2.02
3.32
5.41
8.07
1159
1.87
3.33
5.57
8.08
1449
1.96
3.45
5.53
8.04
Mean
1.97
3.43
5.51
8.03
Standard Deviation
0.06573
0.08438
0.06940
0.05125
Table VII
MPEG4 Video Trafﬁc
Delay by the user
5 ms
10 ms
15 ms
20 ms
Optimal TF
3 ms
6.5 ms
10.5 ms
15 ms
Packages read
Maximum Guaranteed Delay
amount
(ms)
1000
2.00
3.50
5.51
8.01
3000
2.00
3.50
5.50
8.00
5000
2.00
3.50
5.50
8.00
10000
2.00
3.50
5.50
8.00
30000
2.00
3.50
5.50
8.00
50000
2.00
3.50
5.50
8.00
Mean
2.00
3.50
5.50
8.00
Standard Deviation
0.0
0.0
0.00408
0.00408
E. Comparison with other Schedulers
The new scheduler with call admission control, here
called New Scheduler, was compared to those of [12], here
called Scheduler_1, and [9], here called Scheduler_2. The
comparison was accomplished through the ability to allocate
users in a particular time frame (TF). Table VIII shows the
parameters used for comparisons.
In the graph of Figure 10, we compare the New Scheduler
with the Scheduler_1. A maximum delay of 0.12 ms was
requested by the user, and the duration of each frame (TF)
was set at 5 ms. Other parameters are listed in Table VIII.
In comparison, the New Scheduler allocates 28 users in each
frame, while the Scheduler_1, allocates 20 users. Thus, the
New Scheduler presents a gain in performance of 40% when
compared with the Scheduler_1.
In the graph of Figure 11, we compare the New Scheduler
with the Scheduler_2. A maximum delay of 20 ms was
Table VIII
Parameters used for comparisons
Parameter
Scheduler_1
Scheduler_2
Bandwidth
20 MHz
20 MHz
OFDM symbol duration
13.89 µs
13.89 µs
Delay Requested by the user
0.12 ms
20 ms
Time Frame (TF)
5 ms
10 ms
Maximum Data Rate
70 Mbps
70 Mbps
Trafﬁc type
Audio
Audio
Figure 10.
Comparison of user allocation with Scheduler_1
requested by the user, and the duration of each frame (TF)
was set at 10 ms. Other parameters are listed in Table VIII.
The comparison was extended by also considering frame
duration values of 7.00 ms, 8.00 ms and 9.00 ms to
demonstrate the efﬁciency of the New Scheduler. For a
TF of 10 ms, the New Scheduler allocates 41 users in
each frame, while the Scheduler_2 allocates only 33 users.
This represents 24.24% better performance for the New
Scheduler. Similarly, the New Scheduler also allocates more
users per frame in comparison with the Scheduler_2 for all
other frame duration values.
Figure 11.
Comparison of user allocation with Scheduler_2

208
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work has presented the design and evaluation of a
new scheduler with call admission control for IEEE 802.16
broadband access wireless networks (known worldwide as
WiMAX) that guarantees different maximum delays for
trafﬁc types with different QoS requisites and optimizes
bandwidth usage.
A. Conclusion
Firstly, we developed an analytical model to calculate an
optimal TF, which allows an optimal number of SSs to be
allocated and guarantees the maximum delay required by
the user. Then, a simulator was developed to analyze the
behavior of the proposed system.
To validate the model, we have presented the main
results obtained from the analysis of different scenarios.
Simulations were performed to evaluate the performance of
this model, demonstrating that an optimal TF was obtained
along with a guaranteed maximum delay, according to
the delay requested by the user. Thus, the results have
shown that the new scheduler with call admission control
successfully limits the maximum delay and maximizes the
number of SSs in a simulated environment.
B. Future Work
In a communication system with a wireless link, the
channel effects can heavily degrade the system performance
since the wireless link is time-varying and may experience
multipath fading and interference. In future work, the effects
of the channel will be treated.
Furthermore, most four improvements will be introduced
in order to improve trafﬁc in Fixed WiMAX Networks:
1) The loss of packets in the communication channel will
be dealt with so we can get more accurate results.
2) The Call Admission Control (CAC) will use an
optimization tool that can perform more efﬁciently,
control of connections that will be served by the
system.
3) To calculate the time frame (TF), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) [24] is used.
4) The Network Simulator NS-3 [25] is used for the
simulations of performance evaluation of these new
improvements.
In a communication system with a wireless link, the
channel effects can heavily degrade the system performance
since the wireless link is time-varying and may experience
multipath fading and interference.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We
thank
all
researchers
and
collaborators
at
the
Advanced
Nucleus
of
Communication
Technology
at
UTFPR.
REFERENCES
[1] E. R. Dosciatti, W. Godoy Jr., and A. Foronda, "New
Scheduler with Call Admission Control (CAC) for IEEE
802.16 Fixed with Delay Bound Guarantee," in Proc. of the
First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources,
and Users (MOBILITY 2011), Barcelona, Spain, Oct. 2011,
pp. 139-145.
[2] A. Gosh, D. Wolter, J. Andrews, and R. Chen, "Broadband
wireless access with WiMAX/802.16: current performance
benchmarks and future potential," in IEEE Communications,
v. 43(2), Feb. 2005, pp. 129-136.
[3] IEEE
802.16-2004,
"IEEE
Standard
for
Local
and
Metropolitan
Area
Networks
-
Part
16:
Air
Interface
for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems," IEEE Std.,
Rev. IEEE Std802.16-2004, New York, Oct. 2004.
[4] E. G. Camargo, C. B. Both, R. Kunst, L. Z. Granville, and
J. Rochol, "Uma Arquitetura de Escalonamento Hierárquica
para Transmissões Uplink em Redes WiMAX Baseadas em
OFDMA," in Proc. of Brazilian Symposium on Computer
Networks and Distributed Systems (SBRC 2009), Recife,
Brazil, May 2009, pp. 525-538. (in Portuguese).
[5] C. Eklund, R. B. Marks, K .L. Stanwood, and S. Wang, "IEEE
Standard 802.16: A Technical Overview of the WirelessMAN
Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access," in IEEE
Communications Magazine, v. 40(6), June 2002, pp. 98-107.
[6] WiMAX Forum. WiMAX Forum. 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.wimaxforum.org. [Accessed: Dec. 10, 2012].
[7] Y. Sun, I. Sheriff, E. M. Belding-Royer, and K. C. Almeroth,
"Experimental Study of Multimedia Trafﬁc Performance in
Mesh Networks," in Proc. of the International Workshop on
Wireless Trafﬁc Measurements and Modeling, Seattle, EUA,
June 2005, pp. 25-30.
[8] D. Stiliadis and A. Varma, "Latency-Rate Servers: A General
Model for Analysis of Trafﬁc Scheduling Algorithms," in
IEEE-ACM Transactions on Networking, v. 6(5), Oct. 1998,
pp. 611-624.
[9] K. Wongthavarawant and A. Ganz, "Packet Scheduling for
QoS Support in IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access
Systems,"
in
International
Journal
of
Communications
Systems, v. 16, Feb. 2003, pp. 81-96.
[10] G. Chu, D. Wang, and S. Mei, "A QoS architecture for the
MAC protocol of IEEE 802.16 BWA System," in Proc. of
IEEE Conference on Communications, Circuits, and Systems,
v. 1, Chengdu, China, June/July 2002, pp. 435-439.
[11] C. Cicconetti, A. Erta, L. Lenzini, and E. Mingozzi,
"Performance Evaluation of the IEEE 802.16 MAC for QoS
Support," in IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing -
TMC07, v. 6(1), Jan. 2007, pp. 26-38.
[12] R. Iyengar, P. Iyer, and B. Sikdar, "Delay Analysis of 802.16
Based Last Mile Wireless Networks," in Proc. of IEEE Global
Telecommunications Conference - GLOBECOM’05, v. 5, St.
Louis, EUA, Dec. 2005, pp. 1-5.

209
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[13] D. Cho, J. Song, M. Kim, and K. Han, "Performance Analysis
of the IEEE 802.16 Wireless Metropolitan Area Network," in
IEEE Computer Society, DFMA’05, Feb. 2005, pp. 130-137.
[14] S. Kim and I. Yeom, "TCP-aware Uplink Scheduling for
IEEE 802.16," in IEEE Communications Letters, v. 11(2),
Feb. 2007, pp. 146-148.
[15] S. Maheshwari, "An Efﬁcient QoS Scheduling Architecture
for IEEE 802.16 Wireless MANs," Master Degree, K. R.
School of Information Technology, Bombay, India, Jan. 2005.
[16] E. R. Dosciatti, W. Godoy Jr., and A. Foronda, "Scheduling
Mechanisms with Call Admission Control (CAC) and an
Approach with Guaranteed Maximum Delay for Fixed
WiMAX Networks," in Quality of Service and Resource
Allocation in WiMAX, INTECH, Croatia, Feb. 2012, pp.
59-84.
[17] I. F. Akyildiz and X. Wang, "A Survey on Wireless Mesh
Networks," in IEEE Communications Magazine, v.43(9),
Sept. 2005, pp. 523-530.
[18] IEEE
802.16e-2005,
"IEEE
Standard
for
Local
and
Metropolitan Area Networks. Amendment 2: Physical and
Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and
Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands: Part 16: Air Interface
for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems," New York,
Dec. 2005.
[19] A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks. 4. ed. New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall, 2003.
[20] INTEL. Deploying License-Exempt WiMAX Solutions: White
paper. 16 p., Jan. 2005.
[21] A. Foronda, Y. Higuchi, C. Ohta, M. Yoshimoto, and Y.
Okada, "Delay Guarantee and Service Interval Optimization
for HCCA in IEEE 802.11e WLANs," in IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference - WCNC 2007,
v. 1, Hong Kong, Mar. 2007, pp. 2080-2085.
[22] A. Parekh and R. Gallager, " A Generalized Processor
Sharing Approach to Flow Control in Integrated Services
Networks: the Single-Node Case," in IEEE/ACM Transactions
Networking, v. 1(3), June 1993, pp. 344-357
[23] D. M. Ritchie and B. W. Kernighan, The C Programming
Language. 2. ed. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1988.
[24] J.
Kennedy
and
R.
C.
Eberhart,
"Particle
Swarm
Optimization," in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
Neural Networks, v. 4, Piscataway, New Jersey, Nov./Dec.
1995, pp. 1942–1948.
[25] NS-3.
Network
Simulator-3.
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.nsnam.org. [Accessed: Dec. 10, 2012].

