Context Modeling for Cross-layer Context Aware Adaptations
Ruwini Kodikara
Centre for Distributed
Systems & Software Engineering
Monash University
900, Dandenong Road, Caulﬁeld
East Vic 3145, Australia
Arkady Zaslavsky
Department of Information &
Communication Technology
Lule˚a University
of Technology
931 87 Lule˚a,Sweden
Christer ˚Ahlund
Division of Mobile
Networking & Computing
Lule˚a University
of Technology
931 87 Skellefte˚a,Sweden
Abstract
Demand for real-time services over the Internet while
moving, is growing rapidly. This necessitates efﬁcient de-
livery of wireless real-time trafﬁc.
Limitations of exist-
ing layered protocol stack for wireless networks lead to
the proposal of cross-layer interactions as an alternative
solution.
At the same time, next generation ubiquitous
computing drives wireless applications and protocols to
be context aware.
A generic context aware architecture
with context modeling can aid increasingly demanding real-
time applications over highly dynamic wireless networks to
be cross-layer context aware and adaptive. Moreover, a
generic architecture can make lower layer protocols to be
context aware and adaptive to various situations dynam-
ically. This article discusses the adaptive approach sup-
ported by proposed cross layer context aware architecture
called CA3RM-Com. The scope of this article is to discuss
context modeling speciﬁcally and address the issue of con-
text representation of multi-layer context for various adap-
tive situations. Various single layer and multi-layer cross-
layer adaptations and the representation of context param-
eters with respect to each layer of the protocol stack is dis-
cussed. We discuss how these adaptations can be operated
in the proposed CA3RM-Com architecture. Context aware
adaptive multi-homed Mobile IP is discussed as an example
adaptation that the architecture can support. Moreover, the
extended simulation of context aware adaptive multi-homed
Mobile IP is discussed.
Index Terms—Context Awareness; Real-time Commu-
nications; Mobile IP
1. Introduction
Rapid growth of Internet, increasing demand to stay con-
nected while on the move are the driving forces of evolv-
ing wireless technologies. Demand for real time wireless
trafﬁc such as voice, multimedia teleconferencing, mobile
PC, mobile TV, mobile games and video conferencing is in-
creasing day by day. Moreover, next generation computing
is becoming ubiquitous necessitating wireless technologies
to accomplish context aware adaptations [1].
Unlike in static wired networks, wireless networks re-
quire adaptations to various situations for efﬁcient real-time
communication. The reasons for such adaptations are the
challenges arise due to nature of wireless networks, wire-
less devices in use and characteristics of real-time media.
Wireless networks have inherent limitations of radio links
such as noise, shadowing, channel fading and interference;
network topology is unpredictable due to highly dynamic
nature; network management and routing is complex com-
pared to static wired networks. Moreover, there are con-
straints in wireless network devices in terms of energy and
computational capabilities. On the other hand, real-time
applications are bandwidth intensive, latency sensitive and
loss tolerable in nature [2]. Real-time applications demand
for high data rates and are coupled with stringent delay con-
straints. These data packets should be delivered with tol-
erable delays and loss rates to avoid decode errors and to
guaranty the Quality of Service (QoS) levels. Even though
the technology is growing and trying to satisfy the grow-
ing demands of applications, there exists an impediment in
wireless networks due to the dynamic nature and limited re-
sources of the underlying network compared to wired net-
works [1]. Because of this, the next generation wireless
technologies should facilitate adaptations to various situa-
tions dynamically. Challenge in facilitating dynamic adap-
tations is the awareness of the situations.
Modern communication systems use layered protocol
stack for inter-networking due to several reasons. The initial
purpose of layering [3] was to ensure modularity. In a mod-
ular system, each module has clearly deﬁned functions, pro-
cedures, speciﬁed and controlled interactions among mod-
ular component to enable layer independence. Because of
the abstractions, the overall system is easy to understand.
63
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Hence, layered approach reduces system design complex-
ity. So, layering ensures easy implementation and main-
tainability. Moreover, the layered approach assures the in-
teroperability between different systems. Standardized ab-
stractions allow designers of various subsystems to focus
on their particular subsystem without bothering about the
entire system interoperability.
Though strict layered approach serves as an elegant solu-
tion for inter-networking static wired networks, it is argued
in the literature that the layered protocol stack is not ade-
quate for efﬁcient functionality of wireless networks [4],[5].
The layered protocol stack is insufﬁcient to cater for the
adaptations of demanding applications and complex net-
working conditions. Further, the system performance im-
provements are restricted in layered approach, because most
of the time performance improvement is achieved through
multi-layer joint interactions.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section
2 discusses the background and related work. Section 3
presents motivation of the context modeling, classiﬁcation
of context parameters related to adaptive situations and con-
text representation mechanism we propose. Section 4 dis-
cusses the simulation of context aware adaptive handover.
Finally, Section 5 concludes the article.
2. Background and Related Work
2.1
Cross Layer Design
Cross-layer interaction was proposed as a solution to
overcome limitations of layered protocol stack when ap-
plied in wireless networks [6]. Cross-layer design is deﬁned
as Protocol design by the violation of a reference layered
communication architecture with respect to that layered
architecture [7].
According to aforementioned deﬁnition, designing pro-
tocol by violating the reference architecture, by allowing di-
rect communication between protocols at nonadjacent lay-
ers or sharing variables between layers is cross-layer de-
sign with respect to the reference architecture. It is argued
that violation of layered architecture includes creating new
interfaces between layers, redeﬁning the layer boundaries,
designing protocol at a layer based on the details of how
another layer is designed, joint tuning of parameters across
layers and giving up the luxury of designing protocols at
different layered independently [7].
A number of cross layer designs are proposed in the lit-
erature including [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. They can be clas-
siﬁed as speciﬁc solutions and generic architectures.
Speciﬁc solutions are not based on the objective of
providing a generic framework and are tailored towards
a speciﬁc adaptation/requirement. Joint adaptations with
multi-layer interactions were proposed with various perfor-
mance objectives. Joint adaptations of adaptive routing and
rate/channel adaptations are proposed in [13]. Joint con-
gestion Control, rate control, adaptive routing and chan-
nel scheduling is proposed in [14].
Cross-layer mecha-
nism of joint channel scheduling and rate/channel adapta-
tion is presented [15].
Congestion control together with
channel scheduling is proposed in [16]. Adaptive routing
with joint link rate adaptation is discussed in [17]. Link rate
adaptation ([12], [18]) and joint power control is studied in
[19]. Joint application layer and lower layer interactions are
also presented. Packetization with joint link rate adaptation
([11],[20]), Packetization with joint adaptive routing [21],
Packetization with adaptive routing and adaptive modula-
tion are studied in [22]. Energy optimizes routing was pro-
posed in [23]. QoS Control with joint adaptive modulation
and power Control at physical layer is studies in [2]. Study
related to QoS control with joint channel scheduling is pre-
sented [24]. Moreover joint rate control, adaptive routing,
channel scheduling and link rate adaptation are studied in
[25] and [26].
The frameworks which are based on generic cross layer
design are considered in detail for further analysis as bellow.
Cross-Layer Signaling Shortcuts-CLASS. The cross-
layer signaling design framework suggests in [4] is called
Cross-Layer Signaling Shortcuts (CLASS). CLASS pro-
poses direct signaling between non-neighboring layers. In-
ternal message format of CLASS is deﬁned with the objec-
tive of supporting local adaptations. External information
ﬂow is based on standard ICMP and TCP/IP headers.
The direct signaling across the layers proposed by
CLASS inherently has a very low latency.
The mecha-
nism is highly ﬂexible, because any protocol or applica-
tion at any layer can exchange context.
So, wide range
of adaptations can be supported. Internal signals are light
weighted but the external messages are wrapped in either
ICMP or TCP/IP headers so, it introduces some overhead.
Hence, average signaling overhead of internal and external
context exchange is moderate. However, direct interaction
among the protocols introduce high design complexity and
hence, maintenance difﬁculty. Moreover, CLASS proposal
violates the concept of layered protocol stack by direct sig-
naling among layers for performance objectives.
Cross-layer Coordination Planes. A framework based
on cross-layer coordination planes for wireless terminals is
proposed [27]. Cross-layer coordination model composed
of four coordination planes where each of them is a cross-
section of layered-protocol stack. The planes are classiﬁed
according to the functionality as security, QoS, mobility,
and wireless link. Internal details of signaling and inter-
actions are not available.
Coordination planes separate the wireless networking
problems from the existing functionality of the layered
64
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

stack hence ensures uninterrupted operation to existing
stack. So this concept has high degree of coexistence in the
existing layered stack. Due to the cross-section views intro-
duced as coordination planes the modularity of the proposal
is low. Implementation and changes to the existing proto-
cols and proving operations of planes is complex. Similarly
maintenance is also difﬁcult due to the complexity in chang-
ing and evolving the protocols. Flexibility is low since the
adaptations are limited to the once deﬁned in coordination
planes. Moreover, the system cannot support adaptations
which may involve interaction among the planes and scala-
bility is low.
WIreless DEployable Network System-WIDENS. The
WIreless DEployable Network System (WIDENS) [28, 29],
is a ad-hoc communication system speciﬁcally designed for
public safety or emergency applications. WIDENS archi-
tecture supports combination of several joint optimizations
such as secured QoS extension for route optimization, mo-
bility management, resource allocation at the MAC layer
with hard QoS support, combine opportunistic scheduling
and channel coding, slotted multiuser/stream capability.
WIDENS cross-layer architecture preserves modularity
to a great extent, by allowing layer by layer interaction. The
cross-layer interaction is separated from non-cross layer in-
formation ﬂow, so the solution can coexist with the exist-
ing layered protocol stack. However, providing mapping
function with the separated standard protocol functionality
is complex and demands synchronization mechanisms. Fur-
ther, to support wide range of adaptations it demands com-
plex and considerable amount of changes to the protocol
stack. So, design complexity is high introducing difﬁcult
maintainability. The processing overhead of context passes
to the next layer is very high due to mapping of state in-
formation and parameters of adjacent layers. In addition
to that, latency of layer-by-layer traversal and processing
at each layer is very high. However, unnecessary and un-
intended cross-layer operations are avoided by controlling
information ﬂow through the translation at each layer. Flex-
ibility of the architecture to support range of adaptation
is low. Each newly added adaptation requisite changes to
whole protocol stack that the packets ﬂow through.
ECLAIR Cross-layer Architecture. ECLAIR architec-
ture proposed [8], is based on the fact that protocol behav-
ior is determined by the protocol data-structure. ECLAIR
provides an interface to read and update the protocol data-
structures through the interface called a Tuning Layer (TL)
for each layer. TL is further divided in to generic tuning
layer nad implementation speciﬁc tuning layer for porta-
bility objectives of implementation. Cross layer feedback
algorithms and data structures are added in to Protocol Op-
timizers (PO). The collection of POs forms the Optimizing
SubSystem (OSS).
ECLAIR cross-layer architecture is separated and can be
easily enabled/ disabled it facilitates the uninterrupted op-
eration to the layered protocol stack. Modularity of the sys-
tem is high because it allows layer separation and preserves
the modular functionality. Cross-layer interaction can be
facilitated at any layer, and the solution can be extended to
range of adaptations and optimizations through OSS. So,
the scalability of the architecture is high.
However, the
design involves changes to almost every protocol that uses
context as well as providing the context. So, maintenance
and management of product is difﬁcult and it hindered the
evolution. In addition to that, there exists an extra complex-
ity in implementing TLs and POs. Further, TLs and POs
add extra signaling overhead and latency.
Cross-Layer Decision Support Based on Global
Knowledge-CrossTalk. A cross layer architecture called
CrossTalk for decision support based on global knowledge
is proposed [9]. CrossTalk enables mobile devices to es-
tablish the state of the mobile node as a local view and
relative status called global view compared to global net-
work conditions. Local view is represented as the sum of
local parameters such as battery level, SNR, location infor-
mation, transmit power, etc. Global view is based on the
metrics such as energy level, communication load or neigh-
bor degree. The CrossTalk architecture consists of two data
management entities to manage aforementioned two views.
CrossTalk proposes local adaptations of the mobile device
based on the global status. Global view is encouraged to use
whenever possible to have network wide accurate decisions.
CrossTalk proposes a comprehensive network wide deci-
sion mechanism. The architecture can coexist with the lay-
ered architecture with uninterrupted operation to the stack.
However, CrossTalk does not address the local view in de-
tail for example how the local parameters are acquired by
the local view management entity and how they are ex-
changed to the interested protocols. Further, establishing
a global view and data dissemination is costly and com-
plex. Solution is less ﬂexible in local adaptations and per-
formance improvements because of the lack of support for
local adaptations.
Latency and overhead is high due to
complex network wide data dissemination procedure. Lo-
cal data accessibility and dissemination procedure is not
addressed and information about modularity of signaling
mechanism is not available.
Local
Server
based
Cross-Layer
Coordination
Framework. A cross-layer coordination framework which
consists of a local cross-layer coordination server and
clients at each layer is suggested in [30].
Non-adjacent
layer interaction is done through the cross-layer server.
Context delivery is performed in a way that, when an
initiating layer wants to send a certain event to another
target layer, the client of the initiating layer ﬁrst sends
event to the server, and then the server forwards it to
the target layer. How the interested cross-layer protocols
65
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

and applications can express interest for context is not
addressed.
A parameter repository is maintained at the
server.
The framework preserves the modularity while maintain-
ing a higher degree of ﬂexibility by allowing interaction
among non-adjacent layers. Since the cross-layer interac-
tions are separated from the standard operational protocol
stack, coexistence of the framework with the layered stack
is high. However, since the layers that support the param-
eters also need to be changed and all the adaptations are
maintained at the layer client itself, the design complex-
ity of the framework is high. Since the parameters traverse
through server and client are kept in a repository rather than
notifying the interested layers as an when the event occurs,
there is a latency of the signaling. Signaling overhead is low
because the event structure composed of few ﬁelds.
2.2
Context Aware Adaptations
A general deﬁnition of context for context aware com-
puting domain is presented in [31]. According to the def-
inition provided in [31] context is: any information that
can be used to characterize the situation of an entity. An
entity is a person, place, or object that is considered rele-
vant to the interaction between a user and an application,
including the user and applications themselves.
Challenges in context aware computing, include uncer-
tainty, diversity and complexity of context information. Re-
search had been tried to investigate important aspects of
context aware computing such as context discovery, context
presentation, and context execution including reasoning to
address aforementioned challenges [32, 33, 34, 35].
Context Modeling.
Context representation and mod-
eling has been addressed various domain speciﬁc require-
ments to describe context.
Mark-up based models ex-
tend existing web standards such as XML 1 and RDF 2
to represent contextual information. Composite Capabil-
ity/Preference Proﬁles (CC/PP) 3 is a data representation
mark-up format based on RDF, which is proposed to de-
scribe user agent and proxy capabilities and preferences.
The Comprehensive Structured Context Proﬁles (CSCP)
context model which overcomes structural shortcoming of
CC/PP is proposed in [36]. XML based context represen-
tation is proposed in [37]. XML is used to encode context
conﬁgurations and values, and XML associated tree struc-
ture and XML schema are used to represent richer data and
meta-data.
A context modeling approach called Context
Spaces which describe context and situations with spatial
metaphors of state and space is presented in [38]. Context
Space explicitly models context and situations in general
1urlhttp://www.w3.org/XML/
2urlhttp://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-rdf-syntax-19990222/
3urlhttp://www.w3.org/TR/2001/WD-CCPP-struct-vocab-20010315/
rather representing speciﬁc contextual information.
3
Context Representation and Support for
Adaptations
3.1
Motivation
A number of research studies has been done in speciﬁc
cross-layer adaptations as discussed in Section 2. Almost
none of studies address the context awareness in cross-layer
signaling in great detail. None of the studies present a clear,
generic way to model context parameters. None analyses
the context at various layers of the protocol stack relation to
each adaptation.
The generic architectures address the context exchange
and signaling mechanisms and very few studies try to ad-
dress context acquisition including [4, 39].
To facilitate
context awareness it is necessary to investigate other as-
pects of context awareness mentioned in 2.2 in addition
to the signaling mechanisms (context exchange) addressed
in the cross-layer architectures. Generic mechanisms for
context presentation and context acquisition are key aspects
which are missing in the generic cross-layer architectures
proposed in literature. In addition to that, clear deﬁnition of
context parameters used in speciﬁc adaptations and appli-
cations is necessary in order to facilitate control over multi-
ple adaptations to avoid performance degradation of wholes
system.
3.2
Classiﬁcation of context parameters
A detail classiﬁcation of context parameters used in vari-
ous cross-layer context aware adaptations discussed in Sec-
tion 2 is presented in this section. Table 1 shows the iden-
tiﬁed layer parameters related to adaptations at each layer.
This parameter identiﬁcation is based on the review of the
speciﬁc adaptations found in the related work.
3.3
Context Aware Architecture
We propose the CA3RM-Com architecture [44] as a
generic cross-layer context aware framework. The archi-
tectural details, design principles are discussed in [44]. The
CA3RM-Com architecture and its modular components are
illustrated in Figure 1. The CA3RM-Com architecture com-
posed of several components to facilitate aspects of con-
text awareness.
The components are Context Exchange
Module (CEM), Context Acquisition Module (CAM), Con-
text Representation Module (CRM) and a Context Manage-
ment Module (CMM). Context exchange across the proto-
col stack and across the network is carried out through the
CEM which is called ConEx [45]. ConEx is an event driven
66
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Table 1. Context Parameters of Layer Adaptations
Adaptation
Layer
Parameter
Application Layer Adaptations
QoS Control ( [25], [2],
[26], [24] )
Application Layer
user application priorities, user QoS preferences (delay sensitivity, loss tolerance),
Source distortion, packet loss rate, video source coding, user satisfaction (MOS),
PSNR
Link Layer
packet Size
Physical Layer
modulation, code rate, symbol rate
Packetization ( [21],
[11], [20], [40] )
Application Layer
QoS (delay sensitivity)
Data Link Layer
channel rate, multiple access, network access delay, error detection (retry limits, frame
length, BER)
Transport Layer
hybrid ARQ error control
Physical Layer
modulation, antenna diversity, power delay proﬁle, time delay proﬁle, time delay
speed, transmitter signal power, maximum adaptation frequency, battery power
Transport Layer Adaptations
Mobility Adaptations (
[41] )
Network Layer
hand over notiﬁcations
Congestion Control/Rate
Control/ Error
corrections ( [14], [10],
[16], [25], [26], [40] )
Application Layer
service quality, source bit rate
Transport Layer
Congestion distortion, receiver window, timeout clock, congestion window, TCP/UDP
header checksum, TCP/UDP header options, serial number of corrupted packet
Network Layer
route data( route failures, route changes)
Data Link Layer
SNR, BER, error coding, channel conditions (channel access delay, congestion)
Network Layer Adaptations
Adaptive routing ( [14],
[13], [10], [25], [26],
[22], [21], [23], [17],
[19], [12], [18] )
Application Layer
trafﬁc type, delay bound, transmission delay jitter bound
Network Layer
routing metrics, route outage probability, number of nodes in routes, network packet
size(routing protocol), bit rate
Data Link Layer
link outage probability, network congestion, packet delay, link state routing, average
SNR, SNR threshold
Physical Layer
battery power, min transmission power, path loss exponent, transmission range
Mobility Management (
[42], [43] )
Application Layer
Application/User QoS requirements
Data Link Layer
Link layer hand over triggers
Data Link Layer Adaptations
Scheduling and
Adaptive Error Control (
[14], [10], [15], [16],
[25], [26], [24], [40] )
Application Layer
service quality
Network Layer
routing data (route failures, changes)
Data Link Layer
SNR, link transmission rate, packet size/length, symbol rate, constellation size, error
control system, channel conditions (packet loss, sequence number of packets), network
delay, congestion(queue length, average link layer utilization), link BW, PER,RTT,
Time slots, queue of packets per user, partial checksum
Physical Layer
channel conditions (equalizer information -fading.), battery power
Channel/Rate adaptation
( [25], [20], [23], [17],
[12], [18] )
Application Layer
transmission rate
Data Link Layer
SNR, BER, error detection (retry limits, frame control), BW, link capacity, outage
probability of links, link transmission rates
Physical Layer
interference, SNR, noise, fading
Physical Layer Adaptations
Adaptive Modula-
tion/Transmission mode
( [25], [26], [22], [2] )
Application Layer
service quality
Network Layer
Routing data/trafﬁc, network data rate
Data Link Layer
SNR, payload data,
physical Layer
mode, Channel fading, channel code rate, modulation, bytes per symbol, BS-user gain,
transmit power, SINR
Congestion Recognition
Physical Layer
load estimation intra-cell interference, Base station transmit power
Power Control ( [10],
[2], [11], [23], [19] )
Data Link Layer
angle of arrival (AOA) of RTS, CTS, transmission rate
Physical Layer
energy usage (CPU, network )
67
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Figure 1. Cross-layer Context Aware Archi-
tecture
context exchange framework in which context delivery is
based on subscriptions.
Details about ConEx, the algo-
rithms and message formats are presented in [45]. Mod-
eling of ConEx is presented in [46]. Light weighted mes-
sage format of ConEx ensures low overhead of context ex-
change mechanism. Event driven context exchange through
subscriptions and notiﬁcations facilitated by ConEx ensures
low latency in context delivery. ConEx preserves modular-
ity of the protocol stack by enabling cross-layer signaling
through layer agents and by restricting the direct interaction
across protocols at non adjacent layers. Context acquisition
is accomplished through the Local Trafﬁc Analyzer CAM,
which sniffs the packets ﬂow through the protocol stack.
Local packet analyzer is utilized in context acquisition to
minimize changes to the existing protocols during the pro-
cess of acquiring the context and to introduce the uninter-
rupted functioning of non-cross layering protocols in the ex-
isting stack. CAM exchanges context via ConEx. Context
is represented using context space which is a generic rep-
resentation of situations which consists of context parame-
ters at each layer and performance parameters. Moreover,
CA3RM-com supports local and global context awareness
through it ConEx module. Context Manager enables policy
based system driven adaptations and controls adaptations
to avoid conﬂicts which would consequence performance
degradations. The architecture is ﬂexible and can support
adaptations ranging from application adaptations to chan-
nel adaptations. Architecture can be easily enabled and dis-
abled hence ensures higher degree of coexistence with the
existing layered protocol stack.
3.4
Context Representation Module
Context representation is a key aspect in any context
aware system. CA3RM-com architecture exploits extended
multi-layer version of Context Space [38] to represent con-
text parameters and performance optimizing metrics used in
cross-layer adaptations.
Figure 2 illustrates the representation of context parame-
ters and performance parameters in Euclidean vector space
for a given problem domain. These set of parameters rep-
resent a situation. Combination of context and performance
parameters (could be static or dynamic) form the context
vector of a particular situation.
Figure 2. Multi-layer Context Representation
Context vector corresponding to a given situation at time
t vt, can be represented as a vector consists of a set of con-
text parameters (cp) and set of performance parameters (pp)
as shown in Equation 1.
Vt =
n
X
i=1
aicpxit +
m
X
j=1
bippit
(1)
Where, ai , bi are scalars.
x indicates the layer number 1 to 5, which represent the
physical, mac, network, transport, and application layers of
the practical protocol stack.
cpxnt is the nth adaptation parameter at layer x at time t.
ppnt is the nth performance parameter at time t.
So, context vector at time t, can be written as shown in
Equation 2
Vt = a1.cp11t... + an.cp5nt + b1.pp1t... + bm.ppmt
(2)
Further, granularity is introduced to dynamic parameter
ranges in order to provide reasoning and more reliable de-
cision making about the situation as shown in Table 2. For
example, parameter cp11t context space values range from
r1lcp11t to rnucp11t. where, r1l represents lower bound and
68
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

rnu represents the upper bound. The context value range is
subdivided in to n number of ranges.
Table 2. Context parameter value ranges
Range
Parameter values
range1
r1lcp11t - r1ucp11t
range2
r2lcp11t - r2ucp11t
.
.
.
.
.
.
rangen
rnlcp11t - rnucp11t
3.5
Context Management Module
Context Management Module (CMM) in CA3RM-Com
architecture executes two major tasks.
Firstly, Context
Manager (CM) ensures that the context aware adaptations
are based on predeﬁned user and system policies through
the Policy Manager (PM). Secondly, CMM controls context
aware adaptations to avoid unintended conﬂicts that may
arise by uncontrolled adaptations. This is done through the
Conﬂict Handler. Two main categories of adaptation are
considered in the proposed CA3RM-com architecture as il-
lustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Categorization of Adaptations
The two categories of adaptations, entity-executed adap-
tations and system-executed are supported in the architec-
ture. In entity-executed adaptations the entity (the term en-
tity is used to represent any protocol or application at any
layer of the protocol stack) which is executing the adapta-
tion subscribes to the architecture to acquire the context.
Entity-executed adaptation can be achieved based on two
types of subscriptions. In one type of entity-executed adap-
tations the entity requests particular context parameters in
order to make the adaptation decision based on its own
rules or policies and conditions. In the other type of entity-
executed adaptations, entitys subscription is to an adaptive
situation, where the policy manager executes the policies re-
lated to the adaptation and notiﬁes the adaptation decision to
the relevant entity [1]. In system-executed adaptations, the
entity is not involved in subscriptions but the context man-
ager forces the adaptation to the entity, based on system and
user deﬁned policies which enables control and administra-
tion of the system [1].
4
Simulation
4.1
Adaptive Handover
We have evaluated the context aware adaptive Multi-
homed Mobile IP [47] handover mechanism based on the
proposed CA3RM-Com architecture in simulation. The de-
tail discussion of algorithm and simulation of handover sce-
nario is out of scope of this article. In this section we discuss
the simulation in brief and the extended experiments with
multiple candidate networks to provide a validated exam-
ple of adaptation that CA3RM-Com can support. In brief,
context aware adaptive Multi-homed Mobile IP handover
is an adaptive mechanism is an entity-executed adaptation
(as discussed above), where the adaptation decision is done
by the MIP protocol itself based on the subscribed context
parameters. We show overall handover delay can be mini-
mized by fast agent discovery and fast move detection and
context aware decision for adaptation to mobility can be
made. Hence increased throughput and minimized packet
loss is achieved through fast handover. In context aware
adaptive handover, fast movement detection was done us-
ing SNR based movement prediction without waiting for the
conventional unreachability detection. The least congested
GW is selected based on RNL metric [48].
The extended simulation presented here is based on the
topology shown in Figure 4 with multiple candidate net-
works, where more than one possible approaching gateways
are available for the MN for handover. Results are presented
as mean value of multiple simulations with different seeds
to use normal distribution. Results are presented with 90%
conﬁdence level.
Context space discussed in section previously is used as
shown in Figure 5. The context vector for adaptive han-
dover is shown in Equation 3 and the range of values of
the parameters in Table 3. Granularity of SNR and RNL is
shown in Table 4.
Vah := a1.snr + a2.snrth + a3.snrcth + a4.ctp
+a.5.cps + a6.cbf + a7.cdr + a8.rnl
+a9.aaf + b1.pl + b2.thr
(3)
69
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Figure 4. Simulation Network Topology
Figure 5. Context Space for context aware
handover
SNR is Signal to Noise Ratio of received agent advertise-
ment in multi-homed MIPV4 or binding updates of Multi-
homed MIPV6. Context parameters such as RTT, jitter and
frequency of agent advertisement are used to calculate RNL
metric. Simulation of the proposed solution was carried out
using the network simulator Glomosim. Time out for bind-
ings used is three times the agent advertisement time. Sim-
ulation was carried out for 200 seconds. Constant Bit Rate
(CBR) trafﬁc ﬂows were sent from MN to CN every 3MS.
Results of different data rates with different packet sizes
were simulated. Agent advertisements in the MIP were sent
every half a second and MN registered every third adver-
tisement with the HA.
Pure M-MIP approach, which does not use context ex-
Table 3. Context Parameters of Adaptive Han-
dover simulation
Symbol Parameter
Range of Values/Value
Vah : Adaptive Handover
snr
SNR of agent advertise-
ments
>10dB
snrth
radio
receiver
SNR
threshold
10dB
snrcth
CBR trafﬁc SNR thresh-
old
15dB
ctp
CBR trafﬁc priority
0/1
cps
CBR packet size
( 1460 ) Bytes
cbf
CBR packet interval
(0.003-0.011) second
cdr
CBR data rate
(4-4.2)Mbps
rnl
RNL metric
0-1
aaf
agent advertisements fre-
quency
2 per second
pl
CBR pakcet loss rate
(0 - 1)% 4
thr
CBR throughput
(3.96 - 4.22) bits per sec-
ond
Table 4. Parameter ranges of SNR and RNL
SNR
SNR Range (dB)
Relationship to channel
quality
<15
very poor
15 to 20
poor
20 to 30
good
>30
excellent
RNL
RNL
Relationship to congestion
0.1 to 1
poor
.01 to 0.1
good
0 to 0.01
excellent
change for handover decision is represented as WithOut
ConEx (WOConEx) approach. Adaptive handover decision
and is based on ConEx architecture is referred to as the
ConEx (ConEx) approach.
Figure 6 illustrates the packet loss rate of CBR trafﬁc
with variable data rates. Due to the delay of move detec-
tion in WOConEx approach a considerable packet loss is
noticed. In ConEx approach the move detection delay is
zero with the proactive move detection technique. So the
packet loss rate is zero in ConEx approach. The graph in
Figure 7 illustrates the throughput results of CBR trafﬁc for
variable data rates. In the WOConEx approach, there ex-
ists a delay for move detection, which causes the packet
loss. Due to this packet loss during the handover in this ap-
proach, the throughput is decreased. In ConEx approach the
move detection is done proactive without a delay. Hence to-
70
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Figure 6. Packet loss rates of CBR trafﬁc
tal handover delay is reduced and maximum throughput is
available in ConEx approach compared to WOConEx ap-
proach.
Figure 7. Throughput results of CBR trafﬁc
4.2
Context Representation Extensibility
The proposed CA3RM-Com architecture is extensible to
support various single layer and multi layer context aware
adaptations.
These adaptation techniques can be entity-
executed or system-executed based on the application and
the policy managers system policies.
User Perceived Quality Maximization. CA3RM-Com
architecture can be used in user perceived quality maxi-
mization discussed in [24]. The context vector corresponds
to the adaptive quality maximization of video applications is
shown in Equation 4. Static parameter values and ranges of
parameter values for dynamic parameters of context space
are shown in Table 5. MOS values between 0 to 4.4 are used
to represent user satisfaction.
V 2 : upqm = a1.m + a2.cr + a3.smr + a4.snr
+b1.mos + b2.us + b2.abs+
b1.psnr + b2.sl + b3.us
(4)
Table 5. User Perceived Quality Maximization
Symbol Parameter
Range of Values/Value
V2upqm - User Perceived Quality Maximization of video
m
Modulation scheme
DBPSK, BPSK, QPSK,
16-QAM,
64-QAM,
DQPSK
cr
Channel Code rates
1/2,4/3,2/3
smr
Symbol/modulation rate
(500,
700,900)kSym-
bolds/s
snr
Signal to Noise Ration
(SNR)
(7-25) dB
mos
Mean
Opinion
Score
(MOS)
0-4.4
psnr
percieved SNR (PSNR)
(50-200)kbits/s
sl
slice losses
0-15%
us
user satisfaction
very
satisﬁed,
satisﬁed,
some
users
dissatisﬁed,
Many users dissatisﬁed,
Nearly All users dissatis-
ﬁed, Not recommended.
TCP congestion & ﬂow control. TCP congestion and
ﬂow control mechanism is proposed in [49]. The context
vector representation of this adaptation in CA3RM-Com ar-
chitecture we propose is shown in Equation 5. Static pa-
rameter values and ranges of parameter values for dynamic
parameters of context space are shown in Table 6.
V 3 : tcp = a1.up + a2.bw + a3.rtt + a4.aw
+b1.thr
(5)
Energy Optimized Routing.
Context modeling pro-
posed in this article can be extended in energy optimized
routing as an adaptation [23, 19]. The context vector repre-
sentation of this adaptation is shown in Equation 6. Static
parameter values and ranges of parameter values for dy-
namic parameters of context space are shown in Table 7.
V 4 : eor = a1.ps + a2.nn + a3.br + a4.es
+a5.tr + a6.ple + a7.mtp
+b1.thr
(6)
Optimal Transmission Mode. Link adaptation/optimal
transmission mode for IEEE802.11a is proposed in [15].
71
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

Table 6. TCP congestion and ﬂow control
Symbol Parameter
Range of Values/Value
V3:tcp - TCP congestion and ﬂow control
up
User priorities
1,2,3
bw
Network BW
100Mbps
rtt
Round Trip Time
about 5ms
aw
Advertised window
8
KB(for
transmission
<
1
Mbps), 17 KB(for transmission
1-100 Mbps), 64 KB (for trans-
mission > 100 Mbps)
thr
throughput
(500-1060) kbps
Table 7. Energy Optimized routing
Symbol Parameter
Range of Values/Value
V4:eor - Energy Optimized routing
ps
Network packet size
512B
nn
number of nodes
10-25/25
br
bit rate
2Mbps
es
Energy Saving
(0-100)%
tr
Transmission range
150-250m
mtp
Min transmit power
280mW
ple
Path loss exponent
4
thr
throughput
(0-200)kbps
The context vector representation of adaptive transmission
mode is shown in Equation 7. Static parameter values and
ranges of parameter values for dynamic parameters of con-
text space are shown in Table 8.
Table 8. Optimal transmission mode
Symbol Parameter
Range of Values/Value
V5:otm - Optimal transmission mode
tm
Transmission mode
1, 2, 3 ,4 ,5, 6, 7, 8
snr
SNR region (dB)
0-5(Not used) , 5-9, 9-11,
11-15 , 15-20, 20-21, 21-
30
cr
Code rate (FEC)
1/2, 3/4, 1/2, 3/4, 1/2, 3/4,
2/3, 3/4
bps
bytes per OFDM symbol
3, 4.5,6,9,12,18,24,27
dr
Network
Data
rate
(Mbps)
6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 54
m
modulation
BPSK,
BPSK,
QPSK,
QPSK,
16-QAM,
16-
QAM,
64-QAM,
64-
QAM
pl
payload data
16000 bits
thr
throughput
(0-200)kbps
V 5 : otm = a1.tm + a2.snr + a3.cr + a4.bps
+a5.dr + a6.pl + a7.m
+b1.thr
(7)
5
Conclusion
Cross-layer adaptations proposed in the literature are
classiﬁed based on the layer in which the adaptation is ex-
ecuted. The context parameter set for the adaptations, rele-
vant to each layer is identiﬁed. We have presented context
modeling mechanism for cross-layer context aware adap-
tations in proposed CA3RM-Com architecture. CA3RM-
Com is the generic architecture proposed to support adapta-
tion through the multilayer context exchange based on inter-
est, maintaining the system modularity. Various adaptations
and relevant context representation that CA3RM-Com can
support are discussed. Context-aware adaptive handover is
used to illustrate the context modeling. The extended sim-
ulation of context aware adaptive Multi-homed Mobile IP
handover and the performance improvements of the simula-
tion results are discussed. Identiﬁcation of dependency re-
lationships and conﬂicts among adaptation parameters with
the objective of system stability is a open research area to
be addressed in future work.
References
[1] R. Kodikara, A. Zaslavsky, and C. ˚Ahlund, “Towards
Context Aware Adaptation in Wireless Networks,” in
The Second International Conference on Mobile Ubiq-
uitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technolo-
gies (UBICOMM 2008).
Valencia, Spain: IEEE
Computer Society, Oct. 2008, pp. 245 – 250.
[2] M. Van Der Schaar and N. Sai Shankar, “Cross-layer
Wireless Multimedia Transmission: Challenges, Prin-
ciples, and New Paradigms,” IEEE Wireless Commu-
nications, Special issue Advances in Wireless Video,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 50–58, Aug. 2005.
[3] H. Zimmermann, “OSI Reference Model–The ISO
Model of Architecture for Open Systems Interconnec-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Special
issue on Computer Network Architectures and Proto-
cols, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 425 – 432, April 1980.
[4] Q. Wang and A. Abu-Rgheff, M, “Cross-Layer Sig-
nalling for Next Generation Wireless Systems,” in The
2003 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
(WCNC 2003), vol. 2, Louisiana, USA, March 2003,
pp. 1084 – 1089.
[5] J. Stine, “Cross-Layer Design of MANETs: The Only
Option,” in The 2006 Military Communications Con-
72
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

ference (MILCOM 2006), Washington, DC, USA, Oct.
2006, pp. 1–7.
[6] Z. Haas, “Design Methodologies for Adaptive and
Multimedia Networks,” IEEE Communications Mag-
azine, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 106–107, Nov. 2001.
[7] V. Srivastava and M. Motani, “Cross-Layer Design: A
Survey and the Road Ahead,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 112 – 119, Dec. 2005.
[8] V. Raisinghani and S. Iyer, “Cross Layer Feedback Ar-
chitecture for Mobile Device Protocol Stacks,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 85 –
92, Jan. 2006.
[9] R. Winter, J. Schiller, N. Nikaein, and C. Bonnet,
“CrossTalk: Cross-Layer Decision Support Based on
Global Knowledge,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 93 – 99, January 2006.
[10] X. Lin, N. Shroff, and R. Srikant, “ A Tutorial
on Cross-Layer Optimization in Wireless Networks,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1452 – 1463, Aug. 2006.
[11] W. Wang, D. Peng, H. Wang, and H. Sharif, “A Cross
Layer Resource Allocation Scheme for Secure Image
Delivery in Wireless Sensor Networks,” in The 2007
International conference on Wireless communications
And Mobile Computing (IWCMC 2007).
Honolulu,
Hawaii, USA: ACM, Aug. 2007, pp. 152–157.
[12] M. Park, J. Andrews, and S. Nettles, “Wireless
Channel-Aware Ad Hoc Cross-Layer Protocol With
Multi-Route Path Selection Diversity,” in The IEEE
58th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC 2003),
vol. 4.
Orlando, Florida, USA: IEEE, Oct. 2003, pp.
2197 – 2201.
[13] N. Yang, R. Sankar, and J. Lee, “Improving Ad Hoc
Network Performance Using Cross-Layer Information
Processing,” in The 2005 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Communications (ICC 2005), vol. 4, Seoul,
Korea, May 2005, pp. 2764 – 2768.
[14] M. Conti, G. Maselli, and S. Giordano, “Cross-
Layering in Mobile Ad Hoc Network Design,” Com-
puter, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 48 – 51, Feb. 2004.
[15] M. Realp, A. Perez-Neira, and C. Mecklenbrauker,
“A Cross-Layer Approach to Multi-User Diversity in
Heterogeneous Wireless Systems,” in The 2005 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC
2005), vol. 4, Seoul, Korea, May 2005, pp. 2791 –
2796.
[16] S. Shakkottai, T. Rappaport, and P. Karlsson, “Cross-
layer Design for Wireless Networks,” IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine, vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 74–80, Oct.
2003.
[17] W. Yuen, H. Lee, and T. Andersen, “A Simple and
Effective Cross Layer Networking System for Mobile
Ad Hoc Networks,” in The 13th IEEE International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications (PIMRC 2002), vol. 4, Lisboa, Por-
tugal, September 2002, pp. 1952 – 1956.
[18] B. Chen, M. Lee, and S. Yi, “A Framework for Cross-
layer Optimization from Physical Layer to Routing
Layer on Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” in The 50th an-
nual IEEE Global Communications Conference (IEEE
GLOBECOM 2007), Washington, DC, USA, Nov.
2007, pp. 3678 – 3683.
[19] V. Bhuvaneshwar, M. Krunz, and A. Muqattash,
“CONSET: A Cross-Layer Power Aware Protocol for
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” in The 2004 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Communications (ICC 2005),
vol. 7, Paris, France, June 2004, pp. 4067–4071.
[20] B. D. Noble, M. Satyanarayanan, D. Narayanan, J. E.
Tilton, J. Flinn, and K. R. Walker, “Agile Application-
Aware Adaptation for Mobility,” in Proceedings of the
sixteenth ACM symposium on Operating systems prin-
ciples (SOSP ’97).
Saint Malo, France: ACM, 1997,
pp. 276–287.
[21] B. Rivera, M. Humphrey, and C. Todd, “Asynchronous
Feedback of Network Capacity for Application Layer
Tuning,” in The 1998 IEEE Military Communications
Conference (MILCOM 98), vol. 3.
Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA: IEEE, Oct. 1998, pp. 946 – 950.
[22] S. Merigeault and C. Lamy, “Concepts for Exchanging
Extra Information Between Protocol. Layers Trans-
parently for the Standard Protocol Stack,” in The
10th International Conference on Telecommunica-
tions (ICT’2003), vol. 2, Papeete, French Polynesia,
February-March 2003, pp. 981 – 985.
[23] S. Doshi, S. Bhandare, and T. Brown, “An on-demand
minimum energy routing protocol for a wireless ad
hoc network,” ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing
and Communications Review, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 50–66,
July 2001.
[24] S. Khan, S. Duhovnikov, E. Steinbach, M. Sgroi, and
K. W., “Application-driven Cross-layer Optimization
for Mobile Multimedia Communication using a Com-
mon Application Layer Quality Metric,” in The 2006
international conference on Wireless communications
and mobile computing (IWCMC 2006).
Vancouver,
Canada: ACM, July 2006, pp. 213 – 218.
73
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

[25] E. Setton, T. Y., X. Z., A. Goldsmith, and B. Girod,
“Cross-layer Design of Ad Hoc Networks for Real-
Time Video Streaming,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 59–65, Aug. 2005.
[26] S. Ci, H. Wang, and D. Wu, “From Heuristic to Theo-
retical: a New Design. Methodology for Cross-Layer
Optimized. Wireless Multimedia Streaming,” in The
16th IEEE International Packet Video Workshop, Lau-
sanne, Switzerland, Nov. 2007, pp. 228 – 233.
[27] G. Carneiro, J. Ruela, and M. Ricardo, “Cross-Layer
Design in 4G Wireless Terminals,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 7–13, April 2004.
[28] R. Knopp, N. Nikaein, C. Bonnet, H. A¨ıache, V. Co-
nan, S. Masson, G. Guib´e, and C. L. Martret,
“Overview of the Widens Architecture, A Wireless
Ad Hoc Network for Public Safety,” in The 1st
IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc
Communications and Networks (IEEE SECON 2004),
Santa Clara, USA, Oct. 2004.
[29] H.
A¨ıache,
V.
Conan,
G.
Guib´e,
J.
Leguay,
C. Le Martret, J. M. Barcelo, L. Cerd`a, J. Garc´ıa,
R. Knopp, N. Nikaein, X. Gonzalez, A. Zeini,
O. Apilo, A. Boukalov, J. Karvo, H. Koskinen,
L. Bergonzi, J. Diaz, J. Meessen, C. Blondia, P. De-
cleyn, E. Van de Velde, and M. Voorhaen, “WIDENS:
Advanced Wireless Ad-Hoc Networks for Public
Safety,” in The 14th IST Mobile & Wireless Commu-
nications Summit, Dresden, Germany, June 2005.
[30] K. M. El Defrawy, Z. M. S., and M. M. Khairy, “Pro-
posal for a Cross-Layer Coordination Framework for
Next Generation Wireless Systems,” in The 2006 In-
ternational conference on Wireless communications
and mobile computing (IWCMC 2006), Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada, July 2006, pp. 141 – 146.
[31] A. K. Dey, “Understanding and Using Context,” Per-
sonal Ubiquitous Computing., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 4–7,
2001.
[32] J. Pascoe, “Adding Generic Contextual Capabilities
to Wearable Computers,” in The second International
Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC 1998),
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, Oct. 1998, pp. 92–99.
[33] F. Hohl, U. Kubach, A. Leonhardi, K. Rothermel,
and S. M., “Next Century Challenges: Nexus - An
Open Global Infrastructure for Spatial - Aware Appli-
cations,” in The 5th Annual ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MOBICOM ’99), Seattle, Washington, USA, Aug.
1999, pp. 249–255.
[34] M. Khedr and A. Karmouch, “ACAI: Agent-Based
Context-aware Infrastructure for Spontaneous Appli-
cations,” Journal of Network and Computer Applica-
tions, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 19–44, 2005.
[35] A. Padovitz, S. W. Loke, and A. Zaslavsky, “The EC-
ORA framework: A hybrid architecture for context-
oriented pervasive computing,” Pervasive and Mobile
Computing, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 182–215, April 2008.
[36] A. Held, S. Buchholz, and A. Schill, “Modeling of
Context Information for Pervasive Computing Appli-
cations,” in The 6th World Multi Conference On Sys-
temics, Cybernetics And Informatics, Symposium on
Wearable Computers (ISWC 2002), Orlando, Florida,
USA, July 2002, pp. 92–99.
[37] L. Capra, W. Emmerich, and C. Mascolo, “Reﬂec-
tive Middleware Solutions for Context-Aware Appli-
cations,” in The Third International Conference on
Metalevel Architectures and Separation of Crosscut-
ting Concerns, vol. 2192, Kyoto, Japan, Sept 2001,
pp. 126–133.
[38] A. Padovitz, S. W. Loke, and A. Zaslavsky, “Towards
a Theory of Context Spaces,” in The Workshop on
Context Modeling and Reasoning (CoMoRea), at 2nd
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Com-
puting and Communication (PerCom ).
Orlando,
Florida, USA: IEEE Computer Society, March 2004,
pp. 38 – 42.
[39] V. Raisinghani and S. Iyer, “Architecting Protocol
Stack Optimizations on Mobile Devices,” in The First
International Conference on Communication System
Software and Middleware (COMSWARE), vol. 4, New
Delhi, India, Jan. 2006, pp. 1–10.
[40] L.
Larzon,
M.
Degermark,
and
S.
Pink,
“UDP
Lite
for
Real
Time
Multimedia
Appli-
cations,”
1999,
preprint
(1999),
available
at
http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/1999/HPL-
IRI-1999-001.pdf.
[41] R. C`aceres and L. Iftode, “Improving the Performance
of Reliable Transport. Protocols in Mobile Comput-
ing Environments,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 850 – 857, June
1995.
[42] R. Br¨annstr¨om, R. E. Kodikara, C. ˚Ahlund, and A. Za-
slavsky, “Mobility Management for multiple diverse
applications in heterogeneous wireless networks,” in
The 3rd IEEE Consumer Communications and Net-
working Conference (CCNC 2006), vol. 2, Las Vegas,
USA, Jan. 2006, pp. 818–822.
74
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

[43] L. Le and G. Li, “Cross-Layer Mobility Management
based on Mobile IP and SIP in IMS,” in The 2007 In-
ternational Conference on Wireless Communications,
Networking and Mobile Computing (WiMob 2007),
Shanghai, China, Sept. 2007, pp. 803 – 806.
[44] R. Kodikara, A. Zaslavsky, and C. ˚Ahlund, Wireless
and Mobile Networking.
Boston: Springer, August
2008, vol. 284/2008, ch. Supporting Adaptive Real-
time Mobile Communication with Multilayer Context
Awareness, pp. 435–446.
[45] R. E. Kodikara, C.
˚Ahlund, and A. Zaslavsky,
“ConEx: Context Exchange in MANETs for Real
time multimedia,” in The Fifth International Con-
ference on Networking and the International Con-
ference on Systems and International Conference on
Mobile Communications and Learning Technologies
(ICN/ICONS/MCL 2006).
Mauritius: IEEE Com-
puter Society, April 2006, pp. 70–78.
[46] R. Kodikara, S. Ling, and A. Zaslavsky, “Evalu-
ating Cross-layer Context Exchange in Mobile Ad-
hoc Networks with Colored Petri Nets,” in The 2007
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Services
(ICPS’07).
Istanbul, Turkey: IEEE Computer Soci-
ety, July. 2007, pp. 173–176.
[47] C. ˚Ahlund, R. Br¨annstr¨om, and A. Zaslavsky, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science.
Berlin / Heidelberg:
Springer, April 2005, vol. 3420/2005, ch. M-MIP: Ex-
tended Mobile IP to Maintain Multiple Connections
to Overlapping Wireless Access Networks, pp. 204 –
213.
[48] C. ˚Ahlund, R. Br¨anstr¨om, and A. Zaslavsky, “Run-
ning Variance Metric for evaluating performance of
wireless IP networks in the MobileCty testbed,” in
The First International Conference on Testbeds and
Research Infrastructures for the Development of Net-
works and Communities (Tridentcom), Italy, Feb.
2005, pp. 120–127.
[49] V. Raisinghani, A. Singh, and S. Iyer, “Improving TCP
Performance over Mobile Wireless Environments us-
ing Cross Layer Feedback,” in The 2002 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Personal Wireless Communi-
cations (ICPWC-2002), New Delhi, India, Dec. 2002,
pp. 81–85.
75
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/

