 
 
Demonstration of Next Generation Point of Presence for Fixed-Mobile 
Convergence 
  
Bogdan Andrus(1,9), Ricardo Martínez(2), Achim 
Autenrieth(1), Manuel Requena(2), Ricard Vilalta(2), Jim 
S. Zou(1), Peter Olaszi(3) 
(1)ADVA Optical Networking SE, Martinsried & Meiningen, 
Germany, (bandrus, aautenrieth, szou @advaoptical.com) 
(2)CTTC Castelldefelds, Spain (rmartinez, 
manuel.requena, ricard.vilalta @cttc.es). 
(3)AITIA Int. Zrt., Budapest, Hungary(polaszi@aitia.ai). 
(9)DTU, Lyngby, Denmark. 
 
 
Bertrand Le Guyader(4), Xavier Grall(4), Stephane 
Gosselin(4), Alberto Pineda(5), Akos Ladanyi(6) , Juan 
Jose V. Olmos(7), Idelfonso T. Monroy(8) 
(4)Orange Labs, Lannion & Rennes, France, 
(bertrand.leguyader, xavier.grall, 
stephane.gosselin@orange.com). 
(5)Fon Labs S.L., Getxo, Spain (alberto.pineda@fon.com). 
(6)BME Uni., Budapest, Hungary (ladanyi@tmit.bme.hu). 
(7)Mellanox, Roskilde, Denmark 
(jjvegasolmos@gmail.com). 
(8)TU Eindhoven, Netherlands (i.tafur.monroy@tue.nl). 
 
 
Abstract - Distributed data centers can benefit fixed and mobile 
service operators alike. Upcoming 5G technologies will force 
network operators to redesign current network infrastructure to 
deal with a high set of requirements (e.g., increased traffic load, 
reduced latency, improved cost and energy efficiency etc.). An 
appealing solution focuses on rolling out the so-called fixed 
mobile convergence in broadband networks. Fixed mobile 
convergence aims at providing a shared infrastructure (i.e., 
transport solutions and common points of presence) as well as a 
set of universal functions and operations (i.e., authentication, 
accounting, path control and management, caching, etc.) 
regardless of the access network type (fixed, mobile or Wi-Fi). In 
our vision, convergence is attained by developing a next-
generation point of presence based on characteristics of 
geographically distributed data centers. The new point of 
presence can be defined as the location for the common 
subscriber IP edge of fixed, Wi-Fi and mobile networks alike. 
For a given area, user traffic connections, from different access 
technologies, are terminated within this single, shared location 
hosting selected and common network functions and operations. 
To this end, we exploit the benefits of adopting both networking 
trends Software Defined Networking and Network Function 
Virtualization. This work reports on the successful validation of 
the devised and deployed next generation point of presence 
demonstrating true fixed mobile convergence. The targeted 
convergence is attained by providing support for heterogeneous 
(control and data plane) network functions for mobile core, Wi-
Fi gateway and fixed services inside the point of presence.  
Keywords - Universal Access Gateway; Fixed Mobile 
Convergence; Next Generation Point of Presence; SDN; NFV. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As our previous work [1] has shown that a Software 
Defined Networking (SDN) deployment can significantly 
improve performance for high radix Data Center topologies 
such as hypercube, torus or jellyfish (e.g., as far as 45% more 
throughput per node), the complexity of scaling such 
networks proved to be an issue. 
 
 
While the conventional trend regarding data centers is 
focusing on increasing their size and performance, an 
alternative approach turns towards a geographical distribution 
of data centers in key places throughout the network (e.g., 
Next Generation Points of Presence - NG-POPs) and closer to 
the customers. Hosting business critical applications and IT 
infrastructure closer to the office location is preferred, in 
many situations [2], over the choice of a distant central 
location for reasons mainly related to lowered costs and 
latency.  
Even though adoption of the afore mentioned topologies 
could not target conventional data centers, we could argue 
that a geographical distribution could alleviate the 
requirements of scaling internal networks to very large sizes. 
Distributed data centers could become a suitable deployment 
for high radix-networks therefore benefiting from the 
performance and resiliency advantages highlighted in [1].  
Deployment of distributed data centers can provide added 
value not just for business applications. Mobile Cloud Radio 
Access Network (C-RAN) [3] architecture also seeks to apply 
data center technologies to allow for increased bandwidth, 
highly reliable, low latency interconnections in Base Band 
Unit (BBU) pools. C-RAN imposes a set of stringent network 
 
Figure 1. Evolution of access technologies [4] 
33
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
requirements (in terms of increased traffic load, ultra-low 
latency, high availability, etc.) to support advanced services 
that network operators will need to provide. In this context, it 
is widely accepted that such infrastructures will deploy these 
services combining multiple resources such as networking 
(i.e., transmission, switching, etc.) and IT (i.e., computing, 
storage) [3]. 
In this work, we aim to introduce and demonstrate an NG-
POP based on the characteristics of distributed Data Centers, 
that is able to service fixed and mobile access users alike and 
ultimately provide the basis for true Fixed-Mobile 
Convergence (FMC). Towards this objective, in Section II we 
provide a brief introduction into the concept of FMC and the 
motivation behind a shared access infrastructure. The 
following chapter proposes the architecture for a distributed 
NG-POP 
(dNG-POP) 
detailing 
on 
its 
envisioned 
functionality. In Section IV, we describe the implementation 
of a full-scale demonstration setup representing a physical 
fixed mobile converged access network with a dNG-PoP at its 
center. Finally, we report the results from the first 
experimental demonstration and successful validation of the 
dNG-POP architecture for FMC access networks as part of 
the EU funded project, COMBO [5]. 
II. 
FIXED MOBILE CONVERGENCE (FMC) 
The undergoing standardization process for next generation 
mobile networks (i.e., 5G) is expected to increase 1000-fold 
the wireless capacity introduced in 2010 and at the same time 
densely pack wireless links connecting up to 100 times more 
devices [6]. Such a prediction leads to assumptions on 
developing totally new backhaul and possibly adopt fronthaul 
technologies in order to cope with the increase.  
As highlighted in Figure 1, fixed access networks have 
been experiencing a significant increase for over two decades 
with no anticipated growth rate reduction. Ever changing 
multimedia and streaming services providing HD quality, or 
the newer UHD or even 3D formats, are some of the major 
bandwidth-hungry drivers today. Some of the current 
technologies trying to cope with these requirements, like the 
most often used DSL or cable over hybrid fiber-coaxial (HFC) 
infrastructure, offer connections of hundreds of Mb/s 
restricted however to a few hundred meters. In most cases 
already, fiber is deployed closer and closer to the end user 
surely leading to a fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) solution 
replacing copper. 
Besides the increase of the overall throughput, as 
aforementioned, other 5G service and network demands (e.g., 
low latency, energy-efficiency, reduced Capital Expenditure 
(CapEx) and Operational Expenditure (OpEx), etc.) need to 
be addressed by the network operator. These requirements are 
handled from and end-to-end perspective covering several 
network segments and multiple technologies (i.e., mobile, 
Wi-Fi, packet and optical switching, etc.). As a consequence, 
this end-to-end vision significantly challenges network 
operators, which aim at rolling out targeted 5G networks in a 
cost-efficient manner to maintain their competitiveness. 
Bearing the above aim into mind, an appealing approach 
gaining momentum to deploy cost-efficient 5G network is 
based on integrating and merging traditional independent 
network infrastructures for fixed and mobile traffic services 
into a common network and having a common set of control 
functions. This is referred to as FMC and currently is 
envisioned within the 5G networks roadmap [7]. 
We have previously shown in [8], that a FMC architecture 
should target solutions for cost-efficient FMC from a twofold 
perspective: structural and functional convergence. The 
former 
focuses 
on 
sharing 
and 
unifying 
equipment/technologies (at both access and aggregation 
network segments) to transport seamlessly both fixed and 
mobile traffic (e.g., via a WDM-PON infrastructure). The 
latter refers to a common set of control functions (e.g., unified 
control and management, authentication authorization and 
accounting (AAA), etc.) to handle any access service type. 
Both objectives can be achieved by deploying the network 
architectures based on an NG-POP. NG-POP is defined as a 
network location featuring a number of control and data plane 
FMC-driven capabilities, e.g., unified IP layer gateway 
(Universal Access Gateway - UAG), BBU hostel (for C-RAN 
applications), caching server for content delivery networks, 
unified authentication, etc. When NG-POPs are distributed in 
a large number of locations, close to the user, they can also 
host access node functions such as OLTs or BBU pools for C-
RAN applications. 
Two NG-POP scenarios are foreseen, highlighted in Figure 
2: i) a distributed approach, NG-POPs deployed in a large 
number of locations, between access and aggregation 
networks (i.e., Central Office – CO – or main CO – on a 
higher aggregation level than a regular CO however still not 
connected directly to the network core); ii) a centralized 
deployment where NG-POPs are placed in a small number of 
locations, e.g., between the aggregation and core networks. 
Both implementations leverage the benefits of current 
networking trends: centralized SDN control, and instantiation 
of Virtualized Network Functions (VNF) in commodity 
servers (applying the Network Function Virtualization - NFV 
 
Figure 2. Reference locations for Fixed and Mobile Network Integration 
NG-POP (CO: Central Office) 
34
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
concept). In this work, we will focus on the demonstration of 
a dNG-POP deployment. 
A. FMC Fronhaul Network 
Structural convergence in the access and aggregation 
segment requires not only more capacity, but also extensive 
reach and potential transparency [9]. To this end, the 
wavelength division multiplexing passive optical network 
(WDM-PON) is adopted to handle fixed access, Wi-Fi traffic, 
and mobile fronthaul, as shown in Figure 3. The WDM-PON 
technology is able to cope with the high capacity demand of 
expected 5G fixed and mobile advanced services, and also 
guarantee a smooth evolution of the legacy access networks. 
In our demonstration, two different types of WDM-PON [10] 
are 
explored 
for 
different 
use 
cases, 
namely, 
a 
Wavelength-Selective 
(WS) 
WDM-PON 
and 
a 
Wavelength-Routed (WR) WDM-PON. The WS-WDM-
PON is feasible to be upgraded from the legacy power splitter 
based optical distribution network, by using both tunable 
transmitter and receiving filters in the Optical Network Unit 
(ONU). Alternatively, the WR-WDM-PON adopts a novel 
full C-band tunable laser at the ONU, and a cyclic WDM 
multiplexer/de-multiplexer at the remote node to route a 
single wavelength to the corresponding ONU. Such a WDM-
PON solution is especially suited to the aforementioned 
requirements of a converged infrastructure with regard to the 
bandwidth × reach product (e.g., bandwidth of up to 10 Gb/s 
per wavelength and reach of > 50 km), which are not 
supported by today’s existing WDM-PON approaches. 
B. Distributed NG-POP Architecture: Main Features 
A feasible implementation of the dNG-POP architecture 
targeting FMC objectives is depicted in Figure 3. The main 
components (building blocks) are highlighting along with the 
access network infrastructure used to connect transparently 
various client access technologies to the dNG-POP entity. The 
main physical components, upon which the dNG-POP is built 
are:  
- 
An NFV server 
- 
A low-latency cross-connect  
- 
A provider Ethernet switch/aggregator 
The role of the NFV server focuses on providing support 
for the functional convergence. That is, the aforementioned 
VNFs are hosted onto an off-the-shelf server running a 
customized cloud environment. Breaking the static one-to-
one BBU-RRH (Remote Radio Head) implemented by BBU 
hoteling is realized through the low latency cross-connect. 
Such a cross-connect complies with the rigorous latency and 
jitter timing requirements of the Common Public Radio 
Interface (CPRI) [11] between the RRH and the BBU agreed 
on by major system vendors. Aggregating the various user 
connections from a number of access devices onto higher line 
rate links is done by the provider Ethernet switch/aggregator. 
In addition, it is also responsible for identifying the various 
access channel types and isolating them into VLANs. 
The functional role of the dNG-POP can be concentrated in 
the scope of a UAG seeking to provide control over all user 
sessions by taking advantage of resources available within 
each access network. In our implementation, the NFV server 
represents the unique point in the network where data flows 
of any user coming in from any type of network can be 
accessed by the control plane.  
Moreover, the need to have a centralized, intelligent 
network entity that can dynamically allocate and reconfigure 
data paths converging inside the UAG has led to the adoption 
of an SDN approach. The control plane functionality (network 
element configuration) of the Ethernet, the NFV server 
 
Figure 3. Fixed Mobile Convergence system architecture with a shared Access/Aggregation network converging in a NG-POP. (UE: user equipment; 
UAG: Universal Access Gateway; vEPC: Virtual Evolved Packet Core; uAUT: Universal Authentication; uDPM: Universal Data Path Management) 
 
 
 
35
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
internal network and the cross-connect switches is handled by 
an SDN controller (relying on the OpenDayLight 
implementation) via OpenFlow [12] and NETCONF [13] 
interfaces, respectively. 
The devised dNG-POP architecture is targeting a pool of 
use cases, which are executed to validate a number of 
different network functionalities running on the NFV server 
such as the uAUT, uDPM, vEPC (virtual Evolved Packet 
Core) and vCache. The functional convergence covers both 
control and data plane functionalities and are discussed in the 
following sections.  
1) Universal Subscriber and User AUThentication 
(uAUT) 
Resource access control is one of the most important 
functions in a network regardless of the access technology. 
Indeed, there are specific authentication techniques for each 
network type. In a standard scenario with multiple access 
network types, an operator needs to assign credentials for 
users in each network and solve the authentication and the 
accounting in each of them independently. This is not 
efficient since separated and isolated mechanisms and 
databases need to be maintained by the network operator, 
which increases the complexity of the whole system.  
The proposed Universal Authentication (uAUT) system is 
a basic function of the UAG that offers support to all 
additional control plane functions of the NG-POP. Its main 
task is to provide authentication authorization and accounting 
to users associated with all access networks serviced by the 
NG-POP. Its usage is mainly restricted to the initial phase of 
a service setup (e.g., provisioning policies at the network 
attachment) and accounting of the service delivery for billing 
and auditing purposes. uAUT serves as a unique contact point 
within the UAG for all subscriber data and authentication 
related functions, regardless of the access type employed. 
The proposed uAUT architecture, maintaining legacy 
compatibility, is presented in Figure 4. The architecture is 
based on the User Data Convergence concept [14] and 
supports a layered architecture, separating the user data 
storage from the application logic. The view is extended by 
storing the user data in a unique User Data Repository (UDR), 
which provides a unified view for subscriber management to 
the information system (billing, accounting, statistics etc.). 
Dedicated entities handling application logic, named front-
ends (FE) represent the links between fixed/mobile network 
services and the user database. Examples of network services 
that need to access user data include: mobile Home Subscriber 
Server (HSS), Wi-Fi hotspot AAA, broadband AAA, Policy 
Control and Relay function etc. 
The UDR hosted by the uAUT server allows the service 
provider to identify all user connecting to any access type. By 
mapping to the correct profile, users can receive access to the 
converged services such as unified accounting, seamless 
authentication to application platforms (e.g., IPTV, VoD) and 
Over-The-Top (OTT) partners. 
 From the user point of view, the uAUT functional block 
provides a common subscriber authentication platform 
allowing the UE to login from both Wi-Fi and mobile 
networks. This is accomplished by using the same credentials 
stored in the SIM card. In the experimental demonstration, a 
vEPC instance running on the NFV server stores the 
authentication key in the EPC Home Subscriber Server – HSS 
function. The so-called hybrid access is achieved by accessing 
the mobile credentials through the common AAA proxy front-
end. Further in-depth technical details on the proposed hybrid 
access architecture have already been presented in [15] and 
demonstration results are described in Section IV. 
 
Figure 4. uAUT architecture (AAA: Authentication Authorization 
Accounting; HSS: Home Subscriber Server; UDR: User Data Repository ) 
 
Figure 5. Universal Data Path Management (uDPM) functional blocks 
36
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
2) Universal Data Path Management (uDPM) 
High proliferation of mobile broadband communications 
targeting 5G networks is expected. An important objective of 
FMC, which addresses this concern is mobile traffic 
offloading and handover. Implications like metro and core 
offload are also foreseen. Allowing users to roam between 
fixed/mobile/Wi-Fi networks and transport traffic via several 
types of interface requires a converged subscriber and session 
management as well as an advanced interface selection and 
route control. This set of functional blocks fulfil the scope of 
a Universal Data Path Management (uDPM). The uDPM is 
the main entity of the data path control functions performed 
within the UAG responsible for providing the UE session 
continuity.  
From a FMC user’s perspective, which is connected to 
various access points, numerous data paths can be used 
concurrently for increased Quality of Experience (QoE) or as 
backup for seamless handover. Multipath TCP (MPTCP) is a 
TCP extension [16] making use of end-to-end path diversity 
and maintaining backward compatibility. Protocol operation 
establishes several different TCP subflows (e.g., remote/local 
IP and port) for concurrent data traffic managed by a main 
MPTCP connection (between two end points). In our 
scenario, the use of MPTCP enabled UEs and content servers 
mitigates connection interruptions at network access switch 
over. 
Moreover, the uDPM architecture consists of several 
interconnected and dedicated functions as shown in Figure 5. 
These functions control and handle session mappings of each 
individual UE to multiple data paths. A monitoring function 
that collects user and network state information can create a 
session event relative to a UEs activity (e.g., application 
launch request, interface change request, data forwarding 
process etc.) and trigger the uDPM functional block. Session 
event notifications include signal degradation detected by the 
UE or network, discovery of a new access point, applying a 
network policy or a subscriber profile, etc. 
A Decision Engine (DE), being in part under the operator’s 
control, uses an algorithm to check network operator policies 
and subscriber’s profile rules. The algorithm relies on multi-
criteria decision making required by processing multiple rule 
categories. 
The 
output 
of 
the 
DE 
can 
involve 
creating/destroying data paths (data path creation/destruction 
block) or seamless network handover in terms of session 
continuity (path coordination and control). 
When a session is based on multiple paths, there is a 
coordination requirement of those data paths within the 
uDPM architecture and is conducted by the Path Coordination 
and Control element. This element ensures session continuity 
where data traffic is transferred correctly and effectively over 
a number of established paths. 
Session mapping execution, as part of the data plane, 
applies session mapping decisions taken by the DE by relying 
on the control of both “path creation/destruction” and “path 
coordination and control”. Session packets are forwarded or 
filtered on the data path and subflows are merged in MPTCP 
connections. 
The DE algorithm can take into account different sources 
of information for its internal computations, like: network 
related information (Wi-Fi APs and mobile BS location, 
traffic load, energy consumption etc.), subscriber information 
(profiles or QoS classes) or content information (cached 
content). A workflow exemplifying the Decision Engine 
mode of operation is displayed in Figure 6. In the first step, a 
UE requests the stream of an internet video over an LTE 
network. The network monitor function (polling UE, LTE and 
Wi-Fi interface and network status) feeds the decision engine 
algorithm. Evaluating the input information according to its 
preconfigured targets (e.g., cost and bandwidth optimization), 
the DE decides to switch the streaming session from LTE 
(lower bandwidth and higher cost) to Wi-Fi (higher 
bandwidth and lower cost). This is done by notifying the UE 
to switch the active connection from its mobile data to its Wi-
Fi interface. Finally, the UE streams the video content over 
Wi-Fi. Demonstration results for FMC relevant use cases are 
detailed in Section IV. 
3) Content Distribution System 
 
Figure 6. Decision Engine Operation workflow example 
 
Figure 7. Converged content delivery system 
37
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Content distribution techniques aim at reducing the 
redundant traffic in the network and improving quality of 
delivered services. A converged Content Delivery Network 
(CDN), in the context of FMC, can achieve this goal with 
better reliability, scalability and performance.  
Caching efficiency is directly proportional to the user 
density on a network segment. The less population, the less 
useful caching is. In this regard, research studies have shown 
that in fiber access networks (i.e., with 30.000 clients) as well 
as in xDSL infrastructures, more than 30% of the traffic can 
be reduced due to the fact that almost half of the requests are 
cacheable [17] and [18]. The situation is somewhat different 
in the case of a mobile networks. According to the studies 
made in [19], caching at the base station (i.e., inside the 
evolved Node B - eNB) or at home gateway does not bring 
improvements. However, implementing a content delivery 
solution in a converged network, the advantages can be 
multiplied 
with 
a 
collaborative 
caching 
algorithm. 
Measurements performed in [20] support the cooperation 
between telecom and CDN providers. Such a collaboration 
leads to an additional traffic decrease of 12 to 20% if 
collaborative content caches located in NG-POPs are 
implemented. 
A content delivery system is developed, shown in Figure 7, 
comprising of a Cache Node (CN) and a Cache Controller 
(CC). In this custom implementation, the CN, located in the 
home gateway in the form of a Cache Access Point (CacheAP 
is a wireless access point with caching functionality) but also 
in the NG-POP, executes the caching and prefetching. The 
virtual Cache Controller (vCache) installed in the NFV server 
(within the NG-POP) is responsible for managing the caching 
functionality and providing Caching-as-a-Service to content 
service providers.  
The content delivery system relies on the uAUT 
functionality even though in the first authentication phase 
(when the user authenticates in the network) the uAUT does 
not influence the delivery service execution. However, 
extending the authentication from the network level to the 
service level requires interaction between uAUT and the 
content delivery system. The goal is to provide transparent 
service delivery using a unified authentication process. 
The caching system architecture explained in detail in [21] 
(pp. 64) and used in this demonstration (Figure 8) is divided 
in three main components: 
• 
A CN in the form of a CacheAP based on a custom 
NETCONF server implementation and a local 
management primitive that manages the local 
caching/prefetching actions. 
• 
The CC composed of a daemon service that exchanges 
JSON based Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs) with the 
uDPM 
module; 
a 
NETCONF 
client 
for 
communicating and managing the CN; and a data base 
that stores: CN config, user requested content and 
content already cached in the CN. 
• 
A uDPM module described in the previous section 
with a DE and Path Control functions. 
There is a tight dependency between the content caching 
system and the uDPM as seen in Figure 8. When the number 
of hits on a specific content increases over a predefined limit 
(i.e., threshold), the content provider can trigger the caching 
procedure indicating the content (stream URL). The Decision 
Engine provides the needed resource information regarding 
UE location (client ID and IP, cacheAP IP) and network 
performance. This information is required by the input of the 
the cache controller to make an optimal caching decision in 
order to prefetch the contents in a CN (closer) to the UE.  
Further details on the caching-system implementation can 
be found in [21] (pp. 63 – 66) and [22].  
III. 
FMC DEMONSTRATION SETUP 
The FMC setup (shown in Figure 9), used for an integrated 
demonstration, was deployed aiming at validating the 
feasibility and evaluating the efficiency of the proposed dNG-
POP concept and its developed features. 
 
Figure 8. Caching/Prefetching system architecture [21] (pp. 64); 
TABLE I.   
Demonstration setup elements 
UE 
Laptops and smartphones located in the customer 
premises area; 
Access 
endpoints 
Heterogeneous endpoint access equipment containing 
LTE base stations (eNBs), Wi-Fi access points (APs), 
caching AP; 
Fronhaul 
network 
A WR and a WS WDM-PON systems enabling the 
shared access network infrastructure to carry 
transparently Wi-Fi, mobile (LTE), CPRI and fixed 
subscriber traffic;  
The transmission is made over 18 km span of Lannion 
city fiber ring showcasing the capability of real field 
deployment; 
dNG-POP 
dNG-POP (located at the main CO) implements the 
set of control and data plane functionalities needed by 
the common subscriber IP edge for all traffic types 
(i.e., fixed, mobile and Wi-Fi) 
 
38
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The main elements and technologies constituting our 
experimental setup are listed in TABLE I. 
A. Shared fronthaul network: WDM-PON 
Two WDM-PON systems (i.e., WR and WS) have been 
tested in parallel, in this demonstration, to evaluate the 
capabilities of shared fronhaul network solutions. 
• 
WS-WDM-PON: the system comprises of an ONU 
with tunable transmiters and receivers providing 
CPRI 
transport 
capabilites 
for 
fronthaul 
requirements based on power spliters compatible 
with legacy FTTH setups. A WS-WDM-PON OLT, 
two 10 Gb/s tunable WS-WDM-PON ONUs, two 
CPRI interfaces and a CPRI tester were deployed 
and demonstrated in Lannion. 
• 
WR-WDM-PON: the setup incorporates a low-cost 
ONU laser and the wavelentght locker functionality 
is implemented in the centralized OLT. A cyclic 
WDM multiplexer/de-multiplexer at the remote 
node then routes an individual wavelength to the 
corresponding ONU. As shown in Fig. 9, two 1 Gb/s 
tunable ONUs (i.e., one terminating an eNB and one 
for the WiFi AP) and one 10 Gb/s tunable ONU (i.e., 
used for CPRI link transmission tests), were 
deployed and demonstrated in the demo. 
B. dNG-POP setup 
At the core of the dNG-POP, the NFV server is built on an 
OpenStack 
cloud 
system. 
Features 
like 
automated 
configuration and on-demand resource deployment make 
OpenStack an ideal platform for our demonstration. The 
support for allocating various computing and networking 
resources for each targeted functionality, isolating them into 
individual projects (e.g., EPC, uAUT and uDPM) is perfectly 
tailored for our setup. In this scenario, we observe that 
multiple 
(and 
independent) 
instances 
of 
the 
same 
functionality could be instantiated within the NFV server as 
long as sufficient (computing) resources are available. This 
provides the dNG-POP with the capability of supporting 
multi-operator network function instantiation. This means 
that different operators may have their own network functions 
deployed within the same physical host (NFV server) but 
without having visibility of other operator’s network 
functions. To show this, two instances of the mobile core (i.e., 
vEPC1 and vEPC2 in Figure 9) were deployed as VNFs onto 
the NFV server. 
The network control plane overview with VLAN 
assignment in Figure 10 shows the seamless synchronization 
achieved between the OpenStack cloud environment and the 
hardware infrastructure. In this sense, the UAG’s Carrier 
Ethernet switch (ADVA FSP 150EG-X) acts as a VLAN 
cross-connect, isolating individual connection types into 
separate VLANs with unique IDs. In our setup, the access 
channels are numbered from VLAN 110 through 160. More 
exactly, VLANs 110 and 150 are used for identifying the LTE 
S1 interface control and data traffic backhauled from the two 
eNBs over the WDM-PON to the corresponding vEPCs. 
Multiple wireless APs destined for individual test cases are 
mapped with VLANs 120 through 140, and the cacheAP is on 
VLAN 160. 
The stand-alone local services (e.g., video, content, caching 
servers) and testers are grouped into a common service VLAN 
 
Figure 9. Demonstration setup overview 
 
Figure 10. Network control plane overview with VLAN setup assignment 
 
39
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
500. The interconnection channel supporting network 
function chaining is handled in VLAN 1000. On this VLAN, 
installed on the NFV server, a Common Gateway handles the 
network address translation (NAT) for all VNFs providing 
them with Internet access.  
Maintaining a Layer 2 network setup continuity from the 
physical infrastructure inside the NFV server was 
accomplished by configuring OpenStack to have access to the 
provider network through its SDN enabled Open Virtual 
Switches – OVS. A 10 GbE optical line card was set up to 
connect to the Carrier Ethernet switch and the NFV server to 
effectively handle the user data plane traffic for all targeted 
test cases. Even though in our demonstration we used a 
manual configuration of VLANs, in a real live deployment an 
automated SDN controller assignment is expected. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION 
The demonstration of the proposed and implemented 
capabilities of universal authentication, user mobility and 
content caching solution is carried out by individual test 
cases, which are executed over the setup detailed in the 
previous section. 
A. Fronthaul network evaluation 
Tests carried out on the experimental WR-WDM-PON 
system, supporting the functional demonstration, show 
compliance with the CPRI standard even at the highest line 
rates (9.83 Gb/s). In the demonstration report [21], we have 
shown that the maximum jitter specifications on the receiver 
and the transmitter side are fulfilled. Measurements 
performed also showed that the system induced latency is as 
low as 130 ns equivalent to a signal propagation over 26m of 
 
 
Figure 11.  Universal Authentication (uAUT) demonstration overview 
 
Figure 12. LTE attach procedure (Wireshark capture trace) containing the authentication phase (LTE S1 interface: used for communication between eNB and 
EPC) 
 
TABLE II.   
WDM-PON systems performance. [21] (pp.88 – 90) 
WDM-PON 
Latency 
BER 
WR 
130 ns 
10-12 
WS 
91,59 ns 
2.3∙10-15 
 
40
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
optical fiber. The prototype implementing the centralized 
wavelength control provided a stable throughput throughout 
the demonstration. The tuning speed of the POP system was 
measured, on average, at around 180 s. For a larger scale 
deployment, the tuning time should be improved  
Evaluation of the WS-WDM-PON system using an Integris 
Mobile Access Network Performance Tester showed a 
consistent latency of 91.59 ns and a BER of 2.3∙10-15 
measured for 2.45 Gb/s data rate. System attributes of the 
WDM-PON systems used in the demo are listed in TABLE 
II. 
B.  Universal Authentication (uAUT) 
Two access points are set up to provide simultaneous 
network connectivity to UEs through wireless and LTE access 
network types (Figure 11). Both the Wi-Fi AP and the eNB 
are connected through the same access network infrastructure 
(i.e., WDM-PON) to the UAG’s NFV server where the vEPC 
Wi-Fi Gw and uAUT are instantiated as individual VNFs.  
A UE is used to test the authentication by presenting a SIM 
card with the common set of credentials. Using the SIM, the 
UE can transparently and seamlessly authenticate in both 
access technologies (i.e., mobile and Wi-Fi).  
The first step in the functional use case is the validation and 
evaluation of user authentication in the LTE network. In this 
scenario, the user request is sent from the eNB to the vEPC 
over the S1 interface. The entire LTE user-attach procedure 
(Figure 12) was measured (on average) at 650 ms, including 
the user authentication phase, which took around 279 ms. 
Measurements were performed with the use of Wireshark, a 
network protocol analyzer. 
In the second step, the user performs a switchover to the 
Wi-Fi network. Upon the users’ authentication request, the 
Wi-Fi AP is configured to send the connection request to the 
uAUT server residing on the NFV server. The request is 
processed by the uAUT, which compares the credentials 
received from the user with the credentials stored in the HSS 
element of the vEPC VNF. Retrieving the credentials from the 
HSS was accomplished by implementing an extensible 
authentication protocol framework for UMTS (EAP-AKA). 
Measurements showed that authentication phase took 10ms 
over Wi-Fi. 
C. User mobility demonstration 
The second scenario executed reports the offloading and 
handover process especially between mobile and wireless 
networks. This allows a UE to efficiently use the network 
resources. For the user mobility demonstration, two UEs, the 
LTE eNB and two Wi-Fi APs (TP-Link TL-WR1043ND), the 
uDPM VNF have been employed as well as a MPTCP 
Content Server positioned in the Local Services area of the 
dNG-POP (Figure 13). 
Using a custom API, the uDPM-DE provides information 
to the UE regarding the access method selection. In this 
context, a set of feasible scenarios is executed outlining 
automatic and even seamless handover process. The lack of 
service interruption during the handover was ensured by the 
use of MP-TCP function in the NFV Server. 
Three use cases have been conducted in order to 
demonstrate and evaluate the efficiency of the uDPM 
functionality: 
• 
a plain Wi-Fi to Wi-Fi handover corresponding to a 
use case in which a UE will be transferred to another 
AP when the current wireless link is saturated; 
• 
a Wi-Fi to LTE handover corresponding to a use case 
where a UEs’ ongoing connection will be switched 
from the current saturated AP over to LTE; 
• 
A Wi-Fi_1 to LTE to Wi-Fi_2 handover. This use 
case is an improvement on the first test where there 
is a gap in the connection switch, which is now filled 
by a transient LTE connection. 
 
Figure 14. Wi-Fi to Wi-Fi handover – connection gap visible 
 
Figure 13. User Mobility demonstration overview  
41
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Firstly, a Wi-Fi roaming from one AP to another was 
tested. A connection was established between the UE1 and the 
content server by requesting a video stream over Wi-Fi_1. 
Soon after, a second UE (UE2) connected to the same AP 
starts a download and saturates the link.  
The DE that is monitoring the network state, triggers the 
handover of UE1 to the available Wi-Fi2 AP in order to 
offload the former wireless link. As observed in Figure 14, 
there is a connection gap of about 10s during the handover, 
which is the result of using a single wireless interface on the 
client device. 
The second test case shows a Wi-Fi to LTE handover 
triggered by the DE in similar circumstances as the previous 
one. When the Wi-Fi link is saturated, the DE triggers the 
switchover to the available LTE interface. In Figure 15 we 
can observe the seamless transition between the two 
networks. The connection is uninterrupted because the UE 
can be connected simultaneously to both networks. 
The last test case provides a solution to bridge the 
connection gap between inter Wi-Fi handover by transiently 
switching from Wi-Fi_1 to LTE then over to Wi-Fi_2. We 
notice in Figure 16 that employing this method, video 
streaming was uninterrupted. We also observe a small 
overlapping traffic pattern in the case of LTE to Wi-Fi_2 
handover due to packets duplication over the two MPTCP 
subflows. However, data is correctly reassembled by the 
master MPTCP session. 
D. Content Delivery Service (content caching) 
For the caching demonstration, an SDN-based Cache 
Controller VNF (vCache) is instantiated on the NFV server. 
It decides where (e.g, at either access network device – 
CacheAP- or the dNG-POP) to cache or prefetch the content. 
The CC and uDPM-DE are coordinated to instruct any UE to 
connect to a different CacheAP as long as the QoS is degraded 
due to congestion in the CacheAP node or if a better 
connection is available.  
For the test case two UEs and two CacheAPs (mobile AP 
with caching and routing capabilities) have been employed. 
Two test cases have been performed, one highlighting the 
caching ability and one focusing on the prefetching execution.   
In the first caching test case (Figure 17), A UE streams a 
video from the internet (i.e., YouTube source) with a 
bandwidth requirement higher than the network bandwidth 
allocated. Traffic Control (TC), a linux network utility used 
for traffic shaping, was used to set video bandwidth 
limitations. The QoS of the video is visibly degraded (long 
startup delay, frequent interruptions). After the request, the 
content is cached automatically in the CacheAP. When the 
second user (UE2) requests the same content, the video is 
delivered from the CacheAP and the observed quality is 
greatly improved (no more buffering timeout periods). 
The second prefetching test (Figure 18) make use of two 
CacheAPs and one UE. The Cache Controller holds the 
responsibility of making an optimal prefetching decision 
based on user profile information (user ID, URL of video 
played) as well as network status (network address, current 
AP, destination AP) received from the DE. Once the CC has 
 
Figure 15. Wi-Fi to LTE handover – no connection interruption 
 
Figure 16. Wi-Fi to LTE to Wi-Fi handover – no connection interruption 
 
Figure 17. First caching test case demonstration: UE 2 requests the same 
video content as UE 1 after it was cached in the CacheAP; 
42
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
computed the caching location (CacheAp address) the 
decision is sent back to the DE, which will handle the 
interface selection mechanism for the end user. The trigger of 
the prefetching is a UE handover from the first CacheAP 
(LTE network) to the second one (fixed line). This situation 
can correspond to multiple scenarios (e.g., current network 
saturation, a user arriving home and switching to the local 
network etc.). The switchover commanded by the DE is also 
passed to the CC along with source and destination AP. The 
CC then retrieves, from the user profile, the video URL and 
sends it along with the fetch command to the destination AP. 
By the time the UE has switched interfaces, the video has 
already started being cached in the second AP. 
E. Client channel bandwidth testing 
In order to consolidate the demonstration of the fully 
integrated setup and evaluate its impact on the end user, we 
tested the TCP bandwidth from each network access type 
(Wi-Fi, LTE, fixed). As seen in Figure 19, TCP bandwidth 
and latency were measured between a client and a common IP 
core gateway on the NFV server regarded as the reference 
point. Iperf, an IP network measurement tool and ping were 
used to measure the performance on each channel 
consecutively. Relevant settings like Maximum Transmission 
Unit (MTU) with a default value of 1500 MTU and test 
intervals of 10 s were configured. A test report capture of an 
LTE network is present in Figure 20. 
The results obtained for testing each network access 
technology are compared in TABLE III. We mention that the 
tests were executed individually and independent of other 
measurements. As expected, best performance is experienced 
over a fixed line, followed by Wi-Fi and LTE. 
We identify the NFV server as the most relevant throughput 
limitation point of the setup (especially for connections over 
the fixed line). The limitations are the result of several internal 
network virtualization layers of the OpenStack Cloud stock 
distribution. Nonetheless, bandwidth optimizations can be 
achieved with cloud distribution tuning or hardware 
acceleration mechanisms. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The dNG-POP architecture, based on the characteristics of 
distributed data centers, is devised to leverage the advantages 
of SDN and NFV concepts. In particular, the UAG supports 
dedicated control and user plane VNFs related to access 
networks/technologies (e.g., vEPC) and common VNFs 
applicable to any traffic flow regardless of the access 
networks (e.g., uDPM and uAUT). Even though a series of 
benefits result from adopting the presented architecture like 
 
Figure 18. Second caching test case demonstration: CC prefetches the 
video content on second CacheAP when UE switches to another 
network. 
 
Figure 19. Overview of client channel bandwidth test 
 
Figure 20. LTE client channel bandwidth test report example (Iperf and 
ping tools); (rtt – round trip time). 
TABLE III.   
 
Client channel network performance test results 
Network 
access 
connect. 
Throughput (Mb/s) 
Latency - round trip (ms) 
Uplink 
Down link 
Min. 
Avg. 
Max. 
LTE 1 
43.5 
45.4 
16.94 
18.01 
21.80 
LTE 2 
26.4 
55.1 
40.79 
53.92 
68.76 
Wi-Fi 
63.5 
72.1 
1.72 
2.382 
3.19 
Fixed 
line 
676 
781 
0 
0 
1 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
reduced footprint, rent, cooling and power consumption, etc. 
further work is required to automate network resource 
allocation by integrating the setup in an SDN framework. 
FMC is seen as one of the key strategies for deploying 
future 5G networks aiming at satisfying, in a cost-efficient 
way, the stringent requirements imposed by advanced 
services. Within the FMC concept, the deployment of a 
common and unified functional entity, referred to as UAG, 
allows the seamless termination at the IP layer of fixed, 
mobile and Wi-Fi user traffic flows. By adopting such 
principles, the network architecture and operation can be 
simplified which leads to enhanced OpEx and CapEx, critical 
for next generation networks.  
Our implementation of the UAG concept, with all the 
required VNFs, has been successfully validated through the 
experiments presented, targeting both the control and data 
planes. Fixed, mobile and Wi-Fi access users were able to 
establish their sessions demonstrating the FMC capability of 
the UAG. To this end, a common authentication process (i.e., 
uAUT) for any service type was provided. Data path 
management and content caching capabilities were validated 
through various use cases that have proven an increase in QoS 
offered and in user mobility. Finally, the UAG provides an 
attractive platform for exploiting the network sharing concept 
between multiple network operators  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the EU ITN Marie Curie 
project ABACUS – 608363 and FP7 IP COMBO project – 
317762. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Andrus, V. Mehmeri, A. Autenrieth, J. J. V. Olmos and I. T. 
Monroy, “Evaluation of SDN enabled data center networks 
based on high radix topologies,” Proc. of the 12th International 
Conference on Systems and Networks Communications 
(ICSNC), 2017.  
[2] I. Narayanan, A. Kansal and A. Sivasubramaniam, “Right-
sizing geo-distributed data centers for availability and latency,” 
37th International Conference on Distributed Computing 
Systems (ICDCS), 2017. 
[3] China Mobile Research Institute, “C-RAN: the road towards 
green RAN,” white paper, 2011. 
[4] S. Pachnicke et al., “The frontiers of optical access networks,” 
International Conference on Optical Network Design and 
Modeling (ONDM), Pisa, Italy, May 2015. 
[5] EU funded ICT project COMBO. Accessed on 01.06.2018. 
[Online]. Available at: http://www.ict-combo.eu/ 
[6] A. Gupta and R. K. Jha, “A survey of 5G network: architecture 
and emerging technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1206-
1232, August 2015. 
[7] ICT-COMBO alliance white paper “A universal access gateway 
for fixed and mobile integration,” April 2016. 
[8] S. Pachnicke, B. Andrus and A. Autenrieth, “Impact of fixed-
mobile convergence,” International Conference on Optical 
Network Design and Modeling (ONDM), Cartagena, Spain, 
May 2015. 
[9] S. Gosselin et al., “Fixed and mobile convergence: which role 
for optical networks?,” Journal of Optical Communications and 
Networking (JOCN), vol. 7, no. 11, 2015. 
[10] Z. Tayq et al., “Fronthaul performance demonstration in a 
WDM-PON-based convergent network,” European Conference 
on Networks and Communications (EuCNC), Athens, Greece, 
June 2016. 
[11] Common 
Public 
Radio 
Interface (CPRI) 
- interface 
specification (V.6.0), August 2013. 
[12] N. McKeown et al., “OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus 
networks,” ACM SIGCOMM: Computer Communication, vol. 
38, iss. 2, pp. 69-74, 2008. 
[13] M. Bjorklund et al., “Network configuration protocol 
(NETCONF),” RFC 6241, June 2011. Accessed on 01.06.2018. 
[Online]. Available at: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6241 
[14] 3GPP Technical Specification 23.335, User Data Convergence 
(UDC), stage 2, release 9, June 2010. 
[15]  T. Mamouni et al., ”Universal AAA for hybrid accesses,” 
European Conference on Networks and Communications 
(EuCNC), Paris, 2015. 
[16] A. Ford et al., “TCP extensions for multipath operation with 
multiple addresses,” RFC 6824, Jan. 2013. 
[17] E. Nygren et al., “The Akamai network: a platform for high-
performance internet applications,” SIGOPS Operating 
Systems Review vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 2-19, August 2010. (DOI: 
10.1145/1842733.1842736). 
[18] C. Imbrenda et al., “Analyzing cacheability in the access 
network with HACkSAw,” International Conference on 
Information-Centric 
Networking 
(ICN), 
Paris, 
France 
September 2014. (DOI: 10.1145/2660129.2660135). 
[19] S. Elayoubi and J. Roberts, “Performance and cost effectiveness 
of caching in mobile access networks,” International 
Conference on Information-Centric Networking (ICN), San 
Francisco, 
USA, 
September 
2015. 
(DOI: 
10.1145/2810156.2810168). 
[20] G. Nam and K. Soo Park, “Analyzing the effectiveness of 
content delivery network interconnection of 3G cellular 
traffic,” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Future 
Internet 
Technologies (CFI), Tokyo, Japan, June 2014. (DOI: 
10.1145/2619287.2619297). 
[21] EU ICT-COMBO project deliverable 6.3, ”Report describing 
results of operator testing, capturing lessons learned and 
recommendations,” 27 July 2016. Accessed on 01.06.2018. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
 
http://www.ict-
combo.eu/data/uploads/deliverables/combo_d6.3_wp6_2016-
07-22_adva_v1.0.pdf 
[22] Z. Li et al., “ICN Based Shared Caching in Future Converged 
Fixed and Mobile Network,” International Conference on High 
Performance Switching and Routing (HPSR), 2015. 
44
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

