Enhancing Resiliency Against Routing Layer Attacks in Wireless Sensor Networks:
Gradient-based Routing in Focus
Ochirkhand Erdene-Ochir, Apostolos Kountouris
Orange Labs
France Telecom Group
38243 Meylan, France
Email: {ochirkhand.erdeneochir,apostolos.kountouris}
@orange-ftgroup.com
Marine Minier, Fabrice Valois
Universite de Lyon, INRIA
INSA-Lyon, CITI
F-69621 Lyon, France
Email: {marine.minier,fabrice.valois}@insa-lyon.fr
Abstract—This paper focuses on the resiliency of wireless
sensor network routing protocols against selective forwarding
attacks by compromised nodes. Informally, resiliency should
be understood as the capacity of the routing protocol to
endure and mitigate the presence of a certain number of
compromised nodes seeking to disturb the routing process.
To provide for security when nodes may be compromised,
cryptographic solutions must be completed by algorithmic
solutions considering “beyond cryptography” approaches. In
this article, after discussing the shortcomings of existing routing
protocols against packet-dropping malicious nodes we describe
some protocol behaviors enhancing routing resiliency under
several combined routing attacks. These behaviors are mainly
based on trafﬁc redundancy and probabilistic selection for the
next hop candidates, which permit to exploit and beneﬁt from
the inherent structural redundancy of densely deployed sensor
networks. We consider the case that compromised nodes, prior
to selective forwarding, and seeking to increase its impact, may
perform several well known routing attacks such as Sinkhole,
Sybil and Wormhole. Several variants of the well known
gradient-based routing protocol were tested and simulation
results show that using the proposed techniques resiliency can
be improved. Nevertheless, as expected, resiliency comes at a
cost and our results also shed some light on the resiliency-
energy consumption trade-off. We propose in this paper the
behaviors enhancing the resiliency of routing protocols under
several combined routing attacks.
Keywords-wireless sensor networks, routing, security, at-
tacks, resiliency, reliability.
I. INTRODUCTION
In typical Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) applications,
a large number of resource constrained sensor nodes are
deployed over a geographic area in order to collect physical
world data and route them towards one or few destinations
(data sinks). The rapid deployment capabilities, due to
the lack of infrastructure, as well as the self organized
and potentially fault-tolerant nature of WSNs make them
attractive for multiple applications spanning from environ-
mental monitoring (temperature, pollution, etc.) to building-
industrial automation (electricity/gas/water metering, event
detection, home automation etc.). In recent years WSNs have
emerged as a very active as well as challenging research area
in search for solutions to the open problems of scalability,
adaptability, low energy consumption and security. In WSNs
the difﬁculty of all these problems is exacerbated by the
large numbers and the resource constrained nature of sensor
nodes.
Security is particularly challenging in WSNs. Because
of their open and unattended deployment, in possibly hos-
tile environments, adversaries can easily launch Denial-
of-Service (Dos) attacks, cause physical damage to sen-
sors, or even capture them to extract sensitive informa-
tion like for instance encryption keys, identities, addresses
etc. Consequently node compromise poses severe security
and reliability concerns since it allows an adversary to be
considered as a legitimate node inside the network. After
node compromise, an adversary can seek to disrupt the
functionality of routing layer by launching attacks such as
node replication, Sybil, Selective forwarding, Sinkhole or
Wormhole. To cope with these “insider” attacks, stemming
from node compromise, “beyond cryptography” algorithmic
solutions must be envisaged to complement the crypto-
graphic solutions for secure routing proposed in [1], [2],
[3], [4]. The work presented in this paper is an extension of
our ﬁrst exploratory work [5] in this direction.
In the existing literature, papers often focus on a particular
attack proposing ways to detect and to defend against it
mainly by excluding malicious nodes [6], [7], [8], [9]. In
this paper, we have chosen to follow a different path; we
believe the difference is signiﬁcant enough to justify the
need for further study. Our main goal is not to detect
attacks and eliminate malicious nodes, but rather to make
the routing protocol capable to continue routing packets,
at acceptable success rates, in the presence of malicious
nodes. This routing protocol capability will be referred to
as resiliency. Also, it is worth mentioning that even though
routing resiliency is studied using the Selective forwarding
attack as basis of our attack model, interestingly this attack
is combined with several other well known routing attacks
such as Sinkhole, Sybil and Wormhole. Such combina-
tions represent more realistic attack situations than simply
38
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

considering each attack separately. Finally, since we deal
with “insider” attacks, malicious compromised nodes have
access to the same information as honest nodes in agreement
with Shannon’s maxim: “The enemy knows the system”.
Therefore, malicious nodes, aware of defensive strategies
against attacks, are expected to adapt their own strategies to
optimize the impact of their attacks. From this standpoint our
goal is also to dissuade an adversary from creating adapted
attack strategies and just settle for basic (random) Selective
forwarding.
It should be noted that we believe that if an attacker
has decided to break down the network he will succeed
by assuming the necessary cost. The required investment
depends on cost-beneﬁt analysis considerations quantifying
the adversary’s interest in breaking down the network. Under
such a worst case scenario protocol resilience will not be
effective. However, this is also the case of other approaches,
like for instance detecting and isolating malicious nodes.
Even if a source node is capable of detecting and isolating
malicious neighbors, the packet will not reach the sink if
most of its neighbors are compromised. We also show in our
simulation results that under Sinkhole attacks where most of
the compromised nodes are located around the sink, the sink
becomes almost completely disconnected from the rest of the
network which in practice is equivalent to the sink being
compromised. In what follows we assume that an adversary
can compromise only a limited number of sensor nodes,
since compromising a node has some cost. In other words,
mass attacks, i.e., a large number of both insider and outsider
attackers, are out of the scope of this paper. Our main goal
is to render a network inherently resilient in the presence of
a few malicious nodes, we therefore require that the network
performance degrades gracefully as the number of compro-
mised nodes increases. Numerous business applications such
as periodic monitoring of electricity, gaz, water metering,
and environmental monitoring, manipulate some important
but not highly sensitive data. In these non mission critical
cases, we assume that an adversary has limited power.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II, provides an overview of previous work insisting on
information, which is relevant in the context of this paper;
for instance, routing resiliency and its relationship to other
similar notions such as survivability and robustness are
discussed and it is explained why classical shortest path
routing protocols are not resilient against insider attacks.
In Section III, we illustrate our adversary model including
network assumptions, adversarial deﬁnitions and several
routing attacks considered in this paper. We then propose, in
Section IV, several probabilistic node selection and packet
replication strategies, which improve resiliency by making
protocol behavior dynamic and redundant in order to exploit
the inherent structural redundancy in the topology of densely
deployed WSNs. In Section V we present our approach by
mixing and applying these strategies to the well known
Gradient-based routing protocol (GBR) [10]; simulations
were performed for a basic Selective forwarding attack and
for its combination with three other routing attacks, namely
Sinkhole, Sybil and Wormhole attacks. Finally, Section VI
concludes this paper and outlines future work directions.
II. SCOPE AND RELATED WORK
In this paper, we focus on the Selective forwarding attack
where compromised nodes drop data packets. This attack is
not only simple but it can be very effective as well. When
multi-hop packet routing is considered even a small number
of packet-dropping nodes can signiﬁcantly deteriorate the
packet delivery rate of the network. Furthermore, when sev-
eral routing attacks such as Sinkhole, Sybil and Wormhole
are considered in combination with Selective forwarding,
this enables adversary nodes to attract more trafﬁc and so
amplify the impact of malicious packet dropping.
In this Section a rather rapid overview of previous work is
given with the purpose of introducing relevant terminology,
concepts and open issues. The vastness of the literature from
one side and space limitation from the other do not permit
to be more exhaustive but hopefully this brief discussion
will help the reader situate our proposal within this research
context.
A. Routing layer attacks and countermeasures
Attacks at the network layer were summarized in [11] as
follows: (a) spoofed, altered or replayed routing information;
(b) Selective forwarding, node replication, Sybil, Sinkhole or
Wormhole and HELLO packets ﬂooding. HELLO packets are
special control packets sent by each node for neighborhood
discovery. We are mainly interested on the attacks of the
second type targeting the routing layer. After node com-
promise an adversary can extract all sensitive information
stored in the node. Other attacks such as radio jamming,
exhaustion, collisions, link layer jamming or attacks against
data aggregation are out of the scope of this paper since they
do not directly target the network layer.
In Selective forwarding, malicious nodes simply drop
some packets (Greyhole) or all of them (Blackhole) instead
of forwarding them as they are supposed to. The main
principle of the Sinkhole attack is exactly the same except
that the compromised nodes are, or pretend to be, near the
sink to attract most of the trafﬁc. After a successful Sinkhole
attack the adversary performs Selective forwarding. One
possible solution is to use trafﬁc monitoring to ensure that
neighbor nodes forward the messages. In [7], the authors
propose to use a Watchdog scheme that identiﬁes selﬁsh
nodes and a Pathrater scheme that helps routing protocols
avoid such nodes. The Watchdog scheme is further extended
by a reputation based scheme, [12], where the neighbors
of any single node collectively rate the node according
to how well the node executes the functions requested
39
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

upon it. Alternatively an acknowledgment based scheme was
proposed in [6] to detect maliciously packet dropping nodes.
In the Sybil attack, [8], a malicious device illegitimately
takes on multiple identities. Doing so the malicious nodes
can ﬁll up their neighbors’ buffers with non existing neigh-
bors and thus create a false topology. Another way to exploit
node capture is the node replication/cloning attack [13],
where an adversary replicates several nodes with the same
identity at different places in the network. To defend against
the Sybil attack, the network needs some mechanism to
validate that a particular identity is the only identity being
held by a given physical node. In [8] the authors describe
resource tests and in [13] two distributed algorithms are
proposed: randomized multicast and line-selected multicast
exploiting the birthday “paradox” to defend against node
replication.
Finally, the Wormhole attack, [9], occurs when an attacker
receives packets at one location in the network and tunnels
them to another, via an out-of-band connection, in order
to replay them at this other location. This attack creates
a totally false network topology. A Wormhole detection
mechanism, called packet leashes, is introduced in [9] and
is based on distance estimation; it consists in two mecha-
nisms: geographical leashes and temporal leashes. Another
technique to defend against Wormhole attacks consists in
using directional antennas [14].
As a conclusion it can be said that most of the proposed
solutions strive to defend against a single attack adopting
a two stage approach: ﬁrst, actively detect malicious nodes
and second defend against the attack by avoiding routing
trafﬁc through the detected malicious nodes. In contrast our
aim is not to detect and defend against a single attack, as
previously done, but rather to limit damages when several
routing attacks are combined together. We propose to do so
by enhancing the resiliency of the routing protocols.
B. Resiliency and related notions
According to Webster [15] in mechanics, resiliency is the
capability of a strained body to recover its size and shape
after deformation caused especially by compressive stress.
Hinging upon the general dictionary deﬁnition and after
reviewing the multiple deﬁnitions of resiliency and other
similar notions in networking, we deﬁne the resiliency in
[16] as the ability of a network to “continue to operate” in
presence of k compromised nodes, or in other words, the ca-
pacity of a network to endure and overcome internal attacks.
Simply put, resiliency is a means to achieve a “graceful
degradation” in packet delivery rate with increasing number
of compromised nodes.
In the literature, several conceptually similar properties
such as survivability [17] and robustness [18], have been
discussed but mainly focus on system failures from causes
of pure statistical nature contrary to attacks where there
is some behind-the-scenes entity with malicious intention.
Furthermore, the notion of enduring and overcoming an at-
tack (failure) is not explicitly considered. Finally, resiliency
as discussed in [19], [20], [21] is not applied in secure
routing but in contexts like robust data aggregation, fault-
tolerant routing and key distribution schemes respectively.
Nevertheless it should be noted that as [19] compares the
resiliency of aggregation functions, our aim is to compare
the resiliency of several versions of a given routing protocol.
C. Deterministic routing and its limitations
Insofar minimizing power consumption has been con-
sidered a top priority in WSNs research. For increased
efﬁciency, most of the routing protocols use a shortest path
criterion to route DATA packets the goal being to reach
the sink as quickly as possible. Reactive routing, such as
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) [22], geographical routing,
such as Greedy Forwarding (GF) [23] and gradient-based,
such as Gradient-Based Routing (GBR) [10], all employ a
shortest path principle (with some appropriate deﬁnition of
“short”). Unfortunately this underlying shortest-path opti-
mization philosophy is responsible for the severe limitations
of deterministic routing protocols when attacks involving
compromised nodes are considered.
To facilitate discussion lets suppose that some insider
attacker has compromised a number of nodes, which are
uniformly distributed across the network and which drop
all DATA packets they receive. If l denotes the path length
in number of hops from source to destination; pc denotes
the probability that a node is compromised and pn is the
probability that a packet is delivered (i.e., all forwarding
nodes on the route are legitimate), we have pn = (1−pc)l. In
this case, the probability to ﬁnd a “safe” route exponentially
decreases with route length; essentially the same applies for
Selective forwarding attacks where only part of the trafﬁc is
dropped.
In the presence of such attacks, the routing protocols using
shortest paths have better overall delivery ratio. However,
they are not resilient. First, as the routes are static all DATA
packets from a source node take always the same route to
reach a sink. Therefore, if at least one intermediate node is
compromised along a route, all DATA packets will be lost
and the source node will be completely disconnected from
the sink. Second, if a source node has at least one malicious
neighbor who will try to attract the trafﬁc (best delay, best
gradient, geographically closest to the sink etc.), all DATA
packets will be engulfed by such a compromised node. Thus,
the routing protocol as is will not be able to overcome this
situation since the compromised node will always seem the
best routing choice to make.
In previous work, a conﬁgurable secure routing protocol
(SIGF) has been proposed in [24], extending geographical
routing (IGF) [25] with the intention of adding security
and protection against outsider attacks. It advocates for an
incremental approach to security. As a basis SIGF uses
40
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

nondeterminism in neighbor selection, then it adds a rep-
utation scheme and ﬁnally it considers cryptography. In a
sense SIGF strives for a layered resistance to attacks. How-
ever, reputation schemes cannot defend against colluding
malicious nodes and cryptographic primitives cannot defend
against node compromise. Our aim is to contribute in a
similar way by considering, as in SIGF, nondeterminism
as a basis of protocol behavior but in our case striving for
resiliency, instead of resistance, to several combined attacks,
which is more appropriate when compromised possibly
colluding nodes are considered.
III. NETWORK ASSUMPTIONS AND ADVERSARY MODELS
In this section we state the network assumptions and sev-
eral adversarial deﬁnitions and we describe the implemented
routing attacks.
A. Network assumptions
In the following two types of network device nodes are
considered: ordinary sensors and data sinks. Sensor nodes
sense and transmit data of the physical world to a single
data collector, the sink. Here we deal with WSNs where all
sensor nodes are physically identical in terms of transmission
range, power, etc. Sensor nodes are densely deployed in a
square region of size N ×N and the physical topology of the
network is represented by a connected graph. The packets
are routed from the source (sensors) to the destination (sink)
on this topology.
A common and practical graph model proposed for model-
ing WSNs is the ﬁxed radius random graph. Let us consider
a graph G(Ω, E) where Ω is a set of nodes wirelessly
connected pairwise by a set of E of undirected edges to
represent communication links between nodes. In this model,
the nodes are randomly placed in a N ×N region according
to a uniform distribution. A link exists between two nodes
i and j if the Euclidean distance between these two nodes
less than the communication range r. We assume that the
wireless links in our graph are bi-directional, i.e., if node i
hears node j then node j also hears node i.
In addition, from the network security standpoint we use
the following, traditionally made, assumptions:
• the “sink” is considered robust, having enough re-
sources in terms of memory, computational power
and battery to support the cryptographic and routing
requirements of the WSN. Thus, adversaries cannot
compromise the sink in limited time.
• the “sensor” has limited resources in terms of memory,
computational power and battery. Thus, sensor nodes
are non trustworthy since they are vulnerable to phys-
ical attacks and an adversary can compromise them.
B. Adversarial deﬁnitions
According to [26] an attack is an intentional act by which
an entity attempts to evade security services and violate the
security policy of a system; that is, an actual assault on
system security that derives from an intelligent threat.
According to its capabilities an attacker can be character-
ized as:
• A laptop class attacker: It may have access to powerful
devices with more computational resources, such as
laptops or their equivalent. A single laptop-class at-
tacker might be able to eavesdrop and/or jam the entire
network.
• A mote class attacker: It has access to a few motes
with the same capabilities as other ordinary sensor
nodes. They have no resource advantages over legiti-
mate nodes.
Attacks can also be characterized according to intent as:
• A passive attack: In this attack, the adversary attempts
to learn or make use of information from a system
but does not affect system resources. For example,
passive eavesdropping that simply gathers information,
can compromise privacy and conﬁdentiality.
• An active attack: It attempts to alter system resources
or affect system operations. Compared to the passive
attack, here the goal of the adversary is to produce
DoS attacks to disrupt communication by destroying
links or exhaust available resources such as bandwidth
or energy.
Finally, attacks can be characterized according to point of
initiation as:
• An outsider attack: It is initiated from outside the
security perimeter by an unauthorized or illegitimate
user of the system. Examples are external attacks such
as jamming, eavesdropping as well as injecting replayed
or fabricated messages.
• An insider attack: It is one that is initiated by an
entity inside the security perimeter, i.e., an entity that
is authorized to access system resources but uses them
in a way not approved by the party that granted the
authorization. Selective forwarding, Sybil, Sinkhole or
Wormhole attacks being notable examples.
With respect to this classiﬁcation and given our network
assumptions our adversary model considers: “mote-class”,
“active”, and, “insider” attackers.
C. Implemented routing attacks
An adversary will try to disrupt communication and
cause as much as possible damage to routing protocols. To
compare the resiliency of the different protocols, ﬁrstly, we
modeled the basic Selective forwarding attack, and secondly,
we combined it with three other routing attacks; Sybil,
Wormhole and Sinkhole. In this sense our attack model is a
two-stage combination of simpler attacks. At the ﬁrst stage,
the attacker will launch some attacks in order to enable
compromised nodes to attract a lot of trafﬁc. Subsequently
at the second stage the compromised nodes will launch the
41
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.
Basic Selective forwarding attack
routing attack per se by performing selective forwarding
on the attracted packets. We have considered the selective
forwarding attack as a basis of our attack model not only
because it is common to all protocols but also because this
simple attack has a direct impact on reliable data delivery,
which characterizes the success of routing protocols.
In the following the main constituents of our attack model
will be described in more detail.
1) Basic attack: In multi-hop routing, messages may
cross many hops before reaching their ﬁnal destination.
However, a malicious node in the path of data transmission
can refuse to forward messages. Selective forwarding is a
simple and basic routing attack easy for an insider adversary
to launch. After node compromise, malicious nodes instead
of forwarding messages with probability 1 they do so with
some lower probability. For instance, they can drop all
messages (probability to forward = 0) or they can selectively
drop some of them in order to avoid detection of their
malicious activity (Fig. 1).
2) Combined attacks: For more efﬁciency, an adversary
can exploit its “insider” knowledge to ﬁrst try to attract
trafﬁc and then drop it. Selective forwarding is effective
when malicious nodes are on the routes of packet transfer so
it is logical to consider it as the ﬁnal stage of more complex
attack behavior where malicious nodes ﬁrstly employ some
other attack to advantageously place themselves on the
routes of heavy trafﬁc and then effect Selective forwarding.
Hence, well known routing attacks such as Sybil, Wormhole,
Sinkhole could be combined with basic Selective forward-
ing. This type of combined attacks is explicitly considered
within our model.
For instance, to create a Sinkhole, an adversary will try to
compromise nodes closer to the sink, exploiting knowledge
of location information, to attract most of the trafﬁc (Fig.
2). After a successful Sinkhole attack, the adversary will
perform Selective forwarding. The nature of sensor networks
where all the trafﬁc ﬂows towards one (or few) sink node(s)
Figure 2.
Combined Sinkhole attack
Figure 3.
Combined Sybil attack
makes this type of attacks highly relevant.
Sybil attack is deﬁned by malicious nodes illegitimately
taking on multiple identities (Fig. 3) thus compromising the
neighborhood discovery process. For instance, a malicious
node taking two or more identities will increase the proba-
bility of being selected by legitimate nodes as their next hop
and then produce Selective forwarding to disrupt routing.
In Wormhole, a malicious node receives packets at one
point in the network and tunnels them to another point via
an out-of-band connection (Fig. 4). Thus, two malicious
nodes can make believe that they are neighbors even if
they are physically distant. Well placed Wormholes, for
instance an adversary closer to the sink, make possible to
attract the trafﬁc of the two hop neighborhood. Wormhole
attack is particularly dangerous against routing protocols
not only because it creates false topologies but also it
permits to attract effectively the trafﬁc. It should be noted
that Wormholes is also an effective means to create Sybil
identities using existing identities in case legitimate nodes
can detect fabricated or duplicated identities.
In the remainder of this paper we propose some routing
42
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4.
Combined Wormhole attack
behaviors, which could make protocols inherently resilient
to such attacks. Our goal is not to detect and to eliminate
attacks, but rather to enhance the routing protocols resiliency
in order to limit damages.
IV. PROTOCOL BEHAVIORS ENHANCING RESILIENCY
Deterministic protocol behavior forces trafﬁc to ﬂow on
a subset of “best” routes, in the quest of optimization (see
the discussion in Section II-C). As a result of this, packet
delivery success and failure are not fairly distributed among
the network nodes; some nodes will have a good delivery
ratio and others very bad ones. This is a limitation of the
protocol since the network structural (i.e., network topology)
redundancy is not exploited to beneﬁt from physically ex-
isting alternative routes. In this Section, the techniques that
can be employed in order to circumvent this limitation are
described.
In this respect resiliency will permit: ﬁrst, to avoid com-
plete disconnection of nodes; second, graceful degradation
of the delivery ratio as the number of compromised nodes
increases; and third, obtain packet delivery ratios higher than
those achieved by the standard protocols under the same
conditions.
The complexity (overhead) of our proposal compared to
the deterministic protocol is provided in terms of energy
consumption.
Our goal then is to make resiliency emerge through
modiﬁed protocol behavior. To this end, inspired by previous
work, we believe that techniques enabling both dynamic and
redundant behavior at the protocol level are needed.
A. Random selection of the next hop
A dynamic (random) behavior can be introduced in
different ways according to the routing protocol features.
In protocols that require a route discovery process, such
as DSR, multiple routes can be discovered once and for
each DATA packet the source node can each time select
randomly a different route among the discovered ones. In a
protocol without route discovery, such as GF, each node can
determine a subset of direct neighbors that are closest to the
sink compared to itself and choose the next hop randomly
in this subset. Depending on how “greedily” a DATA packet
should be forwarded, several neighborhood subsets can be
constructed. For instance, in a GBR, each node can randomly
choose a next hop among those who have a “height” strictly
less than itself.
Generally speaking implementing this behavior requires
two things. First, the set of selection candidates needs
to be deﬁned; it can be of arbitrary size constrained by
some maximum allowed distance from the sink. Second, a
selection probability law on this set needs to be speciﬁed; for
instance, it may be desirable that the network node chooses
neighbors closer to the sink with higher probabilities. The
network node has thus the opportunity to make a random
choice for the next hop with a probability to choose the
nodes more or less close to the sink.
With this method, the structural redundancy of a physical
topology can be effectively exploited in making the protocol
fairer in terms of packet loss per node and thus more
resilient since the overall packet delivery success can be
attributed to a larger population of nodes. Furthermore the
energy dissipation at the network is also fairer since the
most solicited nodes under a deterministic scheme, i.e.,
those along the shortest routes, are relieved. Yet another
advantage is that attacks targeting state information become
less effective since now a single compromised node is not
enough to compromise an entire neighborhood. However,
this method may decrease packet delivery ratio and increase
power consumption due to the lengthening of routes to the
sink. There is thus a resiliency-power trade-off that needs to
be evaluated. It is possible that by varying the parameters, of
candidate set size and selection probability law, this trade-off
can be controlled and kept to acceptable levels.
B. Trafﬁc redundancy
Another means to effectively exploit the structural redun-
dancy of the network is to enforce some degree of replication
of sent packets. Each replica should then follow its own path
to reach the sink.
Here two packet replication schemes to achieve redun-
dancy are considered:
• Nodes replicate their own packets a number of times
and send them to an equal number of appropriately se-
lected neighbors. The forwarding nodes do not replicate
packets and discard duplicates.
• Packets are replicated both at the source and at each
intermediate node along the route. Intermediate nodes
discard duplicates of already forwarded packets.
By construction deterministic protocols such as DSR, GF,
GBR, cannot take advantage of redundant sends to increase
their delivery ratio. If at least one node is compromised
along the route, all redundant packets are lost, as they take
43
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

always the same route. Such protocols need to be modiﬁed
to be able to construct alternative shortest routes for each
replica but even then their static nature does not allow them
to be resilient. In this respect the discovery, construction and
maintenance of alternative routes becomes an important con-
sideration. In the literature, most of the multi-path routing
protocols use multiple node (or link) disjoint paths to send
redundant packets as shown in [27], [28] for example. A
packet delivery rate can be increased signiﬁcantly by using
node disjoint multi-path routing. However, as the protocol
gets more complex the energy required to discover and to
maintain such multiple node disjoint paths is high.
C. Probabilistic routing with trafﬁc redundancy
Finally, we can mix all presented strategies to obtain
a random probabilistic routing with trafﬁc redundancy. In
this case, the structural redundancy of a physical topology
is effectively exploited with some probability to choose
longer routes. It will be shown that the random choice of a
next hop candidate combined to packet replication naturally
implements efﬁcient enough route diversity even though
for protocol simplicity node disjoint multiple paths are not
guaranteed.
V. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
As a ﬁrst attempt to better understand routing resiliency as
well as the associated cost in terms of power consumption,
these techniques were applied on the conventional GBR
protocol to analyze through extensive simulation if and
how its resiliency to attacks is improved. Simulations were
performed using WSNet [29], an event-driven simulator for
wireless networks.
A. Simulation environment
In our simulations, a unique sink is assumed at the center
of the ﬁeld. The deployed nodes have ﬁxed positions during
each simulation. The simulations are averaged over 100 trials
for each case with a 95% conﬁdence interval. Table I sums
up the simulation parameters.
At this stage we conﬁgure WSNet for ideal MAC/PHY
layers (e.g., no interference, no path-loss and no collisions)
in order to isolate the impact of the deﬁned attacks on
routing and conceptually validate our approach before en-
gaging into more resource consuming simulations and pilot
deployments, which ultimately will be necessary.
B. Protocol under study
GBR [10] is a ﬂooding based routing protocol, which is
suitable for routing DATA packets from all source nodes to a
sink. GBR uses two types of packets: INTEREST and DATA
packets. The sink ﬂoods an INTEREST packet in order to
setup a gradient. The INTEREST packet records the number
of hops taken from the sink. Then a node can discover its
minimum number of hops from the sink, called the node
Table I
SUMMARY OF THE SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Number of nodes
300
Area size
100 × 100m
Transmission range
20m
Topology
uniformly distributed
Trafﬁc generation
Poisson distribution λ = 1 p/s
Simulation time
100s
Number of packets
30000
Number of runs
100
Table II
SUMMARY OF NOTATIONS
Notation
Description
s
a network node
hs
height of s
U(s) = {u1, u2, ..., uns}
neighbors of s
V (s) = {v1, v2, ..., vms}
neighbors of s with height < hs
W(s) = {w1, w2, ..., wls}
neighbors of s with height = hs
“height”. The height difference between a node and each
of its neighbors is the gradient on that link. The gradient
setup process is executed only once at the beginning of the
simulation. The following variants of GBR are considered:
1) Deterministic GBR: A given network node s sends
DATA packets to a forwarding candidate with the minimum
“height” in order to make maximum progress toward the
sink. The next hop candidate, vi, is chosen in V (s), 1 ⩽ i ⩽
ms (Table II). If several neighbors have the same “height”,
we choose the ﬁrst one registered.
2) Random GBR: A given network node s sends DATA
packets to a randomly chosen forwarding candidate with
strictly lower “height” than itself. The next hop candidate,
vi, is chosen randomly in V (s), 1 ⩽ i ⩽ ms (Table II).
The nondeterminism introduced by a random selection of
the next hop is conceptually similar to SIGF [24]. However,
we used a gradient value instead of a geographic distance.
3) Random probabilistic GBR: We have considered two
cases according to the probability to select the next hop
candidate. Let pt and ˜pt be real numbers such that pt +
˜pt = 1. The considered cases are pt = {0.8, 0.6} and ˜pt =
{0.2, 0.4}. For a network node s, pt is the probability to
choose the next hop candidate vi ∈ V (s), 1 ⩽ i ⩽ ms (Table
II) in the subset of neighbors closer to the sink and ˜pt is the
probability to choose the next hop candidate wj ∈ W(s),
1 ⩽ j ⩽ ls (Table II) in the subset of neighbors with the
same height as itself.
4) Random probabilistic GBR with redundancy: Two
cases of redundancy are considered; DATA packets are
replicated twice (i) at the source node and (ii) by each node
along a full path. In those two cases, duplicate copies of a
packet are dropped by forwarding nodes.
C. Implemented attacks
In the following, we assume a unique trustworthy sink.
Sensor nodes are assumed untrustworthy since they are
44
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5.
Compromised nodes randomly placed (uniformly)
vulnerable to physical attacks and can be compromised.
With respect to deﬁnition described in Section III-B, ma-
licious nodes may belong to one of the following adversarial
categories: “mote-class”, “active”, and, “insider” attackers.
We implemented Selective forwarding as a basic attack
and further we considered combining this basic attack with
Sybil, Wormhole and Sinkhole attacks.
1) Basic attack: Selective Forwarding. Assuming that
the adversary has no information about the location of the
sink, the k compromised nodes are randomly and uniformly
distributed on a N ×N square ﬁeld (Fig. 5). For simulations
k varies between 10% and 50% of the node population.
Malicious nodes do not disturb gradient setup phase and
retransmit INTEREST packets with correct hop count. They
drop all DATA packets coming from their neighbors, how-
ever, they generate and send their own DATA packets to the
sink.
2) Combined attack #1: Sinkhole with Selective forward-
ing. Assuming that the adversary has some information
about the location of the sink, the k compromised nodes
are randomly distributed on a M × M (e.g., M = N/2)
square ﬁeld around the sink (Fig. 6). For simulations k varies
between 10% and 30% of the node population. Malicious
nodes simply drop all DATA packets coming from their
neighbors. However it is assumed that malicious nodes
do not disturb the gradient setup phase, retransmit the
INTEREST packets used for gradient setup with with a
correct hop count and ﬁnally, they normally generate and
send their own DATA packets to the sink.
3) Combined attack #2: Sybil with Selective forwarding.
The k compromised nodes are randomly and uniformly
distributed on a N ×N square ﬁeld (Fig. 5). For simulations
k varies between 10% and 50% of the node population. Ac-
cording to Sybil attack taxonomy [8], our model corresponds
to “direct communication” where Sybil nodes communicate
directly with legitimate nodes, using “fabricated identities”
where an attacker can simply create arbitrary new Sybil
identities (not existing in the network) and it is of the
Figure 6.
Compromised nodes concentrated around the sink
“simultaneous” form where an attacker may participate all
of his Sybil identities simultaneously in the network. In
this adversary model, malicious nodes take two identities.
A compromised node disturbs gradient setup phase by
duplicating INTEREST packets. A malicious node puts a
false identity to the duplicated INTEREST packet to make
believe to their neighbors that there are two nodes, while
physically there is only one node. The probability to be
chosen for the next hop increases for a malicious node and
it can attract more trafﬁc. A malicious node does not lie
about its gradient and the two identities take the same true
gradient. We choose this particular strategy to separate the
impact of Sinkhole attack (which will be the case if the Sybil
node lies on its gradient) and of the Sybil attack itself. The
false identity is chosen randomly in the large interval of non
existing identities to avoid collisions. Once two identities are
created, a malicious node drops all DATA packets coming
from its neighbors for both its own and Sybil identities. We
also assume only one Sybil identity to be convinced that a
Sybil node will not be detected by simple mechanisms such
as node degree comparison even if this strategy limits the
impact of Sybil attack.
4) Combined attack #3: Wormhole with Selective for-
warding. Two colluding malicious nodes can make believe
that they are neighbors even if they are physically distant by
tunneling messages via an out-of-band connection. Every
pair of malicious nodes (w1; w2) with a distance greater
than two hops, creates a Wormhole link. An INTEREST
packet received by w1 is directly transmitted to w2 by using
the out of band connection. Thus, tunneled INTEREST
packets arrive sooner than other packets transmitted over
a normal multi-hop route. If w1 is placed near the sink, w2
obtain a gradient lesser than its neighbors and w2 can attract
its neighbors’ trafﬁc. The k malicious nodes are randomly
distributed across the whole network, except in the border.
The total number of Wormhole links is k/2. For simulations
k varies between 10% and 50% of the node population.
Once a Wormhole link is created between two malicious
45
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

nodes (w1; w2), they will drop all DATA packets coming
from their neighbors. A given malicious node only belongs
to one Wormhole link, the case of several Wormhole links
coming from a single Wormhole node is not treated here.The
Wormhole malicious nodes use legitimate trafﬁc to perform
their activity: falsify neighborhood information and attract
trafﬁc; collect node identities and use them as Sybil ones
instead of having to fabricate false ones.
D. Evaluation metrics
To gain insight concerning the WSN routing resiliency
some metrics are needed in order to meaningfully summarize
the information collected by simulations. A single such
metric is currently lacking and is an object of ongoing
research. As a provisional substitute we have used the
following metrics:
• Average delivery ratio (ADR):
ADR = Nr/Ns,
(1)
where Nr, Ns are respectively the total number of
received and sent packets.
ADR is an important metric to evaluate the overall success
of routing functionality, i.e., packet delivery. To reﬁne over
the information provided by ADR, we also measured the
delivery ratio per node and we grouped the measurements
into 5 classes.
• ADR classes:
– Class c1 : nodes with ADR = 100%
all DATA packets from these nodes are received by
the sink
– Class c2 : nodes with ADR ∈ [66%; 100%[
– Class c3 : nodes with ADR ∈ [33%; 66%[
– Class c4 : nodes with ADR ∈]0%; 33%[
– Class c5 : nodes with ADR = 0%
no DATA packet from these nodes is received by
the sink and so they are totally disconnected from
the sink
This measure allows to determine the distribution of
transmission success in the node population and the fracture
of the network connectivity. In our point of view, the higher
the number of connected source nodes (even if with a low
ADR), the more the routing protocol is resilient.
• ADR per distance: The delivery ratio per node is
measured and grouped according to the distance (in
number of hops) of nodes from the sink.
To get the distance in number of hops, we take the geo-
graphical distance between the source nodes and the sink,
and we divide it by the transmission range. All source nodes
have the same transmission range. The routing protocols are
more resilient if more distant nodes are able to still reach
the sink and thus successfully transmit packets.
• Average path length (APL): The number of hops
crossed by each received packet.
The end-to-end delay is not explicitly measured in this
paper since for our simulations we conﬁgure WSNet for
ideal MAC/PHY layers which implies no retransmis-
sion and no propagation delays. However, the average
path length (i.e., hop count) is directly proportional
to the average end-to-end delay of the network (see
Fig. 11a and Fig. 10) and in this sense it provides an
indication of.
• Normalized power consumption (NPC):
NPC = Te/ ˜Te
(2)
where the total energy consumption (Te) is normalized
by the energy consumption of the deterministic GBR
without attack and without packet replication sent ( ˜Te).
NPC allows to objectively compare energy expenditure
under attacks for each case (including redundancy) without
having to enter at this time into low level considerations
requiring power consumption modeling. The energy model
of WSNet as detailed in the WSNet documentation (see in
[30]) is linear: the sleep and idle modes of the MAC layer
are not taken into account whereas the basic model considers
that the cost for one bit sent is 1 and the cost for one bit
received is 2. The total energy is thus computed taking into
account the energy cost of each bit received or sent.
E. Results and analysis
The focus of our simulations is on comparing the four
versions of GBR (Deterministic, Random, Random proba-
bilistic pt = 0.8 and Random probabilistic pt = 0.6) with a
single and two types of redundant DATA packets under four
implemented attacks discussed in Section V-C, in term of
metrics discussed in Section V-D.
An example of the functional ﬂow diagram with trafﬁc
redundancy (double sent full path) under a basic Selective
forwarding attacks is presented in Fig. 7.
1) Results for the basic Selective Forwarding attack:
As expected the average delivery ratio (Fig. 8), the average
path length (Fig. 11) and the total energy consumption (Fig.
12) decrease with increasing number of compromised nodes
under the basic Selective forwarding attack. When a single
DATA packet is considered, Deterministic and Random GBR
have a higher delivery ratio than others (Fig. 8(a)). The
path length is inversely proportional to the average delivery
ratio. With probability pt decreasing, the average path length
(Fig. 11(a)) and the total energy consumption (Fig. 12(a))
increase. However, as the number of the next hop candidates
is increased, the structural redundancy of the network is
better exploited.
As shown in Fig. 9 in Deterministic GBR only two classes
appear. For any source node s either all DATA packets
will be successfully delivered (ADRs = 100%), i.e., no
malicious node is along the route, or all DATA packets
will be lost (ADRs = 0%), i.e., at least one forwarding
node is compromised along the route. In last case, a source
46
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7.
Example of the functional ﬂow diagram with trafﬁc redundancy
(double sent full path) under a basic Selective forwarding attack. * The
choice of the next hop depends on the dedicated routing protocol as
described in Section V-B1 for Deterministic GBR, in Section V-B2 for
Random GBR with p = 1, in Section V-B3 for Random GBR with p = 0.8
and in Section V-B4 for Random GBR with p = 0.6.
node s is completely disconnected from the sink. Note also
that the number of disconnected nodes (c5) is signiﬁcantly
important (15%) for Deterministic GBR. On the contrary
with all variants of Random GBR four classes c1 to c4
appear. With Random GBR a low number of nodes are
completely disconnected from the sink (c5). Note that since
the network saves energy due to dropped packets by the
compromised nodes, this energy gain can then be exploited
by redundant DATA packets to further improve resiliency and
ADR. In this way, the source nodes can reach the sink as
long as possible, thus, enhancing the network connectivity
(Fig. 9).
Resiliency and ADR over Deterministic GBR further
improve when probabilistic behaviors are mixed with DATA
packet replication at the source because DATA packets
may take potentially different routes thanks to the random
selection of next-hop neighbors. As shown in Fig. 8(b), all
random versions exhibit higher delivery ratio performance,
though their average path length is higher (Fig. 11(b)),
than the Deterministic GBR whose performance remains
unchanged. With trafﬁc redundancy, in Fig. 9(b) and (c), we
can observe that the number of nodes with higher delivery
ratio (c1 and c2) is increased and the number of disconnected
nodes from the sink (c5) is decreased for all Random GBR
protocols, while for Deterministic GBR the situation remains
unchanged. Network reliability is thus improved since most
(a) single DATA packet
(b) DATA packets replicated at their source
(c) DATA packets replicated by all forw. nodes along the route
Figure 8.
Basic Selective forwarding - Average delivery ratio (ADR)
source nodes remain connected.
As expected (Fig. 9 (a)) with decreasing probability
pt, ADR decreases when the distance from the sink (in
number of hops) increases due to the route length effect.
However, with trafﬁc redundancy, the ADR of distant nodes
is increased for all random versions, while for Deterministic
GBR it remains unchanged (Fig. 9 (b) and (c)). Resiliency
is thus improved since distant nodes have better delivery
ratio. Nevertheless this has a price, as shown in Fig. 12(b)
47
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) single DATA packet
(b) DATA packets replicated at source
(c) DATA packets replicated by all forw. nodes along the route
Figure 9.
Basic Selective forwarding - ADR classes (c1 to c5) with k =
10% of compromised nodes; distribution of distances from the sink in
number of hops (h1 to h4) within each class is shown
all random versions have a higher energy consumption than
Deterministic GBR.
In the last case, where DATA packets are replicated at
each intermediate node along a full path, a signiﬁcant im-
provement on delivery ratio is observed (Fig. 8(c)). Sending
redundant DATA packets by each intermediate node on a full
path mixed with a random behavior signiﬁcantly enhances
Figure 10.
Basic Selective forwarding (single DATA packet) - Average
end-to-end delay (sec)
the resiliency. It appears that for uniformly distributed
compromised nodes variation of the probability pt does not
inﬂuence the delivery ratio. So, we may choose the value
of pt that has lower energy consumption. In this respect
Random GBR (pt = 1) remains the better trade-off in
term of energy-resiliency (Fig. 12(c)). However, it remains
to be conﬁrmed if for more realistic spatially distributed
compromised nodes, the lower probability pt may allow
better delivery rates as it increases the number of next hop
candidates.
2) Results for the combined attacks: In this Section we
illustrate results of four versions of GBR with combined
attacks;
Sybil,
Wormhole
and
Sinkhole
with
trafﬁc
redundancy, where DATA packets are replicated at each
intermediate node along a full path.
Sybil attack results: In Fig. 13(a), we observe that the
impact of combined Sybil attack is more important than with
basic Selective forwarding. When malicious nodes create
two identities, they increase the probability to be chosen as
the next hop by their neighbors, if they have smallest gradi-
ent. Once chosen as the next hop, they receive more packets
for retransmission. With trafﬁc redundancy all Random GBR
variants have better delivery ratio than Deterministic GBR.
The number of nodes in classes c1 and c2 is higher than in
other classes for all Random GBR variants (Fig. 14(a)). As
a result, with all Random GBRs, most of source nodes have
ADR greater than 66% with 10% of compromised nodes
and very few nodes are disconnected (c5). In Deterministic
GBR, 20% of source nodes are disconnected from the sink
with 10% of compromised nodes, while with Random GBR
48
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) single DATA packet
(b) DATA packets replicated at source
(c) DATA packets replicated by all forw. nodes along the route
Figure 11.
Basic Selective forwarding - Average path length (APL)
(pt = 1) only 0, 01% are completely disconnected. Network
reliability and resiliency are improved again with Random
GBR, since most of the source nodes remain connected. The
ADR of distant nodes is increased for all random versions,
whereas for Deterministic GBR ADR remains unchanged
(Fig. 14 (a)). Resiliency is improved with Random GBR
under combined Sybil attack, since distant nodes have better
delivery ratio. However, the energy consumption with trafﬁc
redundancy (Fig. 16(a)) is increased about 3 times.
Wormhole attack results: Fig. 13(b) shows that the
(a) single DATA packet
(b) DATA packets replicated at source
(c) DATA packets replicated by all forwarding nodes along the route
Figure 12. Basic Selective forwarding - Norm. Power Consumption (NPC)
impact of combined Wormhole attack is more important
than both basic Selective forwarding and combined Sybil
attacks. If we consider a pair (w1; w2) of malicious nodes
49
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Sybil k <= 50%
(b) Wormhole k <= 50%
(c) Sinkhole k <= 30%
Figure 13.
Combined attacks with DATA packets replicated by all
forwarding nodes along the route - Average delivery ratio (ADR)
and if w1 is placed near the sink, w2 obtains a gradient
lesser than its neighbors and the Wormhole can attract the
trafﬁc. Here again, all Random GBR protocols have better
delivery ratio than Deterministic GBR. In Deterministic
GBR, 25% of source nodes are disconnected from the sink
with 10% of compromised nodes and with Random GBR
(pt = 1) it is 0, 06% (Fig. 14(b)). Network reliability and
resiliency are also improved with all Random GBR variants,
since the majority of source nodes remain connected (Fig.
(a) Sybil
(b) Wormhole
(c) Sinkhole
Figure 14.
Combined attacks with DATA packets replicated by all
forwarding nodes along the route - ADR classes (c1 to c5) with k = 10%
of compromised nodes; distribution of distances from the sink in number
of hops (h1 to h4) within each class is shown
14(b)) and the ADR of distant nodes is increased (Fig.
14(b)). Resiliency is improved with Random GBR under
combined Wormhole attack and the energy consumption
(Fig. 16(b)) due to trafﬁc redundancy remains almost the
same as combined Sybil attack.
Sinkhole attack results: In Fig. 13(c), we observe that the
impact of combined Sinkhole attack is the most important
50
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Sybil k <= 50%
(b) Wormhole k <= 50%
(c) Sinkhole k <= 30%
Figure 15.
Combined attacks with DATA packets replicated by all
forwarding nodes along the route - Average path length (APL)
compared to all other attacks. When the compromised nodes
are close to the sink, they receive for retransmission more
packets than other nodes: they naturally attract most of
the trafﬁc. It is worth noting the signiﬁcant differences in
terms of delivery ratio for all random versions compared to
Deterministic GBR as well as among the different versions
of Random GBR with trafﬁc redundancy. As packets can
take longer routes with Random GBR pt = 0.6 (Fig. 15(c)),
(a) Sybil k <= 50%
(b) Wormhole k <= 50%
(c) Sinkhole k <= 30%
Figure 16.
Combined attacks with DATA packets replicated by all
forwarding nodes along the route - Normalized Power Consumption (NPC)
messages can ﬁnd “unaffected” routes around the sink if
exist. Hence, distant nodes have more chance to ﬁnd those
“healthy” routes near the sink. The source nodes close to
the sink have lower ADR because of the important number
51
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of compromised nodes in their neighborhood (Fig. 14(c)).
When all nodes around the sink are compromised, the sink
receives packets only from these malicious nodes and no
DATA packets are received from the legitimate nodes. That
is why we observe on Fig. 15(c) a path length that tends to
1. Resiliency is improved with a Random GBR under the
combined Sinkhole attack and the energy consumption (Fig.
16(b)) due to trafﬁc redundancy remains almost the same as
with other attacks.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have considered the case of mote-
class/active/insider attacks against WSN multi-hop routing
protocols. In this speciﬁc context of node compromise
cryptography needs to be complemented by algorithmic ap-
proaches. We have proposed WSN routing strategies enhanc-
ing the protocol resiliency in the presence of maliciously
packet-dropping compromised nodes. The basic Selective
forwarding attack as well as its combination with Sinkhole,
Sybil and Wormhole attacks was thoroughly investigated in
the context of the well established GBR.
We have started by analyzing the conditions required for
resiliency at the routing layer. The two main ﬁndings were
that, ﬁrst, the shortest-path optimization principles though
good for energy efﬁciency are not adapted at all from the
routing layer security (i.e., resiliency to insider attacks)
standpoint and, second, that the structural redundancy in
the network topology should be effectively exploited by
employing some form of redundant protocol behavior.
In accordance with these ﬁndings our proposal consists
in combining random next-hop selection and packet repli-
cation; both are needed. A random and probabilistic choice
of the next hop candidates allows a dynamic behavior in
route selection exploiting thus the structural redundancy of
the network. However, the packet delivery ratio may suffer
since packets may take longer routes.
With increasing path length (in terms of packet hop
count), the overall delay across the network increases as
well. The overall delay is directly proportional to the average
path length (ideal MAC/PHY layers). However, we observed
that under worst attack scenario such as Sinkhole attacks, the
average path length of successfully delivered packets tends
to one. This can be explained by the fact that with increasing
number of compromised nodes, the sink ends up receiving
packets only from its direct neighbors. Similarly, in the worst
case mass attack scenario (a large number of both insider
and outsider attackers), the observed overall delay across the
network will also decrease since most of the packets from
distant nodes will be lost.
To counterbalance the longer route effect such dynamic
(probabilistic) behavior needs to be combined with some
form of packet replication. To validate our ideas we have
extensively simulated the proposed techniques by modifying
in various ways the well-known routing protocol GBR. The
results show that the resiliency of routing protocols can be
effectively enhanced.
The main merits of our proposal compared to the classical
deterministic protocols are:
• the delivery ratio is improved; “graceful” degradation
of the delivery ratio with increasing number of com-
promised nodes.
• the delivery success is fairly distributed; more sources
transmit with a high delivery ratio and distant nodes
have better delivery success.
• the connectivity is improved; more sources are remain
connected to the sink with increasing number of com-
promised nodes.
• the structural redundancy of the physical topology is
better exploited and the energy consumption is fairly
distributed; more nodes participate to the routing.
From simulations, we found that trafﬁc redundancy is
extremely energy consuming when no attack, but energy
efﬁciency of the protocol is improved when under attack.
Hinging on this observation a future work perspective is
the search of a mechanism to dynamically adapt the degree
of dynamic/redundant behavior to equalize energy cost and
so keep the energy consumption-resiliency trade-off at ac-
ceptable levels. It also seems that keeping the routes short
(in terms of hop count) should be sought but there are
some particular cases (e.g., combined Sinkhole attack) where
longer routes should be permitted in order to get around
obstacles. It is worth mentioning that in our simulation
study we have gone beyond the simple Selective forwarding
attack to consider combined attacks (such as Wormhole and
Selective forwarding) concluding that these attacks have
extreme impact on routing especially when Sinkhole and
selected forwarding are combined together.
From our simulation analysis we conclude that an opera-
tional deﬁnition resiliency, in the context of network routing,
should incorporate the notions of fairness, preservation of
connectivity and graceful degradation of delivery ratio. Thus,
our ongoing research especially concerns the deﬁnition of a
metric of resiliency that includes all those notions. Such a
metric will be a valuable tool in analyzing protocol resilience
and will greatly simplify the process of protocol comparison.
Finally, in a near future, we also need to relax the
ideal MAC/PHY assumption to validate the performance of
resilient routing techniques when channel imperfections and
medium access limitations are taken into account; to this end
it would be interesting to consider modeling packet loss due
to MAC/PHY limitations as a form of unintentional Selective
forwarding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Ochirkhand Erdene-Ochir is partially supported by a PhD
graduate scholarship through a CIFRE contract between
France Telecom and the French Ministry of Industry.
52
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES
[1] P. Papadimitratos and Z. Haas, “Secure rotuing for mobile ad
hoc networks,” in Communication Networks and Distributed
Systems Modeling and Simulation Conference, San Antonio,
Texas, 2002, pp. 27–31.
[2] Y. C. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. B. Johnson, “Ariadne: a secure
on-demand routing protocol for ad hoc networks,” Wireless
Networks, vol. 11, no. 1-2, pp. 21–38, January 2005.
[3] K. Sanzgiri, B.Dahill, B. N. Levine, C. Shields, and E. M.
Belding-Royer, “A secure routing protocol for ad hoc net-
works,” in IEEE International Conference on Network Pro-
tocols.
Paris, France: IEEE Computer Society, November
2002, pp. 78–89.
[4] A. Perrig, R. Szewczyk, V. Wen, D. E. Culler, and J. D. Tygar,
“Spins: security protocols for sensor netowrks,” in Seventh
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networks, Rome, Italy, July 2001, pp. 189–199.
[5] O.Erdene-Ochir, M.Minier, F. Valois, and A. Kountouris, “To-
ward resilient routing in wireless sensor networks: Gradient-
based routing in focus,” in 4th International Conference on
Sensor Technologies and Applications (Sensorcomm), Venice,
Italy, July 2010.
[6] B. Xiao, B. Yu, and C. Gao, “Chemas: Identify suspect
nodes in selective forwarding attacks,” Journal of Parallel
Distributed Computing, vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 1218–1230, June
2007.
[7] S. Marti, T. J. Giuli, K. Lai, and M. Baker, “Mitigating
routing misbehavior in mobile ad hoc networks,” in 6th
annual international conference on Mobile computing and
networking, Boston, USA, August 2000, pp. 255–265.
[8] J. Newsome, E. Shi, D. Song, and A. Perrig, “The sybil attack
in sensor networks: analysis & defenses,” in Information Pro-
cessing in Sensor Networks, K. Ramchandran, J. Sztipanovits,
J. Hou, and T. Pappas, Eds.
Berkeley, USA: ACM, April
2004, pp. 259–268.
[9] Y.-C. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. B. Johnson, “Packet leashes: A
defense against wormhole attacks in wireless networks,” in
22nd Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and
Communications Societies, San Fransisco, USA, April 2003,
pp. 1976–1986.
[10] C. S. Mani and M. B. Srivastava, “Energy efﬁcient routing
in wireless sensor networks,” in Military Communications
Conference Proceedings on Communications for Network-
Centric Operations: Creating the Information Force, vol. 1,
McLean, USA, October 2001, pp. 357–361.
[11] C. Karlof and D. Wagner, “Secure routing in wireless sensor
networks: attacks and countermeasures,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 1, no. 2-3, pp. 293–315, August 2003.
[12] P. Michiardi and R. Molva, “Core: a collaborative reputation
mechanism to enforce node cooperation in mobile ad hoc
networks,” in Communications and Multimedia Security, ser.
IFIP Conference Proceedings, B. Jerman-Blazic and T. Klobu-
car, Eds., vol. 228.
Portoroz, Slovenia: Kluwer, September
2002, pp. 107–121.
[13] B. Parno, A. Perrig, and V. Gligor, “Distributed detection
of node replication attacks in sensor networks,” in IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy.
Oakland, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, May 2005, pp. 49–63.
[14] L. Hu and D. Evans, “Using directional antennas to prevent
wormhole attacks,” in Network and Distributed System Se-
curity Symposium.
San Diego, USA: The Internet Society,
February 2004, pp. 1–11.
[15] “http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/resilience,”
July 2011.
[16] O.Erdene-Ochir, M.Minier, F.Valois, and A.Kountouris, “Re-
siliency of wireless sensor networks: Deﬁnitions and analy-
ses,” in IEEE International Conference on Telecommunica-
tions (ICT), Doha, Qatar, April 2010.
[17] R. J. Ellison, R. C. Linger, T. Longstaff, and N. R. Mead,
“Survivable network system analysis: A case study,” IEEE
Software, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 70–77, July 1999.
[18] J. P. G. Sterbenz, R. Krishnan, R. Hain, A. Jackson, D. Levin,
R. Ramanathan, and J. Zao, “Survivable mobile wireless
networks: issues, challenges, and research directions,” in
Workshop on Wireless Security, W. Maughan and N. Vaidya,
Eds.
Atlanta, USA: ACM, September 2002, pp. 31–40.
[19] D. Wagner, “Resilient aggregation in sensor networks,” in
ACM Workshop on Security of Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks,
S. Setia and V. Swarup, Eds.
Washington, USA: ACM,
October 2004, pp. 78–87.
[20] D. Ganesan, R. Govindan, S. Shenker, and D. Estrin, “Highly-
resilient, energy-efﬁcient multipath routing in wireless sensor
networks,” in 2nd ACM international symposium on Mobile
ad hoc networking & computing.
Long Beach, USA: ACM,
October 2001, pp. 251–254.
[21] X. Li and D. Yang, “A quantitative survivability evaluation
model for wireless sensor networks,” in IEEE International
Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control, Japan,
March 2006, pp. 727–732.
[22] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic source routing in
ad hoc wireless networks,” in Mobile Computing, S. US, Ed.,
vol. 353, 1996, pp. 153–181.
[23] B. Karp and H. T. Kung, “Gpsr: greedy perimeter stateless
routing for wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the 6th
annual international conference on Mobile computing and
networking, Boston, USA, August 2000, pp. 243–254.
[24] A. D. Wood, L. Fang, J. A. Stankovic, and T. He, “Sigf: a
family of conﬁgurable, secure routing protocols for wireless
sensor networks,” in ACM Workshop on Security of ad hoc
and Sensor Networks (SASN), ACM, Ed., VA, USA, October
2006, pp. 35–48.
[25] B. Blum, T. He, S. Son, and J. Stankovic, “Igf : A state-free
robust communication protocol for wireless sensor networks,”
Technical report, Univ. of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA,
Tech. Rep. CS-2003-11, November 2003.
53
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[26] E. D. L. Andersson and L. Zhang, “Report from the IAB
workshop on Unwanted Trafﬁc March 9-10, 2006,” RFC
4948 (Informational), August 2007. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4948.txt
[27] D. Ganesan, R. Govindan, S. Shenker, and D. Estrin, “Highly-
resilient, energy-efﬁcient multipath routing in wireless sensor
networks,” Mobile Computing and Communications Review,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 11–25, 2001.
[28] Y. M. Lu and V. W. S. Wong, “An energy-efﬁcient multi-
path routing protocol for wireless sensor networks,” Int. J.
Communication Systems, vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 747–766, 2007.
[29] E. Hamida, G. Chelius, and J.-M. Gorce, “Scalable versus
accurate physical layer modeling in wireless network sim-
ulations,” in 22nd Workshop on Principles of Advanced and
Distributed Simulation, Roma, Italy, June 2008, pp. 127–134.
[30] “http://wsnet.gforge.inria.fr/,” July 2011.
54
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

