International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
Towards Design and Implementation of the
Breakthrough Web
Santipong Thaiprayoon
Chair of Communication Networks
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
Hagen, Germany
santipong.thaiprayoon@fernuni-hagen.de
Herwig Unger
Chair of Communication Networks
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
Hagen, Germany
herwig.unger@fernuni-hagen.de
Abstract—With rising demands for accessibility, security, and
privacy, the future of the Web has attracted significant attention
from the digital economy, focusing on improving data protection
and user experience. This article proposes a conceptual framework
enabling local users to directly and safely access and share web
content and services on the local and global web through their mobile
devices. The local web is configured to run on a sandbox server
within a specific area over a local network. In addition, the proposed
framework incorporates Web 3.0, which makes the Web better
understand contextual data and automatically provides personalized
responses that match users. In contrast, local users retain private
control over their data. The results of the experiments revealed that
the proposed framework is secure, scalable, and reliable enough to
be used in real-world environments. This framework could also be
highly valuable in evolving the power of a decentralized Web.
Index Terms—web 3.0; privacy protection; user personalization,
proximity authentication, network communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
This article is an extension of research work that was originally
proposed in the Fourteenth International Conference on Advances
in Future Internet (AFIN 2022) [1], which provided a personal-
ized context-aware recommendation for the development of an
autonomous intelligent agent for an individual user on online
social networks.
The World Wide Web, commonly referred to as WWW, W3,
or the Web, is a network system of interconnected documents and
other web resources to be accessed through the Internet, linked
by hyperlinks and Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) [2]. Since
the Web was developed by Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer
scientist, while working at CERN, the European physics research
organization, it is a free “wide-area hypermedia information re-
trieval initiative aiming to give universal access to a large universe
of documents.” However, due to the lack of strict regulations [3],
any user with a server connected to the Internet could freely and
easily access and share any type of information, including texts,
multimedia, and user-generated content.
As there is no connection between information and web ad-
dresses where it is stored, search engines [4] are developed to
support users in an inestimable information space, and rapidly
expanding social network platforms are established to connect
not only content but also users in a single, worldwide-spanning
system, which leads to the commercialization of the Web. Con-
sequently, the Web has become a place that overfloods its users
with plenty of useful, useless, and sometimes even dangerous or
criminal information and services [5]. As a result, government
institutions in all countries attempted to regulate the Internet use
with many more or less valuable regulations, making Internet use
sometimes more stressful than helpful [6].
In this process, users have gradually lost more and more control
over what information about themselves is collected, what part
of the overall available information is offered to them, and how
much outdated advertising they have to tolerate. In particular, the
following drawbacks can be identified:
• The Web architecture today is a centralized system of
information control, which means that all personal data and
user behavior are stored in a single place and controlled
by one corporation or organization. This makes it easy for
governments or hackers to censor content and for users to be
tracked and access all of their personal information without
their consent.
• Web 2.0 enables any user to publish their content in large
social network systems, which is a significant improvement
over Web 1.0, which only allows static linking of web pages
with potentially dynamic content. However, real interaction
between previously unknown users in a given context or lo-
cation is still impossible. Additionally, centralized platforms
can cause numerous issues for users. For instance, users are
unable to quickly transfer data between platforms or switch
between applications that would reuse their data.
• Information is not connected to any location or context.
Typically, a web search engine returns results from any site
worldwide, although that information may be senseless out
of its location and context.
• The amount of information on the Web has made it difficult
and time-consuming for users to find specific information.
Any search engine is still a single event; previous search
results cannot be refined with the help of the system.
In particular, defining locations and addressing groups of
people, information sources, and contexts are tedious tasks
in today’s search engines. Generally, the large number of
search results overwhelms users, and as a result, only the
top 10 to 30 results are considered, which may not be the
result they prefer. The search engines should return results
that are tailored to the needs of a particular user.
• Manifold data security and protection laws like the European
DS-GVO [7], permanent advertisements, and push-up re-
quests annoy users and prevent the Web from being efficient
in information support. Nevertheless, it is unclear to most
users what happens with their data, what meta-information
is collected, and how to suppress or remove such information
from third-party servers.
In conclusion, the Web of today is controlled by large cor-
porations and governments such as Amazon, Meta (formerly
Facebook), and Google. At the same time, users have to follow

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
their guidelines, are limited in the design of the information they
offer, and need help to address it to the right, intended group
of users. Moreover, the existing information flood discriminates
against small information providers and merchants, which disap-
pear in the sponsored offers of tech giants. Following Matthew
Hodgson [8], “A decentralized web would give power back to
the people online,” also regarding their privacy, data portability,
and security. However, those architectures are still not available.
An additional barrier to their construction is the fact that those
systems cannot be built in competition with existing structures
but must be integrated into cooperating with them.
To deal with the drawbacks, a trusted conceptual framework is
proposed. The proposed framework could focus on the develop-
ment of personalized services and the purpose of re-decentralizing
the Web by giving users complete control over personal data
while managing privacy, security, transparency, and the Internet
experience [9]. Additionally, users can grant or revoke access to
their personal data as needed. This way enables direct interaction
between users and external services hosted on local servers
without intermediaries.
This article is structured as follows: In Section II, a litera-
ture review is conducted. Section III explains the architectural
framework. In Section IV, communication designs are described.
The experimental details are presented in Section V. Section VI
contains a discussion of the results. Section VII gives examples
of use cases. Finally, the conclusion and suggestions for future
works are presented.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, the fundamental concepts for designing and
implementing the proposed framework are introduced in detail,
including the evolution of the Web, Wi-Fi technology, Bluetooth
technology, context-aware recommender systems, proximity au-
thentication, user matchmaking, and user personalization. Then,
related research works are discussed.
A. The Evaluation of the Web
In the early 1980s, the Internet evolved into a global com-
munication network infrastructure that allows computer networks
worldwide to connect to one another. The Internet has become an
essential part of human interactions and connectivity. It enables
every individual to gain access to digital information through
various applications, particularly the Web. The Web is a collection
of web pages containing documents and other web resources.
Users can access web content via the Internet on their devices
using web browsers or web-based applications [10], [11].
The development of the Web, known as Web 1.0, began in the
1990s. This is the first stage in the evolution of the Web. All
Internet users are content consumers in the Web 1.0 era, where
content creators provide content in web pages that are stored on
web servers in the HyperText Markup Language (HTML) format.
These web pages are represented as the read-only web, which
consists primarily of static content and allows users to only search
for and read information [12].
The lack of active interaction between users and the web pages
resulted in Web 2.0. Web 2.0, the current age of the Web, is the
second stage of the Web revolution. It is an improved version
of Web 1.0 due to the transition from static to dynamic content
that responds to user input. Web 2.0 is defined as the read-write
web that emphasizes the importance of user-generated content. In
the current era, any user can be both a content producer and a
content consumer. With the growth of mobile technologies, they
can also contribute information and communicate with other users
via websites using smart devices. Meta, Twitter, YouTube, and
Instagram are well-known Web 2.0 commercial platforms that
allow users to contribute content, share information, and interact
with other Internet users in a virtual community [13].
A large amount of new content has been currently being created
and shared on Web 2.0 applications. This content information
is under the control of some of the giant tech companies. This
means that all of that data, including personal and sensitive data,
is exploited for business purposes, such as targeted advertisements
and marketing campaigns. Web 3.0 is, therefore, a concept for a
new iteration of the Web that aims to make the Web more context-
aware and intelligent in decentralized infrastructures. Essentially,
it can understand the meaning of words and emotions through data
analysis in order to automatically provide the user with highly
personalized and appropriate suggestions of items by leveraging
emerging technologies that heavily rely on blockchain technology,
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Natural Language Processing (NLP),
Machine Learning (ML), Internet of Things (IoT), Augmented
Reality (AR), and Virtual Reality (VR). Users will then have a
better experience driven by enhanced data connectivity. This will
be achieved by empowering each user to become the owner of
their data and enhancing the overall user experience through the
implementation of numerous innovations. In Web 3.0, users have
ownership and control over their data and can choose to share
or monetize their data on their own terms. This gives users more
privacy and control, addressing the concerns of data centralization
and lack of privacy that are prevalent in Web 2.0. In addition, Web
3.0 enables participants to interact freely, publicly, and privately
with others without the need for permission or central authorities,
thus avoiding scalability and single-point-of-failure issues [14]–
[16].
In summary, Web 3.0 is still a concept that is being developed.
However, some businesses attempt to develop products that can be
transformed into Web 3.0 applications. Some of the most widely
used Web 3.0 technology can be seen in virtual assistants like
Siri and Alexa and connected smart homes.
B. Wi-Fi Technology
Wi-Fi is a wireless communication technology that allows
devices such as computers, mobile devices, and other equipment
to interface with wireless networks [17], [18]. It is commonly
used for a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) of devices
and Internet access, allowing nearby digital devices to exchange
data over radio waves. Wi-Fi technology uses radio waves to
transmit and receive data between Wi-Fi devices, such as laptops,
smartphones, and Wireless Access Points (APs). The radio waves
used in Wi-Fi technology operate in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz
frequency bands. These frequencies can be divided into multiple
channels, and APs and Wi-Fi devices communicate over a specific
channel. The channel can affect the speed and stability of the Wi-
Fi connection. One of the key advantages of Wi-Fi technology
is that it can support multiple devices simultaneously without
needing physical cables or wires. Wi-Fi also enables multiple
devices to connect to the same network, allowing users to share
resources such as printers and files.
The data sent over a Wi-Fi connection is encoded using a
protocol called the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
neers (IEEE) 802.11 standard. The protocol defines rules and
procedures governing how Wi-Fi devices transmit, receive, and
manage each other over a Wi-Fi network. The Wi-Fi protocol
also includes a range of security measures to protect against
unauthorized access and ensure the privacy of data transmitted
over the network. Some of the security measures built into the Wi-
Fi protocol include the Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) protocol,
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), and Wi-Fi Protected Access II
(WPA2) [19].
When a user needs to connect to a Wi-Fi network, the user
with a Wi-Fi-enabled device begins to scan the environment for
available Wi-Fi networks. It looks for APs broadcasting their
network name, the SSID and determines whether the network
is secured or open. If the network is open, the device can
immediately connect to it, but the user will need to enter a
password to gain access if it is secured. Once the device is
connected to a Wi-Fi network, it starts communicating with other
devices on the network [20].
Wi-Fi technology is used in a wide range of applications, from
home networking to large-scale enterprise networks. In homes,
Wi-Fi connects devices such as smartphones, laptops, and smart
home devices. Wi-Fi is also utilized in public areas such as
airports, cafes, and hotels to provide customers with free or paid
Wi-Fi access [21].
C. Bluetooth Technology
Bluetooth technology is a wireless communication standard for
data exchange over short distances between different Bluetooth
devices, such as smartphones, laptops, and IoT devices, which
attempt to build personal area networks (PANs). It allows users
to simultaneously send or receive data between devices or neigh-
boring active devices within the range of Bluetooth signals [22].
The history of Bluetooth [23]–[26] started with the first gener-
ation developed by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG)
in the 1990s, which provided the Basic Rate (BR) for basic
functionalities. Each new version of Bluetooth usually comes with
a new mode that adds new features or makes certain things work
better. In 2 and 3 generations, the SIG introduced Enhanced Data
Rate (EDR) and High Speed (HS) to boost throughput in different
manners, which comprised one fundamental part of Bluetooth,
BR/EDR. Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) was introduced in the
four generations to increase the application fields of Bluetooth
for low-power devices. Indeed, the fifth generation represents a
significantly improved new generation. According to the SIG, the
latest version of Bluetooth, version 5.2, which was introduced in
2019, achieved two times the transmission speed, four times the
transmission range, and eight times the broadcasting capacity of
Bluetooth 4.2. With Bluetooth 5.2, upgraded devices are able to
transfer data more quickly and establish connections with richer
content that are more stable. Currently, Bluetooth is officially
successful in several areas, including speed, coverage, advertising
capacity, robustness, and network capacity.
There are three primary variants of Bluetooth technology: (1)
Bluetooth Classic (BC), also known as Bluetooth Basic Rate
or Enhanced Data Rate (BR/EDR); (2) Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE); and (3) the recently released Bluetooth Mesh (Mesh). BC
and BLE devices form a piconet in a central-peripheral manner,
whereas mesh enables devices to create a mesh network based on
BLE advertising.
For transferring data between two Bluetooth devices, they first
establish a communication channel using a pairing process. A
discoverable device should accept incoming connection requests.
Generally, a device finds the discoverable device using a service
discovery process. After the discoverable device agrees with the
pairing request, the two devices exchange security keys to perform
authentication and encryption to complete the bonding process.
After the pairing and bonding processes are complete, the two
devices are ready to transmit data. The security keys generated
during the bonding process are reused if devices disconnect and
reconnect. The two devices must always be paired and connected,
with each of the two devices trusting the other and being able to
exchange data in a secure manner using encryption to provide
confidentiality and authenticity guarantees for communication
against attackers.
In Bluetooth technology, Received Signal Strength Indication
(RSSI) is a metric used to estimate the distance between two
Bluetooth devices in close proximity [27]. The basic principle is
that the strength of the signal decreases as the distance between
the two Bluetooth devices increases. The RSSI value is measured
in decibels (dBm) and indicates the power level of the received
signal that reaches a device when a Bluetooth receiver is detected.
Since Bluetooth receivers can broadcast their advertising packets
with varying transmission power (TX) values, a combination of
the RSSI and TX power values is used to estimate the distance
to the device. The TX power value is the strength of the signal
measured at 1 m from the device. The precision of the measured
TX power value is crucial for calculating the distance between
the device and the Bluetooth receiver, as the signal strength varies
with the device’s distance. The distance between two Bluetooth
devices can be calculated using the equation (1).
d =10 T X−RSSI
10n
(1)
where d is the distance in meters, and TX is an RSSI value
known as the signal strength when a device and a Bluetooth
receiver are at 1 meter. RSSI is the device’s RSSI value. The
constant n depends on the location of the Bluetooth receiver or
the environmental factor, ranging in value between 2 and 4.
D. Context-Aware Recommender Systems
Traditional Recommendation Systems (RS) can be modeled as
a two-dimensional (2D): Users×Items space. However, consid-
ering only information about users and items is not enough in
applications. Therefore, additional contextual information should
be considered in the recommendation process. Contextual infor-
mation includes the location, the time, the weather (e.g., the
current temperature), the user’s mood, the user’s current activity,
the user’s current goals, the presence of other individuals accom-
panying the user, and the user’s communication capabilities.
With advances in ubiquitous and mobile computing, the lack
of analysis of contextual information in recommendation systems
has been strongly attacked. Thus, researchers and developers have
mainly focused on solving classic problems of recommendation
systems, such as the cold start problem, spam vulnerability, high
dimensionality, and many others [28], [29]. Recently, researchers
working on recommendation systems have recognized the need to
investigate them in domains where context information is relevant.
In order to improve the recommendations based on contextual in-
formation, the authors extend the classical 2D paradigm to a mul-
tidimensional recommendation model that provides recommenda-

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
tions based on multiple dimensions: Users×Items×Contexts
space. RS incorporating context information in the recommen-
dation process are expressed as Context-Aware Recommender
Systems (CARS). In other words, CARS attempt to accommodate
user preferences in various contexts. Since user preferences may
vary depending on the context, it is necessary to consider context
information when generating the most relevant recommendations
[30]. For example, a user may prefer a different type of restaurant
for a business lunch compared to a casual dinner with friends.
CARS can also consider other factors, such as time of day,
location, and weather conditions to provide more personalized
recommendations.
E. Proximity Authentication
Proximity authentication [31]–[33] is a method of authenti-
cation that uses the proximity of a physical device, such as
a smartphone or smart card, to verify the identity of a user.
This method is commonly employed to enhance the security of
physical access control systems, such as buildings or secure areas,
or to grant access to digital resources, such as online accounts or
computer systems. The basic principle of proximity authentication
is that a device, such as a smartphone or smart card, is associated
with a specific user and can be used to verify their identity. When
a user approaches a secure area or attempts to access a digital
resource, the device is brought close to a reader or sensor that
can communicate with it. The reader or sensor may use a variety
of technologies to communicate with the device, such as RFID,
NFC, Bluetooth, or Wi-Fi. The device then sends a signal to the
reader or sensor, which verifies the identity of the user and grants
or denies access appropriately.
There are various research studies on proximity authentication.
Zhang et al. [34] proposed a novel proximity-based authentica-
tion mechanism for IoT devices called Move2Auth. Move2Auth
detects proximity by comparing the RSS trace and smartphone
sensor trace during two user gestures with large RSS variations.
Kalamandeen et al. [35] introduced a system that determines if
two devices are in close physical proximity by taking advantage
of the similarity of the channel between these devices and a third
observing device. The system leverages the many devices that
users already possess to aid in this process.
F. User Matchmaking
User matchmaking [36], [37] is the process of connecting
users and suggesting potential matches to users with similar user
profiles, interests, preferences, or goals in a digital environment.
This way is commonly used in online games, dating apps, social
media platforms, and other online communities where users can
interact with one another. The process of user matchmaking
typically involves collecting information about each user, in-
cluding their age, gender, location, interests, and past behaviors.
This information is then used to identify other users who are
most compatible with them based on shared interests, similar
activity patterns, and geographical proximity. Moreover, user
matchmaking is essential for creating engaging and personalized
experiences for online community users.
There are several different approaches to user matchmaking.
The first approach is content-based filtering [38]–[40]. This
approach involves analyzing the content of user profiles to
identify shared interests or preferences. The second approach
is collaborative filtering. This approach examines the behavior
patterns of a large number of users to identify similarities and
differences. Hybrid approaches are the third approach in that user
matchmaking systems incorporate content-based and collaborative
filtering to improve precision and efficiency [41]. Building a user
matchmaking system requires a deep understanding of user data,
such as profiles, activity histories, and behavioral patterns. This
data is then analyzed using one or more of the abovementioned
approaches based on machine learning algorithms to identify
potential matches.
G. User Personalization
User personalization [42], [43] is the process of filtering
information systems that use machine learning algorithms and
data analysis techniques to identify patterns and make predictions
about the user. The goal of user personalization is to suggest items
or content that are tailored to the specific needs, preferences,
and interests of individual users. It involves analyzing data
about certain contextual situations and past behaviors of each
user, such as their location, time of day, device type, search
history, browsing history, purchase history, and other factors,
to make relevant recommendations. In recent years, research on
user personalization has been used in several fields, including e-
commerce sites, social media platforms, and other online services,
to suggest products, services, or content that users are likely
interested in. Liu et al. [44] proposed a hierarchical framework
for personalized movie recommendations. The weekly ranking of
a movie is used for association and recommendation. Moreover,
movie content and user preferences are integrated to generate dy-
namic movie synopses for personalized navigation. Yan et al. [45]
proposed a personalization framework for complementary product
recommendation. The model encodes user purchase history into a
personalized embedding and learns product features with graph-
attention networks. It is then trained jointly via a re-ranking
module. Xin and Wan [46] proposed a POI recommendation
model based on an improved factorization machine and BERT
to extract the social, user, POI, and sequence characteristics of
users.
In conclusion, user personalization is an effective way of
providing users with information that is customized to their
specific preferences and interests. It can help businesses to create
a more personalized and engaging user experience, increasing
customer satisfaction and revenue.
H. Existing Research
In the past decade, the rapid development of intelligent Web
systems has been accelerated by the emergence of new Web
technologies and innovative Web usage concepts. Several research
studies have been reported on various application areas. Chen
[47] proposed a personalized learning path generation scheme
that simultaneously considers the courseware difficulty level
and the concept continuity of successive courseware based on
incorrect pre-testing responses while implementing personalized
curriculum sequencing during learning processes. Sharma et al.
[48] proposed the application of semantic web mining, focusing
on web personalization. In addition to providing the user with
personalized web pages, the web personalization system offers
the user a list of domains in which the user may be interested.
Thus, users can switch interests while searching the Internet
for information. Essam et al. [49] presented a decentralized
platform for social Web called Solid. Solid is a decentralized

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
platform for the social web that ensures data independence and
simple yet powerful data management. Users store their data
in Personal Online Datastores (PODs), which can be hosted on
personal servers or public servers by POD providers. Users can
have multiple PODs and choose from various providers based
on privacy, reliability, and legal protection. Solid applications
are client-side web or mobile applications that directly access
and manipulate data from PODs. The platform facilitates the
development and use of social features, allowing applications
to aggregate data from different sources and enabling multiple
applications to reuse the same data on a POD. Users can switch
between applications without losing access to their existing data,
as applications are decoupled from the data they use.
However, most of the existing studies ignore concerns about
privacy and data protection issues for individuals who use the
Web. In addition, they rarely use AI techniques to improve the
performance of the Web based on the specific needs and interests
of individual users in their context.
III. ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK
The Web has dramatically impacted the way people commu-
nicate, interact, and collaborate through various web-based plat-
forms. Online users can contribute information, such as text posts,
documents, videos, and photos, using computer desktops, laptops,
and mobile devices. As a consequence, individuals are now able to
stay connected to their local web as well as the broader global web
that runs on top of the Internet using communication protocols
like Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and Hypertext Transfer
Protocol Secure (HTTPS).
The main difference between the global and local webs is their
scope and accessibility. The local web is a network of websites
and services that are located within a specific geographic area
or physical location, like a home, office, or specific network.
These websites and services typically provide information and
resources to individuals within a local community. It is typically
smaller and more localized than the global web, and it can
be created using a variety of communication technologies such
as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, and others. These technologies
allow devices on the local web to communicate with each other
directly. This allows for faster and more reliable communication
between devices and increases privacy and security. In contrast,
the global web refers to the network of websites and services
accessible by different individuals over a network through specific
communication protocols.
One major weakness of the Web is the lack of privacy
protections and accessibility for users in specific environments.
This issue can be resolved by utilizing locally hosted servers,
also called local servers, in a specific geographical area. It is
suitable for restricted environments, such as campus networks
and company intranets. The use of local servers can increase
accessibility for these users by providing them faster access to
information, more control over the data stored on them, and less
reliance on costly and unreliable Internet connections. Similarly,
local servers can keep local networks safe, which are still invisible
from the Internet. Local servers can also improve security because
they are less likely to be attacked or have their data stolen than
commercial or global servers.
In addition, with the emergence of Web 3.0 technology, the
Web is shifting towards decentralized structures that provide
enhanced security, privacy, and trust. This means that users can
locally store their data on their own devices or on an indepen-
dent server rather than in a centralized location like Google or
Facebook. The idea behind this concept is that users will have
greater control over their personal information. Individual users
have the ability to own and manage their personal information
to preserve their privacy. Local web refers to the concept of
creating and maintaining web content and services on a local level
rather than relying on centralized servers. Similarly, local servers
refer to using small, decentralized servers to store and distribute
information rather than relying on a few large, centralized servers.
Figure 1 illustrates an overview of the local and global webs for
local users to access information and services.
Fig. 1. An overview of the local and global web
From Figure 1, the Web can be expanded from the independent
local level to the global level. Web resources are stored on
a standalone local server, while they are accessed from other
local servers on the Internet or public networks simultaneously.
This means that each local server can securely communicate and
synchronize based on HTTPS, which acts as a tunneling network.
In the tunneling network, data is encrypted and encapsulated
within a tunnel or secure communication channel, which is then
transmitted across the network. HTTPS also uses encryption to
protect data transmissions between local servers over a secure
connection. Consequently, each local server enables its local users
to securely and remotely participate in and access web pages or
services hosted on other or neighboring local servers. The Web
can be divided into two levels: (1) local web; and (2) global web.
Web resources and services at the level of the local web are stored
on a single local server that enables local users to access and
share information about local events, news, or emergency services
within a specific area. In contrast, the level of the global web is
designed to be a global network system that is not controlled by
any centralized servers. Web resources on several local servers
are accessed by each other across that network. To describe the
conceptual framework of a sandbox server in detail, the process
overview is explained and illustrated in Figure 2.
A sandbox server, also called a local server, can be a physical
machine or a virtual machine running on a computer connected to
a local network within a sandbox environment to run applications
in isolation safely. The framework is a proposed alternative
approach to the current Web architecture to create a more secure

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
Fig. 2. The architecture framework of a sandbox server
and open Internet that prioritizes individual privacy. The proposed
framework also provides a solution to privacy and data protection
issues on the Web by independently separating personal data
stored on mobile devices from services on local servers. Each
user controls their own data through their mobile device, enabling
direct interaction between users and their local server without
the need for central servers. The personal data relates to an
identified or identifiable natural person, including information
that specifically identifies an individual, such as a name, address,
telephone number, mobile number, e-mail address, credit card
number, bank information, identification number, location data, or
an online identifier, and information about that individual or their
activities that is directly linked to the individual. The proposed
framework also incorporates advanced technologies such as AI,
ML, and NLP under Web 3.0 to generate personalized intelli-
gent recommendations based on their contextual information and
current vicinity, and increased privacy benefits. The proposed
framework also helps prevent copyright infringement on the
original works of users, such as written texts, music, images,
videos, and software codes, when users publish them on the local
web.
Each local user who holds a mobile device first connects to
a sandbox server through a Bluetooth receiver to obtain a Wi-
Fi password before accessing a local Wi-Fi network. This is
a way to verify the identity of local users and protect against
unauthorized access. Once the authentication process is complete,
the local users are granted access to the local Wi-Fi network.
Meanwhile, some of the user context stored on their mobile
device is also shared and synchronized with different services
on the sandbox server. These user contexts are used to identify
patterns, make predictions about what the users may like, and
recommend relevant information to them. The local users can
then access and contribute information to the sandbox server.
Furthermore, the local web can be integrated into the global web
to improve accessibility and inclusivity for local users. On the
level of the global web, several sandbox servers are connected
across a public network, such as the Internet, to distribute access
to web resources using the tunneling network that allows for
the secure movement of data from one network to another.
As a result, all connected sandbox servers can communicate
securely and remotely with other sandbox servers and share
information, services, and resources without centralized servers.
Sandbox servers are autonomous and can freely join and leave
the global network system at any time, which makes the system
continuously and highly dynamic. For example, when a sandbox
server wants to read a web page, it will look for other sandbox
servers in the neighborhood that have the file and establish a
direct connection between them. The file is transferred directly
between the sandbox servers. One of the main benefits is that it
removes bottlenecks or central points of failure from a system,
as files are transferred directly over the network between two
sandbox servers rather than through a central server. In addition,
the proposed framework could help local users, who interact with
the local and global web, identify opportunities to enhance their
experiences and make the most of the resources available through
the Web.
The proposed framework is designed and implemented to
enable local users to access information and services on both the
local and global web. Local users have the ability to have more
control over their data, increase privacy, and reduce the power and
authority of central servers. To explain the importance of research
work, the main contributions are summarized as follows:
• A conceptual framework for the local and global web that
focuses on providing information and services to local users
is proposed. It enables local users to access and share
information through a sandbox server and multiple sandbox
servers connected together in a network, making the network
more resilient and resistant to failure.
• The proposed framework can be incorporated into the global
web in order to increase accessibility and inclusivity for local
users.
• The local web provides more personalized and relevant
results to local users based on their profiles and locations.
They can be utilized to discover local information about
restaurants, organizations, and opportunities for community
engagement. This way can also assist in avoiding the prob-
lem of information overload.
• The combination of the local and global web is an alternative
way for local users to access information from both levels of
global and local information resources in different locations.
• Multiple sandbox servers operating within a network can
provide benefits, such as enhanced scalability, security, and
privacy, as well as the ability for local users to share
resources and data directly.
In summary, the proposed framework expects to move to-
wards becoming a web of highly intelligent interactions in the
near future. It aims to rebuild the technical architecture of
the Web based on the principles of decentralization. This will
be accomplished through the use of artificial intelligence and
communication technologies to provide Internet experiences with
greater stability, security, and freedom for users, depending on
their current contextual data. Moreover, the proposed framework
is designed to bring power back into the hands of individuals by
allowing them to own and control their data on mobile devices by
utilizing the idea of peer-to-peer networks rather than companies
or governments, which may use that information for their own
purposes or sell it to advertisers, marketers, or others who might
want access to it. This provides greater privacy and security for
users, as no single entity can control what data is stored or how
it can be used. It will also allow individuals to decide how much
information they want to share with third parties or other people
rather than having all their information stored in one place.
IV. COMMUNICATION DESIGNS
This section describes the details of the communication designs
of the proposed framework. The idea behind this framework is to

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
provide web content and services to local users. The sandbox
server is designed as an isolated environment with restricted
access within a specific geographical area. Moreover, each sand-
box server has the possibility to collaborate with each other via
efficient ad-hoc communication. The proposed framework for a
sandbox server consists of four main components: (1) application
services; (2) databases; (3) Bluetooth receivers; and (4) tunneling
network.
1) Application Services: These application services run on a
sandbox server and provide access over a local Wi-Fi network,
allowing local users to interact with the application services from
a specific area and providing secure communication channels. The
application services can offer specific services to local users, such
as local weather and news services, which can provide dynamic
content and helpful information, such as information that changes
frequently or is appropriate for local users. This can help reduce
the spread of misinformation and disinformation, as local users
can access credible and relevant information specific to their
locations and contexts.
2) Databases: This acts as a database server, providing a
centralized data management platform for storing, managing, and
accessing data in a database. The main role of the database
server is to receive requests from the application services, search
for the requested data, and return the results. In addition, this
database server can hold data both temporarily and permanently.
Especially, sensitive data is automatically removed after 24 hours,
according to a timestamp. This provides extra security for the
database, ensuring that unauthorized users cannot access sensitive
data for an extended period of time. There are two databases
stored on the database server, including personal data and data
sources. Personal data is the collection of user data, such as name,
address, date of birth, age, gender, weight, height, education, user
interests, areas of expertise, and short texts from the biography.
In addition, the handling of personal data by application services
is governed by privacy laws and regulations, and individuals
have the right to access and control their data. On the other
hand, data sources refer to general raw data that is widely
available through various sources, such as books, websites, and
news media, typically in the form of numbers, words, images, or
other forms of data. It is used to analyze data to gain a better
understanding and provide users with insights and information. It
can also affect privacy and security, so organizations need to be
careful when collecting and using data to ensure they follow all
the relevant rules and laws.
3) Bluetooth Receivers: The Bluetooth receiver acts as a termi-
nal device for Bluetooth connections, receiving the signal from
source devices, including smartphones and laptops. Bluetooth-
enabled devices communicate with each other using a process
called pairing. To establish a secure wireless connection, the
pairing process involves exchanging information between two
Bluetooth-enabled devices, such as their unique identification
numbers and encryption keys.
4) Tunneling Network:
This is utilized in communication
networks governed by the HTTPS protocol to provide a direct
connection between two sandbox servers for the security and
privacy of data transmission across a public network. The HTTPS
protocol operates on the basis of a client-server model. A client,
such as a web browser, sends an HTTPS request to a local
server, such as a web server. The local server processes the
request and returns an HTTPS response to the client. The response
contains data such as HTML, images, videos, and other files that
can be displayed via the web browser. HTTPS uses SSL/TLS
(Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security) to encrypt the
transmitted data. This provides a secure channel that protects
against eavesdropping, tampering, and data theft. When a client
requests a web page or resource using HTTPS, the server sends its
SSL/TLS certificate to the client, which verifies the certificate’s
authenticity and establishes a secure connection.
The main tasks of the application services consist of five
services: (1) user authentication; (2) user tracking; (3) user
personalization; (4) user matchmaking; and (5) discussion forum.
Each service is explained in the following subsection.
A. User Authentication Service
When a local Wi-Fi network is deployed, a robust authen-
tication mechanism is the first layer of defense for the local
Wi-Fi network. Therefore, strong authentication helps to protect
network access and user-sensitive data and provides security for
data communications between devices on the local Wi-Fi network
so that authorized individuals can only use the network. This
application service proposes a scheme for Wi-Fi authentication
based on Bluetooth proximity, offering an additional layer of
security and functionality. When users log in to the local Wi-
Fi network with Bluetooth authentication, they can access and
manage data through a series of secure, encrypted connections.
Proximity-based authentication is a method of authentication that
relies on the physical proximity of an object or device to verify
the identity of the user. The main idea of this application service is
to verify the identity of local users before granting them access to
the local Wi-Fi network and the resources they need based on their
presence or proximity. Suppose the local users are in close enough
proximity to a sandbox server. In that case, they can perform the
authentication process by connecting with a Bluetooth receiver to
get Wi-Fi passwords sent to their registered mobile numbers via
SMS messages. In the meantime, traffic data transmitted over the
local Wi-Fi network is encrypted and decrypted using the WPA2-
PSK encryption standard to prevent sensitive data from leaking
or being compromised. Moreover, it is a convenient way for local
users with confidence to connect to the Internet through secure
communications on local Wi-Fi networks effectively. The process
of Wi-Fi authentication is shown in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. The process of Wi-Fi authentication
The process begins with a local user holding a Bluetooth-
enabled mobile device that attempts to connect to web content
and services on a local Wi-Fi network. Before accessing the
local Wi-Fi network, the local user needs to use the Bluetooth-
enabled mobile device to scan for advertising signals broadcast
from available Bluetooth receivers to request a Wi-Fi password.
Bluetooth receivers act as devices to advertise and wait for
connections, which accept an incoming connection request after
advertising. When the mobile device is within the range of the
Bluetooth receiver signal, it can connect and communicate with
each other. The mobile device triggers an action on a mobile

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
application to automatically redirect to an authentication page
for network access verification. Then, the local user is required
to provide a phone number on the authentication page via a
Bluetooth connection. Then, the sandbox server generates a Wi-
Fi password and sends it directly to the registered mobile phone
number of the user via SMS message. SMS is a short message
containing a Wi-Fi password that is sent to the mobile phone
of the local user who initiated the request. To gain local Wi-Fi
network access, the local user must enter the Wi-Fi password
into a captive portal authentication page on their mobile device
to prove their identity. This way, it ensures that the local user
accessing the local Wi-Fi network has been verified by the
owner of the phone. This scheme indicates that it is extremely
convenient, safe, and smooth for users, thereby enhancing their
trust and confidence in using resources and services on the local
Wi-Fi network.
The Wi-Fi authentication protocol relies on a combination of
authentication and encryption processes to provide maximum
protection for local Wi-Fi networks. The Wi-Fi authentication
protocol is illustrated in Figure 4.
Fig. 4. The Wi-Fi authentication protocol
The user authentication process on a local Wi-Fi network
performs a multi-step process involving three progressive states.
a) Registration State: A local user with a Bluetooth-enabled
mobile device scans for nearby Bluetooth receivers to make a
connection. After a Bluetooth receiver accepts the pairing request,
the two devices complete a bonding process in which they
exchange security keys. After the pairing and bonding processes
are complete, the two devices exchange information. The local
user then enters a phone number into an authentication web page
before accessing wireless network resources. A sandbox server
generates a Wi-Fi password and sends it back to the mobile phone
number specified by the mobile user via an SMS message.
b) Authentication State: After the registration state is com-
plete with a Bluetooth connection, the local user must enter the
Wi-Fi password to access resources and services on the local Wi-
Fi network. After authorization is complete, network access is
granted to the local user.
c) Encryption State: When the authentication process is
successful, the process of a WPA2 4-way handshake is performed
to encrypt the data being transmitted between wireless access
points and mobile devices. The local Wi-Fi network enables
seamless data exchange through a single wireless access point
at a time.
The Wi-Fi authentication and encryption are used in pairs to
primarily prevent local Wi-Fi networks from unauthorized and
malicious access attempts and secure wireless transmissions. The
Wi-Fi authentication based on Bluetooth proximity acts as an
interface in the middle between wireless access points and mobile
devices. It helps to block all traffic except for authentication
traffic. When the authentication server verifies the credentials of
the user, it unblocks and permits all wireless traffic. This part
could enhance the security and privacy capabilities of local Wi-
Fi networks and improve the user experience.
The Wi-Fi authentication enables only the phone number owner
to receive a Wi-Fi password, allowing them to log in to a local
Wi-Fi network and verify their identity using a password sent via
an SMS message. This makes it difficult for attackers to obtain
unauthorized access to data and resources or to steal user creden-
tials. It differs from traditional password authentication, which
may continue to be useful for attackers with stolen credentials.
This authentication method is an efficient way for businesses and
organizations to integrate it into their authentication strategies
because it has the potential to be implemented at a low total
cost and directly reaches all users’ existing mobile devices.
B. User Tracking Service
This application service presents a user tracking mechanism
to recognize local users if they are inside a certain area based
on Bluetooth technology, which is suitable for an RSSI algo-
rithm. RSSI is a well-known location method that uses a known
mathematical model that describes signal path loss with distance.
The aim of this application service is to automatically determine
and track local users who hold Bluetooth-enabled mobile devices
and enter within the range of a Bluetooth receiver signal in real
time. A sandbox server also displays that local users are present
at a particular location. A Bluetooth receiver is responsible for
detecting the location information of local users, tracking whether
local users are still in signal coverage, and estimating the spatial
distance between the Bluetooth receiver and a mobile device. The
process of Bluetooth user tracking is shown in Figure 5.
Fig. 5. The overview of user tracking
The user tracking mechanism relying on Bluetooth technology
utilizes a range-based method involving the measurement of
the RSSI of the Bluetooth signal from a Bluetooth receiver
fixed at a prominent location. Alternatively, a fixed Bluetooth
receiver is capable of calculating RSSI values transmitted by

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
Bluetooth-enabled mobile devices. Typically, the range-based
method achieves an accuracy of a few meters and is used to de-
termine whether an asset or a person is within a predefined room.
Figure 5 demonstrates that the local users holding Bluetooth-
enabled mobile devices are automatically located inside a room
with a sandbox server that receives advertising messages from the
mobile device. Administrators can also observe and track people
staying in a specific area at a specific time to gain insight into
behavioral patterns and person counts. In this case, with only one
Bluetooth receiver, the local users can be roughly detected within
a certain distance of the sandbox server.
On the basis of Bluetooth technology, the subsequent steps for
detecting local users in a particular environment can be described.
• A fixed Bluetooth receiver starts periodically scanning ad-
vertising signals broadcasted from nearby mobile devices
within the range of the fixed Bluetooth receiver signal. At
the same time, each mobile device constantly advertises a
Bluetooth signal containing identifying information within
its range, enabling other Bluetooth devices to monitor and
connect to them. When the fixed Bluetooth receiver receives
Bluetooth signals from a mobile device, the mobile device
is recognized as being in range. Typically, a Bluetooth
broadcast signal contains a Universally Unique Identifier
(UUID) and raw RSSI values. The scanning interval is set at
1000 milliseconds (1 second) to produce positioning results
every second. The RSS value is measured in the unit decibel-
milliwatts (dBm) and typically ranges from near 0 dBm
(excellent signal) to less than -100 dBm (poor signal). A
pretty value, for instance, is below -50 dBm; a reasonable
value is between -70 dBm and -80 dBm, and a value of -100
dBm indicates no signal at all.
• If a mobile device appears within a specific proximity range
of the fixed Bluetooth receiver signal, a Bluetooth connection
between the fixed Bluetooth receiver and the mobile device
is created. The mobile device is then located to determine
whether it stays in a target area by measuring the signal
strength with RSSI values. If the mobile device is not found,
the fixed Bluetooth receiver tries to scan regularly to see
whether mobile devices are present in their coverage radius.
The signal strength between the fixed Bluetooth receiver and
the mobile device is compared with a threshold value set at
60 dBm. If the signal strength exceeds the threshold value
(<60 dBm), the fixed Bluetooth receiver identifies that the
mobile device is in the range. If the signal strength is greater
than the threshold value (>60 dBm), the fixed Bluetooth
receiver identifies that the mobile device has moved far from
the range of the fixed Bluetooth receiver. The fixed Bluetooth
receiver captures a Bluetooth signal containing a raw RSSI
value broadcasted from the mobile device to estimate the
distance and recognize whether the mobile device is still
inside the signal coverage or the targeted area.
• The fixed Bluetooth receiver roughly determines the geo-
graphical location of the mobile device by obtaining the
known fixed location of the Bluetooth receiver. Then, the
fixed Bluetooth receiver shows the location of the mobile
device on a simple map.
• The fixed Bluetooth receiver processes the raw RSSI value
from the Bluetooth network to calculate the approximate
distance between the mobile device and the fixed Bluetooth
receiver. Both Bluetooth devices need to be within Bluetooth
range to estimate the distance. The distance between two
Bluetooth devices is formulated using the equation (1).
• Administrators can continuously monitor and track the posi-
tion and distance of users carrying Bluetooth-enabled mobile
devices in real-time through a web-based monitoring tool.
Finally, this application service could be used to implement
proximity solutions that provide location data and detect whether
users enter a target area, usually within a closed environment,
such as a building, shopping center, home, office, hospital, airport,
conference room, or museum. Once users are identified, the
system can track their location and identify them among the
group of users. In addition, most smartphones are equipped
with Bluetooth signal-receiving modules. Therefore, smartphones
enable new Location-Based Service (LBS) capabilities. LBS
provides advanced services to customers and managers, assisting
individuals in determining their position. These include asset
tracking, location-based advertising, business intelligence and
analytics, social networking entertainment, and retail experiences.
C. User Personalization Service
The goal of this application service is to automatically provide
users with the relevant information within their current situations
by analyzing and understanding contextual data. A local user
holding a mobile device requests and receives information and
services from a sandbox server through the interface of the mobile
device. The sandbox server is setup as host applications running
on a web server designed to receive requests via the HTTP
protocol in order to deliver static content from a website or other
resources stored in a database, such as HTML, text, images,
video, and other media files, to local users within a vicinity
area. The content is then displayed via a web browser or mobile
application. This application service of personalized information
could also refer to the user tracking to deliver personalized and
context-dependent recommendations of a list of relevant items
based on their current location, such as nearby restaurants or
shopping centers. Moreover, it allows local users to connect to
the sandbox server via a local Wi-Fi network and automatically
offers interesting services, such as private messages, games or
puzzles, local point-of-interest, and advertising campaigns, such
as promotions or discounts. This application service helps busi-
nesses enhance the user experience and improve their engagement
with the product or service. This application service provides
individual customers with a unique and personalized experience,
allowing them to receive services that are tailored to their specific
needs and preferences.
D. User Matchmaking Service
The main objective of this application service is to produce
a list of potential friends with similar interests, ranked accord-
ing to a similarity score based on their personal information.
The matchmaking algorithm compares a user profile with other
profiles using a text similarity technique and suggests a suitable
list of similar users. User interests, expertise, and biographies
are combined to improve the accuracy of recommending similar
users. The text similarity technique measures the similarity score
between two pieces of personal information based on lexical and
semantic similarity, covering both word level and context level
using NLP techniques, word embeddings, and cosine similarity.
Each user profile is cleaned up and transformed from unstructured
textual data into an appreciable format. A word embedding

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
technique encodes and converts textual data into a numeric format
as a vector representation. Two vectors are compared using cosine
similarity to extract semantically similar text from user profiles
and return a similarity score.
E. Discussion Forum Service
The discussion forum is a virtual platform where individuals
can come together to discuss a specific topic or set of topics. This
application service is designed to facilitate online conversations
and exchanges between users and can be used for a wide range
of purposes. The key features of discussion forum tools include
the following:
a) User Profiles: The ability for users to create personal
profiles that include information such as their name, location,
and interests, as well as the ability to upload profile pictures and
other media.
b) Threaded Discussions: The ability for users to start
new discussions or add to existing ones, creating a threaded
conversation.
c) Chat: The ability for users to communicate with other
users in real-time.
d) Search Functionality: The ability for users to search the
discussion forum for specific topics, keywords, or posts.
e) Notifications: The ability for users to receive notifications
when new content is added to the discussion forum, such as new
posts, comments, or replies.
These application services have the potential to greatly enhance
the customer experience, increase customer loyalty, and drive
business growth.
V. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
This section describes the experimental design for the proposed
framework. The experiments are performed to evaluate the perfor-
mance of local communication networks and application services
to ensure the proposed framework can run in real-world use cases
efficiently. The detailed experimental procedures are shown in the
following subsections.
A. Experimental Strategies
The experimental strategies are divided into three strategies,
including (1) Bluetooth signal testing; (2) network latency testing;
and (3) application service testing. The following strategies are
explained below.
1) Bluetooth Signal Testing:
This strategy measures the
strength and quality of Bluetooth signals between a mobile device
and a Bluetooth receiver. The Bluetooth signal testing aims
to estimate the range of Bluetooth signals and how they are
reachable, ensure that the Bluetooth signals are stable and reliable,
and support the required data transfer rate for given use cases.
RSSI values captured from the signals of two Bluetooth-enabled
devices are used to indicate the strength of a Bluetooth signal at
a specific location. Generally, the common range of RSSI values
is between -100 dBm and -20 dBm. An RSSI value of -30 dBm
indicates a strong Bluetooth signal, while an RSSI value of -90
dBm indicates a weak signal. In addition, a reasonably acceptable
value is -70 dBm to -80 dBm.
2) Network Latency Testing: This strategy involves measuring
the time it takes for a data packet to travel from its source to
its destination across a network. This measurement is expressed
in milliseconds (ms). The network latency can be measured by
determining the Round Trip Time (RTT), which is defined as the
amount of time it takes for requested data to be transferred from
a client to a server and for the server to respond to the client
after the request has been processed. Ideally, the response time
of network latency should be as close to zero as possible, which
impacts the user experience of real-time applications, including
online gaming, video conferencing, and financial trading.
3) Application Service Testing: This strategy is referred to as
concurrent user testing, which assesses the performance of an ap-
plication service under heavy loads, with multiple users accessing
the service simultaneously for a specified amount of time. Ideally,
the optimal average load time for accessing an application service
is a few seconds, improving the user experience and making it
easier for users to access the required information. Concurrent
user testing is an important part of software testing because it
helps organizations ensure that application services can perform
scalability and reliability efficiently under multiple concurrent
users.
These strategies could help assess the quality of application
services and local network communication between a mobile
device and a sandbox server and identify any issues affecting
performance.
B. Experimental Setup
To show that the proposed framework is proofed and achieved,
all experiments were conducted on a personal computer (PC)
with an Intel (R) Core (TM) i5-4570 CPU at 3.20 GHz and 8
GB of RAM as a sandbox server in an isolated environment
placed in an indoor office room with a length of 10 meters and a
width of 6 meters. The Xiaomi Redmi Note 11 Pro, based on the
Android 11 operating system, was used as a mobile device in all
of the experimental testing. The Bluetooth receiver comes with
Bluetooth version 5.0. Nginx version 1.23.3 was set up as a web
server to serve dynamic web pages and web applications written
in Python and Java. The backend data was stored in MySQL
Server version 8.0.31, which was running on an Ubuntu 22.04
LTS Linux server.
The proposed framework was evaluated based on the three
strategies mentioned above. In the Bluetooth signal testing, the
mobile device and the Bluetooth receiver were used within the
indoor office room to record raw RSSI values at varying distances
from 1 to 10 meters. The average was calculated within a certain
time frame from the raw RSSI values obtained from multiple
samplings. For the network latency testing, the mobile device
was set up as a client. The process starts when the client sends
a data packet to the sandbox server and measures the time it
takes for the sandbox server to respond. Then, the results, which
contain the amount of time it takes for every packet to reach its
destination and return, are used to calculate the average network
latency value. The number of sending packets in each process is
limited to 100. For parameter setting, the time interval of each
request is set from 0.001 to 1000 milliseconds. The value of
the packet size is set at 1000 bytes. For the application service
testing, the testing procedure begins by simulating a large number
of concurrent users accessing an application service at the same
time, where the number of concurrent users ranges from 1 to

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
1000. The result then displays the average response time for each
procedure.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
To verify the performance of the proposed framework, the
experimental results tested on three main strategies are provided.
A. The Result of Bluetooth Signal Testing
The RSSI measurement is considered to determine the strength
of Bluetooth signals. It is a metric that represents the relative
quality level of a Bluetooth signal received on two Bluetooth-
enabled devices. RSSI values also influence the distance range of
a reliable Bluetooth connection.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−40
−50
−60
−70
−80
−90
−100
Distance (m)
Average RSSI (dBm)
Fig. 6. The relationship between average RSSI and distance
In Figure 6, the graph demonstrates the average of the RSSI
values corresponding to the different distances ranging from 1 to
10 meters. From the graph, the average RSSI values are around
-50 dBm to -90 dBm. The graph is observed that the average
RSSI values significantly increase when the value of the distance
range is changed. Therefore, from this experimental result, the
proposed framework for Bluetooth signals can support Bluetooth
connections within 10 meters stably.
B. The Result of Network Latency Testing
To evaluate the network performance, network latency mea-
surement is an important factor for network communication
between a mobile device and a sandbox server.
Figure 7 shows the graph of network latency measurement
using the round trip time metric by ranging the time interval
from 0.001 to 1000 milliseconds. The graph indicates that the
average network latency is relatively constant between 0.05 and
0.06 milliseconds for time intervals of less than one millisecond.
The average network latency then gradually increases. Since the
average network latency should be close to zero, it is possible
to conclude from this experimental result that the proposed
framework in the network connection section has the ability to
quickly transfer data packets inside the pipe as they travel from
client to server and back again.
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1,000
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Time Interval (milliseconds)
Average Latency (milliseconds)
Fig. 7. The average response time with varying the number of concurrent users
1
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
·104
Number of Concurrent Users
Average Response Time (milliseconds)
Fig. 8. The average network latency
C. The Result of Application Service Testing
To evaluate the performance of an application service running
on a sandbox server under different levels of user concurrency,
the metric of concurrent user testing is used.
Figure 8 shows the average response time varying with the
number of concurrent users. The graph indicates that the average
response time gradually increases when the number of concurrent
users grows. Therefore, the number of concurrent users affects the
growth of average response times because when multiple users
access the application service simultaneously, they compete for
the same resources, such as memory, CPU, disk I/O, network
bandwidth, and database connections, which can cause system
performance to degrade and increase response times. However,
since the average load time should be within a few seconds, this
experimental result can be interpreted as meaning that the sandbox
server has enough capacity to run the application services and
handles several users accessing the sandbox server efficiently.
The experimental results and proofs conclude that the pro-
posed framework could be deployed in a production environment
because it can efficiently maintain several factors at acceptable
levels, including network connectivity, reliability, scalability, and

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
security. This means that the sandbox server is built to do different
things and meet the needs of its local users. It can support
many users with large amounts of data while keeping sensitive
information safe and ensuring the sandbox server is not open to
attack.
VII. USE CASES
In this section, a local conference room and shop located
in its geographic area are examples of scenarios used to de-
scribe the storytelling and planning processes of the proposed
framework. For instance, participants who enter a conference
room and open a mobile application connected to a local Wi-
Fi network will receive real-time information, such as a list
of participants with profiles, scheduled programs, presentations,
documents, videos, and any other relevant material, which will
be reflected immediately in the mobile application for users
who are granted access to the network. Moreover, the mobile
application can be customized to allow participants to collaborate
with each other, meet new friends, make comments, and share
information while displaying relevant information, providing a
personalized experience for each participant. Therefore, the ability
to access information and interact with others through the mobile
application can increase user engagement and participation at
the conference. In another case, customers who enter a shop
and open an application connected to the free Internet access
in the venue will receive notifications on their smartphones about
promotions and menu items related to the shop. This is beneficial
for customers because it provides them with convenient access to
valuable information. Moreover, it can also enhance the positive
user experience in terms of accessibility and user satisfaction.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
This article proposes a step towards a conceptual framework
of the future Web that will help local users access and contribute
web content and services on the local and global webs directly
and safely through their mobile devices over a local network.
The proposed framework is designed and implemented to run
locally on a sandbox server located in a specific area to provide
security, scalability, and reliability to local users. This would
make the Web more secure and private for people while helping
users maintain control over their privacy and avoid the risk of
hacking attacks or theft. In addition, the proposed framework
aims to enhance the Web evolution into an intelligent Web by
leveraging the power of Web 3.0 technologies, including AI,
NLP, and ML. These innovative technologies make the Web
more intelligent because it can understand meaning through data
analysis to automatically provide users with highly personalized
and appropriate suggestions of items according to environmental
contexts such as user profiles, weather, and locations. This way,
the owner of their data can have great user experiences. In
addition, it is crucial to consider potential legal and regulatory
issues that may arise as a result of Web usage and to propose
solutions to address these problems.
The future directions of the proposed framework have great
potential for use in various smart environments within geograph-
ical areas (e.g., smart homes, smart universities, smart cities, and
smart industries) [50]–[52]. From a home automation scenario
perspective, when a user visits a home as a guest, a smart home
enables the user to access and control various smart home devices
via a local Wi-Fi network. When entering the home, the user
must first authenticate with a proximity-based mechanism to be
recognized and permitted. The user is then given access to the
network and can control these smart home devices easily and
safely, such as turning on the lights, air conditioners, and TVs,
using an app on their phone or voice commands. When the user
leaves home, he or she can no longer access and control the
smart home devices. In the context of smart cities, the proposed
framework could offer opportunities to fully integrate into smart
cities, towns, or villages through a smartphone application to
improve the overall quality of life for citizens and make their lives
more efficient and convenient [53]. The mobile application serves
targeted information to citizens in real time, enabling them to
engage with their city. On the other hand, the proposed framework
may enable city commerce to send notifications, promotions,
activities, and events, which each business publishes in the mobile
application, leading to increased visits. Also, all businesses get
direct sales related to the offers sent.
One innovative way of using smart city apps that impact
daily life is the use of navigation city tours with augmented
reality technology [54], [55]. Mobile applications can help tourists
visualize and navigate around cities through the lens of smart-
phones. The tourists receive information of interest about the
history of the city and important places while walking nearby.
Therefore, it is particularly useful for those cities that provide
tourists with location-based augmented reality experiences using
GPS coordinates.
REFERENCES
[1] S.
Thaiprayoon
and
H.
Unger,
“Towards
personalized
context-
aware
recommendation
agent
in
mobile
social
networks,”
in
AFIN
2022,
The
Fourteenth
International
Conference
on
Advances
in
Future
Internet.
IARIA,
2022,
pp.
1–8.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php
?view=article&articleid=afin 2022 1 10 40004
[2] K. Nath, S. Dhar, and S. Basishtha, “Web 1.0 to web 3.0-evolution of the web
and its various challenges,” in 2014 International Conference on Reliability
Optimization and Information Technology (ICROIT).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 86–
89.
[3] P. J. Weiser, “The future of internet regulation,” UC Davis L. Rev., vol. 43,
p. 529, 2009.
[4] T. Seymour, D. Frantsvog, S. Kumar et al., “History of search engines,”
International Journal of Management & Information Systems (IJMIS),
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 47–58, 2011.
[5] N. Choudhury, “World wide web and its journey from web 1.0 to web 4.0,”
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies,
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 8096–8100, 2014.
[6] D. Kaufmann, A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi, “The worldwide governance
indicators: Methodology and analytical issues1,” Hague journal on the rule
of law, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 220–246, 2011.
[7] C. Jaksch, “Digital personal assistants with ai and data protection gdpr
& e-privacy-reg,” in Law and Technology in a Global Digital Society:
Autonomous Systems, Big Data, IT Security and Legal Tech.
Springer,
2022, pp. 135–161.
[8] M. Hodgson, “A decentralized web would give power back to the people
online,” Oct 2016. [Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/09/a-
decentralized-web-would-give-power-back-to-the-people-online/
[9] S. Vojir and J. Kucera, “Towards re-decentralized future of the web: Privacy,
security and technology development,” Acta Informatica Pragensia, vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 349–369, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://aip.vse.cz/artkey/aip-
202103-0009.php
[10] H. K. M. Al-Chalabi, “Evaluation of a multi-parameter e-learning system
using web 3.0 technologies,” in 2021 13th International Conference on
Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI).
IEEE, 2021,
pp. 1–4.
[11] H. C. Salar, U. Bas¸armak, and M. E. Sezgin, “Educational integration of
the metaverse environment in the context of web 3.0 technologies: A critical
overview of planning, implementation, and evaluation,” Shaping the Future
of Online Learning: Education in the Metaverse, pp. 154–173, 2023.
[12] M. Breeding, “Web 2.0? let’s get to web 1.0 first.” Computers in Libraries,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 30–33, 2006.

International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2
[13] K. Zdravkova, M. Ivanovi´c, and Z. Putnik, “Experience of integrating
web 2.0 technologies,” Educational Technology Research and Development,
vol. 60, pp. 361–381, 2012.
[14] R. Rudman and R. Bruwer, “Defining web 3.0: opportunities and chal-
lenges,” The electronic library, 2016.
[15] C. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Liao, S. Zhao, Z. Zheng, H. Huang, and J. Wu,
“When digital economy meets web 3.0: Applications and challenges,” IEEE
Open Journal of the Computer Society, 2022.
[16] F. A. Alabdulwahhab, “Web 3.0: the decentralized web blockchain networks
and protocol innovation,” in 2018 1st International Conference on Computer
Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[17] K. Pahlavan and P. Krishnamurthy, “Evolution and impact of wi-fi tech-
nology and applications: A historical perspective,” International Journal of
Wireless Information Networks, vol. 28, pp. 3–19, 2021.
[18] Y. Guo, S. Zhang, and D. Xiao, “Overview of wi-fi technology,” in 2012
International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling.
Atlantis Press, 2012, pp. 1293–1296.
[19] S. Ahmed, A. N. Sakib, and S. Rahman, “Wpa 2 (wi-fi protected access 2)
security enhancement: Analysis,” Global Journal of Computer Science and
Technology, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 83–89, 2012.
[20] M. Islam and S. Jin, “An overview research on wireless communication
network,” Networks, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 19–28, 2019.
[21] A. I. Al-Alawi, “Wifi technology: Future market challenges and opportuni-
ties,” Journal of computer science, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 13–18, 2006.
[22] P. Suresh, J. V. Daniel, V. Parthasarathy, and R. Aswathy, “A state of the
art review on the internet of things (iot) history, technology and fields of
deployment,” in 2014 International conference on science engineering and
management research (ICSEMR).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[23] S. Zeadally, F. Siddiqui, and Z. Baig, “25 years of bluetooth technology,”
Future Internet, vol. 11, no. 9, p. 194, 2019.
[24] S. S. Chadha, M. Singh, and S. K. Pardeshi, “Bluetooth technology: Prin-
ciple, applications and current status,” International Journal of Computer
Science & Communication, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 16–30, 2013.
[25] R. Shi, “The world of the bluetooth,” in Third International Conference
on Electronics and Communication; Network and Computer Technology
(ECNCT 2021), vol. 12167.
SPIE, 2022, pp. 161–167.
[26] J. Haartsen, M. Naghshineh, J. Inouye, O. J. Joeressen, and W. Allen,
“Bluetooth: Vision, goals, and architecture,” ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile
Computing and Communications Review, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 38–45, 1998.
[27] S. Chai, R. An, and Z. Du, “An indoor positioning algorithm using bluetooth
low energy rssi,” in 2016 International Conference on Advanced Materials
Science and Environmental Engineering. Atlantis Press, 2016, pp. 274–276.
[28] M.
del
Carmen
Rodr´ıguez-Hern´andez
and
S.
Ilarri,
“Ai-based
mobile
context-aware
recommender
systems
from
an
information
management
perspective:
Progress
and
directions,”
Knowledge-
Based
Systems,
vol.
215,
p.
106740,
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705121000034
[29] S.
Raza
and
C.
Ding,
“Progress
in
context-aware
rec-
ommender
systems
—
an
overview,”
Computer
Science
Review,
vol.
31,
pp.
84–97,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574013718302120
[30] Y. Zheng, “Context-aware collaborative filtering using context similarity:
An empirical comparison,” Information, vol. 13, no. 1, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/13/1/42
[31] A. A. S. AlQahtani, H. Alamleh, and B. Al Smadi, “Iot devices proximity
authentication in ad hoc network environment,” in 2022 IEEE International
IOT, Electronics and Mechatronics Conference (IEMTRONICS).
IEEE,
2022, pp. 1–5.
[32] L. Li, X. Zhao, and G. Xue, “A proximity authentication system for
smartphones,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 605–616, 2015.
[33] A. Scannell, A. Varshavsky, A. LaMarca, and E. De Lara, “Proximity-based
authentication of mobile devices,” International Journal of Security and
Networks, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 4–16, 2009.
[34] J. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Yang, and Q. Zhang, “Proximity based iot device
authentication,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2017-IEEE conference on computer
communications.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–9.
[35] A. Kalamandeen, A. Scannell, E. de Lara, A. Sheth, and A. LaMarca,
“Ensemble: cooperative proximity-based authentication,” in Proceedings
of the 8th international conference on Mobile systems, applications, and
services, 2010, pp. 331–344.
[36] L. Bian and H. Holtzman, “Online friend recommendation through personal-
ity matching and collaborative filtering,” Proc. of UBICOMM, pp. 230–235,
2011.
[37] H. Ning, S. Dhelim, and N. Aung, “Personet: Friend recommendation system
based on big-five personality traits and hybrid filtering,” IEEE Transactions
on Computational Social Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 394–402, 2019.
[38] T. Van Le, T. Nghia Truong, and T. Vu Pham, “A content-based approach
for user profile modeling and matching on social networks,” in Multi-
disciplinary Trends in Artificial Intelligence: 8th International Workshop,
MIWAI 2014, Bangalore, India, December 8-10, 2014. Proceedings 8.
Springer, 2014, pp. 232–243.
[39] Z. Deng, B. He, C. Yu, and Y. Chen, “Personalized friend recommendation in
social network based on clustering method,” in Computational Intelligence
and Intelligent Systems: 6th International Symposium, ISICA 2012, Wuhan,
China, October 27-28, 2012. Proceedings.
Springer, 2012, pp. 84–91.
[40] J. Salunke and M. A. Chaudhari, “Implementation of friendbook: a recom-
mendation system for social networks,” Journal of Web Development and
Web Designing, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1–7, 2017.
[41] A. B. Barrag´ans-Mart´ınez, E. Costa-Montenegro, J. C. Burguillo, M. Rey-
L´opez, F. A. Mikic-Fonte, and A. Peleteiro, “A hybrid content-based and
item-based collaborative filtering approach to recommend tv programs
enhanced with singular value decomposition,” Information Sciences, vol.
180, no. 22, pp. 4290–4311, 2010.
[42] S. Y. Ho and D. Bodoff, “The effects of web personalization on user attitude
and behavior,” MIS quarterly, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 497–A10, 2014.
[43] E. Toch, Y. Wang, and L. F. Cranor, “Personalization and privacy: a survey of
privacy risks and remedies in personalization-based systems,” User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 22, pp. 203–220, 2012.
[44] A. Liu, Y. Zhang, and J. Li, “Personalized movie recommendation,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
17th
ACM
International
Conference
on
Multimedia,
ser.
MM
’09.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
Association
for
Computing
Machinery,
2009,
pp.
845–848.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1631272.1631429
[45] A. Yan, C. Dong, Y. Gao, J. Fu, T. Zhao, Y. Sun, and J. Mcauley,
“Personalized complementary product recommendation,” in Companion
Proceedings of the Web Conference 2022, ser. WWW ’22.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 146–151. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3487553.3524222
[46] M. Xin and C. Wan, “Poi recommendation algorithm for mobile social
network based on user perference tracking,” in The 2nd International
Conference on Computing and Data Science, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[47] C.-M.
Chen,
“Intelligent
web-based
learning
system
with
personalized
learning
path
guidance,”
Computers
&
Education,
vol.
51,
no.
2,
pp.
787–814,
2008.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131507000978
[48] A. Sharma, “Semantic web mining for intelligent web personalization,”
Journal of Global Research in Computer Science, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 77–
81, 2011.
[49] E. Mansour, A. V. Sambra, S. Hawke, M. Zereba, S. Capadisli, A. Ghanem,
A. Aboulnaga, and T. Berners-Lee, “A demonstration of the solid platform
for social web applications,” in Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference Companion on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’16 Companion.
Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE: International World Wide Web
Conferences Steering Committee, 2016, p. 223–226. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2872518.2890529
[50] C. Yin, Z. Xiong, H. Chen, J. Wang, D. Cooper, and B. David, “A literature
survey on smart cities.” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 1–18, 2015.
[51] B. N. Silva, M. Khan, and K. Han, “Towards sustainable smart cities: A
review of trends, architectures, components, and open challenges in smart
cities,” Sustainable cities and society, vol. 38, pp. 697–713, 2018.
[52] M. Batty, K. W. Axhausen, F. Giannotti, A. Pozdnoukhov, A. Bazzani,
M. Wachowicz, G. Ouzounis, and Y. Portugali, “Smart cities of the future,”
The European Physical Journal Special Topics, vol. 214, pp. 481–518, 2012.
[53] A. Hoadjli and K. Rezeg, “A scalable mobile context-aware recommender
system for a smart city administration,” International Journal of Parallel,
Emergent and Distributed Systems, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 97–116, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/17445760.2019.1626855
[54] P. Yagol, F. Ramos, S. Trilles, J. Torres-Sospedra, and F. J. Perales, “New
trends in using augmented reality apps for smart city contexts,” ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 7, no. 12, p. 478, 2018.
[55] S. Kaji, H. Kolivand, R. Madani, M. Salehinia, and M. Shafaie, “Augmented
reality in smart cities: applications and limitations,” Journal of Engineering
Technology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 28–45, 2018.

