Deployment of Wireless Sensor Network to Study Oceanography of Coral Reefs 
 
 
Olga Bondarenko, Michael Kingsford 
Stuart Kininmonth 
Australian Institute of Marine Science, 
AIMS 
Townsville, QLD4810, Australia  
e-mail: s.kininmonth@aims.gov.au 
 
School of Marine and Tropical Biology, 
 James Cook University, JCU 
Townsville, QLD 4811, Australia 
e-mail: olechka216@gmail.com, 
michael.kingsford@jcu.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract — Great Barrier Reef Australia (GBR) is affected by 
cold water intrusions originating in the Coral Sea and 
upwelled on the reef. Therefore biological interest in GBR 
upwelling has been driven by the view that upwelled waters 
rich in nutrients boost plankton production and overall 
productivity of the GBR system. Upwelling can be a high 
frequency short-duration event and therefore it may be 
challenging to quantify synchrony between physical and 
biological change impacting the reef. We deployed a Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN) for in situ monitoring of upwelling.  
Temperature is a good proxy for upwelling however 3D dense 
spatial data   required to correctly describe upwelling and 
their impact on plankton abundance. The array of underwater 
sensors was deployed at various depths on the coral reef in 
Nelly Bay, Magnetic Island, GBR.  The temperature data are 
communicated in real time via the ad hoc network using RF 
signal to the on-shore base station. This permits us to collect 
the plankton data in real time synchronized to the 
temperature changes. To explore the utility of WSN we also 
deployed dataloggers to collect temperature data from the 
same location.  This paper outlines the methods of the WSN 
deployment for ecological research. It also describes 
preliminary results. Our preliminary findings did not produce 
sufficient evidence for upwelling however we did find that the 
water temperature can vary by as much as 1 °C even on a 
small spatial scale due to stratification of the water column. 
Stratification can influence depth-related abundance of 
plankton and the supply of food to reef associated organisms 
however we could not confirm this with statistical confidence 
due to the limited plankton data collected while water 
stratification was observed. The use of robust real time WSN 
to trigger plankton collection at the events of upwelling or 
stratification would have assisted with this investigation. 
 
Keywords – oceanography; plankton; wireless sensor network; 
stratification; tidal upwelling; temperature; coral reef 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Understanding the relationships between physical and 
biological oceanography is a challenging task due to the 
very dynamic nature of the oceans. This calls for the 
deployment 
of 
new 
methods 
and 
technology 
in 
oceanographic studies that allows the detection and 
communication of changes in real time. It was proposed to 
deploy a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) to quantify the 
synchrony between physical and biological changes 
impacting the reef due to oceanic upwelling [1]. 
Coral reefs have incredible diversity and density of 
organisms and could not survive without input of additional 
nutrients from outside the reef [2]. Upwelling  has the 
potential to facilitate such input and also has a great 
influence on the supply of planktonic food to reefs [2, 3]. 
Upwelling can be a high frequency short-duration event 
and therefore it may be challenging to quantify synchrony 
between physical and biological change impacting the reef. 
The objective of our study was to determine the influence 
that physical oceanography has on distribution of plankton 
in a coral reef environment.  
In Great Barrier Reef (GBR), Australia, cold water 
intrusions come from the Coral Sea bringing nutrients into 
GBR waters [4]. Biological interest in GBR upwelling has 
been driven by the view that upwelled waters are rich in 
nutrients and contribute significantly to the overall 
productivity of the GBR system [4]. Moreover, Furnas and 
Mitchell [4] found strong correlation between temperature 
and concentrations of phosphate, nitrate and silicate in 
upwelled regions of GBR. The ocean fluctuations in 
nutrients result in variations in the growth of marine 
organisms such as phytoplankton [5-7]. Understanding the 
plankton abundance and composition is essential to 
understanding of the GBR food chain.  
Plankton is considered to be one of the most important 
organisms on Earth since it is a primary food producer for 
most aquatic life.  Based on the trophic level, plankton 
could be divided into three broad groups: phytoplankton 
(producer), zooplankton (consumer) and bacterioplankton 
(recycler) 
[8]. 
Understanding 
the 
phytoplankton 
productivity in the world ocean has recently become a 
major concern  because of its role in CO2 recycling and 
therefore the effect on global climate change [9]. In 
addition to making a significant contribution in removing 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, phytoplankton creates 
the foundation of the ocean food chain. 
The phytoplankton generally increases in biomass at the 
junction where frontally convergent circulation has either 
supplied limiting nutrients or resulted in the aggregation of 
plankton particles [7]. Thomson and Wolanski [10] 
established that strong tidal currents can pump nutrient-rich 
92
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

water from below the mixing layer through the reef 
passages onto the shelf. Such inputs of inorganic nutrients 
are responsible for the large fluctuations in phytoplankton 
biomass and overall primary production [5]. Phytoplankton 
blooms, defined as rapid growth in population, take place 
when upwelled waters bring nitrate, phosphate and silicate 
nutrients into euphotic zones [5].  Plankton species can 
move up and down the water column [11], thus plankton 
abundance should be estimated with respect to depth and 
appropriate 3D sampling design is important.  
The upwelling can be caused by various dynamic 
processes in the ocean including wind, topography and tidal 
movements. Large scale coastal upwellings are generally 
driven by wind force.  This type of upwelling occurs when 
alongshore winds generate Erkman transport causing the 
surface waters to move offshore and be replaced by deeper 
nutrient-rich water that upwells close to shore [12]. High 
frequency  coastal upwelling can also be associated with 
tidal jets,  internal tides, internal waves and internal tidal 
bores [13]. The temporal and spatial variability in 
upwelling near coral reefs may contribute to temperature 
variability,  the balance between locally and remotely 
derived nutrients, and the overall dynamics of coral reef 
system [14]. 
The GBR upwelling allows the cross-shelf intrusions of 
Coral Sea water through the reef matrix [15]. Andrews [16] 
used temperature to trace cross-shelf transport which in 
open stratified water  produces a marked bottom-
temperature signal. The temperature was found to mark the 
upwelling intrusions adequately [16]. Furnas and Mitchell 
[4] found that nitrate, phosphate and silicate concentrations 
are strongly correlated with water temperatures. 
We hypothesized that changes of sea water temperature 
impact the abundance of plankton and propose to set up 
real time monitoring of the effect of high frequency 
temperature changes on plankton abundance.  We also 
hypothesize that daily tides have similar effect on plankton 
abundance as previously documented upwelling but with 
smaller magnitude.  
High frequency upwelling can be created by tidal 
movements.  Tidal currents interacting with complex reef 
topographies are common in  coastal environments [17].  
Tidal jets, tidal waves and tidal bores have predominantly 
cross-shore direction  [18].  In coral reef environments they 
facilitate water exchange between the near-shore shelf, the 
outer shelf, the slope and the open ocean.  Pineda [19] 
found that internal tidal bores produce upwelling by 
transporting subsurface water onshore and facilitating the 
transport of  larvae. It was recorded that such upwelling 
was caused by tidal bores and had an effect on surface 
temperature that lasted days [19]. Along with the water 
exchange, cross-shore circulations  promote  exchange of 
nutrients, pollutants and biological material [18, 20].  The 
intensity of tidal upwelling and the distance they can travel 
shoreward is hard to predict because it is influenced by 
bathymetry, tidal amplitude and the passage shape thus it is 
unique for each area. There are very few comparable data 
available on shallow water upwelling close to the shore.  In 
this study we wanted to verify if tidal upwelling in the 
GBR penetrates as far as 80 km shoreward and thus deliver 
nutrients to inshore coastal reefs.   
Stratification of the water column can also create 
variation in biomass distribution of plankton  [21]. 
Stratification refers to layers of different physical 
properties. A density barrier between the layers reduces 
mixing of the water. However density differences can also 
promote dynamic processes in the ocean. For example, 
even small horizontal density differences caused by 
differences in surface heating can create strong currents. 
Water density is a function of water temperature and 
salinity. Density increases with an increase in salinity and a 
decrease in temperature. Therefore waters of high 
temperature and low salinity generally stay at, or near, the 
surface and the waters of low temperature and high salinity 
are generally located at depth. The salinity barrier is called 
the halocline and the temperature barrier is called the 
thermocline. The thermocline and halocline can have a 
strong influence on the distribution and dispersal of 
plankton species [21, 22]. Stratification can last for hours, 
days and in some cases, when the water is calm, it can last 
for months. Stratification can be destroyed by dynamic 
processes promoting water mixing such as tides, storms, 
hurricanes, upwelling, strong winds and currents.  
To be able to trace the effect of high frequency 
temperature changes due to daily tides, stratification events 
and upwelling with sufficient tolerance we propose to 
monitor on a relatively small spatial scale compared to 
previous studies. Thus the aim of this study was to 
understand the effect of high frequency changes in the sea 
water temperature due to tidal fluctuations, upwelling and 
water stratification on plankton distribution and abundance 
at Nelly Bay, Magnetic Island, Australia. 
We deployed a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) for in 
situ monitoring of temperature on 3D scale to be able to 
collect high quality spatial data required to fully understand 
the impact of temperature on the distribution and 
composition of plankton species. Data loggers have been 
deployed by Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) 
for in-situ monitoring of sea temperature along various 
reefs of GBR. Data loggers instantaneously record sea 
temperatures every 30 minutes and are downloaded every 6 
to 12 months, depending on the site. The data loggers store 
the information which can be downloaded at the end of 
each experiment, generally every few months, thus 
immediate collection of plankton samples in the event of 
high temperature variation was not possible. We therefore 
deployed WSN to allow biological data collection 
(plankton) at the same time as physical change 
(temperature) was detected. 
93
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Utilization of WSN technology is quite appropriate 
when dealing with very dynamic organisms such as 
plankton. One of the main challenges faced in  plankton  
field studies is the fact that plankton communities are very 
dynamic and under favorable conditions the cells can 
divide quite rapidly [23].  Large short-term fluctuations in 
phytoplankton biomass as well as transport of matter and 
energy through plankton community [23] calls for a special 
sampling technique where sampling can be performed 
shortly after the potentially favorable conditions have been 
detected. We deployed WSN to collect 3D temperature data 
and communicate information about changes in the water 
column in real time. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
 
A. Sensor Array 
 
The array of sensors was deployed on a 3D spatial scale 
with horizontal coordinates spaced out along the reef crest 
and reef flat and at various depths. Sensor network is a 
term used to describe the latest trend in electronic 
monitoring where each sensor contains a small computer 
able to manage and collect environmental data and transmit 
in real time [24].  Ambient Systems is a supplier of wireless 
mesh networking solutions that consist of chips embedded 
with the Ambient's networking software and radio 
transceiver technology [25]. In this study we used Ambient 
Systems smart temperature sensor solution based on 1-Wire 
devices DS18B20 from Dallas Semiconductor. The 
DS18B20 communicates over a 1-Wire bus that by 
definition requires only one data line (and ground) for 
communication with a central microprocessor. Each 
DS18B20 has a unique 64-bit serial code, which allows 
multiple DS18B20s to function on the same 1–Wire bus; 
thus, it is possible to use one microprocessor to control 
many DS18B20s. The resolution of the temperature sensor 
is user-configurable to 9, 10, 11, or 12 bits, corresponding 
to increments of 0.5°C, 0.25°C, 0.125°C, and 0.0625°C, 
respectively. In this study the sensors programmed to the 
maximum resolution of +/-0.0625 °C. 
Multiple DS18B20 sensors were connected on 1-Wire 
to a processing unit called Unode supplied by Ambient 
Systems and positioned inside the surface buoy (Fig. 1).  
The Unode has integrated RF networking capabilities to 
communicate with other Unodes and the base station thus 
allowing us to create a sensor network with real time data 
transmission capabilities. Each string of temperature 
sensors was connected to a Unode and positioned 
underwater inside of an hydraulic cable at various depths (2 
meters apart) (Fig. 2). We initially deployed a network 
consisting of 8 moorings with one Unode each, however 
due to technical problems the network was downsized to 4 
moorings (Fig.3).  
 In a sensor network, each node is able to manage the 
collection of environmental data. This management 
includes interacting with other sensors to determine the 
data collection rates and electronic system status. The 
environmental data are then packaged up using standard 
networking protocols to broadcast into the network.  This 
means that if the node is unable to directly contact the 
target base station the data can be rerouted to the target via 
other sensors (ad hoc network establishment). This is very 
important in choppy sea conditions. There is no hierarchy 
between the nodes and they can be spaced out randomly to 
form multi-hop mesh as long as the distances are within the 
signal reach. The sensors communicate a unique 
identification number and thus the data can be tagged with 
three dimensional attributes (x, y and depth).   The 
transmitting frequency band of 900 MHz was selected as 
the most suitable compromise between baud rate, humid 
environment and commercial availability of transmitters 
[1]. Due to corrosion of underwater cables the temperature 
data from WSN was only received for 16 hours on 21st and 
 22nd of September thus limited our analysis.  
B. Dataloggers 
 
To ground-truth the data we planned to receive from 
WSN we also used TG3100 temperature dataloggers 
(Gemini Data loggers UK Ltd), that were calibrated to 
measure temperature with ± 0.2 °C accuracy. These 
dataloggers are manufactured in water proof packages thus 
we could place them on the outside of hydraulic cables 
containing DS18B20 sensors. We employed TG3100 
temperature dataloggers to record temperature data over 
time at two depth levels and different spatial position on 
reef profile. We placed dataloggers on four moorings out of 
total eight moorings used by WSN. The inner moorings 
were positioned on reef flat and the outer moorings on the 
outer edge of reef slope. Dataloggers were attached to 
mooring lines at two depth levels, 1m from the sea surface 
and 1m from the sea floor (Fig. 2).  The loggers at two 
depth levels were expected to detect the presence of 
stratification or upwelling. In total, eight dataloggers were 
synchronized and programmed to record temperature every 
 10 minutes for the period from 05/09/2007 until 25/09/07.   
C.  Study site 
 
The data on temperature and plankton were collected at 
Nelly Bay (146 51’ 9” E 19 9’ 52”S), Magnetic Island, 
Australia.  Magnetic Island is situated about 7 km off 
Townsville; it is bordered by a number of sheltered bays 
with fringing reefs.  Magnetic Island is classified as inner-
shelf Island and is situated 7 km offshore. Nelly Bay's 
1800m-wide sand and rubble intertidal reef crest and slope 
area was used for data collection (Fig. 3). The temperature 
collecting nodes were spaced out along Nelly Bay reef crest 
and reef flat at various depths.  
 
94
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1(a):  The electronic module called Unode supplied by 
Ambient Systems [25]. The Unode incorporates radio transmitter, 
receiver and a memory card. 
Figure 1(b):   Photograph of the surface buoy with Unode 
placed inside the plastic canister with external antennae. The 
black arrow points Unode position inside the surface buoy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 (a):  Diagram of the sensor mooring with seven DS18B20 
digital thermistors and two data loggers TG3100.  
Figure 2 (b):  Underwater photograph of the inner mooring 
with temperature sensors inside the hydraulic cable. Visible in 
this photograph is the sub-surface float and the wagon wheel 
anchor. The cable connecting sub-surface float to the surface 
buoy is floating loose to allow tidal variations.  
95
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
(a) 
Outer 
Inner
Figure 3: a) Magnetic Island and Nelly Bay b) Study site at Nelly Bay, Magnetic Island, Australia. The sensor network consisted of two transects 
with two moorings each. Each moorings had seven temperature sensors deployed on vertical scale 2 meters apart (Fig. 2). The inner moorings of 
each transect were placed on the reef flat at 1.5 meters depth (lowest astrological tide) and the outer moorings were placed on the outer edge of 
the reef slope at 6 meters depth;  c) schematic representation of transects with inner and outer moorings in respect to reef bathymetry on vertical 
scale, dotted line indicates depth strata (shallow and deep). 
 
D. 
Temperature stratification and upwelling 
We expected to detect both water stratification 
and upwelling during observation period.  The 
intrusion of cool water to coastal areas often varies 
with lunar tides [13]. It was predicted therefore that 
stratification and upwelling would be greatest during 
spring tides.  To separate these events from the 
temperature offset caused by calibration and 
resolution of DS18B20 sensors and TG3100 
dataloggers a threshold had to be established. When 
comparing data from 2 dataloggers (shallow and 
deep) the maximum error rate would be 0.4 °C net 
based on the accuracy of TG3100.  This level of error 
would be very unusual. A criterion of 0.5°C net 
vertical gradient  from the surface temperature was 
recommended as a threshold to distinguish weakly 
stratified regions from unstratified [26]. We therefore 
adopted this criterion (0.5°C as maximum difference 
between shallow and deep temperatures, ΔT) for the 
water column to be considered mixed. Thus 
stratification or upwelling would be detected if 
ΔT≥0.5 ºC. 
 We expected to be able to detect upwelling as 
cold water intrusions moving vertically up and 
horizontally towards the shore and finally reaching 
the surface. It was predicted that the outer mooring 
sensors would detect temperature drops first and then 
cold water intrusions would reach inner moorings but 
with some time delays. 
 
 
(b) 
1.5m 
shallow
6m
deep
 
 
(c)
96
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

We initially intended to spatially analyze the 
stratification and upwelling events based on the 
temperature data from 8 mooring stations. However 
due to technical problems the data were downloaded 
from 4 stations only thus limiting our capacity to do 
 spatial analysis with statistical confidence. 
E. 
 Plankton data collection 
 
To measure the influence of water temperature on 
plankton 
abundance, 
depth 
stratified 
plankton 
samples were collected next to each temperature 
station.  We expected that depth related patterns 
would be greatest at spring tides and therefore 
plankton samples were collected on a high tide 
during spring tides using Niskin bottles. Niskin 
bottles are in common use for small size plankton 
sampling; they are cylinders that can remove 
columns of water of known diameter and depth [27]. 
The Niskin bottle method was preferred for this study 
over collection with plankton net because it 
minimizes trauma and enhances the survival of 
phytoplankton taxa that are easily damaged or killed 
when they come into contact with the mesh of 
plankton net [28]. This method also allowed us to 
take samples precisely next to each temperature 
station which would not be possible with long tows 
of plankton nets. In this study we used 5-litre Niskin 
bottles. The water samples were collected next to 
each temperature station at two depth levels that 
correspond with the depth of temperature loggers (1 
meter from the sea surface and 1m from the sea 
floor). We collected plankton samples at the time of 
high tide during spring tides (high tide of ≥ 3.4 
meters).  In total we collected 40 samples over 5 days 
from 6th to 11th of September 2007.  
The 
water 
bottle 
adequately 
sampled 
mesoplankton (0.2 - 2 mm) and microplankton (20-
200 µm). A 50 µm mesh sieve was used to 
concentrate 5-litre field samples into 250 ml jars.  All 
samples were concentrated and preserved in 3% 
formalin within three hours from collection to avoid 
predation or decomposition. 
 
F. 
 Laboratory techniques 
In the laboratory facilities samples were further 
filtered using 50 µm mesh sieve to a 20 ml 
concentrate out of which 1ml subsamples were taken.  
We used a modified  10 ml calibrated pipette with 
wide mouth (5mm) to provide wider entrance for the 
small organisms [28]. The 20 ml concentrate was 
stirred prior to taking a subsample. Manual mixing 
was not sufficient to mix up and break up colonial 
phytoplankton. 
Phytoplankton 
species 
which 
aggregated in colonies or chains were excluded from 
counts due to higher effect of patchiness on 
subsample variance.  Thus only unicellular unchained 
species were counted and analyzed.  We used 
Sedgewick grid which contains 1ml of subsample 
volume for plankton counting.  
 
III. RESULTS 
 
A. 
Temperature 
variations 
and 
physical 
oceanography 
 
The water column was generally homogeneous in 
September 2007 however a vertical stratification was 
found on some occasions at both transects (Fig. 4).  
The average difference between shallow and deep 
dataloggers was 0.1 ºC which indicated that the entire 
study area was a mixed layer. Stratification events 
occurred during spring and neap tides and were most 
obvious at the outer sites (Fig. 4). In contrast, the 
waters were well mixed at the inner sites.   The 
maximum temperature difference between surface 
and near the substratum loggers was 1.2 ºC (1pm on 
6th of September, Fig. 4b).  A 1 ºC difference on 17th 
of September ranked second and occurred around 
4pm (Fig. 4b). The first stratification event lasted for 
2 hours (12pm-2pm) and the second event on 17th of 
September lasted for 8 hours (11am-7pm) calculation 
based on critical criterion of ΔT≥0.5 ºC. 
The first stratification event occurred during 
spring tides (maximum amplitude of 2.7 meters) and 
the second event occurred during extreme neap tides 
(amplitude of 0.8 meters, Fig. 4). Tide amplitude 
therefore was not the main factor driving temperature 
stratification as originally predicted. This was 
confirmed by regression analysis that showed no 
relationship 
between 
the 
tide 
amplitude 
and 
stratification level represented as the difference 
between temperatures of shallow and deep layers of 
the water column (r² = 0.0035; ANOVA F=0.267; 
df=1,78; ns).  
The data also showed that extreme spring tides 
(amplitude of around 3 meters) did not promote 
mixing of the water column more or less than tides of 
lower amplitude. Greatest stratification did not occur 
at any particular phase of the tide. On some 
occasions stratification was greatest at low tide and 
others at high tide but only during neap tides (Fig. 4).  
Peak periods of stratification were during tides of 
low amplitude and near low water at other times (Fig. 
4). 
 
 
 
97
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Days in Sept ember 2007  
Figure 4: a) Tidal variation during 20 day period in September 2007, the red line highlights the spring tides and when plankton was 
collected. b) and c) Temperatures at shallow (1m from the surface)  and deep (1m above the sea floor) dataloggers from transect 1(b) and 
transect 2(c) recorded at the outer moorings (Fig. 3). Circles in figure (b) highlight the events of water stratification. The dotted lines show 
the tidal phases during daily temperature peaks and falls on 6, 12 and 17 of September.  
 
 
98
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
25
26
27
t
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00
sensors shallow
sensors deep
loggers shallow
 
 
No upwelling was detected during the observation 
period. Despite thermal stratification the cold water did 
not persist at the surface. The daily temperature drops 
of 0.8 ºC on average did not always correlate with 
phase of the tide (Fig. 4).  Moreover, high temperature 
variations between daily maximum and minimum 
occurred during spring tides (maximum difference of 
1.3 ºC, Fig. 4) and during neap tides (maximum 
difference of 1.1 ºC, Fig. 4).  Tidal amplitudes did not 
correlate to daily temperature variations (r² = 0.0049; 
df=1, 20; ns).  Thus bigger tides did not produce 
greater 
differences 
between 
daily 
temperature 
maximum (peaks) and daily temperature minimum 
 (drops). 
B. 
Real time sensor array 
The utility of a real time sensor array based on 
WSN technology was tested and ground- truthed with 
dataloggers.  We compared the temperature data 
measured by dataloggers and real time sensors on the 
same spatial and temporal scale (Fig. 5). Both datasets 
showed the same trends, however there was a 
temperature offset between real time sensors and 
dataloggers of approximately 0.5 ºC (Fig. 5).  This was 
due to the accuracy of temperature data received from 
DS18B20 sensors. 
 
C.   Plankton abundance 
 The relationships between plankton abundance and 
depth varied daily for most taxa. When differences 
were found it was generally at day one of the plankton 
collection (6th of Sept) when the water column was  
stratified by 1.2 ºC difference between shallow and 
deep loggers.  Differences in abundance between 
depths were found at day one for nauplius larvae, 
diatom Coscinodiscus spp. and the dinoflagellate 
Ceratium spp. Abundance of nauplius was high in 
shallow waters during day one and changes in rank 
abundance among days resulted in a significant 
interaction between day and depth. Abundance of 
copepods varied among days with highest numbers of 
copepods collected at the last two days of collection 
period. Although there was a trend for difference of 
copepod abundance between depths on day two and 
five this was not detected by ANOVA. Main effects 
and interactions were not detected for other taxa 
probably due to high residual variants. 
 
IV.  DISCUSSION 
 
A. 
 Temperature stratification 
Although we did not find sufficient evidence for 
upwelling this study confirmed initial prediction that 
the water temperature can vary significantly even on a 
very small spatial scale; thus adequate spatial 
resolution is required when collecting temperature data 
to analyse oceanographic events on coral reefs.  
This study challenges the existing view  that the 
inner shelf waters of the GBR Lagoon are generally 
unstratified [16, 29-31].   Wolanski et al. [30]  
measured the temperature across the GBR Lagoon 
offshore from Townsville and found that there were no 
vertical temperature gradients for inshore waters and 
some were found offshore during  calm weather 
conditions. Wolanski et. al’s [30] measurements were 
9
Time
Temperature (ºC)
loggers deep
 
Figure 5:   Temperature data collected by the data loggers (TG3100) and real time sensors (DS18B20) at the outer mooring station of 
transect 2 on 21st and 22nd of September 2007.  The data loggers and real time sensors were fixed on the same mooring line at two depth 
levels: shallow (within 1 meter from the surface) and deep (1 meter from the sea floor). 
99
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

taken weekly from Jan 1979 to Jan 1980 over a large 
spatial scale. Similar observations  were documented 
by Orr [32] in September-October 1933 in the GBR 
Lagoon close to Low Isles (station at 16.35ºS, 145.6ºE) 
in 32 meters of water where they found less than 0.1ºC 
gradient between  surface and deep waters.  Similar to 
Wolanski et al. (1981) Orr recorded  temperature on a 
weekly basis [32]. Our study was different to previous 
studies of the GBR Lagoon both spatially and 
temporally. Stratification events that we found in Nelly 
Bay were short duration events lasting less than one 
day.  For most of the observation period the waters in 
Nelly Bay were well mixed (less than 0.1ºC vertical 
gradient) and thus if the temperature was recorded 
weekly the stratification events most probably would 
not be reflected in the collected temperature data. The 
important implication of this study is that sea surface 
temperature (SST) data alone may not be reflecting the 
full complexity of oceanographic processes within 
lagoon. 
 
B. 
Influence 
of 
stratification 
on 
plankton 
distribution 
 
Thermal stratification of the water column 
influenced the distribution of some planktonic taxa.  
Stratification 
often 
affects 
the 
distribution 
of  
phytoplankton [33]. In this study there were strong 
trends for nauplius larvae, Coscinodiscus spp. and 
Ceratium spp. to be more abundant in shallow waters 
when the water column was stratified. Vertical 
differences in abundance were most obvious in 
nauplius larvae and Coscinodiscus spp, both of which 
were more abundant in shallow waters during 
stratification. 
 
C. 
 Utilization of real time WSN for oceanographic 
studies  
 
The ability to explore the relationship between 
stratification and distribution of plankton is often 
hampered by a lack of real time data. We demonstrated 
that utilization of WSN can provide real time 
communication 
of 
temperature 
data 
about 
oceanographic events and consequently biological 
sampling can be planned to address specific 
hypotheses. For example, timely information about 
stratification events would facilitate exploration of the 
biological effect that physical oceanography has on 
plankton.  Unfortunately due to technical problems 
with WSN we did not receive real time data about the 
second stratification event on 17th of September and 
thus plankton samples were not collected during this 
event. This limited our ability to do comparative 
analysis of plankton abundance during thermal 
stratification but at the same time highlighted the 
advantages that WSN technology can offer for 
plankton studies.   
WSN offers several advantages over historical 
monitoring techniques by streamlining the data 
collection process, potentially minimizing human 
errors and time delays, reducing overall cost of data 
collection, and significantly increasing the quantity and 
quality of data both temporally and spatially [34]. 
Wireless sensor networks allow fine grained interface 
between the virtual and physical worlds and thus 
represent the future for environmental monitoring [35]. 
Future studies would be able to utilize wireless sensor 
network to trigger plankton collection once the water 
temperature anomalies were detected.  The design of 
the system has to be more robust to be able to survive 
in the aggressive sea water environment [36] and 
temperature sensors would have to be calibrated to 
industry standards  prior to deployment. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
 
This 
study 
demonstrated 
that 
short 
term 
stratification can occur in shallow tropical waters and 
influence the distribution of plankton. This challenges 
the traditional view that waters of the GBR Lagoon are 
always well mixed and that surface values of 
temperature and salinity are representative of the 
whole water column.  Stratification was caused by 
cooling in shallow water at night. Greatest warming in 
shallow water happened during low tides and at low 
tide amplitude phases of the lunar cycle. The ability to 
observe changes in phytoplankton production at the 
time or shortly after physical changes in the water 
column is crucial to furthering understanding of the 
trophic dynamics of marine ecosystems. The current 
study highlights the utility of real time WSN as a 
means of achieving this goal. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of: 
• 
The Ambient Systems electronic engineers: 
Supriyo Chatterjea, Wouter van Kleunen and 
Johan Kuperus 
• 
Dr Paul Havinga, Ambient Systems 
• 
A/Prof M. Palaniswami, the ARC Research 
Network on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks 
and Information Processing, The University of 
Melbourne 
• 
Financial support from the Telstra Foundation 
and the ARC Research Network on Intelligent 
100
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information 
Processing 
• 
Lorna Hempstead, Magnetic Island, Australia 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Bondarenko, O., S. Kininmonth, and M. 
Kingsford, Coral Reef Sensor Network 
Deployment for Collecting Real Time 3-D 
Temperature 
Data 
with 
Correlation to 
Plankton Assemblages. In Proceedings for 
SENSORCOMM 
2007, 
Valencia, 
Spain 
2007. 
2. 
Hamner, W.M., M.S. Jones, J.H. Carleton, 
I.R. Hauri, and D. Williams, Zooplankton, 
planktivorous fish, and water currents on a 
windward reefr face: Great Barrier Reef, 
Australia. Bulletin of Marine Science, 1998. 
42(3): p. 459-479. 
3. 
Kingsford, M.J. and A.B. MacDiarmid, 
Interrelations between planktivorous reef fish 
and zooplankton in temperate waters. Marine 
Ecology Progress Series, 1988. 48: p. 103-
117. 
4. 
Furnas, M.J. and A.W. Mitchell, Nutrient 
inputs into the central Great Barrier Reef 
(Australia) from subsurface intrusions of 
Coral 
Sea 
waters: 
a 
two-dimensional 
displacement 
model. 
Continental 
Shelf 
Research, 1996. 16(9): p. 1127-1148. 
5. 
Furnas, 
M.J. 
and 
A.W. 
Mitchell, 
Phytoplankton dynamics in the central Great 
Barrier Reef : Seasonal changes in biomass 
and community structure and their relation to 
intrusive activity. Continental Shelf Research, 
1986. 6: p. 363-384. 
6. 
Steel, J.H., Spatial pattern in plankton 
communities. Vol. 1. 1978: New York : 
Plenum Press. 
7. 
Dustan, P. and J.L. Pinckney, Jr., Tidally 
Induced Estuarine Phytoplankton Patchiness. 
Limnology and Oceanography, 1989. 34(2): 
p. 410-419. 
8. 
Thurman, H.V., Introductory Oceanography. 
Macmillan Pub. Co. NY, 1994. 
9. 
Kolber, Z.S., ECOLOGY: Getting a Better 
Picture of the Ocean's Nitrogen Budget. 
Science, 2006. 312(5779): p. 1479-1480. 
10. 
Thomson, R.E. and E. Wolanski, Tidal period 
upwellings within Raine Island Entrance, 
Great Barrier Reef. Journal of Marine 
Research, 1984. 
11. 
Capone, G.D., G.P. Zehr, H.W. Paerl, B. 
Bergman, and E.J. Carpenter, Trichodesmium, 
a globally significant marine cyanobacterium. 
Science, 1997. 276(May). 
12. 
Mann, K.H. and J.R.N. Lazier, Dynamics of 
Marine 
Ecosystems: 
Biological-Physical 
Interactions 
in 
the 
Oceans. 
Blackwell, 
Cambridge, MA., 1991: p. 11-15. 
13. 
Wolanski, E. and G.L. Pickard, Upwelling by 
internal tides and Kelvin waves at the 
continental shelf break on the Great Barrier 
Reef. Austtralian Journal of Marine Research, 
1983. 34: p. 65-80. 
14. 
Leichter, J.J. and S.L. Miller, Predicting high-
frequency upwelling: Spatial and temporal 
patterns of temperature anomalies on a 
Florida 
coral 
reef. 
Continental 
Shelf 
Research, 1999. 19: p. 911-928. 
15. 
Andrews, J.C. and M.J. Furnas, Subsurface 
intrusions of Coral Sea water into the central 
Great Barrier Reef I. Structures and shelf-
scale dynamics. Continental Shelf Research, 
1985. 6: p. 491-514. 
16. 
Andrews, J.C., Thermal waves on the 
Queensland shelf. Marine and Freshwater 
Research, 1983. 34(1): p. 81-96. 
17. 
Zamon, J.E., Tidal changes in copepod 
abundance and maintenance of a summer 
Coscinodiscus bloom in the southern San 
Juan Channel, San Juan Islands, USA. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 2002. 226: 
p. 193-210. 
18. 
Church, J.A., J.C. Andrews, and F.M. Boland, 
Tidal currents in the central Great Barrier 
Reef. Continental Shelf Research, 1985. 4(5): 
p. 515-531. 
19. 
Pineda, J.S., Predictable Upwelling and the 
Shoreward Transport of Planktonic Larvae by 
Internal 
Tidal 
Bores. 
Science, 
1991. 
253(5019): p. 548-551. 
20. 
Pineda, J., Internal tidal bores in the 
nearshore: 
Warm-water 
fronts, 
seaward 
gravity currents and the onshore transport of 
neustonic larvae. Journal of Marine Research, 
1994. 52(3). 
21. 
Schulz, J., C. Mollmann, and H.J. Hirche, 
Vertical 
zonation 
of 
the 
zooplankton 
community in the Central Baltic Sea in 
relation to hydrographic stratification as 
revealed 
by 
multivariate 
discriminant 
function and canonical analysis. Journal of 
Marine Systems, 2007. 67(1-2): p. 47-58. 
101
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

22. 
Gallager, S.M., H. Yamazaki, and C.S. Davis, 
Contribution of fine scale vertical structure 
and swimming behaviour to formation of 
plankton layers on Georges Bank. MARINE 
ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES, 2004. 267: 
p. 27-43. 
23. 
Morris, I., The Physiological Ecology of 
Phytoplankton. 
Blackwell 
Scientific 
Publications, 1980: p. 58-420. 
24. 
Kininmonth, S., et al., Sensor Networking the 
Great Barrier Reef. Spatial Sciences Qld, 
2004(spring): p. 34-38. 
25. 
Chatterjea, S., S. Kininmonth, and P. 
Havinga, Sensor Networks. GEO connexion 
International magazine, 2006(October): p. 20-
22. 
26. 
Sprintall, J. and M.F. Cronin, Upper ocean 
vertical structure. In: J. Steele, S. Thorpe, and 
K. Turekian (eds.), Encyclopedia of Ocean 
Sciences, First Online Update, Academic 
Press, London, UK, 2008. 
27. 
Sutherland, 
W.J., 
Ecological 
Census 
Techniques. 1996: p. pp 169-170. 
28. 
Kingsford, M.J. and C. Battershill, Studying 
temperate marine environments, a handbook 
for ecologists. Canterbury University press, 
1998: p. 92-172. 
29. 
Andrews, J.C. and P. Gentien, Upwelling as a 
Source of Nutrients for the Great Barrier Reef 
Ecosystems: 
A 
Solution 
to 
Darwin's 
Question? Marine Ecology Progress Series, 
1982. 8: p. 257-269. 
30. 
Wolanski, E., M. Jones, and W.T. Williams, 
Physical Properties of thr Great Barrier Reef 
Lagoon Waters near Townsville. II Seasonal 
Variations. Australian Journal of Freshwater 
Research, 1981. 32: p. 321-3334. 
31. 
Wolanski, E. and P. Ridd, Mixing and 
trapping in Australian tropical coastal 
waters. Coastal Estuarine Studies, 1990. 38: 
p. 165-183. 
32. 
Pickard, G.L., J.R. Donguy, C. Henin, and F. 
Rougerie, 
A 
review 
of 
the 
physical 
oceanography of the Great Barrier Reef and 
Western Coral Sea. Australian Institute of 
Marine Science monograph series, 1977. 2: p. 
20-52. 
33. 
Sournia, 
A., 
Phytoplankton 
manual. 
UNESCO press, 1978: p. 75-87. 
34. 
Glasgow, H.B., J.M. Burkholder, R.E. Reed, 
A.J. Lewitus, and J.E. Kleinman, Real-time 
remote monitoring of water quality: a review 
of current applications, and advancements in 
sensor, 
telemetry, 
and 
computing 
technologies. Experimental Marine Biology 
and Ecology, 2004. 300: p. 409-448. 
35. 
Krishnamachari, B., Networking Wireless 
Sensors. Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
36. 
Bondarenko, O., S. Kininmonth, and M. 
Kingsford, Underwater Sensor Networks, 
Oceanography and Plankton Assemblages. In 
Proceedings for ISSNIP 2007, Melbourne, 
Australia 2007: p. 657-662. 
 
 
102
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

