152
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Tracking of Vehicles by Almost Everyone
Markus Ullmann∗ † Gerd Nolden,∗ and Timo Hoss∗
∗ Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security
D-53133 Bonn, Germany
Email: {markus.ullmann, gerd.nolden, timo.hoss}@bsi.bund.de
† University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhine-Sieg
Institute for Security Research
D-53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Email: markus.ullmann@h-brs.de
Abstract—Increasingly, vehicles will be equipped with information
and communication technologies, e.g., wireless communication
technologies like IEEE 802.11x, Bluetooth, mobile communica-
tion, etc. These communication technologies enable identiﬁcation
and tracking based on identiﬁers used in communication proto-
cols. Today, the Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number, and the license
plate are regarded as vehicle identiﬁers. With new communi-
cation technologies used in modern vehicles, Secondary Vehicle
Identiﬁers are coming up. This paper analyzes the identiﬁcation of
vehicles based on wireless communication interfaces and presents
results of real measurements of vehicular Bluetooth and Wi-
Fi interfaces. Moreover, countermeasures are introduced, which
reduce the risk of being trackable.
Keywords–Vehicle Identiﬁcation; Vehicle Identiﬁer; Wireless
Vehicle Interfaces; Privacy; Vehicle Tracking
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information
technology
in
vehicles
has
signiﬁcantly
changed during the last 10 years. This is shown by the
increasing availability of components for driving assistance:
lane keeping support, trafﬁc jam assist, automatic parking
assistant, remote parking assistant and so on. This development
is a prestage of automatic driving, which is one of the main
challenges in automotive engineering at the moment. Besides
driving assistance, modern vehicles are equipped with wireless
interfaces, e.g., Bluetooth to connect devices (smart phones,
tablets, etc.) to the multimedia component (head-unit) of the
vehicle. In addition, head-units are more and more capable
of establishing a Wi-Fi hot spot to support Internet access
for vehicle passengers. Furthermore, the vehicle-2-vehicle
communication technology (V2V) based on IEEE 802.11p
technology will be deployed in the near future. V2V is one
feature of Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS).
Today, only the Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN), and
the license plate are regarded and used as ofﬁcial vehicle iden-
tiﬁers. This paper analyses vehicle identiﬁcation capabilities of
wireless communication interfaces, called Secondary Vehicle
Identiﬁers, which can be used for vehicle identiﬁcation and
tracking. This issue was ﬁrst published in [1]. Next, results
of further measurements of vehicular Bluetooth interfaces and
vehicular Wi-Fi hotspots are presented. The communication
interfaces are built into the vehicle to support communication
services for passengers. We show, however that these services
are also available outside the vehicle and can be misused
for unauthorized identiﬁcation and tracking. We only use
cheap measurement equipment, e.g., external Bluetooth USB-
Sticks (they cost only a few e) and partially open source
tools (software components of the Kali Linux distribution for
penetration testing), which are publicly available. The smart
phone measurement apps applied can be used by everyone with
every modern Android compatible device for the identiﬁcation
of vehicles based on Bluetooth. The aim of this paper is to
highlight the issue of identiﬁcation and tracking of vehicles
based on Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁers. Therefore, we have
only investigated selected vehicles instead of performing a
study with lots of vehicles. Most of the measurements were
already performed in November 2016. The Bluetooth tests
presented in Section VI-B were conducted in August 2018.
We primarily investigated simple measurements of existing
static Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer, e.g., static MAC IDs. We
know that there exist further device identiﬁcation capabilities
as shown in [2] for Wi-Fi components, which we do not study,
here. In comparison, we only propose simple countermeasures
which avoid an easy tracking of vehicles.
The subsequent sections of this paper are organized as fol-
lows: Section II is a description of related work. Subsequently,
identiﬁers for ITS vehicle stations are presented in Section
III. Section IV describes wireless technologies implemented
in modern vehicles and analyzes identiﬁcation capabilities.
The aim of the tests performed, test equipment used and test
vehicles investigated are presented in Section V. Results of real
measurements of Bluetooth and Wi-Fi identiﬁer are given in
Section VI. In Section VII, the problem of vehicular tracking is
addressed. Section VIII depicts only simple countermeasures
to avoid an easy tracking of vehicles. Finally, we summarize
our results, and mention open research questions.
II.
RELATED WORK
A classiﬁcation of vehicle identiﬁers which is also applied
in this paper is given in [3]. Hwajeng et al. suggested a
vehicle identiﬁcation and tracking system based on optical
vehicle plate number recognition [4]. Tracking of devices
based on Bluetooth interfaces is already discussed for a lot
of applications, e.g., indoor localization [5] or wireless indoor
tracking [6]. In [7], an analysis in Jacksonville, Florida, to
capture vehicle trafﬁc streams is described. To this end, a set
of Bluetooth receivers were installed at the roadside on speciﬁc
streets to capture the Bluetooth MAC ID (BD_ADDR) of
vehicles passing. A quite similar application is still performed
in Bonn to analyse and detect mobility pattern of vehicles
based on a network of stationary road side Bluetooth sensors
[8].

153
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Besides Bluetooth, IEEE 802.11 compliant devices were
suggested for real-time location tracking in indoor and outdoor
environments [9].
Since November 1st, 2014, vehicles and motorhomes have
to be equipped with a Tire Pressure Monitoring System
(TPMS) within Europe. These can be subdivided into direct
and indirect TPMS. Direct TPMS means that speciﬁc physical
sensors measure the air pressure of the tires. These sensors
communicate wirelessly with the vehicle and transmit an
identiﬁer of 28 to 32 bit length. There are different wireless
technologies available for 125 kHz, 315 kHz, and 433 MHz.
A detection range of up to 40 m for direct TPMS is mentioned
in [10].
Apart from the identiﬁcation of vehicles based on static
identiﬁers used in communication protocols different feature
based identiﬁcation methods are proposed. One approach is the
identiﬁcation of vehicles based on noise features (individual
noise spectrum) [11].
Further identiﬁcation techniques allow wireless devices
to be identiﬁed by unique characteristics of their analog
(radio) circuitry; this type of identiﬁcation is also referred to
as physical-layer device identiﬁcation. It is possible due to
hardware imperfections in the analog circuitry of transmitters
introduced during the manufacturing process. A good overview
concerning the physical ﬁngerprinting of different wireless
communication technologies is given in [12]. The discussion
of device tracking based on static identiﬁer of wireless com-
munication interfaces started 15 years ago [13].
In [14], the privacy principles of Bluetooth low energy
(BLE) are described and analyzed. It is shown that the privacy
mechanisms in BLE are only applicable in connection mode
but not during advertising. Moreover, privacy enhancements
for advertising are proposed. BLE is widely applied for the
connection of ﬁtness trackers to smart phones. Though privacy
is an important issue [15] shows that most of the analyzed
devices do not implement the privacy mechanisms of the
standard or, if they do, implement them in a wrong manner.
Mathy Vanhoef [2] et al. highlight the general difﬁculty
of implementing anti-tracking solution for wireless devices. In
particular, they analyzed proprietary Wi-Fi MAC randomiza-
tion algorithms implemented in iOS (starting from iOS 8),
Android (starting from Android 6.0), Linux (starting from
Kernel 3.18) and Windows 10. They analyzed that probe
requests included in their frame body under the form of
Information Elements (IEs), also called tagged parameters, or
tags (e.g., ordered lists of tag numbers, extended capabilities,
etc.) can be misused for tracking. Besides that sequential
frame numbers or predictable scrambling seeds can be used
for device identiﬁcation and device tracking [2].
III.
ITS VEHICLE IDENTIFIER
In this paper, we categorize the available identiﬁers of
vehicles into two classes. Primary vehicle identiﬁers represent
those identiﬁers which will be typically considered today, e.g.,
the Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN). Secondary Vehicle
Identiﬁers come up with new information technology used in
modern vehicles.
A. Primary Vehicle Identiﬁer
To date, every vehicle is identiﬁable based on its unique
VIN. In some areas, the VIN is integrated as human readable
information in the windscreen of vehicles.
Besides the VIN, vehicles are marked with a license plate,
which is already used for identiﬁcation.
With the deployment of V2V technology vehicles will be
equipped with a long term ECC key pair and an appropriate
certiﬁcate [16] [17]. This certiﬁcate will become an additional
primary vehicle identiﬁer in future.
B. Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
Modern vehicles are equipped with multi-media compo-
nents (head-unit), which are able to establish communications
with electronic devices of drivers or passengers. Typically,
wireless communication technologies, e.g., Bluetooth, are used
for that purpose.
A Bluetooth multi-media device emits a static 48 bit
Media Access Control address, named MAC ID. The MAC
ID is composed of two parts: the ﬁrst half is assigned to the
manufacturer of the device, and the second half is assigned to
the speciﬁc device. In addition, each Bluetooth device emits
a “User-friendly-name” which is typically alterable. Bluetooth
devices operate in the ISM band (2.4 to 2.485 GHz).
Moreover, vehicle head-units allow any Wi-Fi ready laptop,
tablet or mobile phone to access the internet within the vehicle
while travelling if the head-unit has mobile communication
capabilities. But head-units conﬁgured as access points need
a unique Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID) or network name to
connect devices. In addition, each head-unit needs a unique
MAC address.
If vehicles are equipped with mobile communication ca-
pabilities an International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI)
is required. This is a unique ID to identify a mobile device
within the network. In addition, a SIM card with a dedicated
mobile phone number is needed for mobile communication.
In [12], physical ﬁngerprinting of wireless transmitters
is investigated. Here, a complete feature set for physical
ﬁngerprinting of a transmitter is a secondary vehicle identiﬁer.
Vehicle identiﬁers mentioned so far are sufﬁcient for iden-
tiﬁcation all the time. Furthermore, vehicle identiﬁers with a
limited validity period, e.g., pseudonymous certiﬁcates (termed
authorization tickets by ETSI) exist. Pseudonymous certiﬁcates
come up with the V2V technology.
Initially, Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer have no formal char-
acter in contrast to a license plate or VIN. But it is technically
very easy to capture Bluetooth and Wi-Fi identiﬁers of a
vehicle as shown in Section VI. So, attackers can misuse them
for their purposes.
IV.
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
In this section, wireless technologies, which are applied
in vehicles are described. In addition an analysis concerning
identiﬁcation capabilities based on wireless communication
technologies is given. We only address local wireless com-
munication technologies, which are quite easy to detect and
omit mobile communications according the Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM) or the Long Term Evolution
(LTE).

154
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Bluetooth
Bluetooth is speciﬁed by the Bluetooth special interest
group. The information mentioned here is based on the Blue-
tooth Speciﬁcation version 5.0 [18].
The concept behind Bluetooth is to provide a universal
short-range wireless communication capability using the 2.4
GHz Industrial Scientiﬁc Medicine (ISM) bands, available
globally for unlicensed low-power uses.
There are two forms of Bluetooth wireless technology sys-
tems: Bluetooth Basic Rate (BR) and Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE). During our measurements we detected only Bluetooth
(BR) compliant devices in the head-sets of the vehicles inves-
tigated.
Both systems include device discovery, connection estab-
lishment and connection mechanisms. The Basic Rate system
includes optional Enhanced Data Rate (EDR), Alternate Media
Access Control (MAC) and Physical (PHY) layer extensions.
The Basic Rate system offers synchronous and asynchronous
connections with data rates of 721.2 kb/s for Basic Rate, 2.1
Mb/s for Enhanced Data Rate and high speed operation up
to 54 Mb/s with the 802.11 AMP. The BLE system includes
features designed to enable products that require lower power
consumption, lower complexity and lower cost than BR/EDR.
The BLE system is also designed for use cases and applications
with lower data rates and has lower duty cycles.
1) Bluetooth (BR) Technology: Bluetooth provides support
for three application areas using short-range wireless connec-
tivity:
•
Data and voice access points: Bluetooth facilitates
real-time voice and data transmissions by providing
effortless wireless connection of portable and station-
ary communications devices
•
Cable replacement: Bluetooth eliminates the need for
numerous, often proprietary cable attachments for
connection of practically any kind of communication
devices. The range of each radio depends on the output
power (up to 100 m)
•
Ad hoc networking: A device equipped with a Blue-
tooth radio can establish an instant connection to
another Bluetooth radio as soon as it comes into range
In vehicles, Bluetooth is used for connecting a smart phone
to the:
•
Hands-free phone system
•
Vehicular head-unit to use the loudspeaker of the head-
unit to output music from the smart phone
The Bluetooth architecture is divided into different layers.
It starts with the Radio Frequency (RF) Layer, also termed
physical layer (PHY). To be resilient to disturbances a fre-
quency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) is used. Three classes
of transceivers are available with different output power. Power
class 1: 100 mW, power class 2: 2,5 mW and power class 3:
1 mW.
Bluetooth (BR) uses 79 frequency channels, spaced 1 MHz
apart. Channel n uses (where n is in the range 0 - 78) a carrier
frequency of 2402+n MHz. Each frequency channel is divided
into 1600 time slots per second; each slot is 625 µs long. Each
data packet may use between 1 and 5 slots and is transmitted
on a different frequency channel, following a pseudo-random
LAP
NAP
UAP
Figure 1. Structure of a Bluetooth Device Address
hopping sequence determined by the device address of the
master device.
At ﬁrst, Bluetooth devices have to establish a connection,
termed pairing, to exchange data. This procedure is initiated
by the host device based on the inquiry process. During this
process Bluetooth devices respond with inquiry reply messages
including BD_ADDR and clock rate (CLK), etc. During the
pairing process the jump sequence for sharing the channels
is calculated by the master device and synchronized with the
slave devices.
There exists a range of Bluetooth Speciﬁcation versions
from Bluetooth 1.0a (published 1999) to Bluetooth 5.0 (pub-
lished 2016).
2) Identiﬁcation Capabilities: A Bluetooth multi-media
device emits a static 48 bit MAC identiﬁer (BD_ADDR). The
MAC ID is composed of three parts: Lower Address Part
(LAP), Upper Address Part (UAP), and Nonsigniﬁcant Address
Part (NAP). NAP (16 bit) and UAP (8 bit) are assigned to the
manufacturer of the device, and LAP (24 bit) is assigned to
the speciﬁc device.
In addition, each Bluetooth device emits a “User-friendly-
name” which is typically alterable. BD_ADDR and the “User-
friendly-name” are the primary identiﬁers. In addition, the
data set of a Bluetooth device: CLK, Bluetooth device proﬁle,
and the Host Controller Interface (HCI) can be used for
identiﬁcation purposes (Table I), too.
3) Bluetooth Low Energy: BLE is a low-power wireless
technology for short-range control and monitoring applica-
tions. It operates in the 2.4 GHz ISM band as well. It uses 40
radio channels. 3 channels are primarily used for advertising.
For BLE only one packet format is speciﬁed in the link layer.
It consists of:
Preamble | Access Code | PDU | CRC.
The access code includes the 48 bit device address.
There are only two PDU formats in BLE, one for adver-
tising packets and one for data packets.
The standard distinguishes between public and random
device addresses. A public and a random device address are
both 48 bits in length. To avoid tracking of a device, random
device addresses should be used. But random device addresses
can only be applied for data packets in a connection mode not
for advertising packets.
The random device address may belong to either of the
following two sub-types:
•
Static address
•
Private address
The term “Static address” means that the device initializes
its static address to a new value after each power cycle. Private
addresses are changed during operation at a ﬁxed frequency.
As long as the Bluetooth device is not powered down and
up, the static address has not changed and sniffed bluetooth
advertising packets of one Bluetooth device can be linked. For
privacy reasons private random addresses should thus be used.

155
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
hash(IRK, prand)
1 0
prand
Figure 2. Structure of a resolvable private Bluetooth device address
A private address may belong to either of the following
two sub-types:
•
Non-resolvable private address
•
Resolvable private address
Resolvable private addresses have the positive side effect
that already connected devices can be identiﬁed later on though
the device address has changed in the meantime. Therefore,
a speciﬁc device, namely, Identity Resolving Key IRK is
needed, which is transmitted from the Bluetooth device to
the Bluetooth component in the vehicle after a ﬁrst paring
procedure. The IRK is linked to an identity at the Bluetooth
host. Figure 2 depicts the structure of a 48 bit resolvable private
Bluetooth address. It consists of three different parts:
•
bit mask ’10’ indicating a random resolvable private
address
•
22 bit random value prand and
•
24 bit hash value hash(IRK, prand)
If a Bluetooth host receives a data packet with re-
solvable private address it calculates for all known IRKi
hash′(IRKi, prand) and compares this value with the current
value of hash(IRK, prand).
hash′(IRKi, prand)
?= hash(IRK, prand)
(1)
If this equation holds for one IKS the component is
identiﬁed and pairing can again be established.
B. Wireless Local Area Network (Wi-Fi)
Primary, Wi-Fi is based on the communication standards
which was made for cable based Local Area Networks (LAN),
IEEE 802.11x.
1) Technology: Brieﬂy spoken, Wi-Fi devices support two
different modes:
•
Ad hoc mode, termed independent BSS (IBSS): Wi-
Fi devices communicate peer-to-peer. During the com-
munication data pakets are sent to all devices of the
network but discarded by the devices if the destination
address does not ﬁt
•
Access point mode, termed Basic Service Set (BSS):
All Wi-Fi devices are connected with the access point
(hot spot)
Head-units of modern vehicles provide Wi-Fi hot spots.
So any Wi-Fi ready laptop, tablet or mobile phone is able to
access the internet within the vehicle while travelling if the
head-unit has mobile communication facilities (GSM, LTE).
Different Wi-Fi Standards exist: IEEE 802.11b / g / a / n /
ac. They differ in the frequency band used (2,4 GHz and/or 5
GHz), and communication speed (1 Mbit/s ...6,96 Gbit/s). The
frequency band is split into channels (2,4 GHz: 13 channels
with a bandwidth of 20 or 40 MHz, hence 5 channels are
needed to establish a network). In the 5 GHz Wi-Fi frequency
band channels have a bandwidth of 20, 40, 80 or 160 MHz.
TABLE I. TECHNOLOGY SPECIFIC IDENTIFICATION FEATURES
Technology
First Level Features
Second Level Features
Bluetooth
MAC ID (BD_ADDR)
CLK, Bluetooth device proﬁl
“friendly name”
Host Controller Interface
IEEE 802.11 X (Wi-Fi)
MAC ID (BSSID)
Information in Beacon Frames
“SSID”
One type of the management frames in IEEE 802.11 based
Wi-Fis is a beacon frame. Beacon frames are transmitted
periodically to announce the presence of a wireless LAN
and contain information about the network. Beacon frames
are transmitted by the access point in an infrastructure Basic
Service Set (BSS). In IBSS networks beacon generation is
distributed among the stations.
2) Identiﬁcation Capabilities: Primary identiﬁers are:
•
Basic Service Set ID (BSSID) or MAC address of the
Wi-Fi device and
•
SSID (primary name associated with an 802.11 wire-
less local area network with a maximum length of 32
characters)
In addition, information in Wi-Fi beacon frames could be
used for identiﬁcation, too (Table I).
3) Random Device Address: A common speciﬁcation on
Wi-Fi MAC address randomization does not yet exist. How-
ever, proprietary Wi-Fi MAC randomization algorithms are im-
plemented in iOS (starting from iOS 8), Android (starting from
Android 6.0), Linux (starting from Kernel 3.18) and Windows
10. Unfortunately, these mechanisms are only available if the
Wi-Fi card and driver support it.
V.
MEASUREMENTS
In this section, the test cases performed and the test
equipment used are described.
A. Aim of the Measurements
By means of the measurements, we investigate vehicular
Bluetooth as well as Wi-Fi communication capabilities espe-
cially for identiﬁcation purposes outside the vehicle. There-
fore, the following measurements, divided into test cases, are
performed:
•
Test case 1: Radiation characteristics
•
Test case 2: Signal strength
•
Test case 3: Activity of the transmitter
•
Test case 4: Detection of Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
in stand still mode of the vehicle
•
Test case 5: Detection of Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
in driving mode of the vehicle
B. Test Vehicles
The following vehicles were investigated during the mea-
surements:
•
Skoda Octavia III (two different models equipped
with Bluetooth chips from Qisda Corporation or Alps
Electronics Co. LTD are investigated): Only used for
Bluetooth measurements
•
VW Passat B8: Only used for Bluetooth measurements

156
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
Opel Astra 2016 incl. OnStar: Only used for Wi-Fi
measurements
•
Opel Insignia Innovation 2016 incl. OnStar: Only used
for Wi-Fi measurements
C. Test Equipment
1) Bluetooth Test Equipment for the Tests in Section VI-A:
•
Notebook
◦
ThinkPad X201 with Kali Linux (64 Bit,
version 2016.2), BTScanner version 2.0, and
Kismet version 2016-07-R1
◦
Ubertooth One (ﬁrmware git-579f25) with
Ubertooth-Specan-Ui, and Ubertooth-Rx ver-
sion 201-10-R1 [19]
◦
Standard antenna, LogPer antenna, and di-
rectional antenna WIFI-LINK WAVEGUIDE
Antenna PN: WCA-2450-12, frequency range
2,4 - 2,5 GHz, 12 dBi
•
Smart phone
◦
Samsung Galaxy S6, Android 6.0.1, Bluetooth-
Scanner app version 1.1.3 (from Google Play-
store)
2) Bluetooth Test Equipment for the Tests in Section VI-B:
•
Notebook
◦
Lenovo ThinkPad T400 with Kali Linux (64
Bit, version 2018.2), BTScanner version 2.1-6
◦
Ubertooth One (ﬁrmware-version: 2018-06-
R1, API 1.03) with Ubertooth-Specan-Ui, and
Ubertooth-Rx [19] and the following antennas
are used: standard antenna, Ettus VERT2450
antenna, and WIFI-LINK WAVEGUIDE an-
tenna PN: WCA-2450-12, 2,4-2,5 GHz, 12 dBi
◦
USB Bluetooth stick: AVM BlueFritz! USB
v2.0
•
Smart phone
◦
Sony Smartphone Xperia Z5 Compact
3) Wi-Fi Test Equipment:
•
Notebook
◦
Notebook Lenovo ThinkPad T400, Ubuntu
16.04 LTS and LinSSID version 2.7
◦
USB-Wi-Fi-device:
TP-Link
TL-WN722N
with standard antenna and directional antenna
WIFI-LINK
WAVEGUIDE
Antenna
PN:
WCA-2450-12, 2,4-2,5 GHz, 12 dBi
•
Smart Phone
◦
Huawei P8 lite 2017, Wiﬁ-Analyzer App (from
Google Playstore)
◦
Samsung S7, Wiﬁ-Analyzer App (from Google
Playstore)
VI.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS
In this section the test results of the performed tests are
described. In Section VI-A an Octavia III head-unit with a
Bluetooth chip of the Qisda Corporation is examined, whereas
in Section VI-B an Octavia III head-unit with a Bluetooth chip
of Alps Electronic Co. LTD is considered.
Figure 3. Radiation characteristic of the Octavia III Bluetooth device
TABLE II. SIGNAL STRENGTH OF THE OCTAVIA BLUETOOTH
DEVICE
Distance
Standard Antenna
LogPer Antenna
Directional Antenna
3 m
-50 dBm
-56 dBm
-47 dBm
6 m
53 dBm
-60 dBm
-51 dBm
9 m
-63 dBm
-63 dBm
-54 dBm
12 m
-67 dBm
-65 dBm
-56 dBm
15 m
-71 dBm
-68 dBm
-60 dBm
18 m
-75 dBm
-69 dBm
-63 dBm
21 m
-78 dBm
-72 dBm
-65 dBm
30 m
-75 dBm
-68 dBm
A. Bluetooth Measurements for the Octavia III equipped with
a Bluetooth chip of the Qisda Corporation (and partly Passat)
1) Test Case 1: As test equipment, a Lenovo ThinkPad
X201, with Ubertooth One, Ubertooth-Specan-Ui and standard
antenna is used. Measurements are performed at one position
inside and 8 positions outside the vehicle. The positions and
results are plotted in Figure 3. As we expected, the highest
signal strength of -30 dBm has been detected inside the
vehicle. But outside the vehicle, a strong signal strengh has
also been measured.
2) Test Case 2: As test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad
X201, with Ubertooth One, Ubertooth-Specan-Ui and different
antennas is used: Standard antenna, LogPer antenna and direc-
tional antenna WIFI-LINK WAVEGUIDE. The test results are
presented in Table II. With all antennas the Bluetooth signal
can always be detected, within a distance of 21 m.
3) Test Case 3: The Bluetooth module of the head-unit
starts with scanning of Bluetooth devices which were already
paired in the past and are registered in the pairing list of the
head-unit after starting the ignition. Scanning is switched off
after the deactivation of the ignition and removal of the key.
4) Test Case 4: First, a Samsung Galaxy S6 with the
Bluetooth scanner app is utilised as test equipment. Figure 4
presents the test setting. The following information about the
Bluetooth device of the head-unit can be captured with the test
equipment mentioned:

157
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Test arrangement for the detection of Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
in stand still mode
Listing 1. BD_ADDR and "friendly name" of the head-unit of a Skoda
Octavia
Skoda_TF
00:1 7:CA: D9:6B:77 (−65 dBm)
AUDIO_VIDEO_HANDSFREE
Scan
Cycle 199
( 2 0 . 1 1 . 1 6
15:01)
SSID “Skoda_TF”, BSSID “00:17:CA:D9:6B:77”, the ser-
vice “AUDIO_VIDEO_HANDSFREE” and the “Scan Cycle
199 (20.11.16 15:01)” with date were captured. This infor-
mation is readable up to a distance of 24 m (signal strength
at this distance: -83 dBm) (it has to be mentioned that the
owner of the Skoda Octavia III has already altered its SSID.
“Skoda_TF” is not the factory setting).
The following information is captured from the Bluetooth
device of the head-unit of the Passat up to a distance of 12 m
(signal strength at this distance: -84 dBm):
Listing 2. BD_ADDR and "friendly name" of the head-unit of a VW Passat
VW BT 2058
A8 : 5 4 : B2 : FE :30:35 (−79 dBm)
AUDIO_VIDEO_HIFI_AUDIO
Scan
Cycle 25
( 0 2 . 1 1 . 1 6
13:15)
From a privacy perspective it is remarkable, that the name
of the car manufacturer is part of the SSID and that the number
part “2058” of the SSID is chosen from the VIN of the Passat.
Next,
Lenovo
ThinkPad
X201,
Ubertooth
One
with
Ubertooth-Rx are used as test equipment to perform the same
test case. The subsequent information can be captured if the
test equipment is switched on and a Samsung Galaxy S6 is
connected to the Octavia III head-unit:
Listing 3. Galaxy S6 connected to the Octavia head-unit
systime =1479652524 ch=39 LAP=d96b77
e r r =0
clkn =100728
c l k _ o f f s e t =1540 s=−35 n=−55
. . .
systime =1479652571 ch=39 LAP=68 dae3
e r r =0
clkn =250437
c l k _ o f f s e t =5596 s=−21 n=−55
. . .
systime =1479652571 ch=39 LAP=68 dae3
e r r =0
clkn =251217
c l k _ o f f s e t =5613 s=−16 n=−55
. . .
This information can be captured up to 18 m with the
standard antenna and up to 42 with the directional antenna.
5) Test Case 5: Using the test equipment Samsung Galaxy
S6 with the Bluetooth scanner app, the subsequent information
can be captured up to a speed of 30 km/h. Figure 5 shows the
test case.
Test equipment
  Smartphone /
     Notebook
Vehicle
Figure 5. Test arrangement for the detection of secondary vehicle identiﬁer
in driving mode
Figure 6. Screenshot of the BTScanner during the measurement
Listing 4. SSID and BSSID in driving mode
Skoda_TF
00:17:CA: D9:6B:77 (−65 dBm)
AUDIO_VIDEO_HANDSFREE
Scan
Cycle 199
( 2 0 . 1 1 . 1 6
15:01)
B. Bluetooth Measurements for the Octavia III equipped with
a Bluetooth chip of Alps Electronic Co. LTD
1) Test Case 4: As test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad
T400 with Kali Linux Version 2018.2, an USB Bluetooth
stick AVM BlueFritz! USB 2.0 and a BTScanner version 2.1-
6 were used to sniff information of the Bluetooth head-unit
of the Octavia in stand still mode and with enabled ignition.
Figure 6 presents the captured information. This information
(BD_ADDR, “friendly name”) can be captured up to a distance
of 67 m between vehicle and measurement device. The test
arrangement is shown in Figure 4.
Next, the sniff distance of an existing Bluetooth communi-
cation between a paired smartphone (Sony Smartphone Xperia
Z7 Compact) and the head-unit was investigated. As test equip-
ment Lenovo ThinkPad T400 with Kali Linux Version 2018.2
and Ubertooth One with Ubertooth-Rx was applied. Table
III presents the maximum detection distance with different
antennas for a successful receiving of the BD_ADDR of the
head-unit.
2) Test Case 5: Figure 5 depicts the test arrangement. As
test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad T400 with Kali Linux
Version 2018.2, an USB Bluetooth stick AVM BlueFritz! USB
2.0 and BTScanner version 2.1-6 were used to detect the
BD_ADDR of the head-unit of the Octavia III in driving mode.

158
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III. DETECTION DISTANCE OF A PAIRED COMMUNICATION
Antenna
Detection Distance
Standard antenna
73 m
VERT2450
89 m
LogPer Antenna
112 m
Figure 7. Radiation characteristic of the Opel Insignia Wi-Fi device
The test equipment was located at a distance of 10 m from the
street to monitor the driving Octavia III. Up to a speed of 50
km/h we could identify the BD_ADDR of the head-unit. We
stopped the investigation at this point. 50 km/h is the speed-
limit inside cities in Europe.
C. Wi-Fi Measurements for the Opel Insignia (partly Opel
Astra)
1) Test Case 1: As test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad
T400, TP-Link TL-WN722N with standard antenna, and
LinSSID is used. The signal strength of the Wi-Fi access point
(Wi-Fi-AP) has been measured at 8 ﬁxed points outside and at
1 point inside the vehicle. The positions are equal to the Blue-
tooth test case. But in contrast to the Bluetooth measurement,
the distance between the vehicle and the measurement tool is 5
m. The results for the Opel Insignia are plotted in Figure 7. As
we expected, the highest signal strength of -22 dBm has been
detected inside the vehicle. But outside the vehicle, a strong
signal strengh has also been measured.
2) Test Case 2: As test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad
T400, TP-Link TL-WN722N with standard antenna, and
LinSSID on the one hand and Samsung S7, and Wiﬁ-Analyzer
on the other hand are used. Using the TP-Link TL-WN722 and
the Samsung S7 the signal strength is measured in increasing
distance from the vehicle, in the direction of the right front
door. The results are plotted in Figure 8. Only small differences
in signal strength can be detected between an active connection
and a non connection of a client to the Wi-Fi-AP of the Opel
Insignia. The measurement sensitivity of the smart phone is
about 10 dBm lower for distances greater 10 m in contrast to
the measurements with the TP-Link. With both measurement
devices the signal of the Wi-Fi-AP can always be detected,
within a distance of 60 m.
3) Test Case 3: As test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad
T400, TP-Link TL-WN722N with standard antenna, and
LinSSID is used.
General Motors and Opel provide vehicle online connectiv-
ity based on the OnStar service. Only if the OnStar service is
Figure 8. Radiation characteristic of the Opel Insignia Wi-Fi device
TABLE IV. SIGNAL STRENGTH OF THE ASTRA WI-FI DEVICE IN
STAND STILL MODE
Distance
Signal strength
Signal strength
Huawei P8 lite 2017
TP-Link TL-WN722N
216 m
-82 dBm
-81 dBm
424 m
no signal
-91 dBm
enabled the Wi-Fi-AP of the Opel Insignia can be switched on.
The Wi-Fi transmitter is activated when the ignition is started
and deactivated when the key is removed from the ignition
lock. Enabling or disabling the Wi-Fi-AP is not possible for the
driver, using only the conﬁguration menu implemented in the
vehicle (disabling is possible with an appropriate smartphone
app).
4) Test Case 4: As test equipment a Lenovo ThinkPad
T400, TP-Link TL-WN722N with standard antenna, and
LinSSID on the one hand and Samsung S7, and Wiﬁ-Analyzer
on the other hand are used. Figure 4 presents the test setting.
In stand still mode the following Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
and additional information has been measured for the Wi-Fi
device of the Opel Insignia, for all distances up to 60m with
both test equipments.
Listing 5. SSID and BSSID of an Opel Insignia head-unit
SSID :
WiFi Hotspot
1760
BSSID : C4 : 4 9 :BB: 2 1 : 9 1 :DE
Frequency :
2437 MHz;
2448−2426 = 22 MHz
Channel :
6
Misc . : WPA2−PSK−CCMP+TKIP , ESS ,
MITSUMI ELECTRIC Co . ,LTD
Next, we determine the maximum detection distance for
the Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁers. As test equipment a HP
notebook, TP-Link TL-WN722N with standard antenna, and
a LinSSID on the one hand and a Huawei P8 lite 2017 with
a Wiﬁ-Analyzer on the other hand are used. The results are
shown in Table IV for the Wi-Fi device of the Opel Astra. If
a signal has been detected, then the SSID and the BSSID can
always be extracted. The smart phone detected a signal up to
216 m, the USB-Wi-Fi-device up to 424 m.
5) Test Case 5: As test equipment a HP notebook, TP-
Link TL-WN722N with standard antenna, and a LinSSID on
the one hand and a Huawei P8 lite 2017 with Wiﬁ-Analyzer

159
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE V. SIGNAL STRENGTH OF THE ASTRA WI-FI DEVICE IN
DRIVING MODE
Speed
Maximum signal strength
Maximum signal strength
Huawei P8 lite 2017
TP-Link TL-WN722N
50 km/h
-60 dBm
-55 dBm
100 km/h
-71 dBm
-50 dBm
Vehicle
Vehicle
Figure 9. Attack scenario: Tracking of vehicles
app on the other hand are used. The notebook with USB - Wi-
Fi device and the smart phones operate 1 m above the ﬂoor
beside the roadway. Figure 5 shows the general test case. The
results for the Wi-Fi device of the Opel Astra are presented
in Table V. The maximum signal strength has been detected
by the USB-Wi-Fi-device. The measured signal strengths with
the TP-Link for 50 and 100 km/h are surprising. We assume
that this issue is caused by the moving vehicle and the sample
rate of the measurement devices of about 1 Hz (vehicle moves
13,9 m/s at 50 km/h and 27,8 m/s at 100 km/h).
VII.
TRACKING OF VEHICLES
We have shown that the identiﬁcation and tracking of
vehicles based on Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer can be per-
formed with very cheap technical measurement equipment.
This capability can be misused for tracking of vehicles. A
technical measurement infrastructure to perform such kind
of tracking is shown in Figure 9. Here, we consider only
adversaries who passively sniff the communication.
To monitor vehicle motions in a speciﬁc geographic region
a dense net of road side stations operating as sniffer would be
needed. Due to current privacy regulations such an infrastruc-
ture for tracking of individual vehicles can be precluded in
Western Europe [20]. It seems more realistic to be identiﬁed
by scattered receivers of crucial neighbours monitoring vehicle
motions in a street.
VIII.
COUNTERMEASURES
A. Technology Independent Measures
In principle, wireless communication technology enables
the identiﬁcation and tracking of vehicles. One basic require-
ment to avoid privacy violations based on wireless interfaces
or communication technologies is to avoid static identiﬁers in
the whole communication stack. For example, communication
technology for the vehicle-2-vehicle communication technol-
ogy applies this rule [16].
Identiﬁcation and tracking are completely excluded if the
wireless communication components are powered down. But in
vehicles Bluetooth (BR) is used for connecting a smart phone
to the:
•
Hands-free phone system
•
Vehicular head-unit to use the loudspeaker of the head-
unit to output the music from the smart phone
If drivers use this Bluetooth capabilities they will not quit the
usage due to possible privacy risk.
The tracking problem can be reduced, however, if the
antennas are located inside the vehicle and the ﬁeld strength
of the Bluetooth and Wi-Fi transmitters are limited. Especially
during connection mode the ﬁeld strength can be reduced to a
necessary range to retain the data communication.
B. Technology Dependent Measures
1) Bluetooth: An alternative to Bluetooth (BR) to avoid
simple tracking is the usage of Bluetooth Low Energy. BLE has
speciﬁc privacy features, which are brieﬂy described in Section
IV-A3. In particular, private Bluetooth addresses should be
used. This feature avoids the tracking of Bluetooth devices
in connection mode. But the issue of tracking is still valid if
BLE components are in advertising mode.
Obviously, private addresses have to be used for the Blue-
tooth interface in the head-unit als well as for the connected
Bluetooth components.
2) Wi-Fi: A common standard for MAC ID randomization
for Wi-Fi components is still missing. There are proprietary
implementations for operating systems mentioned in Section
IV-B3. The mechanism implemented in Windows 10 [21], [2].
Random MAC IDs are possible with Windows 10 if hardware
and driver supports this issue. Interesting is that Windows
10 does not only use random device addresses during probe
requests. It also employs a random address when connecting
to a network. Further detailed investigations are needed to
suggest adequate solutions for Wi-Fi MAC ID randomization
for vehicles which are compliant with the Wi-Fi standard.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
As shown in Section VI, it is technically very easy to cap-
ture Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁers based on wireless interfaces
of vehicles, especially Bluetooth and Wi-Fi (even with low cost
equipment as shown in this paper). Although, these interfaces
are designed to connect the devices of passengers, vehicle
identiﬁers can be detected far away from the vehicle (424 m
for Wi-Fi with a TP-Link device) and high vehicle speed of up
to 100 km/h. This enables the misuse of vehicle identiﬁers for
the tracking of vehicles. At least, MAC ID randomization is
needed for Bluetooth and Wi-Fi interfaces in vehicular head-
units. BLE already supports random device addresses. For Wi-
Fi only proprietary solutions are available. Altogether further
investigations are needed to propose random MAC ID solutions
which can be broadly applied in vehicular devices.
In general, vehicle manufacturer avoid to produce country
speciﬁc vehicles. So we expect that our measurements hold for
all instances of the analyzed car models at least in Europe.
In the context of the upcoming V2V communication our
results are worrysome concerning the privacy of vehicles and
drivers. The V2V communication is a short range communi-
cation technology with a communication range of about 800
m in open space.
In the future, every vehicle will periodically broadcast
Cooperative Awareness Messages (CAM) with a packet gen-
eration rate of 1 up to 10 Hz. A CAM contains a lot of

160
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
data about the sending vehicle: current geographic position,
speed, driving direction, etc., at a speciﬁc time. One privacy
requirement is that a receiver can not link a CAM to a speciﬁc
vehicle. Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁers can be misused to link
captured CAM messages to a speciﬁc vehicle [22].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank our colleagues Christian
Berghoff, Tobias Franz and Thomas Strubbe for detailed
discussions. Also thanks to the anonymous reviewers for the
valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Ullmann, T. Franz, and G. Nolden, “Vehicle Identiﬁcation Based
on Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer - Analysis, and Measurements -,” in
Proceedings VEHICULAR 2017: The Sixth International Conference
on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications.
IARIA, 2017, pp. 32–37.
[2]
M. Vanhoef, C. Matte, M. Cunche, L. S. Cardoso, and F. Piessens,
“Why mac address randomization is not enough: An analysis of wi-ﬁ
network discovery mechanisms,” in Proceedings of the 11th ACM on
Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
ACM,
2016, pp. 413–424.
[3]
M. Ullmann, T. Strubbe, and C. Wieschebrink, “Technical Limitations,
and Privacy Shortcomings of the Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication,”
in Proceedings VEHICULAR 2016: The Fifth International Conference
on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 15–20.
[4]
H. Lee, D. Kim, D. Kim, and S. Y. Bang, “Real-time automatic
vehicle management system using vehicle tracking and car plate number
identiﬁcation,” in Multimedia and Expo, 2003. ICME’03. Proceedings.
2003 International Conference on, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2003, pp. II–353.
[5]
R. Bruno and F. Delmastro, “Design and Analysis of a Bluetooth-Based
Indoor Localization System,” 2003, pp. 711–725.
[6]
R. Zhou, “Wireless Indoor Tracking System (WITS),” Aktuelle
Trends in der Softwareforschung, Tagungsband zum IT Software-
Forschungstag. Dpunkt Verlag Heidelberg, Germany, 2006, pp. 163–
177.
[7]
C. Carpenter, M. Fowler, and T. Adler, “Generating Route-Speciﬁc
Origin-Destination Tables Using Bluetooth Technology,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no.
2308, 2012, pp. 96–102.
[8]
M. Mueller, D. Schulz, M. Mock, and D. Hecker, “Detecting mobility
patterns with stationary bluetooth sensors: A real-world case study,” in
Proceedings of the 18th AGILE International Conference on Geographic
Information Science, 2015.
[9]
M. Emery and M. K. Denko, “IEEE 802.11 WLAN Based Real-Time
Location Tracking in Indoor and Outdoor Environments,” in Electrical
and Computer Engineering, 2007. CCECE 2007. Canadian Conference
on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1062–1065.
[10]
R. M. Ishtiaq Roufa, H. Mustafaa, S. O. Travis Taylora, W. Xua,
M. Gruteserb, W. Trappeb, and I. Seskarb, “Security and privacy
vulnerabilities of in-car wireless networks: A tire pressure monitoring
system case study,” in 19th USENIX Security Symposium, Washington
DC, 2010, pp. 11–13.
[11]
S. Astapov and A. Riid, “A Multistage Procedure of Mobile Vehicle
Acoustic Identiﬁcation for Single-Sensor Embedded Device,” Interna-
tional Journal of Electronics and Telecommunications, vol. 59, no. 2,
2013, pp. 151–160.
[12]
B. Danev, D. Zanetti, and S. Capkun, “On Physical-Layer Identiﬁcation
of Wireless Devices,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 1,
2012, p. 6.
[13]
T. Jiang, H. J. Wang, and Y.-C. Hu, “Preserving location privacy in
wireless lans,” in Proceedings of the 5th international conference on
Mobile systems, applications and services.
ACM, 2007, pp. 246–257.
[14]
Wang, Ping, “Bluetooth Low Energy-privacy enhancement for ad-
vertisement,” Master’s thesis, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Departement of Telematics, 2014.
[15]
Andrew Hilts, Christopher Parsons, and Jeffrey Knockel, “Every Step
You Fake: A Comparative Analysis of Fitness Tracker Privacy and
Security,” 2016, https://openeffect.ca/reports/Every_Step_You_Fake.pdf
access date: July 30, 2018.
[16]
ETSI, “ETSI TR 102 893 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS);
Security; Threat, Vulnerability and Risk Analysis (TVRA); Technical
Report,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org/, Access Date: June 02, 2017.
[17]
——, “ETSI EN 302 665 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
- Communications Architecture,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org/, Access
Date: June 02, 2017.
[18]
“Bluetooth
Core
Speciﬁcation,
v
5.0,”
2011,
https://www.bluetooth.com/speciﬁcations/bluetooth-core-speciﬁcation,
access date: July 25, 2018.
[19]
Ubertooth
Developer,
“Ubertooth
Bluetooth
Sniffer,”
2017,
https://github.com/greatscottgadgets/ubertooth/, access date: March 24,
2017.
[20]
European Commission, “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of
natural
persons
with
regard
to
the
processing
of
personal
data
and
on
the
free
movement
of
such
data,
and
repealing
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation),” 2016,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/priorities/justice-and-fundamental-
rights/data-protection/2018-reform-eu-data-protection-rules_en
access
date: August 03, 2018.
[21]
C. Huitema, “Experience with mac address randomization in windows
10,” in 93th Internet Engineering Task Force Meeting (IETF), 2015.
[22]
M. Ullmann, and T. Strubbe, and C. Wieschebrink, “Misuse Capa-
bilities of the V2V Communication to Harm the Privacy of Vehicles
and Drivers,” in International Journal On Advances in Networks and
Services, vol 10 no 12.
IARIA, 2017.

