315
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Wireless Automation Network Stability Evaluation 
 
Radek Kuchta, Radovan Novotny, Jaroslav 
Kadlec, and Radimir Vrba 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication, 
Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
kuchtar | novotnyr |kadlecja | vrbar@feec.vutbr.cz 
 
Vladimir Sulc 
MICRORISC, s.r.o. 
Jicin, Czech Republic 
sulc@microrisc.com
 
Abstract - This paper describes stability testing of new wireless 
communication 
platform 
for 
automation, 
summarizing 
currently used wireless modules and technologies from 
different vendors and comparing their main advantages and 
disadvantages. Based on the wireless modules study, we have 
chosen one of the promising technologies for deeper analysis in 
real home environment typical for wireless automation 
applications. Two typical test-cases for wireless communication 
parameter evaluation are described within the study in order 
to determine the limits of stability and low error rate. Further, 
the statistical method used is described and testing results 
along 
with 
the 
main 
advantages 
of 
tested 
wireless 
communication platform are discussed. This new wireless 
communication 
platform 
was 
designed 
and 
developed 
especially for home automation and telemetry projects and test 
case 
results 
prove 
the 
suitability 
of 
this 
wireless 
communication technology for home and office buildings 
environment. 
Keywords - Home Automation; IQRF; Wireless communication; 
Stability testing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the advance of networking technologies and 
wireless communications, the popularity and the applications 
of Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) are increasing. Wireless 
connectivity has grown-up considerably in recent years and 
current trends show that the Wireless Sensor Networks will 
be an integral part of our lives, more than the present-day 
personal computers [1][2][3][4]. The driving forces for this 
development include the ease of access and flexibility in ad-
hoc situation or temporary network setups supported by 
wireless connectivity, avoiding restrictive wired connection 
that relies on copper and fiber optic cabling. 
Wireless sensor network consists of a quantity of 
spatially distributed wireless sensor nodes and actor nodes, 
which are densely deployed in wide areas. Wireless sensor 
networks use battery supplied sensing and I/O devices. A 
sensor node, also known as a sensor pod or a mote, is an 
autonomous subsystem in a wireless sensor network, which 
is capable to monitor physical or environmental condition or 
perform 
some 
data 
processing. The 
communication 
infrastructure intended to monitor and record conditions at 
diverse locations is an important subsystem of wireless 
sensor network. This subsystem sends that data to processors 
in the network. Each node in a sensor network is typically 
equipped with a radio transceiver. Sensor nodes gather 
information and send them to a central node (sink) or to 
actors for appropriate actions. Usage of Wireless Sensor 
Networks with low energy demands, low weight and 
intelligent networking features seems to be the most cost 
effective solution for many application areas. These devices 
incorporate wireless transceivers so that communication in 
short distances over a Radio Frequency (RF) channel is 
enabled. Wireless Sensor Networks can be used for many 
applications in various application fields such as automation 
of the buildings, machines, in the monitoring product quality 
or conditions at agriculture, medicine, and healthcare. Our 
goal related to this article was to find and validate 
technology for intelligent wireless network with low power 
consumption. 
Section I and Section II are summary of existing 
technologies. A general overview of available wireless 
solution targeted to the small home automation applications 
and their main parameters and limitations is described in 
Section II. Following section defines case studies and issues 
of testing of the wireless communication platforms. Statistic 
tool and evaluation method is described in the Section IV 
followed by the measured results in Sections V and VI. 
Conclusion of final measured values and their short 
assessment is in the last Section VII. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Various wireless communication solutions are available 
from different vendors in the market. These solutions support 
different network topologies. Many of them are based on 
802.15.4 [4] standard defining Physical Layer (PHY) and 
Media Access Layer (MAC) for Low Rate Wireless Personal 
Area Networks (LR-WPAN). In most cases they work on 
non-licensed wireless communication bands (Table 1).  
Probably, the most known standardized protocol that 
works on non-licensed bands is Zigbee [13]. It is a solution 
based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard prepared by the Zigbee 
Alliance [6]. This standard was developed by consortium of 
industrial companies especially for building automation 
[7][8]. There are also special applications for industrial 
control, e.g., [9] [11] on remote access to the system and 
using small, independent wireless devices, [10][14][15] on 
building automation and telemetry applications, or an alarm 
system suitable for pervasive healthcare in rural areas [12]. 
Among the proprietary solutions, a reference can be made to 
the technology of MiWi launched by Microchip Technology 
Inc. [16]. MiWi is based on the aforementioned standard but 
simpler than Zigbee from the implementation point of view. 

316
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This technology does not support direct cooperation with 
Zigbee devices. From other solutions available on the 
market, mention would be made, for example, of the solution 
promoted by Z-wave alliance [17][18]. 
These solutions have disadvantage in attempt on being a 
universal solution targeting every kind of applications. It 
brings heavier protocols, more difficult and more expensive 
implementations, lower reliability, and increased network 
complexity. 
 
 
Figure 1.  
Block diagram of wireless sensor module 
 
Wireless sensor module with RF measurement signal 
transmission is liable for collecting data from sensor when 
they could be recorded, configuration and switch on of other 
sensors and assuring other functions that are related to 
sensors. A sensor node is accomplished for gathering sensory 
information, 
performing 
some 
processing, 
and 
communicating with other linked nodes in the network. For 
example, the sensor module could be configured to allow a 
microcontroller to determine when a value of critical 
parameter has been reached or exceeded. Effectiveness of 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks 
(WSN) 
relies 
on 
the 
communication parameters of interconnected sensors’ nodes, 
which are typically transmitting power, baud-rate, error-rate 
and their detection range or sensitivity to received signal. 
These WSN technologies are determined especially for 
monitoring environmental and physical conditions, such as 
temperature, pressure, sound, vibration, humidity, and 
motion. WSNs applications are often used to perform many 
critical tasks and sensor networks applications have to meet 
strict rules and parameters to reliably and error-rate.  
A failure of a component or components of a network 
may result in malfunction in the area of sensing, data 
processing, and communication. From this point of view it is 
necessary to evaluate the availability and reliability of 
application 
services 
as two 
important 
dependability 
factors [4]. 
A. Mesh networking RF modules and improvement of 
reliability via redundancy 
RF modules are enabled for mesh networking and robust 
mesh networking topologies are preferred solution for 
developed applications. For example wireless sensor 
modules organized in a network in within the area of interest 
allow for monitoring of environmental conditions, events, or 
processes. A wireless mesh network is a communication 
network made up of nodes structured in a mesh topology. 
Multiple nodes cooperate to transport a message to its 
destination. Each of the nodes is able to cooperate with each 
other in transmitting packets through the network, especially 
in adverse conditions including the impact of powerful RF 
interferences. 
 
 
Figure 2.  
Important aspects of system architecture for wireless 
sensor networks 
 
The mesh network features adaptability, self-configuring, 
flexibility, scalability and high-rate data transmission. This 
technology delivers scalable and self-healing properties: 
nodes are working in coordination with each other to create a 
network. Each node in the mesh network is connected to at 
least one other node and if a device or its link in a mesh 
network fails, data are sent around it via other redundant 
interconnections between network nodes. Nodes are talking 
to each other in a way that gets a message to a desired point 
using the applicable path and when a node is not in use, it 
will sleep using very little energy. 
 
Table 1. Different RF modules of various manufacturers designed for 
operation in the license-free ISM bands 
Producer, RF module type 
Frequency range 
Microrisc, TR-52B 
868 MHz and 916 MHz 
Texas Instruments, CC2500 
2400- 
2483,5 MHz 
Aurel Wireless, XTR-434 
433,92 MHz 
Sonmicro, SM130 
13,56 MHz 
Panasonic, PAN4555 
2,4 GHz 
Micrel, MICRF600 
902-928 MHz 
LS Research, ProFLEX01 
2405 - 2480  MHz 
Hope RF, RFM12-315 
315, 433, 868, 915 MHz 
Friendcom,  FC-221/AP 
433, 868 ,915 MHz 
Shanghai Sunray Technology, 
SRWF-1028 
403, 433, 470, 868, 915 MHz 
Microchip Technology, 
MRF24J40MA 
2,405-2,48 GHz 
Aurel Wireless, RTX MID 
3V/5V 
433.92 MHz 
Digi International Inc., XBee 
RF 
2.4 GHz 
Dorji Applied Technologies, 
DRF7020D13 
433Mhz 
 
The 
mesh 
topology 
offers 
multiple 
redundant 
communications paths throughout the network. This 

317
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
redundancy, which is insensitive to the workload, enhances 
the overall reliability of the network: if one link for any 
reason fails, the network automatically routes messages 
through alternative paths. The degree of redundancy, which 
is a common strategy to enhance the reliability of systems, is 
essentially a function of node density. When one node can no 
longer work, the rest of the nodes can still communicate with 
each other, directly or through intermediate nodes. The 
redundancy improves the general reliability of the network 
simply by adding more node, links are more reliable without 
increasing transmitter power in individual nodes. 
 
Table 2. Different RF modules of various manufacturers designed for 
operation in the license-free ISM bands 
Producer, RF 
module type 
Special firmware 
protocol 
Modulation 
Microrisc, TR-52B 
IQMESH protocol 
FSK 
Texas 
Instruments, 
CC2500 
No 
2-FSK, GFSK, 
OOK, MSK 
Aurel Wireless, 
XTR-434 
No 
FSK 
Sonmicro, SM130 
No 
UART, I2C 
Panasonic, 
PAN4555 
SNAP® (Synapse 
Network Application 
Protocol) 
Timer/Pulse 
Width 
Modulation 
(Tpm) 
Micrel, MICRF600 
No  
FSK 
LS Research, 
ProFLEX01 
SIMPLE ProFLEX01 
OQPSK 
Hope RF, RFM12-
315 
No 
FSK 
Friendcom,  FC-
221/AP 
Yes 
3FSK 
Shanghai Sunray 
Technology, 
SRWF-1028 
No 
GFSK, FSK 
Microchip 
Technology, 
MRF24J40MA 
No 
FSK 
Aurel Wireless, 
RTX MID 3V/5V 
No 
ASK 
Digi International 
Inc., XBee RF 
No 
PWM0 
Dorji Applied 
Technologies, 
DRF7020D13 
No 
FSK 
 
B. Wireless networking protocols for security and 
efficiency 
Network protocol is critical element of the networking and 
ensuring communication functions across implemented 
wireless network. Network protocols facilitate device 
identification and data transfer, and it is the special set of 
instructions that manages the communications among 
devices on a network. Network protocols play significant 
role because they are used for transmitting network packets 
across the network and are able to provide the altered types 
of paths to do the access to the network.  
Network protocols also deal with the topologies of the 
network and can also take work in increasing the speed of 
data transmission. The aim is to use robust wireless 
communication protocols that are energy efficient and 
provide low latency. Principally a network protocol is 
defined as the set of regulations and rules of networking, 
which are needed for communicational process. The 
protocol software components are interfaced with a 
framework implemented on devices operating system. 
Different types of wireless networking protocols are utilized 
to achieve smoothly communication, and there are various 
competing schemes for routing packets across networks. As 
a base for unlicensed operation, standardized and 
proprietary protocols such as Bluetooth, ZigBee or WiFi are 
used and some RF modules manufacturers have their own 
protocols (see Table 2).   
C. Transceivers operating in the ISM band 
Governments regulate the use of various frequency bands 
and a license is necessary to operate in certain frequency 
bands. The industrial, scientific, and medical radio bands 
(ISM bands) are unlicensed frequency bands defined by the 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Radiocommunication 
Sector 
(ITU-R). 
The 
ITU 
Radiocommunication Sector shows an important role in the 
worldwide organization of the radio-frequency spectrum. 
This part of the radio spectrum can be used without a license 
in most countries. License-free utilization is generally 
allowed in these bands though there are some differences in 
national regulations. These portions of the radio spectrum 
were originally reserved internationally for the use of radio 
frequency energy for industrial, scientific and medical 
purposes rather than communications. Despite the original 
purpose of ISM bands, there has been a large extension in its 
use in short-range, low-power, wireless communications 
platforms. Today the industrial, scientific and medical 
unlicensed Sub-GHz radio frequency bands are used for low-
power wireless short-range wireless transfer of data at 
relatively low rates in point-to-point and more complex 
network topologies.  
The 
employment 
of 
ISM 
equipment 
produces 
electromagnetic 
interference 
that 
disturbs 
radio 
communications in case of using similar frequency – the 
communications device must accept any interference 
produced by ISM equipment. Sharing the radio spectrum 
between various wireless devices that can work in the same 
environment may lead to oppressive interference interrupting 
radio 
communications 
or 
substantial 
performance 
degradation that makes use of the same frequency. The 
communication device working in these bands should reckon 
with consequences of the interference produced by ISM 
equipment because users do not have any regulatory 
protection. These undesirable effects are composed in 
densely occupied city areas with large numbers of wireless 
computer accessories, wireless remote controllers or 

318
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
keyboards, cordless phones, Bluetooth devices, microwave 
ovens, and other devices which occupy the ISM band. 
Table 3. Power consumption for various RF modules from different 
manufacturers 
Producer, RF 
module type 
Receiving 
current RX 
Transmitting 
current TX 
Sleep 
mode 
Microrisc, TR-52B 
35 µA - 13 mA 
(14 – 24) mA 
2 µA 
Texas 
Instruments, 
CC2500 
8,1 µA - 19,6 mA 
(11,1-21,5) 
mA 
400 
nA 
Aurel Wireless, 
XTR-434 
(10-12) mA 
(24-32) mA 
100 
nA 
Sonmicro, SM130 
180mA 
180mA 
30 µA 
Panasonic, 
PAN4555 
37 mA 
30 mA 
1 µA 
Micrel, MICRF600 
12 mA 
10 / 23 mA 
N/A 
LS Research, 
ProFLEX01 
25 - 35 mA 
125 - 175 
mA 
8 µA 
Hope RF, RFM12-
315 
10 mA 
13 - 21 mA 
0,3 µA 
Friendcom,  FC-
221/AP 
<65mA 
<120mA 
<25µA 
Shanghai Sunray 
Technology, 
SRWF-1028 
32-38mA 
300-550mA 
N/A 
Microchip 
Technology, 
MRF24J40MA 
19 mA 
23 Ma 
2 μA 
Aurel Wireless, 
RTX MID 3V/5V 
4,5-6,5 mA 
13-20 mA 
8 mA 
Digi International 
Inc., XBee RF 
50 mA 
45 mA 
< 10 
µA 
Dorji Applied 
Technologies, 
DRF7020D13 
28 mA 
35 mA 
5 µA 
 
D. Power consumption for transmit, receive and sleep 
modes 
Building an energy efficient wireless network is one of 
the major efforts. Energy efficiency characteristics during 
routing are important in order to achieve energy savings. RF 
power consumption is very important parameter to be 
considered while designing battery powered systems. 
Typical module allows three different operating modes 
(Table 3). For the purpose of data receiving or transmitting 
there is a transmit mode and receive mode, and the sleep 
mode is designed in order to reduce the power consumption. 
Sleep mode can be activated by sending a sleep command, or 
by setting the module to return to sleep mode at every turn 
after data transmission. 
In sleep mode, all of the system’s interfaces shall support 
their necessary electrical levels and shall be able to wait for 
the next wake up period. When transmit mode is selected the 
module attempts to initialize an RF transmission and in 
combination with receive mode initiates an RF connection 
with other modules. 
 
III. 
CASE STUDY DESCRIPTION AND PROBLEM DEFINITION 
Small battery operated wireless sensor nodes are in our 
network used for automatic monitoring in the system. This 
application not only expects wireless signal coverage but 
also needs undisrupted service and reliable connectivity. The 
key aspect of wireless channel is the monitoring and 
evaluation of the channel quality. Most of the models of 
radio wave propagation involve questions related to the "free 
space" radio wave propagation [19].  
Radio waves emit from a point source of radio energy, 
traveling in all directions. Obstacles such as physical and 
structural components of a building, furniture and fixed or 
movable structures, or the ground can impact signal 
propagation paths. Especially ferrous materials, such as steel 
and 
iron, 
can 
drastically 
alter 
signal 
propagation 
characteristics, communication distances, link quality, and 
many other factors [20]. 
Reflection, diffraction and scattering cause radio signal 
distortions and give rise to signal fades, as well as additional 
signal propagation losses. Indoor use of wireless systems 
creates the necessity for evaluation of indoor radio (RF) 
propagation. Any obstacles in the pathway would be harmful 
to RF transmission; radio signals penetrate obstacles in ways 
that appear hardly predictable. The final composite signal is 
made up of a number of components from the various 
sources of scattered and diffracted signal components or 
reflections from different directions. 
To better understand this effect in our case study we at 
first evaluated the communication characteristics when 
sensor nodes were placed in various locations and distances. 
Absorption of RF energy resulted in loss of signal strength 
and reduced transmission distances. RF signals from wireless 
sensor nodes are air radiating from a transmitter and 
propagating through a medium in all directions. We need to 
understand the communication distance of individual nodes 
as well as to evaluate how and where to install the nodes.  
The WSN in this case study is based on the IQRF 
(Intelligent Radio Frequency) wireless communication 
platform for industrial and home automation. This is the 
technology that was specifically developed for wireless 
sensor mesh networks by Microrisc company [21]. Typical 
application scenario of home automation with IQRF 
communication technology for a smart house is shown in the 
Fig. 3. Wireless sensor network as part of network 
infrastructure is depicted in Figure 3, sensing and controlling 
is accomplished by means of connected sensors and 
actuators. Upon detecting a relevant stimulus (signal) by 
sensors in the sensor field, sensors send reports to a sink 
node. 
Networking collectively many of cheap wireless sensor 
nodes lets accurately evaluate a remote processes by 
utilization of the data from the individual nodes [25]. 

319
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  
Block diagram of the telemetry and control for smart 
house 
 
The main parts of the platform are covered by Czech and 
US patents [22][23][24]. For our experimental purposes, the 
standard IQRF components and development tools have been 
used. This wireless solution could be used for wireless 
connectivity necessary for telemetry, remote control, 
displaying of remotely acquired data, connection of more 
equipment and building automation. The implementation of 
IQRF 
transceiver 
modules 
works 
in 
non-licensed 
communication bands, license-free ISM bands 868 MHz in 
EU, 916 MHz in US, 433 MHz in EU, US and other 
countries. 
Basic features of the IQRF communication platform are 
especially extra low power consumption (1 µA in the sleep 
mode and 35 µA in the on-line mode), available networking 
functions, programmable RF power up to 3.5 mW, SW 
selectable in steps, up to 170 m communication range, 15 
kb/s (optionally 100 kb/s) RF bit rate. A transceiver module 
is the basic communication component needed for realization 
of wireless RF connectivity and can work as a node or a 
network coordinator. The IRQF modules could be integrated 
into any electronic device via SIM (Subscriber Identity 
Module) card connector. The low power consumption 
predetermines 
these 
modules 
for 
battery 
powered 
applications. The transceiver module is equipped with the 
IQRF operating system supporting functionality for the user 
application. There are RF functions for transmitting, 
receiving, network bonding, routing, main parameters 
configuration, EEPROM access functions, and IIC (Inter-
Integrated Circuit bus) and SPI (SPI - Serial Peripheral 
Interface) communication functions. Data processing, for 
example, encoding, encryption, checksums, adding headers, 
is evaluated automatically by IQRF operating system during 
the communication. The other functions of operating system 
are three buffers and some other auxiliary functions. IQRF 
operating system is buffer-oriented and allows sending up to 
32 bytes in one packet. 
 
 
Figure 4.  
Wireless sensor network as part of network infrastructure 
 
This application case study demonstrates simple data 
collection from wirelessly connected sensors. The network 
used for our experiment consists of one coordinator and a set 
of communication units. This is the basic star network 
topology where a sensor network is created around a core 
coordinator. The packet is wirelessly sent by operating 
system to the coordinator and the quality of the 
communication is statistically evaluated. 
 
IV. 
CASE STUDIES AND USED DATA EVALUATION METHOD 
For wireless communication parameters measurement 
were used two basic measurement criteria. The first one 
examined 
communications’ 
parameters 
and 
wireless 
technology limits under typical building environment with 
the set of rooms separated by the plasterboard walls and the 
second set of measures was done in a long hall without any 
physical obstacles to test free space signal propagation. 
A. Statistical description of the wireless network stability 
The binomial distribution B(n,p) with parameters n and p 
gives the discrete probability distribution of independent 
observations by the number of observations in the group that 
represent one of two outcomes. This distribution describes 
the behavior of a count variable X if the number of samples n 
is fixed, each sample represents "success" or "failure", each 
sample is independent, and the probability of "success" p is 
the same for each outcome.  
Internet 
Intranet 
Firewall 

320
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The binomial distribution gives the approach to 
dependability evaluation for wireless communication. We 
expect that in the stable wireless network each type of 
outcome has a fixed probability, and by evaluation of the 
proportion of individuals in a random sample we could 
evaluate the stability of the network. They are the sequences 
of independent transfers in the communication model with 
two possible outcomes ("success" or "failure"). 
B. Statistical description of the wireless network stability 
We extract samples of a certain size from the ongoing 
Wireless Sensor Network in our case study related to the 
stability testing of the channel quality. These are the 
sequences of independent transfers with two possible 
outcomes ("success" or "failure") in this experimental 
situation. The fraction or proportion of "failure" items can be 
expressed as a decimal or as a percent (when multiplication 
by 100 is used). 
From the statistical point of view, the number of failures 
is the random variable. Common-causes and special-causes 
are the two distinct origins of variation. One common-cause 
variation is the noise within the system and is inherent to the 
process. It could be removed by making modifications to the 
process. Special-causes are unusual, not previously observed 
variation, which is inherently unpredictable. There are only 
common-causes in the stable system and the statistical 
monitoring and control could be used for stability evaluation.  
Each run that is accomplished is then a realization of a 
Bernoulli random variable with parameter p. The binomial 
distribution B(n,p) with parameters n and p gives us the 
discrete probability distribution of these independent 
observations. If a random sample of n units of transfer 
realization is selected and if k is the number of units that are 
nonconforming, the k follows a binomial distribution with 
parameters n and p according to following equation 
 
 
 = 
	
1 − 
  ∀ 0 ≤  ≤  
(1) 
 
We expect that in the stable wireless network each type 
of outcome has a fixed probability and by determining of the 
proportion of individuals in a random sample we can 
evaluate the stability of the network in setting condition. The 
np-chart such as Shewhart control chart with underlying 
binomial distribution can be used for the stability evaluation 
[26]. The sample size is constant and the amount of the 
unsatisfactory is plotted in a graph along with regulation 
limits. The regulation limits are defined as  
 
 

 ± 3
1 − 
, 
(2) 
 
where n is the sample size and 
 is the estimation of the 
long-term mean. Rational subgroups for our testing are 
composed of the transfer of packets under essentially the 
same experimental conditions.  
V. 
STABILITY EVALUATION OF INDOOR RF 
PROPAGATION (THE CASE STUDY OF MORE RF PROPAGATION 
OBSTACLES) 
In this application case study, there were five 
transmission units in five various rooms each separated by 
the plasterboard partitions. There are two changed factors in 
this experiment: eight various levels of transmitting power 
and the time of the day. In each run, 80 data transfers were 
executed each of which consisted of 500 data frames. The 
selected scenarios cover most typical usages of this 
technology. 
The number of failures in the communication was then 
evaluated. Failure in our case study indicates that the data 
frame was not received or there was a bit error in the data 
transfer (mismatched CRC). The results from this first 
experimental case study are summarized in Figure 6. There 
are two factors influencing the results. The mark (a) in the 
graph highlights the independence of the number of failures 
on the RF power. For a distance that is higher than 5 meters, 
it is necessary to optimize the RF power value. The mark (b) 
in the graph highlights the special-causes variation. The 
influence of parasitic effects such as the interference from 
microwave, treadmill, vacuum cleaner etc. has not been 
tested. These parasitic sources of wireless signal interference 
have unpredictable and hardly tested behavior which rapidly 
varies in every application conditions. 
Experimental results were evaluated by using the np 
control charts (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 5). An np-chart is a plot of 
the number of failed items observed in a sample where n is 
the sample size and p is the probability of observing a 
defective item when the system is in control without 
affection of special cause variation. The statistical 
distribution of the number of failed items is assumed to be 
binomial. The observed number nonconforming (NP) is 
plotted against the control limits (UCL – Upper Control 
Limit, LCL – Lower Control Limit), which are statistically 
determined. These limits are usually calculated as three 
standard deviations from the mean, so there is around a 99.73 
percent probability that a data point representing actual value 
of tracked parameter will be within those limits in the case of 
stability. 
For the purpose of statistical evaluation of this wireless 
communication, experiments were used np control charts. 
The results of this analysis are summarized at the control 
charts (Fig. 6 and Fig. 8). If a data distribution is 
approximately normal the fluctuation of the points between 
the control limits (UCL, LCL) is due to the common cause 
variation. Then about 99.7 percent of the data values are 
within three standard deviations: µ ± 3σ, where µ is the 
arithmetic mean and σ is the standard deviation. Any points 
outside the control limits related to the six standard deviation 
empirical rule could be attributed to a special-cause 
variation. There are some cases where special-causes are 
affecting the results. Out of control points are marked as “1”. 
Overall interpretation of created np control charts for this 
part of experiment leads to these conclusions: 

321
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
The higher distance between the transmitter and receiver 
is in the relation to the special-cases variation existence 
and communication failure.  
• 
The higher RF power gives the higher probability for 
wireless communication without failures. 
 
 
Figure 5.  
Wireless stability evaluation (the case study of more RF 
propagation obstacles) 
 
 
Figure 6.  
 NP chart of  wireless stability evaluation for the 
measurement at 6 p.m. (the case study of more RF obstacles) 
 
VI. 
STABILITY EVALUATION OF INDOOR RF 
PROPAGATION (THE CASE OF THE FREE SPACE RF 
PROPAGATION)  
In this part of the experiment, there were five 
transmission units in five various places in a region, which is 
free of all objects that might absorb or reflect radio energy. 
Eight various levels of the RF power and the various daytime 
are changed in this experiment. In each run, there was 80 
data transfer execution, which each consists from 500 data 
frame. The number of failures in the communication system 
in this configuration was then evaluated. The results from 
this part of experimental case study are summarized in the 
Fig. 7. 
We could see that there are some communications 
problems related to the setting of the RF power. The RF 
power needs the optimization according the distance between 
the transmitter and receiver. These situations are in the Fig. 7 
depicted by mark (a). 
Communication with the fifth transmitter unit located in 
the distance 25 meters for the receiver is affected by special 
cause variation in this case. This is the limiting distance that 
the signal is able to penetrate at the building environment in 
this experiment configuration. The reason for this is a 
hardware solution based on the used inbuilt antenna. 
Transmitting power is independent on the voltage level from 
the battery. If critically low value of battery voltage is 
reached transmitter stops operation and goes to switch-off 
state. Also temperature will not affect the result, because of 
the automated periodical crystal recalibration. Other parts of 
the transmitted do not have high temperature dependence. 
 
 
Figure 7.  
Wireless stability evaluation (the case study of the free 
space propagation) 
 
 
Figure 8.  
NP chart for wireless stability evaluation (the case of the 
free space propagation, 4 p.m.) 
 
The mark (b) in the Fig. 7 is related to the 
communication failure and the special cause variation case. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1
4
7
10
13
16
19
22
25
28
31
34
37
40
 6 hod.
 8 hod.
10 hod.
13 hod.
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Daytime:
5 meters
10 meters
15 meters
20 meters
25 meters
The distance between transmitter and receiver
min
Output RF power
max min
max min
max min
max min
max
Quantity of defects [-]
No. of run [-]
   
a.m.
a.m.
a.m.
1  p.m.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39
1 p.m.
4 p.m.
6 p.m.
8 p.m.
11 p.m.
Daytime:
5 meters
10 meters
15 meters
20 meters
25 meters
The distance between transmitter and receiver
min
Output RF power
max min
max min
max min
max min
max
(b)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Quantity of defects [-]
No. of run [-]
  
 

322
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The number of communication problems in comparison 
to the case of more RF propagation obstacles is smaller. The 
requirements for higher RF power are smaller and the overall 
stability is better. The higher RF power gives the higher 
probability of wireless communication without failures. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our goal related to this article was to find and validate 
technology for intelligent wireless network with low power 
consumption. IQRF is a new wireless communication 
platform especially designed and developed for specific 
requirements from home automation and telemetry. One of 
the main aims was to offer wireless platform to developers of 
the end user devices that allows rapid development without 
necessity 
of 
stack 
implementations. 
As 
a 
typical 
representative of the low-cost wireless communication 
technology IQRF presents ideal solution for home 
automation and office or light industry applications. As such, 
this platform was designed especially for home automation 
and telemetry applications.  
This paper describes stability testing of the IQRF 
wireless platform in some real cases. We have focused on the 
long-term stability test and the verification of the parameters 
required for implementing the network. Proposed case 
studies have proved suitability of this technology to typical 
application scenarios, test their real communication 
parameters under buildings environment and determine 
limits. We are using real test cases i.e., sequence of events 
(actions) whose purpose is to find defects in a 
communication transfer. Based on the statistical result of 
measured data analysis, optimal node distance and output RF 
power to communication defects ratio can be set. Output RF 
power influences power consumption and then operation 
time. Optimal combination of distance and output RF power 
in specific operation conditions under different environments 
is therefore highly needed and can significantly improve 
operation time and minimize communication failures. 
Real tests proved wireless communication abilities of 
IQRF, which fits to the requirements for usage in home 
automation and telemetry applications and also in the 
currently developed automatic stochastic system. 
Our future work covers implementation and testing of 
selected 
wireless 
technology 
under 
real 
application 
conditions in the wide wireless sensors network.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by ARTEMIS JU in 
Project No. 100205 POLLUX - Process Oriented Electronic 
Control Units for Electric Vehicles Developed on a multi-
system real-time embedded platform, by the Czech Ministry 
of Industry and Trade in projects FR-TI3/254 OPT - Open 
Platform for Telemetry and by the CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068, 
OP RDI CEITEC 
- 
Central 
European 
Institute 
of 
Technology. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kuchta, R.; Novotný, R.; Kadlec, J.; Vrba, R.; Sulc, V. Wireless 
Home Automation Network Stability Testing. In The Eleventh 
International Conference on Networks ICN 2012. Saint Gilles, 
Reunion Island: IARIA, 2012. s. 39-43. ISBN: 978-1-61208-183- 0. 
[2] Akyildiz, F., Weilian, S., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., and Cayirci, E. 
A Survey on Sensor Networks, IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 
102-114, August 2002. 
[3] Akyildiz, F., Wang, X., and Wang, W. Wireless mesh networks: a 
survey, Computer Networks, no. 47, pp. 445-487, January 2005, 
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2004.12.001. 
[4] Taherkordi, A., Taleghan, A., and Sharifi, M. Dependability 
Considerations in Wireless Sensor Networks Applications, Journal of 
Networks, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 28-35, November 2006. 
[5] Naris, L. and Benedetto, G. Overview of the IEEE 802.15.4/4a 
standards for low data rate wireless personal data networks., in 4th 
Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and Communication 2007 
(WPNC 07), 2007, pp. 285-289. 
[6] ZigBee: (2009, May) ZigBee Aliance Web Pages. [Online].   
HYPERLINK "http://www.zigbee.org"  http://www.zigbee.org , Last 
accessed on 27 December 2011, <retrieved: 1, 2011>.  
[7] Evans-Pughe, C. Bzzzz zzz [ZigBee wireless standard], IEE Review, 
pp. 28-31, March 2003, 0953-5683. 
[8] Gill, K., Yang, H., Yao, F., and Lu, X. A ZigBee-Based Home 
Automation System, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER 
ELECTRONICS, pp. 422-430, May 2009. 
[9] Gill, K., Yang, H., Yao, F., and Lu, X. A zigbee-based home 
automation system, Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, pp. 
422-430, March 2009, 0098-3063. 
[10] Edgan, D. The emergence of ZigBee in building automation and 
industrial control, Computing & Control Engineering Journal, pp. 14-
19, April-May 2005. 
[11] Zualkernan, A., Al-Ali, R., Jabbar, A., Zabalawi, I., and Wasfy, A. 
InfoPods: Zigbee-based remote information monitoring devices for 
smart-homes, Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, pp. 1221-
1226, August 2009. 
[12] Casas, R., Marco, A., Plaza, I., Garrido, Y., and Falco, J. ZigBee-
based alarm system for pervasive healthcare in rural areas, 
Communications, IET , pp. 208-214, February 2008. 
[13] Poole, I.: What exactly is... ZigBee?, Communications Engineer , pp. 
44-45, August-September 2004. 
[14] Ciardiello, T. Wireless communications for industrial control and 
monitoring, Computing & Control Engineering Journal , pp. 12-13, 
April-May 2005. 
[15] Gomez, C. and Paradells, J. Wireless Home Automation Networks: A 
Survey 
of 
Architectures 
and 
Technologies, 
IEEE 
COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 92-101, June 
2010. 
[16] Flowers, D. and Yang, Y. MiWi Wireless Networking Protocol Stack, 
2010. 
[Online]. 
HYPERLINK 
"http://www.newark.com/pdfs/techarticles/microchip/AN1066_MiWi
AppNote.pdf", Last accessed on 27 December 2011, <retrieved: 1, 
2011>. 
[17] Gomez, C. and Paradells, J. Wireless home automation networks: A 
survey of architectures and technologies, Communications Magazine, 
IEEE , pp. 92-101, June 2010. 
[18] Walko, J. Home Control, Computing & Control Engineering Journal, 
pp. 16-19, October-November 2009. 
[19] Rappaport, T. Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: IEEE Press (The Institute of 
Electrical And Electronics Engineers, Inc.), 1996, ISBN: 0-7803-
1167-1. 
[20] Sun, Z. and Akyildiz, F. Channel Modeling and Analysis for Wireless 
Networks in Underground Mines and Road Tunnels, IEEE 
Transactions on Communications, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1758-1768, June 
2010, ISSN: 0090-6778. 

323
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[21] Microrisc 
(2009, 
May) 
Microrisc 
Web 
Page. 
[Online].   
HYPERLINK 
"http://www.microrisc.cz/new/weben/index.php"  
http://www.microrisc.cz/new/weben/index.php, Last accessed on 27 
December 2011, <retrieved: 1, 2011>. 
[22] Šulc, V. Czech Republic Patent - A method of accessing the 
peripherals of a communication device in a wireless network of those 
communication devices, a communication device to implement that 
method and a method of creating generic network communication, 
PUV 18679, 2008. 
[23] Šulc, V. US Patent - Method of coding and/or decoding binary data 
for wireless transmission, particularly for radio transmitted data, and 
equipment for implementing this method., 7167111, 2007. 
[24] Šulc, V., Kuchta, R., Vrba, R. IQMESH implementation in IQRF 
wireless communication platform, In 2009 Second International 
Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks, pp. 62-65, 2009, ISBN 
978-0-7695-3667-5. 
[25] Heintelman, W., Chandrakasan, A., & Balakrishan, H. An 
Application-Specific Protocol Architecture forWireless Microsensor 
Networks. 
IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS 
ON 
WIRELESS 
COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 1, NO. 4, pp. 660-670, October 2002 . 
[26] Ho, L., Costa, A. Monitoring a wandering mean with an np chart. 
Producao, v. 21, n. 2, p 254-258, June 2011. 
 

