Target Tracking in Marine Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Ahmed M. Mahdy and Jonathan M. Groenke 
Department of Computing Sciences 
Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi 
Corpus Christi, TX USA 
ahmed.mahdy@tamucc.edu and jgroenke@islander.tamucc.edu 
 
 
Abstract— It is evident that wireless sensor networking has a 
secure place in the future of communication systems. The 
potential 
and 
promise 
of 
such 
networks 
cannot 
be 
underestimated. A major advantage is the wide array of 
configurations and working environments that allow a wealth 
of applications. In the last few years, research on marine 
wireless 
sensor 
networks 
has 
been 
growing 
steadily. 
Nonetheless, there is an immediate need for further 
investigation into basic and applied research. In this paper, 
major challenges and applications are discussed. A perspective 
on target tracking in marine wireless sensor networks is 
thoroughly presented. In addition, the basic concept for 
underwater tracking algorithms is presented. From inhabitant 
monitoring to homeland security, the underwater environment 
is a major user of target tracking. The military field has 
greatly benefited from terrestrial wireless sensor networks. We 
strongly believe that the case with marine wireless sensor 
networks is no different. This paper discusses how underwater 
target tracking may enhance digital battlefields of the future. 
We also present a two-layer broadband wireless infrastructure 
for marine/terrestrial sensor networks with military and 
homeland security applications. The development of such 
infrastructure enhances the survivability of ad hoc networks, 
widens the domain of applicability, and emphasizes the role of 
marine wireless sensor networks in future battlefields. 
  
Keywords-marine wireless sensor networks; underwater 
communication; target tracking; digital battlefields 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modern communication systems have been enjoying 
the unique capabilities of the wireless technology for the last 
few decades. Wireless systems have introduced new 
possibilities and opened the door for novel technologies that 
made wireless communications a first choice to a wide 
range of applications in a variety of domains. The versatility 
and flexibility of the wireless technology have enabled the 
design of revolutionary systems including satellite, cellular, 
and ad hoc networks through the years. 
The communications discipline has substantially 
progressed over the last century. From the early telegraphs 
and telephony, to mobile systems, and to recent optical 
wireless systems, the field has witnessed numerous 
advances 
on 
all 
levels. 
Nonetheless, 
wireless 
communications represent a major factor in the way 
communications have evolved. The use of wireless 
transmission added new dimensions to the human 
perception of communications especially with the evolution 
of cellular and satellite systems. Cellular systems are 
infrastructure based networks divided into a group of 
contagious cells. Every cell is serviced by an access point 
(i.e. base station) that controls data traffic. Ideally, a cell is 
circular with a radius equal to the transmission range of a 
centered base station. However, hexagonal cells make the 
actual case. The ability to communicate on the move has 
enabled tremendous applications and fuelled related 
research especially within the areas of network protocols 
and data multiplexing. Satellite systems with their line of 
sight communications have triggered extensive research 
leading to novel transceiver designs. The application of 
satellite systems affects our daily life whether it is a TV 
broadcast, weather forecast, or a Global Positioning System 
(GPS) satellite. The impact of wireless systems on all 
aspects of our modern life is clear. 
Among the many flavors of wireless systems, ad hoc 
and sensor networks represent a remarkable and unique kind 
of wireless communications. An ad hoc network is a 
multihop wireless system; an autonomous system that is 
composed of wireless nodes communicating in a peer to 
peer fashion where every node serves as a host and router at 
the same time [2][3]. A node may be mobile or stationary. 
Nodes exchange information packets that usually travel in a 
store and forward manner. A wireless sensor network is a 
collection of tiny sensor devices with wireless capabilities. 
A 
sensor 
device 
includes 
sensing, 
processing, 
communication, and battery modules. A sensor node can 
locally process data and communicate with other nodes to 
form a network of tiny sensors. The placement of such 
nodes usually follow a random approach, which eases the 
setup process and facilitates the deployment of sensor 
networks in temporary locations such as disaster relief areas. 
Nevertheless, this complicates the design process of sensor 
networks’ algorithms and protocols, which have to be self-
organized. 
Despite the fact that wireless sensor networks have a 
wide range of applications that have ensured a secure place 
in the future for this technology, research and development 
of underwater wireless sensor networks have been minimal 
[4]. Basic and applied research on the development of this 
103
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

unique kind of wireless sensor networks is greatly needed. In 
this paper, we present major challenges and applications 
focusing on the role of marine wireless sensor networks in 
future digital battlefields. The rest of this paper is organized 
as follows. In Section II, major research challenges are 
presented. In Section III, a discussion on target tracking in 
marine wireless sensor networks is presented. Sections IV 
and V emphasize the use of these networks in military 
applications. The paper is concluded in Section VI. 
II. 
MARINE WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS 
The current protocols and design specifications of 
terrestrial wireless sensor networks cannot accommodate the 
requirements of the marine environment [5]. This makes the 
deployment of current wireless sensor networks in a marine 
environment 
challenging 
[6]. 
New 
techniques 
and 
algorithms are needed to achieve this goal. The following 
presents major design issues that need immediate attention. 
 
A. Types of Sensors 
Sensor nodes are the building components of wireless 
sensor networks. A sensor node is a tiny device that has the 
ability to sense, process, and communicate data. These 
nodes are usually deployed in harsh environments such as 
battlefields and disaster relief areas. Therefore, the 
manufacturing of sensor nodes handles this problem by 
providing reliable sensors that can stand unfriendly 
conditions. Nonetheless, most of these sensors cannot 
survive marine environments. Water can have severe impact 
on the operation of sensors. The effect of water on sensor 
devices and the different characteristics of waterproof 
sensors need to be closely studied. In addition, we believe 
that the marine environment opens the door for the 
introduction of new capabilities of the sensor devices. 
Many applications of marine sensor networks will 
require sensors to monitor the underwater conditions. This 
necessitates the need for sensor nodes that can either reside 
under the water surface permanently or temporarily. 
Accordingly, new features of sensor devices will be 
introduced, which may lead to a redesign of existing sensor 
nodes. A typical marine sensor network will be composed of 
floating and diving sensor nodes. The former will be nodes 
that can float on the water surface and collect relevant data 
such as surface temperature, wave frequency…etc. On the 
other hand, diving sensors are those nodes residing under 
the surface of the water collecting data like pressure, depth, 
visual imaging…etc. It is imperative to understand the 
different factors that affect the operation of such nodes. 
Each type has its own and unique characteristics that should 
be reflected on the design of these sensors. A careful study 
on these factors should be conducted and a comparative 
analysis of the different characteristics should be carried 
out.      
 
 
 
B.  Network Architecture 
 Ad hoc networks can be classified according to the 
existence of an infrastructure support. In fact, ad hoc 
networks do not necessarily require an infrastructure, which 
leads to two 
major classes; infrastructureless and 
infrastructured ad hoc networks. Infrastructureless ad hoc 
networks are pure decentralized systems where all 
participating nodes equally share network management 
responsibilities. This organization has been known for its 
simplicity and has dominated the design of ad hoc networks. 
Yet, its performance has never been to the expectations due 
to 
the 
inefficiency 
of 
such 
decentralized 
systems 
[7][8][9][10]. This triggered the development of more 
efficient infrastructured organizations, centralizing some 
functionalities of the network, has been inspired by the 
classic base station cellular scheme. The hierarchical 
clusterhead model has proved to be the best practical 
solution for infrastructured ad hoc networks. The network is 
virtually divided into clusters managed by designated nodes 
called clusterheads. Despite the fact that many clustering 
techniques have been proposed for the clusterhead based 
scheme, the selection of clusterheads has been mostly based 
on a single quality measure. This severely limits the 
efficiency of the selection process and can degrade the 
network performance. For example, consider a connectivity 
based selection that assigns the node with the highest 
connectivity degree to be the clusterhead. In this case, a 
highly connected node with low energy level can be selected 
as a clusterhead. Such a node, with the extra load a 
clusterhead is exposed to, may become out of energy in a 
short period of time triggering a new selection round, which 
increases the overhead and affects the stability of the 
network. We believe that clusterhead selection should not be 
based on only one measure but rather a set of quality 
measures. Moreover, the selection criterion should be 
scalable in order to accommodate new measures and/or 
disable existing measures. The effect of the clustering 
techniques on the network performance is commonly 
evaluated in terms of network stability and fairness (i.e. load 
balance). Network stability is adversely proportional to the 
number of clusterhead replacement; the less the number of 
selected clusterheads is, the more stable the network is. On 
the other hand, an ideally fair clustering technique 
uniformly distributes the management load over the network 
nodes. The more the number of nodes involved in the 
management of the network is, the fairer the technique is. 
Clearly, there is a tradeoff between network stability and 
fairness. One of the two merits is sacrificed on the account 
of the other in many cases for the sake of simpler designs. 
This can significantly deteriorate the network performance. 
Therefore, the clustering technique should be able to strike a 
tradeoff between stability and fairness in order to achieve 
better overall performance. We believe that clustering 
techniques should be adaptable and can be easily configured 
to seek specific network merits. To illustrate, the same 
104
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

technique can be configured for maximum stability, 
maximum fairness, or optimized overall performance.  
 
C. Network Protocols 
 The impact of the marine environment on the operation 
of sensor networks cannot be underestimated. Basic 
communication protocols and techniques will need to be 
redesigned to reflect the new requirements of such an 
environment [11][12]. For example, existing routing 
algorithms cannot serve marine sensor networks in their 
current format [13][14]. A distinction between the floating 
part of the network and its diving counterpart will be 
essential for a proper operation of the network. Therefore, 
the algorithm should reflect the associated cost with every 
communication link by providing a relative weighing factor 
distinguishing all-surface, surface-underwater, and all-
underwater links’ costs. 
It may be necessary for a wireless sensor network to 
update its topology to alleviate the effect of recent changes 
to the environment that degrade or even halt the operation of 
the system. In such cases, the network seeks the best 
possible topology that can furnish an optimized performance 
given the current conditions. A best possible topology for 
conventional sensor networks may not be the same for a 
marine sensor network due to the heterogeneity of 
communication links and the impact of water on signal 
transmission. This raises the need for new algorithms that 
can handle the topology reconfigurability in the water. The 
network efficiency highly depends on the performance of 
clusterheads. A clusterhead failure might result in a cluster 
failure triggering the isolation of its nodes. Accordingly, 
clusterheads must be qualified enough and adequately 
selected to claim such responsibility. Ideally, the outcome of 
the selection process should improve the performance of the 
cluster as well as the whole network. Currently available 
selection algorithms need to be revisited to reflect the 
changes in the environment and the characteristics of the 
sensor devices. The selection of a diving sensor as a 
clusterhead may not be appropriate in a network dominated 
by floating nodes. 
A vital aspect of sensor networks is the energy 
consumption due to the size and working lifetime of sensing 
nodes. Therefore, low-energy protocols are essential for the 
operation of marine sensor networks. New internetworking 
schemes are also needed to allow better communication 
between sensor networks and other non sensor networks. In 
addition, error control protocols for mobile sensor networks 
are highly appreciated. Dedicated coding schemes to 
improve communication quality between nodes are needed.  
Another major issue is network security. The rapid 
growth rate of communication networks and the open nature 
of nowadays information resources have turned network 
security into a mandatory requirement for communication 
systems. Military, business, and personal information are 
major types of data exchange across networks. Such 
information is mostly intended to designated recipients. 
Vulnerability of such networks imposes a major design 
challenge for secure data transmission. With this concern in 
mind, security is on the top of design priorities in current 
networks especially wireless sensor networks. Several 
security measures are required including authorization and 
authentication. Relevant research has shown that secure 
protocols for the recently developed communication 
technologies, especially those involving mobility, are easily 
recognizable. Routing algorithms with security guarantee 
are needed. Related research focuses on the different types 
of attacks to help measure the vulnerability of a network. In 
this context, detection of anomaly in communication 
behaviors can help prevent possible attacks. More attention 
to this issue should be given. All of these areas are widely 
open for research especially for the unique marine 
environment. Further discussion can be found in [15]. In 
this paper, we focus on target tracking algorithms due to the 
wide range of applications that may benefit from such 
capabilities. 
 
III. 
A PERSPECTIVE ON TARGET TRACKING USING 
MARINE WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS   
 
Target tracking is a skill currently used by individuals in 
occupations such as wildlife management to locate and track 
various animals, and military organization to detect and 
track the enemy on a battlefield.  For example, in wildlife 
management, there are many cases where a specific animal 
needs to be located or tracked for various studies. 
Depending on the environment it may be very difficult for 
any person or group to deploy in order to locate a specific 
animal and gather required information.  This is especially 
true if the animal’s habit is not well suited for humans.  For 
example, if marine biologists are trying to track and record 
what specific species of fish eat in a certain area of the 
ocean, it might be more prudent to deploy relatively low 
cost sensor nodes to record data in the area of interest 
instead of deploying a team of scientists to collect the same 
data. Deploying sensor nodes can be less dangerous and 
more cost effective than having a group of people live on a 
boat in the middle of the ocean for some indeterminate 
amount of time.  This also holds true for other inhospitable 
environments such as a desert or tropical jungle. Military 
applications of WSN for target tracking may be more 
apparent. On the battlefield there are numerous scenarios 
where sensor nodes would be preferred over human 
deployment. For instance, if some military leader needs to 
know when or if the enemy is transiting some specific area 
of interest then it is much safer to deploy a network of 
sensors instead of sending a team of soldiers. 
Issues to be considered with mobile target tracking 
include types of nodes, node distribution, initial target 
detection, target localization, target classification, and 
sustained target tracking.  Node type discusses basic types 
of sensor nodes and how they can be configured.  Node 
105
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

distribution covers how nodes are to be distributed given 
specific target characteristics. Target detection discusses 
how the network detects a target. Localization deals with the 
transition from target detection to sustained target tracking.  
Classification and sustained tracking cover how the network 
classifies the target and tracks its movement.   
One of the first items to consider prior to determining the 
type of sensor node to use is the target’s characteristics.  
Knowing the characteristics is essential to identify what 
target traits can be exploited.  In order to better illustrate this 
point, consider an example of a marine biologist who needs 
to locate a specific species of whale off the coast of Alaska.  
The biologist wants to locate as many of the whales as 
possible so it can tag and track them for further study. The 
biologist knows the general area where the whale lives but 
the area covers hundreds of square miles and he does not 
have the manpower to effectively cover the territory. The 
biologist wishes to utilize sensor networks that will be 
deployed in strategic areas and notify him when a whale is 
located. 
There must be some classifying trait that emanates from 
the whale such as sound. If the biologist heard this particular 
noise he could immediately identify the sound as a 
characteristic of the target whale and classify the target as 
the whale of interest. We can now use this identifying 
characteristic to choose or configure a specific sensor. In 
this example, the sensor must be able to detect sound in a 
particular frequency range with the use of a hydrophone. 
Sensors can be configured to sense one or many frequencies 
in the spectrum and they are not limited to sound.   
Sensors can be categorized as passive or active. Passive 
sensors are more suitable for target tracking since they do 
not disrupt the environment in which they are placed and 
they do not alert the target to anything unnatural. These 
passive sensors can be a) omnidirectional which simply 
detects a signal within a particular range from any three 
dimensional directions, or b) directional which means they 
can provide a relative bearing to the signal of interest.  
Active sensors do not rely on the target to emit light, sound, 
or electromagnetic energy. Instead the active sensor 
transmits some form of energy and detects any alteration of 
that energy caused by the target. For example, an 
underwater sensor can produce sound and sense any echo 
that bounces off an object in the water.  The advantage of 
using this type of sensors over a passive sensor is the higher 
probability of accurate tracking data. In some cases, this 
active signal will illuminate the target more than the targets 
natural emissions. However, the disadvantage is the target 
will be alerted to the tracking devices and it may alter its 
course away from the sensor field. Also, the energy needed 
to produce an active signal will deplete the battery life much 
faster than that of a passive sensor. 
Sensors can detect many different phenomena and it is 
paramount the right sensor is used when trying to locate a 
target. Using the correct type of sensor is the foundation for 
the rest of the network. The sensor must be able to detect the 
exploitable characteristics of the target or the entire system 
may fail. 
Prior to searching, the sensor’s storage device will have 
to be preloaded with the relevant target information. In 
order for the sensor to detect the target, each sensor will 
have to discern between the target of interest and any other 
frequency it may detect.  When a node is first deployed one 
of the first tasks the node must execute is an ambient noise 
reading. Ambient noise is background noise which is always 
present and the sensor will use this reading as a baseline for 
all other signals received. Having the ability to compare a 
received signal with ambient levels and prerecorded target 
data is an important feature. The end user is only interested 
in target information and he/she is not concerned with all 
received signals. Therefore, we do not want every sensor 
node to pass everything it detects to the base station or end 
user. This will expend much of the network’s power by 
transmitting data that could be of no use. If each node can 
determine if the frequency received matches that of the 
desired target then each node will only pass relevant data.  
This will allow for efficient message passing which helps 
maximize quality of service and increase energy efficiency. 
The sensor node distribution is important because 
sensors must be placed in such a manner that the network 
will have the highest probability of target detection.  One 
factor to consider when designing a distribution pattern is 
the detection range of the sensor. This will require some 
prior research of the target to determine a source level for 
each detectable characteristic. If the user wishes to exploit a 
specific frequency then he will need to know the average 
distance from the source that the frequency will be 
detectable. For example, if the sensor uses a hydrophone to 
detect a target then the source of the sound must be close 
enough to the sensor for the sensor to detect the sound.  
Using our whale scenario, an average range of the emanated 
sound from the whale must be predetermined in order to 
know how far apart we want to place our sensors.  For 
example, if we want to use the song of the whale as a target 
identifier. We will assume the biologist has done some 
research and knows the average distance from which a 
whale’s song can be heard is 5 kilometers direct path.  
Therefore, for a high probability of detection the sensor 
must be within 5 kilometers of the whale to detect the song.  
This means the distance between any two nodes should be 
no greater than 10 kilometers to ensure no holes exist inside 
the network. Nodes can be positioned closer together to 
increase probability of detection but then area covered will 
be reduced.  Conversely, the nodes can be positioned farther 
apart to cover more area but then probability of detection 
will decrease.  Node placement all depends on probability of 
detection and the desired area coverage. 
Once the detection range is resolved it must be compared 
to the effective communication range between sensor nodes.  
If the sensor nodes are too far apart to communicate then 
spacing will have to shrink.  A cost analysis will have to 
determine the best course of action.  One solution would be 
106
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

   
 
 
Figure 1. An Example of a Network Distribution Pattern; 2x10 and 5x5 patterns 
 
 
to use sensor nodes with larger batteries and powerful 
transmitters but this raises the price of each node.  If the 
nodes are placed closer together then the target may be 
alerted and it may alter its natural course or speed of 
advance. This is a case where an Autonomous Underwater 
Vehicle (AUV) [16] would be a good option to cover the 
voids within the network grid.  
After the node spacing is decided, it is necessary to 
determine the overall physical shape of the distributed 
sensor node network.  This shape, of course, depends on the 
target.  If the target is going to transit from some point ‘A’ 
direct to another point ‘B’ then an elongated pattern 
configured perpendicular to the line from ‘A’ to ‘B’ would 
be favored; shown in Figure 1.a.  A good example would be 
a 2 by 10 pattern with 10 kilometer spacing between nodes 
and the center node positioned on the expected route of 
travel.  A top down view of the nodes would look like a 100 
kilometer long pattern.  This will provide a good probability 
of detecting our transiting whale. If we determine that our 
target is not transiting and is, instead, feeding or mating in a 
certain area then our pattern will have to adapt. The shape of 
the distribution pattern should match the search area while 
maintaining our predetermine node spacing as shown in 
Figure 1.b.  A typical example would be n nodes laid out in 
a √n by √n pattern. 
Since the sensor nodes are placed in specific locations 
relative to each other it is easier to manage the topology of 
the network.  Topology control is an important issue that 
determines which nodes are allowed to, or able to, 
communicate with surrounding nodes.  When there is a 
predetermined plan where each node will be placed then it is 
easier to control and maintain the topology.  Depending on 
the network structure and the nodes task designation the 
node will become self aware of its relative position when 
the node is alive.  If we are using a flat network structure 
were all nodes play the same role then each node will find 
its location in the network by finding its neighbors and the 
topology control protocol will establish links. If it is a 
hierarchical network structure then, after each node 
discovers it relative position within the network, the 
topology 
protocol 
will 
establish 
master 
nodes 
or 
clusterheads.  These superior nodes are either chosen 
through some election protocol or they are preselected 
because they possess some characteristics the surrounding 
nodes do not.  The nodes will self organize in their 
respective 
clusters 
and 
communicate 
with 
the 
clusterhead/master node.  Homogeneous nodes may 
alternate roles between slave and master status depending 
on the network protocol [17].   
When the search area is large, the nodes will most likely 
be deployed from a moving airplane, boat, or truck so node 
placement is estimated and not exact. This differs from 
random node distribution where nodes are deployed in some 
arbitrary pattern leading to unpredictable node density.  This 
type of deployment is faster but the topology control is more 
difficult to establish and maintain.  The nodes will still form 
a predetermined flat or hierarchical network but the initial 
establishment of communication links will take more 
processing power. When nodes are distributed randomly, 
there is no way to determine if every node will be connected 
to the network.  The possibility of multiple networks within 
the entire set of nodes is possible. On the other hand, if 
nodes are placed in a prearranged manner then this 
possibility is greatly reduced. 
 Routing techniques are vital for such systems because 
the information must go from the sensor to some 
clusterhead or base station when the target is detected.  In 
the case of the clusterhead, it must receive all relevant 
information from the sensor nodes in order to locate, track, 
and classify the target.  The information must transfer from 
node to node with minimal latency. The routing technique 
mentioned in [17] discusses virtual grid architecture routing.  
A 
B 
Expected 
course 
Search Area 
Sensor Node 
107
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

The network is constructed in “clusters that are fixed, equal, 
adjacent, and no overlapping with symmetrical shapes.”  
Each cluster has a clusterhead that performs data 
aggregation at a local level (i.e. within the cluster) while a 
subset of clusterheads perform data aggregation at a global 
level.  The clusterheads are responsible for tracking targets 
moving throughout their respective clusters. The data is 
routed from the sensors to the clusterhead. In [18], a 
different approach with location-aware routing and 
processing is discussed. In this case, the nodes are self 
organized in cells upon the occurrence of an event of 
interest. The event in this case is target detection. When a 
target is detected, the nodes detecting the target are 
organized in a cell and elect a manager node which creates 
new cells.  As the target moves through the sensor field, the 
nodes route data to the current manager node which 
processes the data to track the target.  There are numerous 
routing techniques that can be used. The application takes a 
toll on determining which technique to use. 
Once the network is configured, deployed, and activated 
the network works autonomously to detect the target.  
Target detection begins when one or more of the sensor 
nodes detect a frequency that matches a target frequency in 
its database.  If the target is moving, which is likely the 
case; the detected frequency may not be the exact frequency 
in the data base due to the Doppler effect. The node will 
have to process this information in order to determine a 
probability or confidence level that the frequency is the 
target of interest.  If the node determines that the frequency 
does belong to the target then it will pass this information to 
the manager node (or clusterhead).  The manager node will 
process this information and match it with any other event 
data received.  If the manager node has not received any 
messages from other nodes it might send a request message 
or alert message to other nodes in the vicinity of the sensor 
which received the target frequency.  Once other nodes 
detect the target and pass the respective information to the 
manager node, the manager node will attempt to localize the 
target and determine an estimated course and speed of the 
target.  The manager node will send a message to other 
manager nodes in the direction of the target.  These other 
manager nodes can put their respective clusters on alert if 
they have been asleep to conserve energy. One of the 
manager nodes will have to eventually collect enough data 
points to positively classify the target as the target of 
interest and then send a message to the base station which 
will alert the end user. 
 
A. Target Tracking Algorithms  
Following the aforementioned discussion, developing a 
tracking algorithm for such underwater applications is 
greatly based on the classical Doppler equation: 
 
s
s
o
o
f
v
c
v
c
f
)
(
)
(
+
+
=
 
(1) 
 
Where:  fo= the frequency observed by the listener.  fS = the 
frequency emitted by the source. c = the speed of the wave 
through the medium. vo = the velocity of the listener through 
the medium. vS = the velocity of the source through the 
medium 
The basic algorithm concept is for a given sensor to 
detect an acoustic frequency fo of a target source fS and 
calculate the velocity of the target vs. If the observed 
frequency is higher than that of the source frequency then 
the target is moving toward the sensor. Conversely, if the 
observed frequency is less than that of the source frequency 
then the target is moving away from the sensor.  The 
location of the target is automatically known to be in the 
vicinity of the sensor due to the fact that the sensor detected 
the target.  The direction of the target can be approximated 
if other sensor nodes detect the same target. It should be 
noted that this Doppler equation is only accurate when the 
source is moving directly to or from the listener.  However, 
the level of inaccuracy for targets that do not move directly 
to or from a sensor is acceptable considering the large 
coverage areas in an ocean environment.  It is also assumed 
that the acoustical path from the source to the sensor is a 
direct path. 
For this concept to work properly, the node placement 
and the acoustical characteristics of the target must be 
predetermined.  Sensor nodes must be spaced at a distance 
so that only one or two sensors can detect the target at any 
one point in time.  As previously discussed, in order to 
ensure appropriate sensor spacing, we must take into 
account the predicted range or our target. Assuming the 
target is in the vicinity of our sensor network, if the 
detection range of our target is smaller than expected then, 
at most, only one sensor will detect the target at a given 
point in time.  If the detection range is larger than expected 
then no fewer than two sensor nodes will detect the target at 
any given point in time. The tracking algorithm can still 
work in these two cases but it will require more processing 
and more intra-network communication which will result in 
more power consumption.  For the purpose of this research, 
the assumption is made that the predicted detection ranges 
of the target are accurate and spacing between any two 
sensors is twice that of the predicted range. Once 
the 
sensor spacing has been determined the next step is to 
construct a sensor pattern. We believe that a honeycomb 
pattern, illustrated in Figure 2, fits the majority of 
underwater tracking applications. 
108
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
Figure 2. A Honeycomb Pattern 
 
This orientation will provide minimal overlap in sensor 
coverage and negate any coverage gaps.  Each hexagon is 
divided into six sections with the sensor node positioned at 
the center and each of the six sections is given a number and 
relative bearing as shown in Figure 3.  Neighboring nodes 
are predetermined and programmed into each sensor.  
Furthermore, each sensor node is aware of its neighbors’ 
relative location. This configuration will aid in allowing the 
sensor nodes to pass relative positions of the target.  When a 
sensor detects a target the only immediate conclusion that 
can be made is that the target is within the detection radius 
of a sphere surrounding the sensor.  Using the Doppler 
equation and the stored source frequency the sensor can 
determine an approximate velocity.   
The stored source frequency is loaded into the sensor 
and based on historical target observations.  Multiple source 
frequencies can be loaded in the sensor for the same target.  
Using a threshold for acceptable velocities, the sensor can 
ignore observed frequencies if they do not match target 
characteristics. For example, suppose a sensor observes a 
frequency of 80 Hz and has two stored frequencies of 30 Hz 
and 150Hz.  
3000 - 3600
2400 - 3000
1800 - 2400
0600 - 1200
1200 - 1800
0000 - 0600
1
5
3
4
2
0
 
 
Figure 3. A Honeycomb Cell 
The stored frequencies are used as frequency emitted by 
the source in the Doppler equation.  The stored historical 
target data gives an acceptable velocity of two to seven 
knots.  Computing the velocity of the observed frequency 
would yield 1820 knots and 2548 knots respectively.  This 
observed frequency would be discarded by the sensor.  If the 
sensor observed a frequency of 149.8Hz then the computed 
velocity would be 2329 knots and 4 knots respectively.  
This observed frequency would be accepted and the sensor 
would continue to monitor this frequency. 
In the following, we present a tracking algorithm that 
can be used in marine wireless sensor networks (i.e. Figure 
4 and Figure 5): 
1) Sensor receives frequency and compares it with 
preset frequencies in its tiny database through the use of 
the Doppler equation. 
2) If velocity is out of predetermined tolerance then 
discard.  Otherwise, send ‘contact’ message to 
neighboring nodes. 
3) Receive ‘contact’ replies from neighbors.  If no 
positive contact replies from neighbors then send 
contact report with time stamp to clusterhead.  Wait for 
another signal and/or continue monitoring frequency 
4) If positive contact from a neighbor is received, then 
match neighbor’s ID with sector and determine 
approximate relative direction. Send contact report with 
time stamp to clusterhead. 
5) If a contact message is received by neighbor and no 
received frequencies match target data, reply to 
neighbors with ‘no contact’ message.  If monitoring a 
frequency that matches target data then reply to 
neighbor with ‘contact’ message and then calculate 
approximate direction of target. 
 
With respect to communication between nodes, all 
stationary nodes will be connected in a 2-D mesh with no 
wrap around.  That is, each node will only be able to 
communicate with its immediate neighbor north, south, east, 
and west.  When the sensor nodes are given their respective 
grid coordinates, they are also given the coordinates and 
identification of their immediate neighbors. The AUV will 
be able to communicate only with its closest neighbor.  To 
find its closest neighbor, the AUV will have to broadcast its 
position and wait for a return message from the closest 
stationary sensor node. Different algorithms may be 
developed based on the concepts discussed in this Section. 
IV. 
APPLICATIONS OF MARINE WIRELESS SENSOR 
NETWORKS WITH TARGET TRACKING 
Marine wireless sensor networks offer an unmatched option 
to a wide range of different domains. The significance of the 
aforementioned research lies in the fact that it opens the 
door for a variety of applications as well as new areas of 
relevant research in wireless networks. In the following, we 
present candidate areas that highly benefit from a marine 
wireless network with target tracking capabilities. 
109
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Flow Chart for the Tracking Algorithm 
 
 
Military and Homeland Security: The land-based 
applications of sensor networks in the military and 
homeland security domains show how significant wireless 
sensor networks can be. Smart uniforms equipped with 
sensor nodes can automatically report data on the status of 
troops and their locations. Tanks and military vehicles can 
also be equipped with sensor nodes forming a wireless 
network connecting the different units of the army. Real-
time border sensor networks represent a great asset in 
policing the borders and reporting any suspicious 
movements. All of these applications can be mapped to their 
corresponding marine applications only if a wireless sensor 
network can be deployed in the water. 
 
Ocean Inhabitant Research: The possibility of having 
sensor nodes diving in the ocean collecting data about the 
different inhabitants offers a unique opportunity for ocean 
life can play a major role in bringing ocean research to new 
levels. 
 
V. 
MARINE WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS IN FUTURE 
DIGITAL BATTLEFIELDS 
According to the “Army Research Office In Review 
document” [1], the need for on-the-move mobile wireless 
networks that can be deployed in the battlefields of the 
future cannot be underestimated. Sensor networking 
presents 
an 
essential 
component 
of 
future 
digital 
battlefields. The main idea is to develop a secure two-layer 
broadband wireless infrastructure for mobile ad hoc and 
sensor networks with military and homeland security 
applications that take advantage of underwater sensors that 
can track targets of interest. The development of such 
infrastructure enhances the survivability of ad hoc networks 
and widens the domain of applicability by ensuring secure 
communications with broadband capabilities that can meet  
110
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

 
 
 
Figure 5. Flow Chart for the Tracking Query 
 
the requirements of expected future digital battlefield 
applications. More specifically, improving the efficiency of 
the virtual organization of ad hoc networks through scalable 
clustering techniques and the support of a secure wireless 
broadband backbone are the scope of this work. We present 
a two layer networking infrastructure with virtual as well as 
physical support. The bottom layer is a virtual layer that 
addresses the efficiency issues of infrastructureless ad hoc 
networks by providing a hierarchical organization. The 
network is divided into clusters where every cluster is 
supervised by a clusterhead. Clustering methods are 
designed to seek specific network merits such as security, 
stability, and load balance. The proposed infrastructure 
includes further support through a second layer of 
broadband backbone. This top layer furnishes the network 
with 
broadband-enabled 
nodes 
with 
communication 
capacity that meets the growing demands on high 
transmission rates unlike existing ad hoc networks. This 
layer provides an alternate communication path for isolated 
nodes ensuring a connected network and robust military 
operations. This will alleviate the problem of poor reliability 
of existing ad hoc networks leading to better scalability. In 
addition, these nodes will function as gateways allowing 
broadband 
communications 
with 
other 
networking 
platforms independent of the underlying technology, thus 
conferring to a major requirement of future wireless 
systems. Figure 6 depicts a hypothetical battlefield sensor 
network based on the proposed architecture. This network 
can be rapidly deployed allowing a wide range of entities to 
securely communicate for fast information sharing and 
better decision making. The bottom layer forms a mobile ad 
hoc network of army robots, underwater sensor nodes, 
111
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

troopers, tanks, vehicles, sensors…etc. The top layer is a 
backbone that provides a broadband wireless cloud using 
high-speed wireless technologies such as optical wireless, 
ultra-wideband, WiMAX and/or WiFi. Helicopters, robots, 
and ships can be equipped to operate as backbone 
communication nodes. The following explains how this 
research satisfies the Army Future Force operational goals 
and how it is highly relevant to the army research and needs.
 
 
Wireless
Broadband Backbone
Marine Wireless
Sensor Networks with Target Tracking
To Other Networks
Helicopter
Mobile Communication Tower
Navy Ship
Vehicle
Underwater Robot
Floating Sensor
Submarine
Robot
Marine Sensor
MANET/Sensor
Network
Tank
Trooper
Vehicle
Robot
Video Capturing Node
 
 
Figure 6. An Example of How Marine Wireless Sensor Networks can be used in Future Digital Battlefields 
 
Communications and Networks Needs: 
The Army Research Office In Review explicitly states 
its major communications and networks needs as follows 
[19] 
• 
“Mobile wireless communications networks will be 
required that are both adaptive and can operate 
on-the-move.” 
• 
“New sensor, communication, and weapon systems 
based on unmanned robotic and teleoperated 
aerial and ground vehicles must be developed.” 
• 
“The concepts of light, agile forces and the digital 
battlefields require a seamless…and highly mobile 
wireless communication system with a highly 
dynamic topology.” 
 
The proposed architecture directly addresses the above 
army research goals by providing a self-organizing mobile 
ad hoc network that can be rapidly deployed. The bottom 
layer of the proposed architecture furnishes the network 
with a flexible topology that can timely respond to 
environment changes. Moreover, the nature of mobile ad 
hoc networks allows the use of marine sensor networks, 
robots, and vehicles to serve as communication nodes (see 
Figure 1). The ad hoc layer of the proposed infrastructure 
will address the performance and efficiency issues. This 
layer is organized in the form of clusters and is dynamically 
established in two steps. Clusters are, first, formed 
following a cluster formation technique, and then 
clusterheads are selected. The top layer of the proposed 
architecture provides a backbone through the use of 
broadband wireless technologies that mostly operate in a 
point-to-point fashion (ex, optical wireless or ultra-
wideband) achieving highly secure communication links 
with high immunity to jamming and interference. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Current research on wireless sensor networks is based 
on the assumption that these networks are deployed in a 
terrestrial environment. Relevant protocols and design 
specifications are developed under this condition. This 
makes the deployment of currently existing wireless sensor 
networks in marine environments extremely challenging. In 
this paper, we present major challenges and applications of 
underwater wireless sensor networks. Target tracking in 
such environments is emphasized. A basic target tracking 
algorithm for cluster-based marine wireless sensor networks 
is presented. We discuss application areas that highly 
benefit from a marine network with target tracking such as 
military and inhabitant monitoring. We highlight the army’s 
immediate 
needs 
for 
secure 
agile 
broadband 
communications for future digital battlefields emphasizing 
the role of marine sensors with target tracking capabilities. 
A two-layer architecture for broadband terrestrial/marine ad 
hoc and sensor networks that can provide warfighters with a 
112
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

secure 
on-the-move 
means 
for 
high-capacity 
communications is discussed. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported, in part, by an NSF CRI grant 
and a Texas Research Development Fund grant. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A.M. Mahdy, “Marine Wireless Sensor Networks: Challenges 
and Applications," Proceedings of the 7th International Conference 
on Networking (ICN), 2008, pp 530-535. 
[2] D.P. Agrawal and Q-A. Zeng, “Introduction to Wireless and 
Mobile Systems,” Thomson Brooks Cole, USA, 2003. 
[3] D.B. Johnson and D.A. Maltz, “The Dynamic Source Routing 
Protocol in Ad Hoc Networks,” Mobile Computing, T. Imielinski 
and H. Korth eds., Culwer, 1996, pp. 152-181. 
[4] I.F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili, and T. Melodia, “Underwater 
Acoustic Sensor Networks: Research Challenges”, Ad Hoc 
Networks, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2005, pp. 257-279. 
[5] J.H. Cui, J. Kong, M. Gerla, and S. Zhou, “The Challenges of 
Building Scalable Mobile Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks 
for Aquatic Applications”, IEEE Network, 2006, pp.12-17. 
[6] I. Vasilescu, K. Kotay, and D. Rus, “Krill: An Exploration in 
Underwater Sensor Networks”, Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE 
Workshop on Embedded Networked Sensors, 2005. 
[7] J.N. Al-Karaki, A. Kamal, and R. Ul-Mostafa, “On the Optimal 
Clustering in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), 
2004, pp. 71-76. 
[8] W. Lou and J. Wu, “A Cluster-Based Backbone Infrastructure 
for Broadcasting in MANETs,” Proceedings of the International 
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), 2003. 
[9] J. Waldo, “Constructing Ad Hoc Networks,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE International Symposium on Network Computing and 
Applications (NCA), 2001, pp. 9-20. 
[10] Y. Song and D. Park, “Infrastructure Support for Ad Hoc 
Network: When and Where?,” Proceedings of the 2004 
International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshops 
(ICPPW), 2004, pp. 141-147. 
[11] P.C. Etter, “Underwater Acoustic Modeling, Principles, 
Techniques and Applications,” 2nd edition, E&FN Spon, 1996. 
[12] D.B. Kifoyle, and A.B. Baggeroer, “The State of the Art in 
Underwater Acoustic Telemetry”, IEEE Journal of Oceanic 
Engineering, (OE-25, no. 5), 2000, pp. 4-27. 
[13] D. Makhija, P. Kumaraswamy, and R. Roy, “Challenges And 
Design of Mac Protocol For Underwater Acoustic Sensor 
Networks”, 4th IEEE International Symposium on Modeling and 
Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks, 2006, 
pp.1-6. 
[14] J. Proakis, J. Rice, E. Sozer, and M. Stojanovic, “Shallow 
water acoustic networks,” Encyclopedia of Telecommunications, 
John Wiley and Sons, 2003. 
[15] J. Partan, J. Kurose, and B.N. Levine. “A Survey of Practical 
Issues in Underwater Networks,” Proceedings of the 1st ACM 
International Workshop on Underwater Networks, 2006, pp 17-24. 
[16] S. Pai, P. Guerrini, and J. Potter, “Autonomous initial capture 
systems for AUV recovery,” Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference and Exibition for Underwater Acoustic Measurements: 
Technologies and Results, 2009. 
[17] J.N. Al-Karaki, and A.E. Kamal, “Routing techniques in 
wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 
Volume 11, Issue 6, 2004, pp 6-28.   
[18] R.R. Brooks, P. Ramanathan, and A.M. Sayeed, “Distributed 
target classification and tracking in sensor networks.” Proceedings 
of the IEEE. Volume 91, Issue 8, 2003, pp. 116 –1171. 
[19] 
Army 
Research 
Office 
In 
Review, 
http://www.arl.army.mil/main/main/default.cfm?Action=29&Page
=172, (last visited June 2010). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

