130
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 Wireless Condition Monitoring for Industrial Applications  
based on Radio Sensor Nodes with Energy Harvesting  
Michael Niedermayer1, Stephan Bennecke2, Rainer Wirth3, Eduard Armbruster1, Klaus-Dieter Lang2 
1Dept. RF & Smart Sensor Systems, Fraunhofer IZM, Berlin, Germany, email: {niederm, armbruster}@izm.fraunhofer.de 
2Dept. Center of Advanced Packaging, Techn. University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, email: {benecke, tib421}@tu-berlin.de 
3GfM Gesellschaft für Maschinendiagnose mbH, Berlin, Germany, email: wirth@maschinendiagnose.de 
 
 
Abstract — Wireless sensor nodes can detect component 
wear and tear just in time. Such sensor networks can allow for 
waiting to overhaul delay the overhauling of machines until it 
is really absolutely necessary. This means that time-consuming 
and expensive downtime can be avoided. A sensor network for 
the condition monitoring of industrial machines has been 
developed in the publicly funded project ECoMoS. The 
implemented sensor nodes are able to predict machine failures 
until three months in advance. 
Keywords — Energy Harvesting; Condition Monitoring; 
Machine Diagnosis; Wireless Sensor Networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With the availability of inexpensive, self-powered 
wireless sensor nodes the burden of condition monitoring 
systems drops significantly. The cost savings by introduction 
of wireless condition 
monitoring solutions can be 
considerable. Furthermore, new service concepts in 
conjunction with a maintenance cloud are enabled by a role-
specific access to the sensor data and diagnostic results. Such 
cloud based sensor networks for condition monitoring will 
avoid time-consuming and expensive downtime of much 
industrial equipment in the near future. Sensor networks 
offer the chance to revolutionize measurement technology in 
the coming years. In the joint project 'Energy-autarkic 
Condition Monitoring System' (ECoMoS), the application 
field of self-powered wireless sensor technology has been 
expanded to the wireless condition monitoring of industrial 
plants [1]. A lot of research has been done to prepare this 
development. The preceeding research activities focused on 
the implementation of sensor nodes with small size [2][3] at 
minimal costs [4][5] for industrial enviroments [6][7].  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: first, we 
discuss relevant aspects of vibration diagnosis in Section II. 
Afterwards, prototypes for energy harvesting are presented in 
Section III. Section IV describes several implementation 
details of the wireless sensor network. The field test is 
introduced in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes our 
work and gives a perspective on our future work. 
II. 
DETECTING MACHINE DAMAGES IN ADVANCE 
Several measurement categories can be checked for the 
condition monitoring of machines. Temperature and vibra-
tion signals are most frequently analyzed to identify 
malfunctions of machines. Here, we focus on condition 
monitoring based on acceleration sensors, which measure 
vibrations. Vibration diagnosis was established for early 
prediction of machine breakdowns. The corresponding signal 
analysis methods are usually based on spectral analyses of 
the occurring mechanical vibrations. Two types of machine 
diagnosis can be distinguished regarding the accuracy. In one 
variant, the basic diagnosis utilizes methods of simple 
characteristics. The second variant of condition monitoring 
applies an in-depth diagnosis to predict machine failures 
several weeks in advance. The higher accuracy can be 
achieved with the help of diagnostic algorithms, which use 
knowledge of kinematic drive models in addition to the 
analysis of vibration measurements. Condition monitoring 
systems for in-depth diagnosis are based on wired accele-
ration sensors, which are connected with diagnosis core 
units. There are only few wireless system solutions to run the 
less precise base diagnosis of machines. 
The concept in the joint project ECoMoS (see Fig. 1) is 
based on wireless condition monitoring using wireless sensor 
nodes [8]. The individual sensor nodes have the intelligence 
to carry out an in-depth diagnosis directly at the measuring 
position. This makes it possible to predict, for example, 
bearing damage by up to three months in advance. The 
sensor systems can be configured via radio transceiver and 
regularly send the machine state to a remote base station. 
 
 
Figure 1.  
Condition monitoring of plants by wireless sensor networks 
The complexity of the in-depth diagnosis drives the 
system requirements for the wireless sensor nodes to a large 
extent [9]. The vibration signal needs to be sampled at a 
frequency of 10 kHz and then digitized. At the same time, it 

131
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
is required to check whether the engine speed has remained 
within a tolerable range of about 0.5 percent during the 
measurement interval. If the change in rotational speed is 
greater, the measurement will be discarded. Since the measu-
rement of the engine speed is performed by a different sen-
sor, the speed values are transmitted before and after the 
vibration measurement of the wireless sensor node. 
The spectrum of the measured time signal has to be 
calculated by a Fast Fourier transform (FFT) [10] to later 
derive the envelope spectrum of the vibration signal. 
Whenever the engine speed remains in a tolerable range, the 
order spectrum can be determined by replacing the frequency 
in the spectrum abscissa with the basic rotational speed. The 
critical multiples of the basic rotational speed are identified 
by a significance analysis. In a subsequent step, it is checked 
whether these coincide with typical damage patterns. If 
errors are detected, e.g., irregularity on the inner ring of the 
roller bearing SKF 6309, the results of the diagnosis are 
transmitted in the form of feature vectors, comprising error 
code, 
kinematic 
frequency, 
significance 
level, 
and 
magnitude. 
For the implementation of wireless sensor nodes that can 
perform this type of machine diagnostic directly at the 
measuring position, different circuit designs were evaluated 
regarding their energy ficiency. Some Digital Signal 
Processors (DSP) were capable of performing the algorithms 
for in-depth diagnosis more energy-efficiently than 16-bit 
microcontrollers, e.g., MSP430 from Texas Instruments, or 
32-bit microcontrollers, e.g., AVR32 from Atmel. Hence the 
power consumption of the processor types could be 
compared for a number of FFT cycles with 1024 samples at a 
clock frequency of 1 MHz (see Fig. 2). While the DSP based 
system architectures require significantly higher peak 
currents, the execution time is considerably shorter. This 
results from the special hardware support for filters and FFT 
calculations. 
 
Figure 2.  
Comparison of different system architectures [11]  
The analysis of analog circuit elements for data 
acquisition showed that the use of a DSP system architecture 
is the best solution to minimize the power consumption 
because the data from the acceleration sensor can be 
digitized immediately while the necessary filtering and 
scaling is left to the DSP. Another advantage of this 
approach is the increased flexibility in the evaluation of the 
measurement. It is thus possible to generate customized re-
ports for specific measurement positions by parameterization 
with moderate effort. Fig. 3 summarizes the system archi-
tecture of the ECoMoS sensor nodes. 
 
 
Figure 3.  
System architecture of the radio sensor nodes [11]  
The selection of the appropriate sensor depends on accu-
racy of the measurement range, size, supply voltage, and 
power consumption. It was found that a piezoelectric 
acceleration sensor from IMI Sensors with charge output 
provides the preferred properties for the target application. 
Thus, a charge amplifier has been added to the input stage on 
the sensor node. This makes it possible to sample the 
machine vibrations with minimal energy consumption. 
Furthermore, the duration of the transient can be consi-
derably shortened by a special discharge stage. This would 
not be possible for sensors with integrated amplifier. 
III. 
ELECTRIC ENERGY FROM VIBRATIONS AND 
TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCES 
Research and development in the area of micro-scale 
MEMS transducers is still ongoing with future potentials to 
satisfy 
steadily 
decreasing 
energy 
demands 
of 
microelectronic circuits [1]. However, depending on the 
ambient conditions available energy harvesting solutions 
with size constraints of a few centimeters already provide 
adequate voltage and current level. While solar cells achieve 
high power densities in direct sunlight, stability of solar 
irradiance is a challenging issue especially when designing 
technical solutions for a broader range of possible 
applications. Artificial lighting conditions, however, provide 
rather predictable illumination conditions, e.g., considering 
public buildings, workspaces, etc. Amorphous solar cells 
will deliver around 3µW/cm² at fluorescenting light with an 
illuminance of 200lux (machine hall) [12]. In case kinetic 
energy from vibrating objects such as engines, buildings or 
vehicles is available, resonant electromechanical transducers 
might be best suited. Piezoelectric transducers based on 
bimorph cantilever structures oscillating at resonant 
frequency of 120Hz and amplitude of vibration at 2.25m/s² 
deliver a power density of 375µW/cm³ on an ohmic load 

132
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[13]. Macro-scale assemblies of thermoelectric harvesters 
with total dimensions in the range of cubic centimeters 
consist of leg pairs of doped semiconductors that are 
mounted between two ceramic substrates and electrically 
connected in series. Subjected to a temperature gradient of 
5K at 50°C a power density in the order of 590µW/cm² can 
be achieved [14]. 
As all harvesting technologies deliver an unstable output 
voltage depending on the available profile of energy inputs, a 
voltage converter is necessary in order to adapt to the 
requirements of the consuming electronics. In order to buffer 
energy, ultra-capacitors, accumulators or even a supporting 
primary battery might be an option, depending on the 
envisioned application. The storage unit should be designed 
to enable operation at times when ambient energy is not 
sufficiently available, but also to allow duty-cycle operation 
of the system. Another voltage converter at the output 
terminals of the energy buffer will regulate the output 
voltage provided to the energy consuming subsystems. A 
categorized schematic of the energy harvesting conversion 
chain is shown in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  
Schematic of the energy harvesting conversion chain 
The introduction of energy harvesting technologies to 
wireless sensor nodes for condition monitoring purposes has 
the potential to overcome the current conflict between 
desired operating time and functionality [15]. To replace 
conventional 
battery-based 
solutions 
with 
energy 
harvestings systems on a broad basis, system behavior under 
realistic ambient conditions needs to be described by 
adequate models. Design approaches for self-sufficient 
sensor systems rely on the provision of sufficient power 
levels according to the specific boundary conditions 
determined by the application. In order to sufficiently 
describe the dynamic behavior of energy harvesting systems 
over its operating range, a modeling framework according to 
Fig. 5 was implemented as presented in [16]. Components 
of the conversion chain are modeled using parameter sets 
acquired from measurement to fully describe the devices 
over their operating range. The parameterized sub-models 
are then transformed into modeling platforms, e.g., 
Matlab/Simulink that provide capabilities for mutual 
modeling of different but connected physical domains. As a 
result, energy flows can be simulated based on the time 
history of the non-electric ambient energy source’s intensity 
and the specific load profile of the power consuming 
electronics.  
 
 
Figure 5.  
Concept of system-oriented modeling approach 
The operating time of the wireless sensor nodes with 
batteries – depending on the duty cycle of the in-depth 
diagnoses – can reach several years by application of low-
power components in combination with an optimized power 
management [8]. Cycles of sleep-mode vs. active phase need 
to be adapted to the available power budgets. Fig. 6 
exemplarily demonstrates the voltage level monitored at an 
ultra- capacitor used as an energy buffer in the application 
case described in this paper.  
 
Figure 6.  Voltage profile of ultra-capacitor during duty-cycle operation of 
the sensor node; field measurement 
However, there are several concerns regarding battery-
powered wireless sensors especially in industrial environ-
ments. The users prefer energy harvesting solutions when-
ever possible. While solar cells can only be used in very 
clean industrial surroundings with little dust, thermal gene-
rators and vibration transducers provide a good way to 
convert the energy from the environment. This eliminates 
any effort for battery replacement and increases the opera-
Ambient 
Energy Source
Solar radiance 
or  artifical 
lighting
Temperature 
gradients
Kinetic energy 
from mechanical 
vibrations
Solar cell
Thermoelectr
ic element
Piezoelectric 
harvester
Inductive 
harvester
Capacitive 
harvester
DC/DC 
converter
AC/DC 
converter
DC/DC + 
energy-feed-
back
Charging 
electronics
DC/DC 
converter
Capacitor
Ultracap
Secondary 
battery
Primary 
battery
Energy 
Harvester
Voltage 
Converter
Charging 
Control
Energy 
Buffer
Voltage 
Converter
Regulated 
Output Voltage
Voltage V
                                         Time t

133
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tional reliability. As thermal gradients and mechanical 
vibrations provide useful energy sources in industrial 
environments, concepts for a thermoelectric and piezo-
electric energy harvesting device are described exemplarily 
in the following sections. 
There are many different types of vibrations that can be 
used for powering wireless sensor nodes in industrial 
environments. However, rigid structures should be chosen 
as measurement position for in-depth diagnosis of machines. 
This improves the precision of the diagnosis results but the 
magnitude of vibrations on these locations is typically 
below 2m/s² (see Fig. 7). Most commercial vibration 
transducers are designed for a single resonance frequency of 
between 50 and 120 Hz. This means that such a narrowband 
converter cannot be used on each machine, since the 
efficiency massively decreases whenever the vibrations are 
not in the vicinity of the resonance frequency. 
 
 
Figure 7.  
Exemplary acceleration spectrum of a typical drive 
 
 
Figure 8.  
Prototype implementation of the vibration harvester,  
 
source: Baumer  
A broadband vibration transducer (see Fig. 8) has been 
developed in the ECoMoS project by skillful stacking of 
piezo elements. The first prototypes of the vibration energy 
converter (see Fig. 9) were tested with a tunable Shaker. It 
was found that the vibrations in the range of 300 to 800 Hz 
provided enough energy to supply the radio sensor elec-
tronics. Such broadband transducers can be used more 
universally. 
 
Figure 9.  
Design of a broadband vibration transducer by stacking  
piezo elements [10] 
Significant temperature differences can often be found in 
industrial plants. Different drives were examined under 
operational conditions regarding their temperature distri-
bution to develop very compact wireless sensor nodes with 
an integrated thermal converter. The temperature differences 
that occur directly on the thermocouple were observed for 
typical measuring points using a special test setup consisting 
of a reference heat sink and thermal converters with 
embedded temperature sensors. A temperature difference of 
only 3°C at the thermocouple was required to deliver enough 
energy for the power consumption of wireless sensor nodes 
for condition monitoring.  
The developed concept for the sensor node shown in Fig. 
10 provides integrated thermoelectric energy conversion 
capabilities allowing for fully autonomous operation. The 
concept is based on dual usage of the housing as both, 
protective holding of sensitive electronic components and the 
thermal path. In the center, a Bi2Te3-based thermoelectric 
device with edge-length of 20mm is mounted in between a 
bottom mounting base and a top cooler with integrated cavity 
for inclusion of the electronic system. The aluminum body 
with 58mm in diameter and a total height of 45mm is then 
mounted to a hot surface allowing for direction of heat flow 
orthogonal to the plane coupled to the hot spot. Screws for 
fixture of cooler and mounting base include thermally 
isolating sleeves and an isolating spacer defining a fixed 
height for thermoelectric module inclusion. Silicone-based 
heat-conductive pads are included on hot and cold sides of 
the thermoelectric modules to account for height tolerances 
by the manufacturer and provide damping when opposing 
the module to mechanical loads.  

134
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a) 
  b) 
 
Figure 10.  a) Assembly concept of the radio sensor system with 
integrated thermal energy havesting, b) Implemented 
prototype 
Energy harvesting devices combine properties of 
different physical domains. The development of a 
multiphysics model suited to describe these domains 
simultaneously 
is 
therefore 
recommended. 
For 
the 
thermoelectric converter a suited model comprises the 
thermal path through couplings to heat source and –sink as 
well as the electrical side. Thermal voltage generated  

dT
T
T
U
S
c
h
S
th







)
(


depends on the Seebeck coefficient αS and the thermal 
difference between hot- and cold-side temperatures Th and Tc 
respectively across the thermoelectric element. However, the 
thermoelectric figure of merit  

T
ZT
S
 



2


is a measure of a material’s capability to efficiently generate 
electric power from temperature gradients. It depends on the 
thermal conductivity λ, and electrical conductivity ρ and 
absolute Temperature T.   
By transformation using the analogy between thermal 
and electrical path a mutual modal can be derived that 
enables computation of electric voltage and current 
depending on the heat flow through the device as well as the 
peripheral electric circuitry. The setup of the electronic 
subsystem for voltage conversion and buffering was included 
in the analysis to simulate performance on system level.  
Temperature distribution at the measuring points was 
applied in simulations to evaluate different assembly 
concepts (see Fig 11). In order to optimize the thermal 
properties of the housing computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD) software assuming varying ambient conditions was 
applied. The model was then used to calculate available 
temperature levels within the construction considering 
thermal interfaces and coupling to hot and cold sides. For 
this purpose a geometry model of the proposed solution was 
set up in ANSYS Icepak with the thermoelectric device 
being modeled with the elements shown in [10]. Material 
properties of metals and isolators were taken from Icepak 
library while specific heat conductivity of the thermoelectric 
element as well as the thermal interface material were 
determined 
from 
experiment. 
Boundary 
conditions 
resembling possible field conditions were set after applying a 
standard hexahedral mesh to the model.  
All modules were aligned orthogonally to the z plane 
with the main direction of heat transfer in the z-direction. A 
constant temperature of T=61°C resembling available hot 
surfaces of industrial type engines was applied to the lower 
x-y-plane of the cabinet. The ambient temperature of 
surrounding medium at initial state was set to 35°C as 
measured in the machine hall. For simulation of natural 
convection effects, activation of gravity in the z-direction 
was considered. In the x-direction, the flow of fluid (air) 
particles was increased in four steps. In the worst case, the 
sensor node has to function at a solely natural convection. A 
typical velocity of v=0.2m/s was then increased in discrete 
steps to values of 0.5m/s and 1m/s resembling forced 
convection in the immediate environment of the devices, 
e.g., fans in the motor block available within immediate 
distance from the mounting base.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Simulation result of temperature distribution for a thermo-
electric harvesting device at forced convection of v=1m/s 
a) 
 b) 
 
Figure 12.  a) Simulation of temperature distribution, b) Temperature 
distribution during machine operations   

135
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Temperature distribution of running engines was 
determined by infrared-thermography (see Fig. 12). A robust 
housing with a diameter of only 4 centimeters was designed 
so that the hot and cold sides of the thermal converter are 
coupled particularly well with the industrial environment, 
without reducing the accuracy of the high-precision 
acceleration sensor.  
Fig. 13 demonstrates the exemplary results of a 
simulation applied to the demonstrator. Average power 
provided to the consuming electronics at a constant voltage 
of 2.1V was calculated based on the simulation results of the 
system-oriented modeling concept using Matlab/Simulink 
(see Fig. 5).   
 
 
Figure 13.  Continuous net power generated by the thermoelectric  
energy harvester 
In the case of natural convection, only copper-based 
housing provided sufficient heat transfer within the thermal 
path. Choosing this option, voltage converted at the 
thermoelectric device was just above threshold value to start 
up the power management IC. Efficiency of the demonstrator 
was verified using a wind tunnel test setup with deviations 
below 10% from energy output simulation results.  
A design tool for a first order approximation has been 
implemented to facilitate the future development of wireless 
sensor systems with embedded energy harvesting. This 
software provides the system specific parameters from the 
component library. The parameters can be adjusted by the 
hardware designer to layout the power supply of self-
powered wireless sensor nodes. After selection of the 
conversion method, the type of physical size of the 
harvesting unit can be suitably configured. In the example of 
the thermal converter, this applies to additional layers, (e.g., 
thermal paste and mounting adapter), which have to be taken 
into account for their impact on the energy efficiency (see 
Fig. 14).  
 
 
Figure 14.  Selection of the energy converter and configuration  
Following the energy conversion chain, the parameters 
for the voltage conditioning and energy storage can be 
queried. It is possible to select predefined voltage 
transformers. During simulation the input or output 
impedance at the operation point as well as the converted 
output voltage or current level are considered together with 
non-ideal effects of energy buffers such as leakage current 
and a parasitic internal resistance. In the input mask for the 
configuration of the load, the clock frequency of the 
processor is to be set in order to determine the computation 
time for the individual algorithms. This approach allows for 
a first estimation of the energy performance of the wireless 
sensor node to determine the size of the power conversion 
stage and energy buffer so that particularly compact sizes 
can be realized inexpensively. The method can be seen as a 
supplementary tool to detailed system analysis as previously 
described. It is also planned to use System-C for system 
modeling to investigate more complex algorithms in terms of 
energy requirements. 
IV. 
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE PER WIRELESS 
NETWORK 
In production halls, there are many sources of 
interference that can affect radio transmission considerably. 
In the early days of radio communication, many problems 
regarding robustness of radio links occur in the industrial 
sector. This led initially to a high skepticism about wireless 
sensors, because the robustness of data transmission in 
industrial environments is particularly important. Mean-
while, there are various solutions to ensure robust radio 
communications. In particular, procedures at the protocol 
level of digital radio communication can reconstruct the 
correct data even when data erasure of multiple bits occurs. 
Therefore, the problem of robust data transmission is well 
under control in this manner, although the increase in energy 
efficiency of robust radio communication still remains an 
important research topic. An energy-efficient medium access 
control protocol based on Time Division Multiple Access 
[17] was applied here. In this single-hop network, all sensor 
nodes receive a time schedule about the next communication 
interval from the base station. 
Security and trust are very important issues in industrial 
environments. The corresponding measures are currently 
under development. A secure wireless communication 
among the sensor nodes and the gateway will be ensured by 
AES encryption and unique identifiers for each device. The 
communication between the gateway and the private cloud 
server will be implemented using the OPC UA protocol 
stack. To assure a secure data access of the different users, a 
commercial solution such as CodeMeter® will be chosen for 
the license management in the cloud. This security approach   
guarantees diagnostic results based on trusted sensor data. 
The installation of wireless sensors can now be done 
quite comfortably. After attaching to a machine, sensor 
nodes identify existing wireless networks and log on. The 
operating parameters of the sensor systems, such as duty 
cycles, can be adjusted via the radio base station. A software 
update via radio link is also possible if new damage patterns 
or changes in communication protocols require reprograming 

136
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the wireless sensor nodes. Thus, the user does not need to 
trigger a time-consuming firmware update for each 
individual sensor nodes via cable. Such a wired repro-
graming of sensor node can be very expensive especially for 
measurement positions, which are hard to reach. 
For the preparation of the field tests, the prototypes were 
first tested in the laboratory by a tunable Shaker, which 
simulated the vibration profile of broken machines. The 
direct field trials were carried out in the harsh environment 
of a paper mill under realistic operating conditions in order 
to obtain more meaningful test results. 
On the site of the former gas conglomerate, Schwarze 
Pumpe, between Cottbus and Dresden, where earlier lignite 
was refined, paper production has been in full swing since 
April 2005. 170 million euros were invested to build the 
Spremberg mill. With a capacity of 330,000 tons of base 
paper per year, corrugated board is produced from 100 
percent recycled paper. The preparation of a 1000 meter long 
and 5.4 meter wide paper web requires just a minute. Only 
one hour of downtime would cost 5,000 euros. Wireless 
technology significantly reduces material and installation 
costs for copper wire and cable channels for about 100 
meters total length of the paper machine (see Fig. 15), that 
the initial investment for a wireless condition monitoring 
system offers a very short payback time. 
 
Figure 15.  Paper plant in Spremberg [10] 
The fusion of data from the wireless sensor nodes is 
provided by the base station, the so-called ECoMoS server, 
which is connected by field bus with the control center of the 
paper machine (see Fig. 16). During the installation of sensor 
node as well as the exchange of production components the 
kinematic parameters for the in-depth diagnosis has to be 
updated at the ECoMoS server. The ECoMoS server also 
receives the rotation speeds of the individual drives in the 
paper machine and transmits this data to the corresponding 
sensor nodes ted to the server ECoMoS. This procedure is 
done before and after each measuring interval.  
If a damage pattern is detected, each sensor node can 
send the raw data via the base station and the ECoMoS 
server to the control center of the paper plant. So, experts can 
examine the characteristics of serious errors in critical cases 
before costly actions for damage repair are initiated. Often, it 
is sufficient to replace a damaged bearing during the regular 
maintenance interval. 
 
Figure 16.  Integration of the ECoMoS sensor network into the process  
 
control system of the paper plant [10]  
V. 
SUCCESSFUL PRACTICAL TEST IN THE PAPER FACTORY 
In the first prototype generation, the system parts sensor, 
data processing, radio interface and power supply had been 
designed as modules to be tested in the paper mill separately. 
The final prototype generation as a compact complete system 
was produced in February 2014. Currently, the last work on 
the wireless protocol and the software for the ECoMoS 
server ECoMoS is nearly finished. Firstly, four measuring 
positions in the paper mills were equipped with the ECoMoS 
wireless sensor nodes to demonstrate a successful project 
completion (see Fig. 17). This sensor network can be 
extended to the full configuration with 664 sensor nodes. 
 
 (a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 17.  a) Field tests of the second prototype generation,  
b) ECoMoS-Server  in operation 

137
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The wireless sensor network, developed by the ECoMoS 
project, can be used to detect wear of machines and plants 
that have drives, which are at least temporarily operated at a 
constant speed. There are many such manufacturing 
facilities. When in the future, low-cost wireless sensor 
systems will be available, condition monitoring will be used 
for additional rotating parts such as fans, which are not 
currently monitored due to cost reasons. The bill of material 
for such sensor node ranges from 10 to 300 euros depending 
on the requirements and environment. The cost of an entire 
sensor network, however, is mainly influenced by the 
production quantity. The development costs dominate the 
overall cost in niche applications. For a wide range of 
applications, however, such wireless sensor nodes will be 
produced in large quantities, so that the design and software 
costs only account for a small proportion of total costs. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The aim of the joint project ECoMoS was to develop a 
wireless sensor network for the condition monitoring of 
industrial machines. The wide range of expertise in the fields 
of measurement technology, wireless communication, energy 
harvesting, module integration and machinery diagnosis 
were necessary to demonstrate the opportunities of modern 
wireless sensors for condition monitoring. The installation of 
sensor networks within plants provides the basis for 
advanced concepts in condition monitoring. Wireless 
solutions for machine diagnosis make it possible to reduce 
installation costs while collecting and evaluating more data 
on the individual sensors. 
As such systems become available, the leverage effect for 
the construction of machines and plants becomes hard to 
predict. Such sensor networks will be connected with cloud 
services, so that the machine diagnosis can be supported by 
external service providers or by the system manufacturer. 
The manufacturer would then be in a much better position to 
assess the reliability of their products. It can be observed, for 
instance, whether or not the construction of machine 
components needs to be improved, or whether it is possible 
to reduce costs, without impairing the reliability. 
Even if the use of radio sensor systems with artificial 
intelligence in production facilities is still to be regarded as 
visionary, highly miniaturized wireless sensor nodes for the 
future self-organization of production systems are under 
development.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The joint project ECoMoS was funded by the Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and 
managedwith support of VDI / VDE Innovation + Technik 
GmbH in Berlin. The project results has achieved by the 
cooperation of the companies IMC Meßgeräte, Elbau, GfM 
Gesellschaft für Maschinendiagnose, GE Energy, Baumer, 
EnOcean, Hamburger Rieger together with the Fraunhofer 
IZM and the Technical University Berlin. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Niedermayer, E. Kravcenko, R. Wirth, A. Haubold, S. 
Benecke, and K. D. Lang, “Early-Warning System for 
Machine Failures: Self-Sufficient Radio Sensor Systems for 
Wireless Condition Monitoring,” Proc. of 7th Int. Conf. on 
Sensor Technologies and Applications SENSORCOMM, 
Barcelona, Spain, pp 225–230. 
[2] M. Niedermayer, R. Thomasius, D. Polityko, K. Schrank, S. 
Guttowski, W. John, and H. Reichl, “Miniaturization Platform 
for Wireless Sensor Nodes Based on 3D-Packaging 
Technologies,” Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. IPSN/SPOTS, 
Nashville, TN, Apr. 2006, pp 391–398. 
[3] M. Niedermayer, J. Hefer, and S. Guttowski, “Technology-
Oriented Design of Radio Sensor Nodes,” in Smart Systems 
Integration and Reliability, Ed. B. Michel, Goldenbogen, 
ISBN: 3540238670, Dresden, Germany, 2010. 
[4] M. Niedermayer, C. Richter, J. Hefer, S. Guttowski, and H. 
Reichl, “SENESCOPE: A Design Tool for Cost Optimization 
of Wireless Sensor Nodes,” Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. 
IPSN/SPOTS, San Francisco, CA, Apr. 2009, pp. 313–324. 
[5] M. Niedermayer, “Commercialisation and Application Driven 
Economic Viability of Sensor Technology,” in Comprehen-
sive Materials Processing, Ed. S. Hashmi, Elsevier Science 
Ltd, ISBN: 0080965326, Oxford, UK, 2013. 
[6] E. Hohwieler, E. Uhlmann, M. Niedermayer, and B. Hirsch, 
“Self-organizing Production with Distributed Intelligence,” 
Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Innovative Production Machines and 
Systems, Ischia, Italy, May 2009, pp. 163–167. 
[7] M. Niedermayer, H. Scholtz, T. Bonim, S. Guttowski, and K. 
D. Lang, “Robust 3D Radio Sensor Systems with Embedded 
Active and Passive Components for Industrial Applications,” 
Proc. Int. Conf. on Sensors and Its Applications SIA, Jeju 
Island, Korea, Nov. 2012, pp. 336–341. 
[8] E. Kravcenko, M. Niedermayer, S. Guttowski, N. Nissen, S. 
Benecke, A. Middendorf, and H. Reichl, “A System-oriented 
Approach for Modeling Energy Harvesting Devices in 
Wireless Sensor-Modules, ” Proc. of 4th Int. Conf. on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications SENSORCOMM, Venice, 
Italy, Jul. 2010, pp. 305–310. 
[9] M. Niedermayer, “Cost-Driven Design of Smart Micro 
Systems,” Artech House Publishers, ISBN: 1608070840, 
Norwood, MA, U.S. 2012 
[10] E. O. Brigham, “The Fast Fourier Transform,”  Prentice-Hall, 
New York, 2002. 
[11] R. Wirth, “Self-Sufficient Condition Monitoring System 
ECoMoS,” Grant 16SV3371-16SV3377, Project Report, TIB 
Hanover, 2013. 
[12] Solar Cells Technical Handbook ‘98/99, Panasonic, Industrial 
Co., Ltd. 
[13] S. Roundy, P. K. Wright, J. Rabaey, “Energy Scavenging for 
Wireless Sensor Networks with Special Focus on Vibrations,” 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004. 
[14] Product information TEG-127-150-26, www.thermalforce.de, 
March 2010. 
[15] S. Sudevalayam, and Kulkarni, P., “Energy Harvesting Sensor 
Nodes: Survey and Implications. IEEE Communications 
Surveys and Tutorials,” Vol. 13, No. 3, 2011, pp. 443–461.   
[16] S. Benecke, J. Rueckschloss, A. Middendorf, N.F. Nissen,  
and 
K.-D. Lang, 
“Energy Harvesting 
for 
distributed 
microsystems – The link between environmental performance 
and availability of energy supply,” Proc. EcoDesign, 2011. 
[17] S. C. Ergen and P. Varaiya, “TDMA scheduling algorithms 
for wireless sensor networks,” Springer Wireless Network, 
Vol. 16, 2010, pp. 985–997.  
 
 

