92
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Using Dijkstra and Fusion Algorithms to Provide a Smart Proactive mHealth 
Solution for Saudi Arabia’s Emergency Medical Services 
Khulood Alghamdi 
Medical Education Department, College of Medicine 
Information Technology Department, College of Computer 
and Information Sciences 
King Saud University (KSU), Riyadh, KSA 
kmalghamdi@ksu.edu.sa 
Shada Alsalamah 
Information Systems Department  
College of Computer and Information Sciences, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA 
saalsalamah@ksu.edu.sa
Ghada Al-Hudhud 
Information Technology Department 
College of Computer and Information Sciences, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA 
galhudhud@ksu.edu.sa 
Thamer Nouh 
Trauma and Acute Care Surgery Unit 
Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA  
tnouh@ksu.edu.sa 
Ibrahim Alyahya 
Emergency Medical Services 
Saudi Red Crescent Authority 
Riyadh, KSA 
imyahya@srca.org.sa 
Sakher AlQahtani 
Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics 
College of Dentistry, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA 
asakher@ksu.edu.sa
 
 
Abstract—Ambulance diversion in overcrowded hospitals and 
Emergency Departments (EDs) can have negative consequences 
on patients' health and safety. Saudi Arabia is thriving to enhance 
its healthcare sector through an ongoing digitization transition as 
part of Vision 2030. However, existing infrastructure is still ill-
equipped to integrate the distributed siloed systems involved in 
hospital bed and Emergency Medical Services (EMSs) ecosystem 
leading to delayed decisions and poor outcomes based on 
incomplete and inaccurate information. This article addresses this 
problem by proposing, mEmergency, a smart proactive mobile 
healthcare solution that connects EMS ambulances with EDs in 
Riyadh trauma centers to facilitate making real-time informed 
decisions in a timely fashion to save lives. First, mEmergency 
predicts inpatient bed capacity using Fusion Algorithm and 
prioritizes the nearest and most equipped ED for the patient’s 
condition to paramedics using a mHealth application. Second, it 
uses Dijkstra’s Algorithm to route the ambulance path taken to the 
right ED, while the patient’s vital signs are being recorded into the 
solution along with physical assessment. Finally, mEmergency 
disseminates the paramedic’s assessment information to the ED 
prior to arrival to optimize time and resources for continuous 
readiness. mEmergency is an effective solution that should 
optimize EMS resources, reduce ED crowding, and increase the 
quality of urgent care services to help stakeholders regain trust in 
Saudi urgent care service delivery. 
 
Keywords- mHealth; Emergency medical services; Emergency 
department; Dijkstra algorithm; Fusion algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Ambulance diversion is a strategy often used by 
overcrowded hospitals and Emergency Departments (EDs) 
with unavailable beds or resources. EDs that do not have 
available inpatient beds for emergency patients often have to 
divert ambulances to other hospitals. This adds to the total 
time it takes the ambulance to transport the patient, and thus, 
can have negative consequences on the patient’s health and 
safety, especially in cases of urgent care when every second is 
crucial and could mean life or death. Shen and Hsia, in the 
Journal of the American Medical Association [2], report that 
heart attack victims are more likely to die when their nearest 
hospital has high diversion rates for more than 12 hours per 
day, in contrast to other heart attack victims who happen to be 
near a hospital without diversion or with diversion for less 
than 12 hours per day [2]. Therefore, to reduce the time it takes 
to reach the nearest available emergency department, there is 
an urgent need for a continuous, stable process that connects 
both the ED and the ambulance services together.  
Furthermore, an arriving patient may be declined or placed 
on hold by Medical Care Utilization (MCU) if there is no bed 
available. In such cases, the patient may be subject to similar 
health risks due to the necessity of finding an alternative 
health care provider or waiting until a bed becomes available. 
Similarly, an arriving patient may be accepted for treatment 
but can be accommodated in another MCU (e.g., an arriving 
obstetrics patient can be boarded in neurosurgery), and hence 
there is the chance that it may not be possible to move 
admitted patients from the ED due to an inpatient bed 
problem. This forces the ED to board admitted patients until 
inpatient beds are available, effectively reducing the ED’s 
capacity to care for new patients. Boarding of inpatients in the 
ED has also been cited as the most important determinant of 
ambulance diversion. 

93
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In addition to time and systems integration factors, cyber 
attacks on healthcare infrastructure for a deliberate 
interruption of healthcare services could leave hospitals no 
choice but to divert ambulances. Global attacks on electronic 
service providers in healthcare, business, and government 
sectors have been witnessed in recent times, and there has 
been a wave of deliberate attacks using the WannaCry virus. 
WannaCry is a Trojan 
malware 
virus 
known as 
“ransomware.”  The virus holds the infected computer hostage 
and demands that the victim pays a ransom to regain access to 
the files on his/her computer.  Ransomware, like WannaCry, 
works by encrypting most or all of the files on a user’s 
computer. demanding that a ransom be paid in order to have 
the files decrypted. The episodes of Ransom ware attacks [3] 
have had a massive scale effect on roughly 150 countries, 
targeting not only home computers but also healthcare, 
communications infrastructure, logistics, and government 
entities for financial gain. This has challenged healthcare 
providers’ deployment of their computerized complex 
systems to maintain patient records and patient diversion data 
at critical times, so as to paralyze healthcare services in some 
targeted health trusts in European countries, such as England’s 
National Health Service (NHS) [3]. Hospitals across 
England’s National Health Service reported that the 
cyberattack was causing huge problems to their services by 
affecting X-ray imaging systems, pathology test results, phone 
systems and patient administration systems” [3]. 
This article is an extended version of preliminary work 
published in [1] that aims to address ambulance diversion 
challenges in Emergency Medical Services (EMSs) in Saudi 
Arabia by connecting siloed information systems to make 
informed decisions in a timely fashion. The preliminary work 
[1] identified the decentralization challenges faced in Saudi’s 
EMS ecosystem due to the fragmentation of data, a lack of 
communication among stakeholders, and a lack of 
interoperability between the information systems. This article 
proposes mEmergency, a practical solution that can reduce 
ambulance diversion and the time it takes to reach the nearest 
appropriate ED: one with available inpatient beds and the right 
resources for that patient’s care.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
introduces the background, while Section III discusses related 
work. Section IV describes our methodology and structure, 
and Section V draws our conclusions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND  
The Saudi Arabian government has accorded high priority 
to healthcare services. According to the Saudi Arabian “Basic 
Law of Governance” [4], the government guarantees the right 
to healthcare for its citizens and their families. It is responsible 
for providing public health care services to all Saudi citizens.  
In recent years, healthcare services in Saudi Arabia have 
improved tremendously in terms of quantity and quality. This 
is evident in the literature and government white papers in 
general, and reflected in the total number of hospitals in Saudi 
Arabia. The governmental sector owns nearly 70 percent of 
hospitals, with the rest being operated by the private sector [5]. 
The number of government hospitals in Saudi increased by 49 
hospitals between 2011 and 2015 with a capacity of 69,394 
beds. 
A. ED Crowding  
ED crowding and inpatient bed capacity are pressing 
problems facing healthcare worldwide. ED Crowding is 
defined as [6]: 
“A situation in which the ED function is impeded by 
the number of patients waiting to be seen, 
undergoing assessment and treatment, or waiting 
for departure, exceeding the physical or staffing 
capacity of the department.”  
Ed crowding should not be managed as a standalone 
problem. Contributing factors must be examined in order to 
eliminate the problem. The lack of hospital inpatient bed 
capacity could lead to ED boarding, which is a significant 
cause of ED crowding [7]. ED boarding is the practice of 
keeping patients in the ED waiting area due to the lack of 
available inpatient beds, even after their admission to the 
hospital. This results in many issues, including ambulance 
diversion, extended patient waiting periods, delays in 
treatment, and longer waiting times for other patients who do 
not require admission to be treated [8]. Finally, there is an 
urgent need for a solution to eliminate ED crowding and 
ambulance diversions resulting from unavailable inpatients 
bed capacity and ED boarding. This is to provide emergency 
patients with fast and reliable healthcare and reduce the time 
it takes the ambulance to reach the nearest available 
emergency department. To address the above issues, there is 
a need for a continuous, stable process that requires system-
wide support among all healthcare related parties, in order to 
connect and work with both the emergency departments and 
the ambulance services together. 
B. Hospital Bed-Ecosystem 
A hospital bed is not simply a piece of furniture; it is a vital 
part of hospital infrastructure that enables patient treatment. A 
hospital bed is an ecosystem that enables delivery of care via 
trained professionals, managerial staff, equipment and 
pharmaceuticals (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Hospital Bed EcoSystem. 

94
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Hospital Bed Capacity Planning  
Hospital capacity planning is crucial in healthcare. It is 
essential for managing hospital resources and hospital staff 
and personnel. In addition, it could be the deciding factor 
between a patient’s life and death.  In some countries, such as 
Finland, New Zealand and Germany, the unit for measuring 
hospital care and capacity is bed occupancy rate [9], which is 
defined as “the number of hospital beds occupied by patients 
expressed as a percentage of the total beds available in the 
hospital” [10]. This rate remains an essential unit in hospital 
capacity planning. Nevertheless, using bed numbers and 
occupancy as a measurement in hospital capacity planning 
will not foretell the hospital’s future demand; neither will it 
provide a valid estimate of hospital services [9]. 
In research published by the World Health Organization, 
researchers propose using strategies that focus on the benefits 
of using systematic processes in hospital capacity planning. 
They argue that it is not beneficial to look at the hospital from 
the perspective of beds and occupancy rates, but rather it is 
necessary to focus on processes and the path taken by the 
patients inside the hospital. One of the strategies mentioned is 
to design hospital flows around “care pathways” instead of 
counting beds; the strategy works by identifying the variety of 
pathways the patients take inside the hospital, as well as the 
factors that can cause delays in patients’ treatment, thus 
identifying bottlenecks ]11]. 
Therefore, the key to successful capacity planning is to try 
to eliminate any possible future cause of bottlenecks.  
Sometimes this could be the number of inpatients' available 
beds, ineffective allocation of existing patients among 
different medical service units. and sometimes it could be 
other hospital departments attempting to enhance their 
performance without realizing how such actions might affect 
others. Guaranteeing that there are as few bottlenecks as 
possible will, in turn, result in minimizing delays in patient 
treatment, separating patients into two streams based on 
complexity rather than urgency, and as a result creating a fast 
track for patients who can be treated and discharged more or 
less immediately [10]. 
D. International Hospital Statistics  
Despite hospital planning strategies, this section highlights 
some international statistics for acute hospital bed shortages 
around the globe. In Austria [12], hospital beds have an 
Average Length of Stay (ALoS) of 18 days or less. This 
includes some daycare beds.  In Germany, acute hospital beds 
are the beds other than psychiatric and long-term beds. It does 
not include any daycare beds. In Iceland, acute hospital beds 
are calculated from bed-days, assuming 90% occupancy rate; 
beds in medicine and surgeries of leading hospitals and mixed 
facilities are available in small hospitals that do not include 
any daycare beds. In Italy, acute hospital beds include 
inpatient beds of psychiatric hospitals and in-patient beds of 
psychiatric wards of other hospitals; these do not include any 
daycare beds. In Spain, acute hospital beds include general 
hospitals, maternity, other specialized hospitals, and health 
centers -- no daycare beds. In the UK, acute hospital beds 
include NHS acute medical, surgical and maternity beds 
(excluding Northern Ireland) [12] (see Table I below for 
others country). 
TABLE I.  
DEFINITIONS OF HOSPITAL BEDS IN SELECTED 
COUNTRIES [12] 
Country 
Content 
Austria 
Beds in hospitals with average length of stay of 18 
days or less 
Germany 
Beds other than psychiatric and long term beds 
Italy 
In-patient beds of psychiatric hospitals and in-
patient 
United 
Kingdom 
National Health Service acute medical, surgical and 
maternity beds (excluding Northern Ireland) 
Spain 
General hospitals, maternity, other specialized 
hospitals, health centres 
Sweden 
Beds for short term care run by county councils and 
three 
independent 
communities 
(short-term 
includes 
medical, 
surgical, 
miscellaneous 
medicine/surgery, 
admission 
department 
and 
intensive care) 
Turkey 
Public hospitals, health centres, maternity hospitals, 
cardiovascular and thoracic surgical centres, 
orthopaedic surgery hospitals 
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Bed Capacity Planning Approach 
Like any other industry, healthcare faces enormous 
pressure to improve efficiency and reduce costs. A study by 
McKinsey [6] points out that the U.S. spends at least $600 - 
$850 billion on healthcare annually. One area that can be 
leveraged in healthcare is the support of informed decision-
making processes. This is to allow the end user (namely, 
hospital administrators or clinical managers) to assess the 
efficiency of existing healthcare delivery systems.  
Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) is a widely used 
technique for the analysis of systems with complex behaviors 
[14]. DES has been widely applied in healthcare services [14] 
to study the interrelationships between admission rates, 
hospital occupancy, and several different policies for 
allocating beds to MCUs. Lewis D [15] studied bed 
management in Germany's hospitals, and decision support 
systems were presented depending on mathematical 
approaches and computer-based assistance designed to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of admission 
planning and bed assignment. The study starts by 
interviewing professionals in bed management to identify 
aspects that must be respected when developing the decision 
system, ensuring that patients' treatment priorities and 
individual preferences are respected [15]. Patient admission 
and assignment are based on up-to-date and flexible Length 
of Stay (LoS) estimates, being taken into aggregated 
contingents of hospital beds, treatment priorities, patient 
preferences, and a linkage between clinics and wards [15].  
The main reason for using DES for modeling a healthcare 
clinic instead of other mathematical modeling tools (such as 
linear programming and Markov chain analysis) is the ability 
to simulate complex patient flows through healthcare clinics, 
and to play “what if” games by changing the patient flow 

95
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
rules and policies [15]. Such flows are usually in emergency 
rooms, where patients can be seen without appointments and 
require treatment for various sets of ailments and conditions 
[15]. These disorders can range from mild injuries to serious 
medical emergencies. Although the number of patients is 
unpredictable, medical staff can control the treatment by 
minimizing patient waiting times and increasing staff 
utilization rates [16]. 
In emergency rooms, to reduce waiting times of low 
priority patients, Schmidt et al. [16] analyzed the effects of 
using a fast track lane. As emergency rooms are prioritized 
according to the level of patient sickness, low priority 
patients may have to wait for exceedingly long periods of 
time [16]. A simulation model is used to classify daily 
occupancy distributions; it helps in studying the swapping of 
overflow and bed capacity levels, and it investigates the 
effects of various changes. ED overcrowding principally 
results from the incapability of admitted patients to be 
transferred toward beds in a timely manner [17]. Most experts 
agree that a greater inpatient capacity is required in order to 
relieve access block and decrease ED overcrowding [16]. The 
authors in [16] collected real data from a single month at a 
single hospital, and a computer model was developed to 
examine the relationship between admissions, discharges and 
ED overcrowding (the number of hours admitted patients 
waited in ED before transfer to an inpatient bed). Meanwhile, 
authors in [16] proposed a facility location model to locate 
ER services on a network and determine their respective 
capacity levels, such that the probability of diverting patients 
is not larger than a particular threshold.  
Author Chin-I Lin in [17] presents a conceptual model of 
ED overcrowding to help administrators, researchers, and 
policymakers. The ED conceptual model recognizes at least 
three general categories of care delivered in the ED: 
Emergency care, Unscheduled urgent care, and Safety net 
care. The outputs are patients who are unable to obtain 
follow-up care and often return to the ED if their condition 
does not improve or deteriorates [17]. The throughput 
component of the model identifies the patient length of stay 
in the ED as a potential contributing factor to ED crowding. 
The ED crowding is then measured based on two phases; the 
first phase includes triage, room placement, and the initial 
provider evaluation. The triage phase is used to objectively 
identify patients suitable for treatment by emergency nurse 
practitioners [17]. Since emergency nurse practitioners show 
high diagnostic accuracy, the emergency nurse practitioner 
model of care is considered an essential strategy in reducing 
the LoS of ED patients and may prevent ED crowding [17]. 
Meanwhile, the second phase of the throughput component 
includes diagnostic testing and ED treatment.  
The input-throughput-output conceptual model of ED 
crowding may be useful for organizing research, policy, and 
operations management agenda to alleviate the problem [17]. 
This model illustrates the need for a systems approach with 
integrated, rather than piecemeal, solutions for ED crowding 
[17]. In the study, there are four general areas of ED crowding 
that require future research.  
First, research must consider developing valid and 
reliable measures of ED crowding. These measures should be 
sensitive to changes throughout time. Second, research in the 
field should identify the most critical causes of ED crowding 
from each component of the model. Third, the effect of ED 
crowding on the quality of patient care must be assessed. 
Finally, interventions to reduce ED crowding need to be 
evaluated.   
Ineffective allocation of existing bed capacity among 
different medical service units can lead to service quality 
problems for the patients, along with operational and 
financial inefficiencies for the hospitals [17]. Most health 
care managers apply relatively simple approaches, such as the 
use of target occupancy level with an average length of stay, 
to forecast bed capacity required for a hospital or an MCU 
[17]. The failure to adequately consider uncertainties 
associated with patient arrivals and the time needed to treat 
patients by using such simple approaches may result in bed 
capacity configurations where a large proportion of patients 
may have to be turned away. The application of queuing 
theory allows for the evaluation of the expected (long-run) 
performance measure of a system by solving the associated 
set of flow balance equations [17]. 
Other research considers the hierarchical relationship 
between care units. For example, after a mother-to-be 
delivers her child in the labor and delivery unit, she should be 
moved to the postpartum unit for recovery [17]. If the 
capability downstream is insufficient, patients must stay 
within the current care units with typically more costly 
equipment, thereby reaching capacity limits at these upstream 
care units [17].  
To take the interactions among care units in a hospital into 
account, C Lin [17] first applies queuing network 
methodology (without blocking) to discover a balanced bed 
allotment, which is obtained through trial-and-error work. 
Then, they use simulation analysis to estimate the blocking 
behavior and patient sojourn times. The authors [17] develop 
a mathematical programming formulation to address this 
problem, and the system uses a different approach by 
integrating results from queuing theory into an optimization 
framework. Specifically, the model with each MCU in a 
hospital has an M/M/c/c queuing system to estimate the 
probability of rejection when there are beds. 
B. International Bed Management System (BMS) 
Hospitals should use a BMS that provides a real-time 
display of hospital occupied beds, along with the available 
beds, as well as the current status of each one [17]. Therefore, 
by using a BMS system, the hospital staff would be able to 
view the status of each bed, whether the bed was occupied, 
vacant or being prepared for a patient. Also, the hospital staff 
would be able to view the patient's status; if the patient was 
going to be discharged, had already left, or was being 
transferred. Moreover, by using the system, nurses can utilize 
more of their time in caring for the patient, instead of handling 
bed assignment tasks manually.  This Bed Management Unit 
used at Alexandra Hospital has provided critical benefits to 
both patients and staff; indeed, by using the system, patients’ 
waiting times have been decreased by 30 percent [18]. 
Singapore General Hospital (SGH) is another hospital that has 
benefited from the use of technology to manage hospital beds. 

96
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The SGH uses BMS technology to help improve hospital 
capacity and care. BMS is a web-based system that allows 
hospital staff and administration to access information related 
to patient flow anywhere in the hospital. The BMS user 
interface has been configured to display the location of 
patients in the hospital as well as the primary physician. The 
system also allows the hospital staff to view and track 
information, records and any specific actions related to the 
patient's needs, as well as any follow-up movements required.  
The system gives nurses and bed management staff a full 
overview of the bed status and patient needs, which allows 
them to take immediate action.   
The way this system works is as follows: when the patient 
is admitted to the hospital, he/she will receive a Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) tag with a unique identifier 
that will identify and track the patient's location during his/her 
stay in the hospital. The system will then search for a bed that 
best fits the needs of the patient, based on his/her condition 
before assigning that bed to the patient.  The system also uses 
a real-time location system to help identify the location of the 
patient through the tag and display; this creates a workflow 
related to the patient's movements.  Hospital departments are 
also provided with LCD panels that display the BMS 
dashboard with real-time patient RFID location, which shows 
the patient's' information and bed statuses automatically in 
real-time. Once the patient is discharged, the BMS system will 
notify the housekeeping staff through their PDA to clean and 
prepare the vacated bed, and once the bed is ready, the 
housekeeping staff update the bed status [19]. 
C. Nature of Trauma 
In physical medicine, major trauma is an injury or damage 
to a biological organism caused by physical harm from an 
external source [29]. Major trauma is also an injury that can 
potentially lead to long-term severe outcomes, such as chronic 
pain or other lifelong ailments. There are different types of 
trauma [29]: 
1. 
Birth trauma: an injury to the infant during the 
process of being born. In some psychiatric theories, the 
psychic shock is produced in an infant by the experience of 
being born [29].   
2. 
Psychic 
trauma: 
a 
psychologically 
upsetting 
experience that produces an emotional or mental disorder or 
otherwise has lasting negative effects on a person's thoughts, 
feelings, or behavior [29]. 
3. 
Risk for trauma: a nursing diagnosis accepted by the 
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association, defined as 
accentuated risk of accidental tissue injury, such as a wound, 
burn, or fracture.  
The initial evaluation of a trauma patient is challenging 
and time-critical, as every minute could be the difference 
between life and death. Over the past 50 years, the assessment 
of trauma patients has evolved because of an improved 
understanding of the distribution of mortality and the 
mechanisms that contribute to morbidity and mortality in 
trauma [28]. On the one hand, early deaths may occur in the 
minutes or hours after the injury. These patients frequently 
arrive at a hospital before death, which usually occurs because 
of hemorrhage and cardiovascular collapse [28]. On the other 
hand, late trauma mortality peaks in the days and weeks after 
the injury and is primarily due to sepsis and multiple organ 
failure [28]. Therefore, systems supporting trauma care focus 
on the treatment of a patient from early trauma mortality, 
whereas critical care is designed to prevent late trauma 
mortality. This is the reason why it is essential to find beds 
prior to trauma cases [29], and therefore, our proposal strives 
to address this matter. 
D. Hospital Bed Capacity Globally and Saudi Vision 2030 
Hospitals’ provisions for accommodating the increasing 
number of emergency admissions is a matter of considerable 
public and political concern and has been the subject of 
widespread debate [26]. When discussing a hospital’s bed 
capacity, a number of questions are often raised. First, what is 
a hospital bed? As discussed earlier, a bed is more than an item 
of furniture on which a patient can lie. For a bed to make any 
meaningful contribution to a healthcare facility’s ability to 
treat someone, it must be accompanied by an appropriate 
hospital infrastructure, including trained professional and 
managerial staff, equipment and pharmaceuticals [13].  
For several years, hospital managers have been under 
pressure to reduce bed capacity and increase occupancy rates 
for operational efficiency, especially in the Hajj season [26]. 
More recently, public concern has arisen in cases where 
patients could not gain access to a local hospital or were 
subjected to extended delays for the availability of vacant beds 
[21]. Many countries now struggle to provide cost-effective, 
quality healthcare services to their citizens [24]. Saudi Arabia 
has experienced high costs along with concerns about the 
quality of care in its public facilities [27]. To address these 
issues, Saudi Arabia is currently restructuring its healthcare 
system to privatize public hospitals and introduce insurance 
coverage for both its citizens and foreign workers [27]. These 
changes provide an exciting and insightful case for the 
challenges faced when radically changing a country's 
healthcare system. The situation also demonstrates a unique 
case in the Middle East for greater reliance on the private 
sector to address rapidly escalating healthcare costs and 
deteriorating quality of care [27]. The complexity of changing 
a healthcare system is discussed with the many challenges 
associated with the change. 
According to Saudi Vision 2030 [23], the healthcare 
system has benefited from substantive investment in recent 
decades. As a result, we now have 2.2 hospital beds for every 
1,000 people, world-class medical specialists and an average 
life expectancy rising from 66 years to 74 years in the past 
three decades [25]. Work is currently underway to build and 
develop 38 news hospitals with a total capacity of 9,100 beds, 
in addition to two medical sites accommodating 2,350 beds 
[25]. During the current fiscal year, 1437/1438, 23 new 
hospitals (4,250 beds) in various regions across the Kingdom 
were built [25]. 
E. Availability of Beds in Saudi Hospital ED 
Implementing a Saudi Arabia-wide system would allow a 
patient's referral from one healthcare provider/facility to 
another. This includes the ability to electronically transfer 
patient-related data in either a structured (namely, organized 

97
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and well-maintained information that can be obtained in a 
simple click) or non-structured fashion (namely, data which is 
laborious to handle). Alternatively, pointers to eHealth 
accessible data could be used, including patient diagnosis and 
treatment, referral notes, medication lists, laboratory test 
results, radiology reports, digital images, audio and video 
files. This solution would enable integration of information on 
the availability of the facility, bed, provider or specialty. In 
addition, such a solution supports optimizing the search for 
best-fit resource utilization. The proposed work supports: 
• 
Riyadh 
hospital's 
bed 
management 
program, 
including automated interfaces with a hospital 
information system (HIS) “as an element of health 
informatics that focuses mainly on the administration 
needs of hospitals.” 
• 
Centralized query capabilities for Headquarter and 
Regional Administrators.  
• 
Operational support for the hospital and PHC 
practitioners providing patient referrals. 
• 
Support for full inpatient bed management cycle-
interface with multiple systems, including registries, 
HIS and communication systems. Generation of 
messages to hospital housekeeping. 
Emergency bed requirements and other hospital 
departments to inform of status - full reporting and 
analytical capability [25] (see Table II below). 
TABLE II.  
HOSPITALS ESTABLISHED IN SAUDI ARABIA (2010-2013) 
[25] 
Regions 
No. of Hospitals 
Established 
No. of Beds 
Riyadh 
8 
1,400 
Makkah 
8 
2,386 
Eastern 
7 
1,150 
Al Madinah 
5 
650 
Hail 
3 
180 
Qassim 
4 
475 
Northern Border 
3 
400 
Asir 
8 
800 
F. Regionalization Vs. Bed Capacity 
In a healthcare service facility, when an ER is full or all 
intensive care beds are occupied, hospitals send out a divert 
status. When a hospital is on divert status, incoming patients 
might be sent to hospitals which are farther away or kept at 
the hospitals where they are currently that may not be able to 
provide adequate service. For a critical trauma victim, the 
consequence of diverting status can be the difference between 
life and death. The healthcare service facility attempts to 
construct a facility location model, which simultaneously 
determines the number of facilities opened and their particular 
locations, as well as the capacity levels of the facilities so that 
the probability that all servers in a facility are busy does not 
exceed a pre-determined level. In other words, we want to 
locate ER services on a network and determine their 
respective capacity levels such that the probability of diverting 
patients is not larger than a particular threshold. To address 
the issue, some papers incorporate queuing systems into 
facility location models to consider the chance of availability 
of servers and focus on reducing the demand lost due to the 
shortage of capacity or system congestion. 
It is worth mentioning that we try to find similar solutions 
in this field to compare with our proposal. mEmergency is 
expected to enhance performance of emergency service as 
well as to reduce number of deaths number of trauma 
diversion. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This research uses a mixture of qualitative research 
methods for data collection and system design. First, a set of 
semi-structured interviews with different stakeholders (ED 
and EMS) were conducted to collect data about: a) all Trauma 
Centers in Riyadh, b) the number of states in emergency and 
c) data assessment sheet that needs to be sent to hospitals with 
notification along with patient ID number. After conducting 
interviews, information about the challenges faced by the ED 
was collected. Second, soft systems methodology was used to 
design the proposed system and produce an architectural 
design.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Prposed System Overview. 
A. mEmergency System Framework 
After interviewing five Saudi Red Crescent Authority 
representatives (with information technology and medical 
backgrounds), we came to learn that there is substantial 
evidence that supports the assertion that hospital beds can 
reduce deaths during emergencies, and enable treatment of 
many patients in an emergency by developing the bed capacity 
system. Therefore, this research decided to develop web 
services (see in Figure 2) that connect the proposed mobile 
application with any Electronic Health Record (EHR) in any 
hospital to show the bed capacity. Furthermore, to learn more 
about ED process, we met with Dr. Thamer Nouh [30], and 
discussed eight questions, so that we could then decide criteria 
relating to emergency department bed capacity in trauma care. 
We started by basing the criteria on one of the large tertiary 
hospitals in Riyadh (namely, King Khalid University 
Hospital).  

98
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  Proposed System Architecture 
B.  mEmergency System Architecture  
mEmergency solution is structured as a multi-layered 
application (See in Figure 3) consisting of: 
• 
Interface layer: This is the top level of the 
application. 
The 
presentation 
tier 
displays 
information 
related 
to 
nearest 
hospitals. 
It 
communicates with the next layer (application layer) 
by which it puts out the results to the EMS rescuer/ 
paramedic. In simple terms, it is a layer which users 
can access directly system's GUI.  
• 
Application layer: The algorithm layer is pulled out 
from the Interface Layer and, as its own layer, it 
controls an application’s functionality by performing 
detailed processing through follow criteria in section 
C. 
• 
Physical layer: The physical layer includes the data 
persistence mechanisms (database hospitals servers) 
and the data access layer that encapsulates the 
persistence mechanisms and exposes the data. An API 
is generated by the data access layer to the application 
layer to find out different methods for managing the 
available data without creating dependencies on the 
data storage mechanism. 
 
1) mEmergency Functional Requirements 
Based on two interviews with a trauma surgeon who 
works in King Khalid hospital and workers in EMS [31], the 
following solutions were proposed:  
a) The EMS rescuer/paramedic can view information 
about hospitals across the city of Riyadh. 
b) The information available in the application must be 
dynamic and in real-time, which means that the paramedic 
can see the available and current 
c) Anywhere across Riyadh. 
d) The EMS rescuer/paramedic can view each hospital's 
exact location, bed capacity, and the available medical 
resources to suit a patient's case. 
e) The paramedic can view available inpatient bed 
capacity in real-time for the hospitals. 
f) The paramedic can find the nearest suitable hospital 
location for a patient’s case with the right medical services 
for this patient’s emergency situation, to guarantee a transfer 
in a speedy manner that would prevent negative implications 
to the patient and, at the same time, provide the right health 
care at the right time in a speedy  manner. 
g) The Emergency Department Support Officer (EDSO) 
[32] receives notification of the new patient and can view 
his/her assessment information. 
h) The administrator of EMS can view reports about 
every EMS rescuer/paramedic case and patient information. 
 
C.  mEmergency Workflow Design  
Based on the collected data, four criteria are used to decide 
on bed availability: 
1) Available bed in Radiology department 
2) Available bed in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) 
3) Available bed for inpatient 
4) Available bed in OR 
Another criterion is the availability of specialists in one of 
the three 
fields (Orthopedic surgery, Neurosurgery, 
Emergency surgery; however, the EMS cannot decide which 
patient needs to go to the radiology department for 
examination unless the specialist visits the radiology 
department. Hence, the system will be in green mode, and then 
the rescuer/paramedic can choose a suitable hospital. 
Accordingly, ER can be available if there are enough beds in 
the Radiology department, ICU, inpatient and Operation 
Room (OR) (see Figure 2).  
The system has two components: 
1) In the first part of the system, an attempt is made to 
construct module web services integration with each internal 
hospital system to decide ability of ER to receive the new 
patient; this depends on the criteria that are mentioned 
above. 
2) On the other hand, EMS regenerates bed capacity of 
Riyadh hospitals in trauma cases to decide on a suitable 
hospital, depending on the following: 
• 
Shortest way from the hospital location that 
guarantees a speedy transfer that would prevent 
negative implications.  
• 
Hospitals have the medical resources to treat the 
patient’s case. 

99
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
 Hospitals have specialized personnel to treat the 
patient’s case. 
 
Figure 4.  System Framework  
D. mEmergency Process Algorithm 
The goal of this phase is to build a decision support model 
that is powerful, robust, comprehensible, optimal, and 
effective. There is a large number of different search 
algorithms that can be chosen to run the best diction support 
model (for example, Fusion [33] and Dijkstra's [34]). The best 
algorithm to be chosen depends on the collected data.  
Fusion Algorithm is used in many tracking and 
surveillance systems. One method for the design of such 
systems is to employ a number of sensors (perhaps of different 
types) and to fuse the information obtained from all these 
sensors on a central processor. Past efforts to solve this 
problem required the organization of feedback from the 
central processor to local processor units. This can be used by 
the hospitals for proper surveillance of accidents on the roads. 
It can also reduce the time necessary for bringing the patient 
to the hospital [32]. 
Dijkstra's Algorithm is an algorithm for finding the 
shortest path from a starting node to a target node in a 
weighted graph. Dijkstra’s Algorithm is a graph search 
algorithm that solves the single-source shortest path problem 
for a graph with nonnegative edge path costs, producing a 
shortest path tree. This algorithm is used in routing and as a 
subroutine in other graph algorithms. It can also be used for 
finding the costs of shortest paths from a single vertex to a 
single destination vertex by stopping the algorithm once the 
shortest path to the destination vertex has been determined. 
For example, if the vertices of the graph represent cities and 
edge path costs represent driving distances between pairs of 
cities connected by a direct road, then Dijkstra’s Algorithm 
can be used to find the shortest route between one city and all 
other cities. It can also be used by hospitals for ambulances in 
case of emergency to find the shortest available path. The 
algorithm creates a tree of shortest paths from the starting 
vertex, the source, to all other points in the graph. The 
algorithm exists in many variants; Dijkstra's original variant 
found the shortest path between two nodes, but a more 
common variant fixes a single node as the “source” node and 
finds the shortest paths from the source to all other nodes in 
the graph, producing a shortest-path tree [33]. For this, the 
following are points which are necessary for Dijkstra's 
Algorithm in hospitals [34]: 
• 
The existence of a widespread road system that 
connects all parts of the city.  
• 
Availability of sufficient VANET modules in the 
routes in order to detect traffic congestion. 
• 
Infrastructure, such as GPS, communication links and 
two-way radio are provided.   
• 
Presence of a Dispatch Centre (DC) that serves the 
purpose of information exchange. 
• 
The existence of an updated database of the roads and 
hospitals.  
• 
The existence of Road Side Units (RSU) at suitable 
locations which might be inaccessible due to 
restrictions for the propagation of the signal.  
 
Algorithm of Decision Support Model 
Initialize arrivaltime to time start to enter 
data  
Initialize senddatatime to time submit 
assessment sheet   
Initialize responsetime to time hospital receive 
data  
Initialize location to location of patient  
Initialize Empty Nearestlist 
Initialize Empty Availablelist 
Initialize Empty Availablespecialistlist 
For each hospital around Location value 
Collocate distance  
Set all Hospital to Nearestlist Item arrange by 
Short distance   
For each Hospital In Nearestlist 
Connect with Bed Capacity Web Service 
Call and set value of Available Bed 
Call and set value of  available  Orthopedic 
Surgery specialist 
Call and set value of  available  Neuro surgery 
specialist  
Call and set value of available Emergency 
surgeon specialist  
For each hospital in Nearestlist 
If Available Bed is Not False  
Set Hospital in Availablelist  
Print Availablelist 
Delete Hospital from Nearestlist 
For each Hospital In Availablelist 
If available Orthopedic Surgery 
specialist OR available Neuro surgery 
specialist OR Emergency surgeon 
specialist 
Set Hospital in Availablespecialistlist 
Delete Hospital from 
Availablespecialistlist 
Print Availablespecialistlist 
Else  
Print Nearestlist 
 
 

100
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Algorithm of Bed Capacity Web Service 
Initialize available bed to False  
Initialize available Orthopedic Surgery 
specialist to False 
Initialize available Neuro surgery specialist to 
False 
Initialize available Emergency surgeon 
specialist to False 
Connect Electronic Health Record  
Call Available bed in Radiology department 
Call Available bed in  intensive care unit (ICU) 
Call Available bed for inpatient  
Call Available bed in OR 
Call available Orthopedic Surgery specialist  
Call available Neuro surgery specialist  
Call available Emergency surgeon specialist  
If Available bed in Radiology department is 
Not False AND Available bed in intensive care 
unit (ICU) is Not False AND 
Available bed for inpatient is Not False AND 
Available bed in OR is Not False 
Set available bed True  
Print available bed 
Else  
Set available bed False   
Print available bed 
If Orthopedic Surgery specialist is Not False  
Set Orthopedic Surgery specialist True    
Print available Orthopedic Surgery specialist 
Else  
Set Orthopedic Surgery specialist False    
Print available Orthopedic Surgery specialist 
If Neuro surgery specialist is Not False  
Set Neuro surgery specialist True    
Print available Neuro surgery specialist 
Else  
Set Neuro surgery specialist False    
Print Neuro surgery specialist 
If Emergency surgeon specialist is Not False  
Set Emergency surgeon specialist True    
Print available Emergency surgeon specialist 
Else  
Set Emergency surgeon specialist False    
Print available Emergency 
 
 
E. mEmergency Interface Design 
In the proposed mHealth application, there are three 
potential users: rescuer or paramedic front-end, EDSO, and 
EMS administrator for the back-end. The rescuer or 
paramedic is the primary user of the mHealth application. 
They can view a list of suitable nearest hospitals then choose 
one of them; they can also send the trauma victims assessment 
sheet containing vital information on patients to the chosen 
hospital. An EMS dashboard administrator can view reports 
about every rescue/paramedics, and we can also search by 
rescue/paramedics name, code number or hospital name (see 
Figure 5). On the other hand, the EDSO can view the 
assessment sheet of patients before they arrive (see Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Hospital Bed Capacity Webpage Interface. 
 
Figure 6.  mEmergency Dashboard Interface. 
An aggregated result illustrated in Figure 7 below shows all 
suitable hospitals prioritization by location and available beds. 
This is a color-coded scheme of availability: Red icon: Not 
Available, and Green icon: Available.  
 
 
Figure 7.    mEmergency 
prioritisation of nearest and most- 
equipped trauma EDs to the 
patient’s case. 
• 
First icon from 
the right is: 
Available bed.  
• 
Second icon from 
right is: Available 
Orthopedic 
Surgery 
specialist.  
• 
Third icon from 
right is: Available 
Neuro Surgery 
specialist.  
• 
Fourth icon from 
right is: Available 
Emergency 
Surgery 
specialist.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

101
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The screen in Figure 8 appears after choosing the suitable 
hospital in Figure 7, so the EMS paramedics can record the 
patient’s assessment data for sharing with the selected hospital 
prior to arrival to optimize its resources and enhance its 
readiness. 
 
 
Figure 8.   mEmergency records 
the patient’s assessment data for 
sharing with the selected hospital 
prior to arrival. 
• 
 A "fields set" of 
patient's attributes 
should be 
completed.  
• 
A Next button 
transfers the user 
to the next page 
(confirmed page).  
• 
A Back button 
transfers the user 
to the previous 
screen. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Overcrowded hospitals with limited resources in Saudi 
Arabia are left with no option but to divert ambulances, which 
can be the leading cause of death in some trauma cases. The 
work presented in this article proposes an effective 
mEmergency solution to this problem. First, it links 
Emergency Medical Services (EMSs) with trauma centers in 
Riyadh to help the paramedic deliver patients to the nearest 
trauma center’s Emergency Department (ED) with available 
resources based on informed decisions in the shortest possible 
time to save their life. This is achieved by predicting inpatient 
bed capacity in real-time using Fusion Algorithm, while 
routing the EMS ambulance path taken using Dijkstra’s 
Algorithm. In addition, mEmergency, optimizes the selected 
trauma center’s resources and enhances its readiness by the 
sharing of patient’s vital signs and physical assessment data 
prior his/her arrival to reduce the time for preparation prior to 
trauma victim arrival. The evaluation results of the solution 
show the capability of providing regional-based availabilities 
of resources in nearest hospitals in order to avoid ED 
crowding and shortages in inpatient bed capacity. Ultimately, 
mEmergency should help optimize EMSs resources in Riyadh 
city to improve the ambulance diversion issue in particular 
and the quality of urgent care service delivery to Saudis in 
general. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Alghamdi, S. Alsalamah, G. Al-Hudhud,T. Nouh, I. 
Alyahya and  S. Alqahtani. “Region-Based Bed Capacity 
mHealth Application for Emergency Medical Services: Saudi 
Arabia Case Study”, eTELEMED, 2018, p.114 
[2] Y. Shen, "Association Between Ambulance Diversion and 
Survival Among Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction", 
JAMA, vol. 305, no. 23, p. 2440, 2011. 
[3] "WannaCry 
ransomware: 
Everything 
you 
need 
to 
know", CNET, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.cnet.com/news/wannacry-wannacrypt-uiwix-
ransomware-everything-you-need-to-know/. [Accessed: 23- 
Nov- 2018]. 
[4] Ministry of Foreign Affairs. "The Basic Law of Governance" 
Kingdom of Saudi. 1992. 
[5] Ministry of Health, "Kingdom of Saudi Arabia - Ministry of 
Health 
Portal", 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/Ministry/Statistics/book/Pages/def
ault.aspx. [Accessed: 29- Nov- 2018]. 
[6] Indexmundi. "Hospital bed density - Country Comparison", 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.indexmundi.com/g/r.aspx?v=2227. [Accessed: 29- 
Nov- 2018].  
[7] Van der Linden, M. C. "Emergency department crowding: 
Factors influencing flow", 9789461089007, 2015. 
[8] National Association of EMS Physici, "Ambulance Diversion 
and Emergency Department Offload Delay", Prehospital 
Emergency Care, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 543-543, 2011. 
[9] Encyclopedia. "bed occupancy - Dictionary definition of bed 
occupancy", Encyclopedia.com, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/caregiving/dictionaries-
thesauruses-pictures-and-press-releases/bed-occupancy. 
[Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[10] ACEP, "Definition of Boarded Patient", 2017. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.acep.org/Clinical---Practice-
Management/Definition-of-Boarded-Patient-2147469010/. 
[Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018].  
[11] B. Rechel, S. Wright, J. Barlow and M. McKee, "Hospital 
capacity planning: from measuring stocks to modelling flows," 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 88, no. 8, pp. 
632-636, 2010. 
[12] World Health Organization, "Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/en/. 
[Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[13] M. McKee, "What are the lessons learnt by countries that have 
had dramatic reductions of their hospital bed capacity?" HEN 
synthesis report on reduction of hospital beds", Health 
Evidence Network (HEN), 2003. 
[14] Jun, S. Jacobson and J. Swisher, "Application of Discrete-
Event Simulation in Health Care Clinics: A Survey", The 
Journal of the Operational Research Society, vol. 50, no. 2, p. 
109, 1999. 
[15] Dawn M. Lewis,” A Qualitative Case Study: Hospital 
Emergency Preparedness Coordinators’ Perspectives Of 
Preparing For And Responding To Incidents”, Capella 
University, 2015 
[16] R. Schmidt, S. Geisler and C. Spreckelsen, "Decision support 
for hospital bed management using adaptable individual length 
of stay estimations and shared resources", BMC Medical 
Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 13, no. 1, 2013. 
[17] Chin-I Lin. "Optimization Models For Capacity Planning In 
Health Care Delivery.” (Doctoral Dissertation). University of 
Florida, Gainesville, USA. 2008.  
[18] B. Asplin, D. Magid, K. Rhodes, L. Solberg, N. Lurie and C. 
Camargo, "A conceptual model of emergency department 
 
 

102
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
crowding", Annals of Emergency Medicine, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 
173-180, 2003. 
[19] Cisco Systems. “Singapore Hospital Modernizes Bed 
Management.” [Accessed: 7- Nov- 2018] [Online]. Available: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/solutions/industries/docs/
healthcare/AlexandraHospital.pdf. 2006. 
 
[20] Groundbreaking Bed Management Technology Helps SGH 
Improves 
Capacity 
and 
Care. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.sgh.com.sg/about-us/newsroom/news-
release/2010/Pages/GroundbreakingBedManagementTechnol
ogyHelpsSGHImprovesCapacityandCare.aspx. [Accessed: 30- 
Nov- 2018]. 
[21] M. Ribbe, G. Ljunggren, K. Steel, E. Topinkova, C. Hawes, N. 
Ikegami, J. Henrard and P. JONnson, "Nursing Homes in 10 
Nations: A Comparison Between Countries and Settings", Age 
and Ageing, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 3-12, 1997 
[22] Kerr E, Sibrand V. Health care systems in transition: Belgium. 
Copenhagen, European Observatory on Health Care Systems, 
2000. 
[23] S. Hussain, "Full Text of Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 | Saudi 
Gazette", 
Saudi 
Gazette, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://saudigazette.com.sa/saudi-arabia/full-text-saudi-arabias-
vision-2030/. [Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[24] Ministry of Finance. “Ministry of Finance 2017 Budget of 
Kingdom 
of 
Saudi 
Arabia.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mof.gov.sa/en/budget2017/Documents/The_Nati
onal_Budget.pdf. [Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[25] Ministry of Health. "Achievement of Ministry of health 2013", 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/ministry/statistics/book/documents
/1433.pdf [Accessed: 21- Nov- 2018]. 
[26] Ministry of Health. "News - Ajyad Hospital in Makkah Shows 
Continuous Readiness for the Hajj Season", Moh.gov.sa, 2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/hajj/news/pages/news-2014-09-22-
002.aspx. [Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[27] S. Walston, Y. Al-Harbi and B. Al-Omar, "The Changing Face 
of Healthcare in Saudi Arabia", Annals of Saudi Medicine, vol. 
28, no. 4, pp. 243-250, 2008. 
[28] A. Bagust, M. Place and J. Posnett, "Dynamics of bed use in 
accommodating emergency admissions: stochastic simulation 
model", BMJ, vol. 319, no. 7203, pp. 155-158, 1999. 
[29] Emedicine.medscape. "Initial Evaluation of the Trauma 
Patient: Overview, Triage and Organization of Care, Initial 
Assessment", Emedicine.medscape.com, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/434707-
overview. [Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[30] Dr. Thamer Nouh, King Khaild Hospital,Riyadh, 2017. 
[31] M.  Aouad,Saudi Red Crescent Authority, Riyadh, 2017. 
[32] "Emergency 
Department 
Support 
Officer", 
Nswhealth.erecruit.com.au, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://nswhealth.erecruit.com.au/ViewPosition.aspx?Id=2704
27. [Accessed: 23- Nov- 2018]. 
[33] Yuemin Li, Renbiao Wu, Tao Zhang, "Multi-scale fusion and 
estimation for multi-resolution sensors", Signal Processing 
(ICSP) 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on, vol. 1, pp. 
193-197, 2012, ISSN 2164-523X. 
[34] P. Singal and R. R.S.Chhillar, "Dijkstra Shortest Path 
Algorithm using Global Position System", International 
Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 101, no. 6, pp. 12-18, 
2014. 
 
 
 

