81
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
ClusterWIS Revisited 
An Updated Look at the Decentralized Forest Information and Management System 
 
Jürgen Roßmann, Michael Schluse, Martin Hoppen 
Institute for Man-Machine Interaction 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
email: {rossmann,schluse,hoppen}@mmi.rwth-aachen.de 
Gregor Nägele, Tobias Marquardt 
Department Robot Technology 
RIF Institute for Research and Transfer e.V. 
Dortmund, Germany 
email: {gregor.naegele,tobias.marquardt}@rt.rif-ev.de 
Christoph Averdung 
CPA ReDev GmbH 
Siegburg, Germany 
email: averdung@supportgis.de 
Werner Poschenrieder, Fabian Schwaiger 
Chair of Forest Growth and Yield Science 
Technical University of Munich 
Freising, Germany 
email: 
{werner.poschenrieder,fabian.schwaiger}@lrz.tum.de 
 
Abstract—The cluster forestry and wood’s major challenges are 
its structural complexity and heterogeneity, its many 
stakeholders, and its decentralized processes. The aim of the 
ClusterWIS approach is to overcome these challenges. Its core 
idea is the development of a novel forest information system 
based on a decentralized infrastructure integrating new 
planning and consulting methods and interconnecting existing 
decentralized work processes. It provides end-to-end encrypted 
communication to run the various processes and to supply them 
with data while using international standards throughout the 
system and keeping participation requirements low. The paper 
at hand gives details on the ClusterWIS communication 
infrastructure, its apps and services, and the reference 
applications as well as their realization in a comprehensive 
demonstrator. 
Keywords-forest information system; sustainable feedstock 
management; 
decentralized 
data 
management; 
secure 
communication; demonstrator. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In [1], we introduced the idea of ClusterWIS, a completely 
decentralized forest information and management system that 
conveys principles of Industry 4.0 to the cluster forestry and 
wood. The conceptual framework of ClusterWIS has now 
been further developed in its communication infrastructure 
and implemented as a demonstrator for practice oriented test 
and promotion. 
 The cluster forestry and wood is the economic sector 
comprising all stakeholders from forest owners to forestal 
service providers and the woodworking industry. Its major 
challenges are its structural complexity and heterogeneity, a 
huge number of stakeholders with often contrary objectives, 
and decentralized processes. In the federal state of North 
Rhine-Westphalia (Germany) alone, 150,000 private forest 
owners own two-thirds of the forest (90% of which own less 
than 5 ha), and many small service providers (for planning, 
tending, logging, etc.) exist [2]. Furthermore, the “production 
plant” forest provides not only wood as its main product (used 
for building, paper or as a fuel) but also serves as a long-term 
CO2 reservoir or as a recreation area. Altogether, this renders 
process optimization far more complex than in classical 
manufacturing industry.  
Thus, for a sustainable feedstock management and an 
efficient wood and biomass mobilization throughout the 
cluster, the increasing demand for wood from sustainably 
cultivated forests need to be aligned with the requirements of 
climate change and resilience, environmental protection and 
society in general. For that purpose, the research project 
ClusterWIS (WIS for German “Waldinformationssystem” – 
Forest Information System) introduces novel planning and 
consulting methods. In order to implement these processes 
within a decentralized infrastructure, ClusterWIS adopts, 
refines and widely interconnects the crucial working 
processes within the wood and forestry sector.  
Often, centralized approaches have been used to resolve 
the cluster’s structural weakness. However, such approaches, 
contradict the highly decentralized organization that is typical 
for the whole sector. In particular, many conservative forest 
owners do not accept an obligatory centralized data 
management for reasons of data privacy (especially in 
Germany). For this reason, the foundation of the ClusterWIS 
approach is a novel, decentralized infrastructure based on 
standards for data modeling and data exchange. It provides 
end-to-end encrypted communication to run the various 
processes and to supply them with highly topical inventory 
and process data. To provide for the cluster’s heterogeneity, it 
keeps the participation requirements for third party systems 
low. Furthermore, international standards are used throughout 
the system like Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) web 
service standards, Geography Markup Language (GML) for 
data exchange in general, ForestGML [3] for nD temporal 
inventory data, ELDATsmart [4] for timber logistics data, 
StanForD [5] for forest machine data, or papiNet [6] for 
communication with the paper industry. However, the 
approach is open to any other formats and standards. 

82
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
A ClusterWIS network (Figure 1) comprises applications 
and services as its nodes, connected by means of the secure 
communication infrastructure. Stakeholders use specialized 
desktop and mobile applications (e.g., for forest information, 
forest inventory, production planning etc.) or web applications 
(e.g., for forest owners, service providers etc.) to access this 
network. Specialized services, e.g., for processing remote 
sensing data or forest growth simulations, perform 
computationally expensive and data intensive tasks for a 
broad user group even on thin clients like mobile devices. 
Finally, services for administrative tasks like communication, 
cloud storage or registration build the network’s backbone. 
 
 
Figure 1. A ClusterWIS network consists of service and application nodes. 
For the first time, this decentralized network allows for 
process optimization across the cluster. In the research project, 
eight interdependent reference processes (like forest 
information, 
planning, 
consulting, 
timber 
trade 
and 
production) are analyzed in detail. 
The ClusterWIS concept can also be described in terms of 
four layers: 
ClusterWIS Documentation: This layer provides the 
documentation of the service infrastructure comprising data 
standards, a common communication standard, and a common 
public key infrastructure (PKI). Furthermore, it contains best 
practices for data exchange (e.g., which formats to use), the 
usage of software services (e.g., for remote sensing data 
processing), and for offering services (e.g., consultation or 
forest inventory). 
ClusterWIS Directory: While ClusterWIS Documentation 
yields a “common language”, ClusterWIS Directory provides 
the necessary directory (or registry) of users and nodes. This 
includes the infrastructure for their registration, retrieval, and 
authentication – all needed for secure communication and data 
exchange.  
ClusterWIS Notifications: In principle, the previous two 
layers suffice to realize and operate a ClusterWIS network. 
This third layer adds a communication infrastructure to further 
simplify data exchange between actors within the forestal 
domain (where senders and receivers are often offline) by 
buffering messages and by publishing notifications for them.  
ClusterWIS Applications: This layer consists of the 
software solutions built on top of the ClusterWIS 
infrastructure. The focus is on extending existing software. 
For that purpose, the participation requirements are kept low 
(see previous levels). Such systems comprise locally installed 
management software (e.g., for forest inventory), web-based 
management software, platforms for data exchange or trading, 
and mobile applications. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
presents work related to our own and motivates the 
development of the ClusterWIS approach. Sections III and IV 
give more details on the ClusterWIS infrastructure and its 
communication approach. Sections V and VI introduce the 
ClusterWIS applications (desktop, mobile, Web) and 
specialized services while Section VII gives an overview of 
the reference processes analyzed in the research project. In 
Section VIII, we add a detailed look at the recently realized 
demonstrator and the yielded response. Finally, Section IX 
concludes this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
ClusterWIS is built on its project partners’ preliminary 
work. Important results come from the research project series 
Virtual Forest in general, its commercial spin-offs, the 
underlying SupportGIS technology, and the forest growth 
simulator SILVA [7]. ClusterWIS aims at making these 
results available to the whole cluster. Besides summarizing 
this work, this section introduces similar approaches 
developed by others. 
A. The Virtual Forest 
The ClusterWIS approach is built on the methods of the 
“nD Forest Management System Virtual Forest” [8], 
developed in the research project series “Virtual Forest”. It 
provides the necessary technological framework as well as the 
basis for data modeling, management and distribution. 
The idea of the Virtual Forest is a central database that 
manages all forestal data. It provides various applications for 
remote sensing data processing (tree species classification [9], 
stand attributes evaluation [10], or single tree delineation and 
attribution [11]), forest inventory, planning in biological and 
technical production, forest machine simulation for training, 
and support of the logging process.  
The technological basis of the central database is the 
SupportGIS technology [12]. It is widely used for GIS related 
applications, is based on the standards of OGC and ISO, and 
powered by object-relational databases. It efficiently manages 
large amounts of data and supports exchange by standard 
OGC web services. Furthermore, data can be managed in n 
spatiotemporal dimensions [3], allowing to track and analyze 
forestal data over time. 
Communication 
Service
Node & User 
Registry
Web 
Application
Cloud 
Service
Forest Inventory
Desktop App.
Forest Owner
Consultant
Browser
Communication 
Object
Notification

83
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The Virtual Forest uses ForestGML [3], a GML-based 
modeling language, to model forestal data on a consistent, 
OGC compliant basis. This facilitates its widespread usage 
and allows for the usage of OGC web services. 
Central parts of the Virtual Forest system are already in 
use by two German state enterprises. While the Virtual Forest 
focuses on the usage in such large, homogenous enterprises, 
ClusterWIS aims at making these results available to the 
whole cluster by decentralizing the approach. 
B. Forest Growth Simulator SILVA 
Silviculture today has to consider a wide range of 
ecosystem services (ES) that earlier were considered a by-
product of traditional forestry. Moreover, against the 
background of climate change, forest management has to 
maintain climatic resilience and stability through provision of 
an adequate forest structure. Thus, forest consulting 
increasingly applies forest simulation models to estimate the 
effect of various silvicultural pathways on productivity, 
quality and further ES [13] [14]. Such ES are carbon 
sequestration, biodiversity, recreation, and groundwater 
recharge. Yet, they typically stand within the particular focus 
of state forestry. However, private forest stakeholders today 
also advocate to foster the adaptation of such services by 
private forestry based on financial incentives [15]. The forest 
ecosystem model [13] is a preferential tool to take into account 
ES synergies and tradeoffs and to optimize among various 
silvicultural objectives. It allows forest consulting to compare 
scenarios that adhere to a sensible preselection of silvicultural 
pathways and to direct forest management towards the most 
effective subset of them. Such simulation models have 
primarily been applied within state forestry institutions that 
maintain the necessary IT infrastructure.  
Within that scope, the forest growth simulator SILVA has 
been integrated into the aforementioned Virtual Forest 
system. SILVA implements the paradigm of a service oriented 
architecture (SOA). Its kernel is an independent application 
that does not expose any specific tasks but rather a wide 
collection of services that may be coupled and assembled to 
provide specific simulations or evaluations. Moreover, it 
provides its services through various types of interfaces that 
use international standards, such as the Simple Object Access 
Protocol (SOAP). Thus, it fits into a distributed environment 
as well as into a strictly local one. Within the Virtual Forest 
project, several scenarios that integrate SILVA both locally 
and as a remote service into the larger environment were 
implemented and tested. 
C.  Similar Approaches 
Until now, others developed approaches similar to 
ClusterWIS. Some proprietary solutions are available, e.g., 
online platforms like “IHB Holzbörse” for timber trade [16] 
or the “Branchenbuch Wald und Forst” as a business directory 
for consultants [17]. The internet marketplace “CoSeDat" 
offers the possibility to exchange data and electronically 
signed PDF documents [18]. In Finland, UPM Paper offers 
“UPM Customer Online” [19], a digital service channel for 
customers. In summary, these approaches focus on specific 
aspects of the complex process chain, only. Hence, a 
permeability of shared data between the different processes is 
not given. Often, the idea was to develop centralized systems 
such as “virtual enterprises” [20], the “FOCUS-Platform” 
[21]. Another centralized approach is presented in the research 
project “GeProOpt_Holz” [22]. Similar to ClusterWIS, it aims 
at optimizing business processes in the cluster. However, as 
mentioned in the introduction, such centralized approaches 
are not accepted by many cluster actors. 
Software solutions like “WaldPlaner” [23] already deliver 
functionality for planning and decision-making regarding 
sustainable forest management, but on their own they lack the 
necessary communication infrastructure and integration into 
larger processes. Approaches like the “Scottish Forest and 
Timber Technologies initiative”, supported by enterprises and 
industry, promote knowledge exchange and cooperation 
between enterprises in the sector [24]. They are successfully 
able to connect regional actors, but the knowledge is not 
shared more widely. The web portals “Wald in Österreich” 
[25] in Austria and “WaldSchweiz” [26] in Switzerland serve 
the exchange of information in the sector.      
Thus, existing approaches already cover several of the 
cluster’s requirements. However, they lack an approach to 
connect its complex and decentralized structure and do not 
support a comprehensive execution of all the essential 
business processes from request to invoicing. This motivates 
the development of the ClusterWIS approach as introduced in 
Section I.  
III. 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
The cluster’s achievable efficiency is strongly related to 
the way its actors communicate. This requires a framework 
that does not unnecessarily restrict an actor’s professional 
view or its organization’s structure. Thus, the ClusterWIS 
infrastructure is based on secure networking of so-called 
ClusterWIS nodes. These nodes can either be applications 
(Section V), specialized web services (Section VI) or services 
for administrative tasks. 
To use its services and applications, any actor can register 
and participate in the ClusterWIS network. Well-established 
methods of IT security are employed to guarantee the safety 
of connections and exchanged data between actors, 
applications and web services. Client-side Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol Secure (HTTPS) is used for authentication and 
secure connections. It is integrated into a PKI that allows for 
end-to-end data encryption. Finally, authorization is based on 
GeoXACML (Geospatial eXtensible Access Control Markup 
Language) providing user rights on data and methods. 
The administration of the ClusterWIS network is reduced 
to few central services: 
 
A node and user registry for all participating actors 
and nodes (applications and web services) accessed 
via Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP). 
 
A Web Feature Service (WFS)-based communication 
service as a mediator between sender and receiver of 
so-called communication objects. 
 
A cloud service used to buffer communication 
objects, as a general data storage for the network, and 
as a platform to initialize and run OGC compliant web 

84
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
services (WFS, Web Map Service (WMS) and Web 
Map Tile Service (WMTS)) on its stored data. 
This 
lean 
infrastructure 
(combined 
with 
its 
communication approach presented in the next section) also 
keeps the participation requirements for third party systems 
low. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATION 
Three basic rules apply to communication within a 
ClusterWIS network: Data and (service) requests are always 
transferred by secure connections and encrypted by the public 
key of the recipient. Furthermore, recipients account for 
conformant data usage inside their domain. Finally, it has to 
be assumed that many communication partners and systems 
are regularly offline (e.g., when being in the forest with bad 
reception). 
A. Communication Object and Encryption 
The aforementioned communication objects are a means 
for the secure transfer of data and corresponding requests. As 
shown in Figure 2, a communication object consists of two 
parts: The non-encrypted transport information (top) and the 
encrypted secured message (bottom).  
While not encrypted, the transport information is still 
secured by transport level security using HTTPS. It comprises 
information on the sender, the receivers, the utilized 
encryption (see below), and optional metadata used to flexibly 
add further information needed on transport level, e.g., to 
identify that a message is a response to another one.  
The encrypted message comprises the intention in terms 
of a request, which can be, e.g., a service call, a service call 
response or a user-to-user message. It is complemented by 
parameters, e.g., for service calls (name of the service to be 
executed, surface under investigation, alphanumerical 
parameters), service call responses (a computation’s result), 
or subject and body of a user-to-user message. Furthermore, 
embedded files, links to files on cloud services, or metadata 
describing files can be added. 
 
 
Figure 2. Implementation of the ClusterWIS communication object. 
The communication object is implemented as follows 
(Figure 2): The to-be-secured message is stored as a GML file 
(“encryptedPart.gml”). The data set comprising this GML file 
together with the (optional) file attachments is stored in a ZIP 
file that is subsequently encrypted.  
 
Figure 3. Structure of the ClusterWIS communication object. 
transport information
secured message
AbstractGML
cwis::CommunicationObject
- 
communicationObjectUUID: String
- 
senderUUID: String
AbstractGML
cwis::Request
- 
typeOfRequest: RequestType
- 
typeOfRequestFreeText: String
cwis::FileDescription
- 
comment: String
- 
commentFile: URI
- 
kindOfFile: String
- 
typeOfFile: MimeType
AbstractGML
cwis::FileLocation
cwis::
IndirectLocation
AbstractGML
cwis::
EncryptedPartOfCommunicationObject
cwis::DirectLocation
- 
pathInFileArchive: String
AbstractGML
cwis::FileArchive
cwis::
LocationByMetadataFile
- 
metadataFileURI: URI
cwis::CloudLocation
- 
password: String
- 
pathInCloud: String
- 
uriOfCloud: URI
- 
userName: String
AbstractGML
cwis::AbstractParameter
cwis::Parameter
- 
description: String
- 
name: String
- 
type: ParameterType
AbstractGML
cwis::Value
- 
value: String
AbstractGML
cwis::ReceiverInformation
- 
receiverCertificateUUID: String
- 
receiverUUID: String
AbstractGML
cwis::ContentEncryptionKey
- 
encryptionAlgorithm: String
- 
encryptionKey: base64Binary
AbstractGML
cwis::
CommunicationObjectmetadata
- 
name: String
- 
type: String
- 
value: String
AbstractGML
cwis::
EncryptedPartOfCommunicationObjectAsStream
- 
content: base64Binary
1
contentEncryptionKey
0..*
fileArchives
0..1
location
1
1..*
requests
1
1
encryptedPart
1..*
receiver
0..*
parameters
«ordered»
«substitute»
0..*
metadata
1
value
1

85
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The unencrypted transport information combined with the 
encrypted 
data 
is 
also 
stored 
as 
a 
GML 
file 
(“CommunicationObject.gml”). Thus, only the transport 
information remains readable. 
Figure 4 illustrates the encryption of the communication 
object in more detail. First, the zipped data set is encrypted by 
an automatically generated symmetric key that is disposable 
and only used for this single data interchange. In turn, this key 
is encrypted by the receiver’s public key and stored together 
with the user id of the receiver within the transport 
information.  
 
 
Figure 4. Encryption process of the ClusterWIS communication object. 
This combination of encryption methods has three 
advantages: 
 
First of all, symmetric encryption is much more 
efficient on larger data sets.  
 
Secondly, the same data set can be encrypted for 
multiple receivers. For that purpose, the same 
disposable symmetric key is separately encrypted 
for each receiver of the communication object 
using the receiver’s public key (Figure 5) and 
embedded into the transport information.  
 
At last, for the sake of keeping requirements low 
for participants in the ClusterWIS network, even 
users without a public/private key pair can 
participate. 
In 
this 
case, 
the 
disposable 
symmetric key is encrypted using a password 
agreed upon by the sender and the receiver(s). 
For decrypting a message (Figure 5), the receiver uses his 
own private key only he knows (or the agreed upon password).  
 
 
Figure 5. Decryption process of the ClusterWIS communication object. 
This yields the disposable symmetric key needed to 
decrypt the ZIP archive containing the actual data set. Finally, 
the received data can be accessed. 
B. Communication Service 
The communication service operates the transfer of 
communication objects. Using HTTPS, a second layer of 
security is added to the encryption of the communication 
objects. This guarantees that neither unauthorized third parties 
nor the cloud service or even the communication service itself 
get access to the data. 
The registry service provides information on the dispatch 
method for the communication objects, which may be 
different with regard to the receiving user (or node). 
Following dispatch methods are available: 
 
Notification by mail or smartphone push message 
including a download link to the communication 
object. 
 
Direct delivery using a WFS-like interface of the 
recipient. 
 
Actively pulling the list of new communication 
objects from the communication service. 
The communication service provides a WFS interface that 
uses the unencrypted part of the communication object 
schema (Figure 3). Thus, a new communication object is sent 
to the communication service by using a WFS transaction 
(insert). For each communication object, the communication 
service creates a lightweight acknowledgement object (Figure 
6) for message management. Here, any update to a 
communication object’s state is logged (received, notification 
sent, communication object fetched …). Using these 
acknowledgement objects, the receiver can query a list of new 
messages (communication objects) from the communication 
service using a standard WFS query. Subsequently, this list 
can be used to fetch the actual communication objects 
themselves.   
 
 
Figure 6. Acknowledgement objects provide an interface to fetchable 
communication objects. 
A communication example is shown in Figure 1 (note that 
the disposable key is omitted in this sequence): A forest owner 
uses a browser to access the web application (Section V.B) 
and create a communication object with a request for forest 
inventory. It is encrypted (using the public key of the 
consultant) and sent to the communication service, which 
buffers it and sends a notification to the recipient (consultant). 
The latter starts its Forest Inventory application (Section 
AbstractGML
cwis::AcknowledgementObject
- 
acknowledgementObjectUUID: String
- 
communicationObjectUUID: String
- 
receiverUUID: String
- 
senderUUID: String
AbstractGML
cwis::StateLogEntry
- 
state: StateType
- 
timeStamp: DateTime
1..*
stateLogEntry
1

86
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
V.A.2), which asks the communication service for new 
communication objects that are subsequently fetched. Finally, 
the consultant decrypts the communication object with his 
private key and processes the message.  
Note that all connections between nodes are additionally 
secured by client-side HTTPS, which is also used for 
authentication.  
C. Open Platform Communications - Unified Architecture 
The decentralized ClusterWIS approach is similar to those 
approaches subsumed as “Industry 4.0” in the manufacturing 
industry. Thus, it can be counted among current intentions 
relating to an adaption for the cluster forestry and wood 
dubbed “Forestry and Wood 4.0”.  
Furthermore, ClusterWIS communication not only takes 
place between actors but also from and to forest machinery. 
This motivates the integration of standard Industry 4.0 
protocols into the network. As a well-established standard, 
Open Platform Communications – Unified Architecture (OPC 
UA) [27] is advisable for this purpose. Especially, as it 
provides a decentralized client server architecture without the 
need for central servers, it integrates well into the ClusterWIS 
PKI, it is an open and vendor-independent standard, it is 
robust, and it supports participants being temporarily offline. 
Thus, to complement the aforementioned WFS-based 
approach, ClusterWIS nodes may also be equipped with an 
OPC UA client and server component allowing the exchange 
of communication objects. 
V. 
APPLICATIONS 
An important part of the ClusterWIS approach are the user 
and scenario specific portals the actors can use to access the 
network. These comprise desktop, mobile and web 
applications. 
A. Desktop and Mobile Applications 
Desktop and mobile end-user applications provide online 
as well as offline access to ClusterWIS features. They can be 
used by actors like forest owners, service providers, or 
contractors to view, gather, modify, and exchange forestal 
data. In the context of the research project, applications are 
based on the Virtual Forest prototypes. They use the 
VEROSIM framework [28] that combines an integrated 
runtime database with subject-specific modules to create 
adapted applications for diverse scenarios. 
Four different applications are being developed and 
refined to meet the requirements of the project’s reference 
processes as described in Section VII: 
1) Forest Information 
The Forest Information application acts as an information 
portal to the data managed by ClusterWIS. Its primary 
functions are visualization, combination and analysis of 
geographic and business data, e.g., orthophotos, satellite 
imagery, LiDAR, cadaster, inventory, or regulatory data. This 
data may be available locally via files and databases or 
provided by OGC-compliant web services (WMS, WMTS, 
WFS) within the ClusterWIS network.  
 
 
2) Forest Inventory  
This application supports the forest inventory process. It 
allows a service provider to work with data made available by 
the commissioning forest owner and provides tools to record 
relevant stand attributes and single tree information. As this 
data is typically gathered on-site, the software also offers 
assistance for spatial localization during the process. 
3) Forest Planning  
The Forest Planning application provides a user-friendly 
and efficient interface to forest growth simulation. This 
comprises input parameterization as well as result analysis and 
visualization. The computationally intensive simulation itself 
is sourced out to a service (see Section VI.B). 
4) Technical Production  
This application supports the technical production process 
in its different phases, namely preparation of work 
assignments, assistance of forest workers and machine 
operators with instructions, and practical guidance as well as 
documentation of the harvesting operations and its results. 
B. Web Applications 
Web applications are ideally suited to provide a low-
threshold access to the ClusterWIS network. They do not 
need client-side installation and can be used on both desktop 
and mobile devices alike. Capacity and performance scaling 
is easy and new features can be provided to users with no 
effort. Finally, web applications easily support operation in 
secure networks. 
The browser-based GIS SGJ GeoHornet is one example 
of such a web application that is used in ClusterWIS. It has 
already successfully been employed in the Virtual Forest 
project as well as its commercial spin-offs. Various data 
sources like ForestGML databases or web services can be 
accessed and embedded. For example, registered forest 
owners can get an overview of their entire property. 
GeoHornet also provides methods to plot maps and enhance 
these plots with own graphical and textual annotations. It can 
create, send and receive communication objects, e.g., to send 
a request to another actor in the ClusterWIS network or to 
commission a service-based computation. GeoHornet can be 
customized for the user’s demands. 
VI. 
SPECIALIZED SERVICES 
Based on the backbone services of ClusterWIS (Sections 
III-IV), a large variety of specialized services for supporting 
particular 
business 
processes 
can 
arbitrarily 
be 
interconnected. Examples for such services are the processing 
of remote sensing data or the simulation of forest growth. As 
a single requirement, a specialized service has to comply with 
the ClusterWIS communication approach and its PKI. 
Within a typical scenario, an application might call a 
service for data processing and store the results either locally 
or in a ClusterWIS cloud service. Subsequently, it might run 
two complementing simulation services based on this 
preprocessed data set. Finally, the application might use 
various evaluation services for evaluating the resulting 
scenario data. 

87
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
A. Remote Sensing Data Processing 
Often, the data necessary for a sustainable feedstock 
management can only be made available using remote sensing 
methods like tree species classification [9], stand attributes 
evaluation [10], or single tree delineation and attribution [11]. 
However, such methods usually need to access, process and 
store vast amounts of raw geo data, unfeasible, e.g., for mobile 
apps. Furthermore, existing methods need to be enhanced to 
easily incorporate stakeholders to refine the data with their 
expert knowledge (e.g., provide tree samples to optimize local 
tree species classification results). Thus, a goal of the 
ClusterWIS project is to make these methods available as 
services to allow the usage of suitable hardware on server side 
and to provide service interfaces for user provided calibration 
data. 
B. Forest Growth Simulation 
Forest growth simulators - beyond scenarios of stand 
development - provide further services that are closely 
connected to a simulator’s core function. Such services are 
virtual tree generation based on stand structure attributes and 
computation of assortments using individual tree data. Hence, 
one relevant task within ClusterWIS is to extend existing data 
formats, such as ForestGML, to comply with the time-related 
data content that is specific to simulation models. 
SILVA provides stand development as a result of rule-
based management plans. That way, the simulator may 
provide scenarios that put emphasis on a specific subset of 
ecosystem services or that promote the development of 
specific stand structures and species mixtures. The seamless 
and manifold integration of SILVA [7] into the ClusterWIS 
infrastructure enables its coupling to any other service that 
might receive data from the simulator or provide essential 
basic data to it. That objective is particularly important against 
the background of ecosystem service provision. Ecosystem 
services are typically linked by mutual synergies and 
tradeoffs. Therefore, one relevant coupling scenario is the 
linkage between SILVA and vegetation distribution models. 
Such specialized land surface models [14] represent processes 
of vegetation growth, seed dissemination and disturbance. 
They may thus provide valuable results about the 
establishment of regeneration trees and individual young trees 
to forest growth simulators. Moreover, as vegetation models 
often use a simplified representation of main stand 
development, 
they 
might 
straightforwardly 
integrate 
individual tree data provided by the growth simulator.  
C. Evaluation Services 
While simulation services such as SILVA may provide 
built-in components for result evaluation, ClusterWIS may 
also complement such simulation services with dedicated 
evaluation services to provide them in any environment 
desired. Evaluation services may be readily implemented by 
forest and wood scientific staff within statistical environments 
such as R [29] that do not presuppose profound experience in 
software development. For example, R based evaluation 
services may simply be exposed by embedding them into 
ClusterWIS compliant service wrappers that call the R 
runtime with script name and parameters. As R provides 
packages for convenient XML parsing, a wrapper may 
straightforwardly pass ForestGML data to and from the script 
being called. Thus, an evaluation service may run on 
simulation results or survey data that has been generated on a 
remote system by services hosted on a different platform.  
VII. REFERENCE PROCESSES 
ClusterWIS not only provides an infrastructure, protocols 
and applications. It also specifies processes for a sustainable 
feedstock management realized on this foundation, which will 
be tested and demonstrated in actual forest stands. An 
important aspect of ClusterWIS is that these processes do no 
longer take place in a parallel and unrelated manner but start 
to interact with each other. A selection of practically relevant 
reference processes is considered within the project and 
briefly introduced below:   
A. Forestal Data Provision 
Sustainable natural resource management requires 
information and planning. For that purpose, up-to-date, highly 
qualitative, and detailed (geo) data is needed. Data is usually 
compiled of various data sources (ForestGML-structured data, 
third party spatial base data and business specific data). 
Currently, the comprehensive provision of such data to the 
cluster is an unresolved problem. Thus, this process describes 
the provision within the ClusterWIS network.  
B. Forest Information 
This process describes an actor’s access to the provisioned 
forestal data of a specific area in the right time at the right 
place, comprising visualization, analysis, and editing. 
C. Forest Inventory 
Forest inventory is the acquisition and management of 
environmental data in forestry. Thus, the purpose of this 
process is to provide the cluster with always up-to-date, 
detailed and high-quality data. An important aspect in this 
context is to automatically and logically connect different data 
sources and, if applicable, different timestamps (for trend 
analysis) within the nD forest information system. 
D. Planning and Consulting 
The comprehensive data provided by the ClusterWIS 
network enables consultants to give forest owners efficient 
and goal-orientated advice on how to manage their forests.  In 
particular, they can use simulation tools to demonstrate how 
different management alternatives result in different future 
outcomes. 
E. Timber Trade 
The ClusterWIS network opens new ways for getting in 
contact. By providing all relevant information to all actors 
involved in the process, a more efficient communication 
between sellers and buyers can be established. Thus, 
ClusterWIS provides the framework for a more efficient 
timber trade and contributes to a more efficient wood and 
biomass mobilization.  

88
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
F. Sustainable Harvesting 
Integrated into the aforementioned processes within the 
ClusterWIS network, the technical production process can 
access a vast number of relevant data. This allows for the 
planning of more sustainable harvesting measures. It 
comprises the (simulated) determination and visualization of 
wood assortments, harvesting costs, accessibility and 
harvesting routes, average skidding distances, as well as 
aspects of nature conservation. Besides planning, this process 
also comprises the execution of planned measures and their 
documentation, where the latter can again be used in 
downstream processes. 
VIII. DEMONSTRATOR 
In order to implement and test the developed concepts and 
to showcase them to potential users, a demonstrator has been 
created. It serves as a proof of concept and includes 
prototypical implementations of different applications, 
services and processes as described above. 
The current demonstrator contains two demo scenarios 
focusing on different aspects of the aforementioned reference 
processes. 
A. Demo Scenario: Forest Inventory and Planning 
This scenario contains aspects of the reference processes 
“Forestal Data Provision”, “Forest Information”, “Forest 
Inventory” as well as “Planning and Consulting”. It addresses 
the private forest owner’s demand to easily get up-to-date 
stand attributes and data evaluations for his forest as a basis 
for further planning. 
The forest owner uses an Android app (Figure 7) with a 
GIS user interface to connect to the ClusterWIS network.  
 
 
Figure 7. ClusterWIS Android app for the forest owner. 
Various freely available WMS are integrated and provide 
geo data like orthophotos or LiDAR images. Using a remote 
service for remote sensing data processing (see Section VI.A), 
the user can retrieve automatically calculated forest inventory 
data for his or her forest areas just by selecting the desired 
areas and invoking the service by a simple push of a button 
(Figure 8). The service receives the work order packaged in 
an encrypted communicating object that also contains the 
surface to process on via the communication service. It uses 
remote sensing data to calculate stand attributes (tree species, 
area, age, stock volume, top height etc.) and creates a new 
communication object containing the encrypted results, which 
are sent back to the forest owner’s client app using the 
communication service, as well. 
 
 
Figure 8. Exemplary stand attributes result from ClusterWIS remote 
sensing data processing service in the Android app for the forest owner. 
In addition, several R-based evaluation services (see 
Section VI.C) have been integrated into the demonstrator. 
Based on the previously generated stand attributes, they 
calculate values like groundwater recharge [30] or key 
indicators of biodiversity [31]. The results are visualized in 
the form of diagrams (Figure 9).  
 
 
Figure 9. Stand inventory data aggregated to the forest owner specific 
resolution level (volume share per species and stand) by the ClusterWIS 
evaluation service and presented in the Android app for forest owners; tree 
species distinguished by color and abbreviation (Bu: European beech, Ei: 
oak, Dg: Douglas fir, Fi: spruce, La: larch). 
The service is used the same way:  
 
The user selects surfaces,  
 
invokes the service call,  
 
an encrypted communication object containing 
both is sent to the service via the communication 
service, 
 
results are calculated, encrypted and sent back in 
a 
new 
communication 
object 
via 
the 
communication service, and 

89
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
the user’s client fetches the new communication 
object and presents the results. 
By using these two services alone, the forest owner 
already gets a considerable amount of information about his 
forest on demand and without the need for locally stored 
masses of geo data, for massive local computing power or for 
doing site surveys. This information serves as a basis for 
further planning of tending and felling measurements. The 
forest owner usually relies on other experts to get efficient and 
goal-oriented planning advice. To support this process, the 
mobile app gives access to a “yellow pages” feature, which is 
based on the registry service, where the user can search, e.g., 
for consultants registered in the ClusterWIS network and 
correspond with them directly via his app. In addition to a 
written request, other relevant data can be attached to the 
message that is forwarded to the recipient via the 
communication infrastructure described in Section IV. That 
way, forest consultants may offer support in forest planning 
based on the data within the secure communication object. 
Such planning, in turn, may be backed by scenarios from 
simulation services like SILVA (see Section VI.B).  
B. Demo Scenario: Timber Trade 
This scenario builds on the previous one and addresses the 
reference process “Timber Trade”. Having planned or already 
conducted a felling, the forest owner wants to sell the 
harvested wood to a selling agent or directly to a saw mill.  
 
 
Figure 10. ClusterWIS Android app with a timber logistics user interface 
for creating ELDATsmart jobs. 
For that purpose, he can use the Android app (Figure 10) 
to create the appropriate ELDATsmart-based timber logistics 
job for wood allocation. Again, the “yellow pages” feature 
integrated into the ClusterWIS network helps him find a 
registered selling agent or saw mill operator. Subsequently, he 
can send the generated wood allocation job to the chosen 
recipient using the ClusterWIS communication infrastructure. 
The communication partner on the side of the selling agent 
or saw mill retrieves the message using his own client 
application, extracts the ELDATsmart file and can continue to 
use it in his usual workflow.  
A similar user interface for timber logistics was also 
created for a prototype of a ClusterWIS desktop app (Figure 
11). Here, the user can also derive ELDATsmart-based timber 
logistics files, e.g., for wood allocation, which is (in parts, 
where applicable) derived from inventory data and can 
subsequently be sent using a ClusterWIS communication user 
interface within the app. 
 
 
Figure 11. ClusterWIS desktop app with a timber logistics user interface 
for creating an ELDATsmart wood allocation job. 
C. Achievements 
The demo scenarios implemented in the current 
demonstrator showcase a variety of concepts and their 
practical application in real world scenarios. They 
demonstrate the communication between the cluster’s actors, 
easy and inexpensive information retrieval and processing via 
user-specific applications and the integration of service 
providers into the network. 
Furthermore, the demonstrator is a proof of concept for the 
technical aspects of ClusterWIS. For example, different types 
of nodes have been implemented and connected to a network: 
 
Desktop and mobile applications tailored to the 
needs of private forest owners. 

90
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Automated services that calculate stand attributes 
and evaluations on demand based on remote sensing 
data. 
 
A 
user 
registry 
service 
providing 
lookup 
functionality using LDAP. 
 
A communication service transporting user-to-user 
and user-to-service messages. 
The nodes communicate via HTTPS utilizing the 
ClusterWIS PKI and communication objects as described 
above. Client applications and services implement an 
interface to ForestGML and are able to serialize and 
deserialize data like surface geometries, stand attributes and 
evaluation results. In addition, the evaluation service based on 
SILVA demonstrates the successful integration of existing 
software into the ClusterWIS network. 
D. Presentation and Feedback 
The ClusterWIS project and its current demonstrator were 
successfully presented at the INTERFORST 2018 [32], an 
international leading trade fair for forestry and forest 
technology in Munich, Germany. Private forest owners, 
freelance forestal experts and service companies showed a 
particular interest. In general, most visitors expressed the 
willingness to participate in a network like ClusterWIS. 
Especially small forest owners see a great advantage in the 
ability to get forest inventory data in an inexpensive way as 
such data is usually not easily available without a traditional 
forest inventory measurement. There is also a demand for 
lightweight apps and web portals as costs and complexity of 
traditional desktop software are not feasible for many forest 
owners. Easy to use and intuitive user interfaces are a must for 
such apps and portals. 
Another aspect favored by some forest owners was the 
straightforward communication with other actors, which 
improve 
their 
independence 
and 
avoids 
fees 
for 
intermediation by third parties. 
While the consistent use of end-to-end-encryption was 
well received, some visitors expressed security concerns 
regarding the public accessibility of the network. Some kind 
of “supervisory body” to review registered users was 
suggested. Some forest owners also fear that the structures of 
ClusterWIS might promote the dictate of pricing by buyers of 
timber like saw mills. These concerns deserve particular 
attention and will be considered in the further course of the 
ClusterWIS system. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
The cluster forestry and wood is an important economic 
sector. Yet, its major challenges (structural complexity and 
heterogeneity, 
huge 
number 
of 
stakeholders, 
and 
decentralized processes) are insufficiently addressed in 
current IT solutions. The ClusterWIS approach can resolve 
these problems by providing a decentralized, secure, and lean 
infrastructure for communication and data management. 
Based on this infrastructure, services and applications are 
orchestrated to realize novel, interconnected, and sustainable 
processes for feedstock management among the cluster’s 
actors. 
As presented in the paper at hand, in its current phase, 
most ClusterWIS services and apps are implemented and 
integrated into a comprehensive demonstrator. The feedback 
to this demonstrator already shows the high interest of 
different actors (forest owners, service providers …) in 
ClusterWIS-based solutions. 
Next steps within the project comprise the integration of a 
payment infrastructure to allow service providers to offer 
payed services and the implementation of a tree species 
classification service based on user-provided local samples. 
Subsequently, the demonstrator will be complemented by 
further aspects of the reference processes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 The research project ClusterWIS is co-financed by 
the European Union and the German federal state of North 
Rhine-Westphalia: European Union - Investing in our Future 
- European Regional Development Fund (EFRE-0800036, 
EFRE-0800037, EFRE-0800038, EFRE-0800088). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Rossmann et al., “ClusterWIS - A Decentralized Forest Information 
and Management System for the Cluster Forestry and Wood,” in The 
Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information 
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2018) IARIA, 
March 25-29, 2018, Rome, Italy, pp. 29-35, ISBN 978-1-61208-617-0, 
2018. 
[2] Waldbauernverband NRW e.V. (English: Wood owner association of 
North Rhine-Westphalia), “Waldbauernverband NRW e.V.,” URL: 
http://www.waldbauernverband.de/2016/ [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[3] M. Hoppen, M. Schluse, J. Rossmann, and C. Averdung, “A New nD 
Temporal Geodata Management Approach using GML,” in 
GEOProcessing 2015 - The Seventh International Conference on 
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and 
Services, Lisbon, Portugal, 2015, pp. 110–116. ISBN 978-1-61208-
383-4, Permalink https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article 
&articleid=geoprocessing_2015_6_20_30086 [accessed: 2018-11-08] 
[4] Kuratorium für Waldarbeit und Forsttechnik e.V. (KWF, English: 
German Center for Forest Work and Technology), “ELDATsmart,” 
URL: http://www.eldatstandard.de [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[5] Skogforsk, “StanForD,” URL: http://www.skogforsk.se/english/pro-
jects/stanford [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[6] papiNet Europe/NA, “The intelligent choice…..papiNet,” URL: 
http://www.papinet.org [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[7] M. Kahn and H. Pretzsch, “Parametrisierung und Validierung des 
Wuchsmodells SILVA 2.2 für Rein- und Mischbestände aus Fichte, 
Tanne, Kiefer, Buche, Eiche und Erle (English: Parameterisation and 
validation of the growth model SILVA 2.2. for pure and mixed stands 
of spruce, fir, pine, beech, oak and alder),“ in Jahrestagung der 
DVFFA Sektion Ertragskunde, Kevelaer , 1998. 
[8] J. Rossmann, M. Hoppen, and A. Buecken, “Semantic World 
Modelling and Data Management in a 4D Forest Simulation and 
Information System,” in ISPRS 8th 3DGeoInfo Conference & WG II/2 
Workshop, International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote 
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Istanbul, 2013, vol. XL-
2/W2, pp. 65–72. 
[9] P. Krahwinkler, “Machine learning based classification for semantic 
world modeling : support vector machine based decision tree for single 
tree level forest species mapping,” PhD thesis, RWTH Aachen, 2013. 
[10] A. Buecken and J. Rossmann, “Mining for the Timber-Volume for a 
State-Wide Forest Information System,” Intl. LiDAR Mapping Forum 
2017, Denver, pp. 1-4, 2017 

91
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[11] A. Buecken and J. Rossmann, “Modelling of Forest Landscapes from 
Remote Sensing LiDAR Data and Aerial Photos,” in Capturing Reality 
- 3D, Laser Scanning and LiDAR Technologies Forum 2015, 23-25 
November, 2015, Salzburg, Austria, pp. 1-6, 2016.  
[12] CPA, 
“CPA 
ReDev 
GmbH,” 
URL: 
http://www.cpa-
redev.de/index.php?lang=e [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[13] P. Biber et al., “How Sensitive are Ecosystem Services in European 
Forest Landscapes to Silvicultural Treatment?,” Forests, 6(5), 1666–
1695, 2015. doi: 10.3390/f6051666 
[14] S. Hudjetz et al., “Modeling Wood Encroachment in Abandoned 
Grasslands in the Eifel National Park – Model Description and 
Testing,” 
PLoS 
One 
9:e113827, 
2014. 
doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0113827, 2014. 
[15] I. Prokofieva, “Payments for Ecosystem Services—the Case of 
Forests,” Current Forestry Reports, 2(2), pp. 130–142, 2014. 
doi: 10.1007/s40725-016-0037-9 
[16] Fordaq, “IHB,” URL: http://www.ihb.de [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[17] Wald-wird-mobil.de gGmbH, “Branchenbuch Wald und Forst 
(English: 
Yellow 
Pages 
Wood 
and 
Forest),” 
URL: 
http://www.waldhilfe.de [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[18] EGGER, “Der Internet-Marktplatz CoSeDat (English: The internet 
marketplace CoSeDat),” URL: http://www.cosedat.com [accessed: 
2018-11-08]. 
[19] The Biofore Company UPM, “UPM Customer Online” URL: 
http://www.upmpaper.com [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[20] H. Jacke, “Abschlussbericht zur Pre-Feasibility-Study "Holztransport 
und Logistik / Virtueller Betrieb Forst und Holz NRW (English: Final 
report of the pre feasibility study “wood transport and logistics / virtual 
enterprise forest and wood NRW”)",“ Göttingen, 2001. 
[21] “Vision, FOCUS - The Project,“ URL: http://focusnet.eu/about-
focus/project-vision [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[22] J.-L. Payeur-Poirier and T. Ahrenholz, “Die Wertschöpfungskette 
Holz: optimiert vom Wald ins Werk. Ein Holz-Logistikprojekt für den 
Kleinprivatwald (English: The valued added chain wood: optimized 
from forest to plant. A wood logistics project for small forest owners),” 
proWALD, 2(2018), pp. 9-11, 2018. 
[23] Nordwestdeutsche Forstliche Versuchsanstalt (NW-FVA, English: 
Northwest German Forest Research Institute), “Softwareprogramme 
und Webapplikationen der NW-FVA (English: Software programs and 
web 
applications 
of 
NW-FVA),“ 
URL: 
http://www.nw-
fva.de/index.php?id=3 [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[24] Scottish Forest & Timber Technologies, “The Scottish Forest and 
Timber 
Technologies 
initiative” 
URL: 
http://www.forestryscotland.com [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[25] Wald in Österreich (English: Forest in Austria), “Das Portal zu Wald 
und Holz (English: Portal to forest and wood)” URL: http://www.wald-
in-oesterreich.at [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[26] WaldSchweiz, Verband der Waldeigentümer (English: Suisse wood 
owner 
association), 
“WaldSchweiz” 
URL: 
http://www.waldschweiz.ch [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
[27] J. Lange, F. Iwanitz, and T. Burke, “OPC From Data Access to Unified 
Architecture,” 2010. ISBN 978-3-8007-3242-5 
[28] J. Rossmann, M. Schluse, C. Schlette and R. Waspe, “A New Approach 
to 3D Simulation Technology as Enabling Technology for 
eROBOTICS,” in 1st International Simulation Tools Conference & 
EXPO 2013 (SIMEX'2013), 2013, pp. 39-46. 
[29] R Development Core Team, “R: A language and environment for  
statistical computing,” R Foundation for Statistical Computing,  
Vienna, Austria, 2008, ISBN 3-900051-07-0, URL: http://www.R-
project.org [accessed: 2018-11-08] 
[30] F. Schwaiger, W, Poschenrieder, T. Rötzer, P. Biber, and H. Pretzsch, 
„Groundwater recharge algorithm for forest management models,” 
Ecological 
Modelling, 
385, 
154-164, 
2018. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2018.07.006 
[31] A. Toraño-Caicoya, P. Biber, W. Poschenrieder, F. Schwaiger, and H. 
Pretzsch, “Forestry projections for species diversity-oriented 
management: an example from Central Europe,” Ecological Processes, 
7(23). doi: 10.1186/s13717-018-0135-7 
[32] Messe München (English: Trade fair Munich), “INTERFORST | Key 
Trade 
Fair 
for 
Forestry 
and 
Forest 
Technology,” 
URL: 
https://www.interforst.com/index-2.html [accessed: 2018-11-08]. 
 
 
 

