17
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Challenge of On-demand Routing Protocols
Improvement in Mobility Context
Tiguiane Y´el´emou∗, Philippe Meseure §, Anne-Marie Poussard§, and Tound´e Mesmin Dandjinou∗
∗Polytechnic University of Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso
§University of Poitiers, XLIM-SIC CNRS Lab, France
E-mail : tyelemou@gmail.com, (Philippe.Meseure, anne.marie.poussard)@univ-poitiers.fr, dandjimes@yahoo.fr
Abstract—Mobile Ad hoc NETworks are characterized by rapid
change in their topology and the lossy nature of wireless links.
In this context, achieving respect the QoS constraints of mul-
timedia communications is a real challenge. Routing protocols
play an important role in achieving the required performance.
They should be smart enough to select better paths for data
transmissions. Several routing approaches are used. Most are
derived from adapting those used in wired networks. They are
not suited to the context of wireless networks. We focus on
the well-known Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV)
protocol, commonly used protocol in ad hoc network. Standard
route discovery process used in AODV is expected to obtain
the best path in term of delay. However, in lossy-links context,
multimedia data packet transmission success, on path established
thanks to control packets, may require several attempts. These
retransmissions increase delay and overhead. Many QoS-based
methods failed to make a meaningful improvement due to added
complexity and additional delay and overhead. In this paper, we
use a convenient and practical way to evaluate quality of links
in mobile context. With these measures relating to the number
of retransmissions, we produce a new metric. Thereafter, we use
this metric to highlight the limitations of QoS approaches used
to improve the performance of AODV. We show that improving
performance of on-demand routing protocols, in the mobility
context, lies on effective control of node neighborhood.
Keywords–mobility; reliability; wireless networks; quality of
service; on-demand routing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the socio-economic context marked by the need to
communicate any time and any where, use of Mobile Ad hoc
NETworks (MANET) in the communication chain is essential.
However, to communicate in these networks with a satisfactory
level of Quality of Service (QoS) stands as a challenge to
network services and infrastructures developers. Due to the
unstable nature of radio links, routing protocols that establish
communication path, are struggling to ﬁnd and to maintain the
best paths between a source and a destination. Indeed, due to
the mobility of nodes, obstacles in the medium of the radio
wave propagation and interference, the radio links are broken
quickly.
In order to guarantee QoS, routing protocols should be
smart enough to choose a reliable route in order to avoid packet
loss. To deal with the problem, Qos-based routing protocols
are proposed. Route selection process should take into account
link quality. However, most methods proposed for link quality
estimation and best path selection are not appropriate for
this rapid topology change. Most QoS protocols have many
problems, among which, we can mention the additional costs
induced by the determination of the value of the metric used,
the accuracy of the value of the metric used, the additional
complexity made to the route selection process. The obtained
path is, very often, longer than the shortest path (in terms of
number of hops). In mobility context, long paths are more
vulnerable to breakage than shortest paths. In [1], a primary
study was conducted on these issues.
In this paper, we use a realistic simulation environment
to explain the problem. We use of a convenient and pratical
way to evaluate quality of links in mobile context. Then,
we design different QoS-based Ad-hoc On-demand Distance
Vector (AODV) protocols. The QoS metric used (called PR-
metric) is based on the number of retransmissions. It takes into
account accurately the proportion of retransmission time with
respect to time of ﬁrst issue. We use this metric to compare
effectiveness of different QoS-based methods used to improve
on-demand routing protocols performance. Finally, we conduct
a detailed analysis of differend QoS-based AODV protocol
performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, we present and analyze related work. In Section III,
we present our QoS-based routing protocols. Performance eval-
uation and discussions are made in Section IV. We conclude
in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK AND ANALYZES
In MANET [2], achieving good Quality of Service (QoS) is
a critical issue and is very difﬁcult to guarantee mainly due to
the dynamic nature of the network and the lossy nature of wire-
less links. In this context, routing protocols play a signiﬁcant
role. The main goal of any ad-hoc network routing protocol
is to establish an efﬁcient route between any two nodes
with minimum routing overhead and bandwidth consumption.
The protocols are different in terms of routing methodologies
and the information used to make routing decisions [3].
The different routing approaches used in MANET can be
classiﬁed into table driven protocols [4][5] and on-demand
protocols [6][7][8]. Table driven protocols are proactive. In the
proactive approach, the nodes maintain updated routing tables.
To communicate, a path is immediately available for the source
node. The drawback of this approach is that control messages
are broadcasted periodically in the network. This leads to high
routing overhead, limiting the network data communication

18
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
capabilities. On-demand approaches are source-initiated reac-
tive mechanisms. With this routing approach, a path is issued
at the request of the source node. In this study, we focus
on reactive protocols. AODV is a well known protocol in
this category. In recent years, much effort has been made to
improve the standard AODV protocol [6]. In this section, after
presenting the critical behaviors of the protocol, we review
various proposed improvements. We conclude the section with
a discussion on limitations of two important processes of
AODV protocol.
A. AODV protocol
On-demand approaches are source-initiated reactive mech-
anisms. When a node needs to communicate and no route
toward the given destination is available in its routing table, a
route request packet is issued and ﬂooded in the network [6].
Once the ﬁrst RREQ packet reaches the destination node or
an intermediate node with a fresh route toward the destination
is reached, a route reply (RREP) packet is sent back to the
source node. The source node rebroadcasts the RREQ if it
does not receive a RREP during a Route Reply Wait Time
(RREP WAIT TIME). It tries discovery of path up to a given
maximum number of attempts and aborts the session if it fails.
As the RREP packet is routed back along the reverse path,
the intermediate nodes along the path record a tuple for the
destination in their routing tables, which point to the node from
which, the RREP is received. This tuple indicates the active
forward route.
AODV uses a timer-based technique to remove stale routes
promptly. Each routing entry is associated with a route expira-
tion timeout. This timer is refreshed whenever a route is used.
Periodically, newly expired routes are invalidated.
Route maintenance is done using route error (RERR) pack-
ets. When a link breakage is detected, routes to destinations
that become unreachable are invalidated. RERR propagation
mechanism ensures that all sources using the failed link receive
the RERR packet. RERR packet is also generated when a node
is unable to forward a data packet for route unavailability.
Broadcasted route request and route error messages may be
important if established routes are much bits error-prone. This
can be demonstrated by simulation with the use of a realistic
physical layer and a realistic wave propagation model.
B. Enhanced AODV
The AODV protocol has two major problems: a long
end-to-end communication delay due to overtime induced by
route discovery process and an important routing load and
communication delay variation when the frequency of link
failures is high. Since the publication of standardized version
of AODV, many efforts have been made to improve it. The
major challenge is to limit the frequency of route discovery
process. Thus, several optimizations have been proposed in
the literature. Among them, we note taking into account link
quality in the route selection process and adapting timers to
the network dynamics.
1) Tacking into account link quality: In a wireless net-
work, several factors impact on the quality of links. Among
others, we can cite the distance between nodes, obstacles in
the propagation medium, interference in the environment of
communicating neighbors. Highlighting the impact of barriers
in the propagation medium is only possible with a realistic
propagation model. Taking into account link quality in the
establishment of communication paths is an important factor
for efﬁcient use of network capacity. Correct estimation of link
quality and choice of effective metrics are major problematics
for QoS routing protocols designers. To take into account
link quality in the route selection process, several methods
are proposed with different QoS metrics including bandwidth,
delay, packet delivery ratio, Bit Error Rate (BER). Fei et
al. [9] present the design and selection of appropriate routing
metrics as the principal issue to guarantee efﬁcient routing in
self-organizing networks. They attempt to analyze, compare
and summarize trafﬁc-based routing metrics in the Expected
Number of Transmissions (ETX) family.
Khaled et al. [10] propose a path robusteness-based quality
of service routing for MANET. They proposed that before
processing RREQ packet, an intermediate node must assure
that its lifetime and the delay toward the neighbor from which,
it receives the RREQ packet are above given delay-threshold
and lifetime-threshold. At each hop, at least ﬁve checks are
made and RREQ packet size increased with a node address.
Destination node and source node must wait for copies (that
have followed different paths) of RREQ and RREP packets
until a timeout. The overhead (additionnal delay and routing
load) and the complexity of this approach make problematic
protocol effectiveness.
Some works, such as [11], use optimal link metric value
in the path choice. Path selection choice based on optimal
link metric value may not allow to get the best path. For
example, for number of hops or retransmissions count-based
metric, a path containing the link with the badest metric value
m (compared to links of other feasible paths), is prefered to
anyone, which links metrics values are upper than m, even if
the other links quality of the ﬁrst (path) are very good.
Some authors use additive and multiplicative metric to
enhance AODV route discovery process. To ﬁnd the optimal
path in wireless mesh networks, Kim et al. [12] modify the
standard AODV RREQ process. They propose that duplicate
RREQs with better cumulative link metric value be forwarded,
so that all the possible routes are considered. As link quality
metric, they use an improved Expected Transmission Time
(ETT) [13]. Their RREQ packet carries the cumulative link
ETT value. They estimate the archievable throughput of their
approach more than twice compared to standard AODV. We
presume it is not necessary to re-broadcast duplicate RREQ
packets. The intermediate node may note all possible reverse
paths and retain as active reverse path to the source the better
one according to the considered QoS metric. Their approach
needs to be tested in MANET context with realistic simulation
assumptions.
2) Taking into account network dynamics: Mobility of
nodes is one of the essential issue of MANET. Taking into
account the mobility of nodes is countered, ﬁrst, by difﬁculties
to adequately measure the mobility degree of a node. Many

19
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
papers [14][15] propose to privilege nodes with low speed but
network topology change is not local problem. A node may be
ﬁxed but if its neighborhood moves a lot, integrating this node
into transmission path will not allow efﬁcient communication.
Some authors propose to use link breakage prediction
for packet loss avoidance. In fact, when intermediate node
detects degradation of neighbor link quality on active route,
it may anticipate route maintenance process. Then, source
node is advertized to the probable path failure and anticipates
route recovery process. This avoids transmission interruption.
QoS metrics used in this method include received signal
strength [16], packet delivery ratio of control packets [17].
Very often, the power of modeled signal depends only on
the distance to the concerned neighbor node. It is known that
obstacles in wave progation environment has an impact on
signal strength [18][19]. Even if these metrics are accurately
measured, the approach only anticipate the break of the link.
The source must initiate a new route recovery process. The
impact on delay improvement is not signiﬁcant.
Amruta et al. [16] and Naif et al. [20] focused on accessi-
bility prediction to restrict route discovery for future commu-
nications. Indeed, during the usual routing operations, a node
can collect signiﬁcant information enabling it to predict the
accessibility and the relative mobility of the other nodes in the
network. However, due to rapid change of network topology
and since they are not actively maintained, these routes become
obsolete. Macker et al. [21] study mobile routing path stability
performance when constrained to use a distributed connected
dominating set (CDS) control plane induced sub graph. They
presente weighted, degree-based Essential CDS (ECDS) results
alongside those obtained using a CDS temporal stabilization
algorithm. Compare to full topology shortest path forwarding
(SPF) their work provides signiﬁcant improvement in lifetimes
for the ECDS election stabilization mode but at the price of
additional average routing stretch.
Kirthana Akunuri [22] proposes a novel on-demand routing
protocol, Speed-Aware Routing Protocol (SARP) to mitigate
the effects of high node mobility by reducing the frequency of
route disconnections in a MANET. SARP identiﬁes a highly
mobile node which forms an unstable link by predicting the
link expiration time (LET) for a transmitter and receiver pair.
Their work decreases control trafﬁc but deteriores other per-
formance metrics like the throughput (i.e.,number of packets
received).
C. AOMDV
In classical AODV, a route discovery process allows the
source node (initiator of the route request) to obtain a single
path for its data transmission. It must re-initiate the process
when the used path is broken. Since each route discovery
induces high routing load and latency, frequency of use of
this process should be kept low so that the routing is effective.
Multipath routing protocols have been proposed to meet this
objective.
Ad
hoc
On-demand
Multi-path
Distance
Vector
(AOMDV) [23] is a well known multi-path routing protocol.
The key concept of this protocol is the computation and
recording of multiple paths (to a given destination) by route
search. With these paths to a given destination, a node chooses
a new route from backup routes when the active one (what
was in use) is broken, thus avoiding having to re-initialize the
route discovery process. A new route search process is only
necessary when all the available routes fail. To form multiple
paths, all duplicate RREQ packets received by a node are
taken into account but not rebroadcast, as each RREQ deﬁnes
an alternative route. Several studies have shown that the
multipath approach improves AODV performance. However,
in a context of very unstable network topology, AOMDV’s
performance are not stable.
Yufeng et al. [11] propose to improve the AOMDV pro-
tocol. They focus on the choice of path having a minimum
number of retransmissions. However, a metric based on the
number of retransmissions is not suitable in their context.
Indeed, the route recovery process, the focal point for the
effectiveness of reactive protocols, can not beneﬁt from this
improvement because the RREQ packet is not forwarded.
Authors in [24] highlight a major drawback due to the fact
that the relief routes are not maintained. Source node does not
know if a given relief route is still valid when it is needed.
The use of a obsolete path lead to increased average delay
and jitter. They present two main contributions to improve the
robustness of standard AOMDV protocol:
•
the decentralized multi-path. The basic idea is to allow
intermediate nodes to have multiple paths and locally
repair broken routes,
•
by a cross-layer approach, they take into account links
reliability in the route choice process.
D. Analysis
In this sub-section, we present limits of the ﬁrst received
RREQ packet based route choice and issue of route mainte-
nance especially in the case of multi-path routing. The ﬁrst
RREQ consideration approach means the selected path is the
one with the better Round Trip Time (RTT). This path is the
sorthest one in term of hops count if all links are considered
as similar. This path is the best path for control packets but
not obviously the best for the data packets. Indeed, the RREQ
packets, like for most of routing control packets, are small size
packets. They are less vulnerable to interference. We study
the impact of the packet size on the number of transmissions
required to successfully communicate on a link and on bit
error rate (BER). Simulation conditions are simular with those
presented in presented in Section IV. These results show that
the number of retransmissions required to successfully transmit
on a link increases with the packet size (see Figure 1). Thus,
a link that is very reliable for control packet transmission may
require several retransmissions for successful data packet. It
is not conceivable to use reasonably sized packet for route
discovery (close to that of data packet) as this will cause
constantly high routing load and much of the bandwidth is
consumed by routing overhead.
Another questionable process of on-demand routing proto-
cols is their route maintenance process. Contrary to proactive
routing approaches, in on-demand routing methods, nodes
maintain information only for active routes. In [24], it is shown
that in mobility situation, AOMDV does not reach the expected

20
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
performance because the backup routes are obsolete when the
active route is broken.
Figure 1.
Number of expected retransmission according to packet size and
BER link
III.
QOS-BASED ON-DEMAND ROUTING PROTOCOLS
In this section, we present the PR-metric and three variants
of AODV based on this metric. However, comprehensive
presentation of this metric is beyond the scope of this paper.
A. QoS metric
The most commonly metrics used in QoS routing are
bandwidth, delay, packet delivery ratio and bit error rate.
Authors in
[25][26][27][28][29] highlighted the problematic
of link quality estimation and metrics design. An inaccurate
design of link metric causes non-optimal route construction
and thereby leads to end-to-end performance degradation. To
partly solve this issue, retransmissions should be avoided
whenever possible. BER is highly related to retransmissions.
BER has a direct impact on Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) and
end-to-end delay, however, this metric has many drawbacks.
Indeed, BER criteria is quite hard to measure in practice. A
ﬁrst method consists in injecting probe packets in the network.
This method generates an additional load for the network [30].
Another approach consists in sending impulses and measuring
the impulse response associated with a transmission. The main
drawback is that this method requires an adapted physical
layer. An estimation of all these disadvantages is presented
in [25]. Moreover, using BER as an additive metric induces
long end-to-end transmission path [31]. These long paths
with an overall good BER value would potentially permit a
better packet delivery ratio, but they generate long delay and
induce poor throughput. Indeed, ﬁrst, long paths increase intra-
communication interfer-ence. Second, in mobility context, long
path is very vulnerable.
For this study, we use a new metric based on the expected
number of retransmissions required to communicate successful
data packet on this link. Let us call it PR-metric. With PR-
metric, distance between a node and its neighbor will not
be 1 but 1 + a ∗ (n − 1), where n represents the average
number of transmissions required to make a data transmission
successful and a is a parameter to weigh retransmission cost.
For retransmission, we want to design a transmission made
after the ﬁrst issue (after the ﬁrst transmission attempt). The
coefﬁcient a is the ratio between the average time required
for a retransmission over the time necessary for an initial
successful transmission. Statistical analysis and results permit
us to estimate a to 0.65 with 0.03 as standard deviation. Note
that a is a mean value that represents retransmission cost.
The experimental setup for this evaluation is similar to that is
presented in Section IV. We investicated the simulated commu-
nications delays. Comparisons of delay where communication
required a single transmission (one attempt) to those who need
several retransmissions allowed us to obtain this value of a.
To evaluate this metric, we only have to get the number of
packet transmissions. This information is available at the MAC
level (it is a part of the communication statistics at the MAC
layer) and, by a cross layer approach, is operated at routing
level. We remind that there is no need to use special probes
as in the estimation of most metrics. When the used packet
size is small (like hello packet), the number of transmissions is
almost always 1 (no retransmission). The large packages allow
to better estimate the quality of a link with this metric. In our
protocols all packets are taken into account. This metric has a
direct impact on delay and throughput. Contrary to the well-
known metrics like BER or ETX [32], it takes into account real
time network load. Its estimation is local. It does not induce
a signiﬁcant routing load or a large computation time. It is a
good compromise between the number of hops criterion and
the BER or ETX criterion, which induces selection of long
route [31].
B. QoS routing approach
QoS routing approach In a cross-layer approach, we use
this criterion at the network layer. The objective is to avoid
data transmission on bad paths in terms of BER. The following
sub-sections present how we enhance routing protocols with
BER information.
C. AODV-BL-PR
The basic idea of AODV-BL-PR is to remove from route
establishment process poor quality links. Thus, the route search
process will use a sub network with good quality links.
AODV-BL-PR picks out AODV where we apply blacklisting
approach to route recovery process. With AODV-BL-PR, when
an intermediate node receives a RREQ packet, it compares the
PR-metric value of link on which, this packet is received to
a predetermined threshold. If this PR-metric value is higher
than this treshold, the packet is discarded, otherwise it is
managed as in standard AODV. Indeed, if this node forwards
this request, it contributes to establish a bad path, which may
cause high packet loss and high delay due to possible several
retransmission attempts. Better paths may be found. We set this
threshold to 2. We estimate that, in mobility context, after 2
attempts to transmit data, the path used is no longer valid. Note
that maximum number of retransmissions at MAC layer is 4
for our test. We note that a control message (usually lighter)
can be successfully transmitted on a poor quality link when a
normal payload message can not be transmitted. With this route
selection approach, paths containing bad links are disregarded.

21
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This will also limit the dissemination of RREQ messages and
then reduces routing overhead.
D. AODV-sum-PR
The basic principle of AODV-sum-PR during the route
search process, is the choice of better route among the different
possible routes between the source and the destination. To
design this protocole, two main modiﬁcations are made to
standard AODV, namely QoS-information dissemination and
duplicate RREQ packets process by intermediate node.
•
QoS-information dissemination: for AODV-sum-PR,
RREQ and RREP packets are extended with the cu-
mulative PR-metric (C-PR-metric) ﬁeld. Source node
initializes this metric to 0.0. An intermediate node
increases the value of C-PR-metric by the PR-metric
of the link on which, it received the packet. The
intermediate node also integrates reverse path into its
routing tables. Each entry is improved with the C-PR-
metric as QoS-metric. The RREP packet also carries
the C-PR-metric. The ﬁeld is, this time, initialized to
0.0 by the destination node or to the current value of
entry related to this destination by intermediate node,
which initiates the RREP packet.
•
Duplicate RREQ packet process: contrary to stan-
dard AODV, an intermediate node manages duplicate
RREQ packet. Indeed, if the C-PR-metric of a dupli-
cated RREQ packet is lower than the recorded one,
the entry for source node (reverse path) is updated:
the previous hop to the source node will be the new
transmitter. Finally, the source node obtains a path to
the destination with the lowest C-PR-metric value.
Note that intermediate node does not need to re-broadcast
the duplicate RREQ packet and does not need to integrate the
PR-metric value of all its neighbors as control packets header
information, as widely done.
In Table I, we summarized the duplicate packet processing.
TABLE I.
SAMPLE OF DUPLICATED PACKET PROCESSING ALGORITHM
f o r
the
concerned
r e v e r s e
path
i f
new C−PR−metric < c u r r e n t C−PR−metric
update
next−hop
update C−PR−metric
e l s e
drop
the
packet
E. AODV-new-timer
AODV protocol has several timers to manage the status
of known routes and links with the neighborhood. These
timers are updated through the various received packet man-
agement processes. The values of these timers are crucial for
the protocol effectiveness, specially in the route announces
by intermediate nodes. Indeed, an intermediate node, which
knows a route to a desired destination, responds by RREP
packet to the RREQ request. The announcement of an obsolete
route leads, from the ﬁrst attempt at data transmission, to the
use of route repair process by a RERROR packet diffusion.
In most different experiments, these parameters have the same
values in a static context and a dynamic context. However,
in a context of mobility nodes, the neighborhood of a node
changes quickly.
The basic idea of AODV-new-timer is to allow nodes
to detect, as soon as, possible broken links or new links
established. Then, in this enhanced protocol, we reduce the
timers associated to the various recorded routes, established
links with neighbors and waiting for a response (hello timer,
route validity timer, waiting RREP packet timer, etc.). These
timers are used to manage routes and links validation or
recovery processes. To highlight the impact of these parameters
and make a judicious choice of values, we have performed
simulations and conduct a statistical study of the results of
message exchanges. The simulation conditions are presented
in Sub-section IV-B. The average speed of the 60 nodes used is
12m / s. 10 simultaneous end-to-end transmissions are initiated
during 165s. We focused on the number of RERROR packets
issued in the network. This performance parameter is used to
highlight the level of network stability. The four sets of timers
are presented in Table II. The obtained results are shown in
Figure 2.
TABLE II.
DIFFERENT SETS OF AODV TIMERS VALUES
Timer Parameter
Set1
Set2
Set3
Set4
MY ROUTE TIMEOUT
15s
10s
5s
2.5s
ACTIVE ROUTE TIMEOUT
15s
10s
5s
2.5s
REV ROUTE LIFE
10s
6s
3s
1.5s
BCAST ID SAVE
10s
6s
3s
1.5s
MAX RREQ TIMEOUT
15s
10s
5s
2.5s
RREP WAIT TIME
2s
1.0s
0.7s
0.4s
HELLO INTERVAL
2s
1s
0.5s
0.3s
BAD LINK LIFETIME
6s
3s
1.5s
0.8s
Figure 2.
Number of RERROR packets according to the set of timers values.
These results have allowed us the choice of set 3 values
(see Table II). It is these values that are used in the rest of the
document for AODV-new-timer.
The new parameters are exhaustively presented in Table III.
AODV-st means usual AODV. This coordinated reduction
globally means that a node more frequently inventories its links
and routes.
With this approach, we want to know the determining
factor between taking into account link quality or a convenient
control of neighborhood information for better performance in
mobility context.
In summary, the reduction of route timeout value to 5s
means that a path that is not used 5s ago is considered obsolete.
The default value in standard AODV is 10s. The source waits

22
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III.
DEFAULT (AT LEFT) AND MODIFIED (AT RIGHT) AODV
PARAMETERS FOR OUR TESTS
Timer Parameter
AODV-st
AODV-new-timer
MY ROUTE TIMEOUT
10s
5s
ACTIVE ROUTE TIMEOUT
10s
5s
REV ROUTE LIFE
6s
3s
BCAST ID SAVE
6s
3s
MAX RREQ TIMEOUT
10s
5s
NETWORK DIAMETER
30 hops
10hops
RREP WAIT TIME
1.0s
0.7s
HELLO INTERVAL
1s
0.5s
BAD LINK LIFETIME
3s
1.5s
less time (0.7 instead of 1.0) to restart a new request if it
receives no response to a previous query. The network diameter
is reduced to 10 instead of 30. We estimate that over 10 hops
it is impossible to communicate in node mobility context. A
HELLO INTERVAL timer set to 0.5s instead of 1.0s, means
that nodes should test their neighborhood more frequently.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst present our simulation environment,
we then present the results of simulation tests and analyze the
performance of different protocols.
A. Simulation conditions
Simulation hypotheses have a major impact on the analysis
of protocols’ effectiveness. In wireless networks, the main fac-
tors that impact the probability of successful packet reception
are the radio propagation environment, interference from other
transmissions and link breakages due to dynamic topology of
ad hoc network. On-demand and link states routing protocols
suffer differently from these factors. To compare the efﬁciency
of protocols, the effets of these factors must be taken into
account. In this sub-section we want to highligth the impact
of these simulation conditions.
Most research studies rely on simulation to show the
effectiveness of their proposal. However, they do not take
into account any environment when modeling propagation
channel. They suppose that two nodes can communicate based
on various empirical formulas. Often, the free-space model is
used, only the direct ray between transmitter and receiver is
considered and no obstacle disturbs transmissions. The two-
ray-ground approach is also quite simplistic to compute such
interferences. A realistic propagation model should consider
path loss, fading and shadowing effects. If the environment is
not considered, the obtained results can be biased and rather
optimistic, since the inﬂuence of bad links is underestimated.
In [18][19], authors show that interactions with wave propa-
gation environment affect signiﬁcantly link quality.
To better estimate the quality of links and to take into
account the impact of propagation medium on the quality
of communications, we use a realistic propagation simulator
developed by XLIM-SIC laboratory [33] called Communica-
tion Ray Tracer (CRT). This software allows the modeling of
the electromagnetic wave propagation in 3D environment. The
paths between two points (transmitter and receiver) uses a 3D
ray tracing technique. Thus, for a selected link, it determines
the existing paths and their own characteristics like delay,
attenuation, phase and polarization. These parameters depend
on the environment. It allows to fully characterize narrow and
broad band channels and thus provides a realistic approach to
multipath. With CRT, we conduct a semi-deterministic simula-
tion of the entire chain of transmission (encoding, modulation,
sound effects, demodulation and decoding). The impulse re-
sponses (IR) from the simulation are precisely computed and
can thus be used, processed or analyzed easily afterward. From
these impulse responses, they calculate the BER of the radio
links by counting errors to the message originally sent.
Hamidouche et al. [18] highlight the overly optimistic
results, when using free-space model propagation, compared
to the ones provided by CRT. In these results, while the Free-
space model provides a 100% as packet delivery rate, the CRT
model offers about 60%. When the average number of hops
is 1.2 in free-space, the CRT model offers a minimum of 2.5.
To experiment quality of service, simulation should compute
correct attenuation and error rate by taking into account not
only shadowing and fading but also obstacles and multipaths
effects.
Multi-communication effects must also be considered in a
suitable way. Interference is an inherent property of wireless
networks, which affects network efﬁciency as well as routing
protocol performance [34]. As pointed out by Gupta and
Kumar [35], the degradation of performance is observed when
the number of nodes increases because each node has to share
its radio channel with its neighborhood. Thus, in order to
route data packets over non congested links and maximize
overall network throughput, a protocol should focus on using
available capacity of suitable links. On this subject, Jain et
al. [36] advocate that routing or transport protocols in ad
hoc networks should provide appropriate mechanisms to push
the trafﬁc further from the center of the network to less
congested links. Some researchers emit important assertions
about the correlation between number of nodes and source-
destination throughput. Gupta and Kumar [35] prove that when
the number of nodes n increases, the throughput per source-
destination pair decreases approximately as O(1/n). Hekmat
and Van Mieghem [37] reveal the existence of a network
saturation point, after which, the network throughput no longer
increases with respect to the number of nodes. Nevertheless,
these assertions should be veriﬁed in realistic communication
conditions.
In mobility situations, unrealistic mobility models (use of
constant speed, pause time method, etc.) are very often used
and interactions between mobile entities are not taken into
account. It is shown in [38] that mobility model may drastically
affect protocol performance.
B. Experimental setup
To compute more real simulations, we use a realistic wave
propagation model taking into account environment charac-
teristics. Therefore, we enhanced NS2 [39] with a ray-tracer
simulator, Communication Ray Tracer (CRT) [33], that has
been developed at the XLIM-SIC laboratory. CRT simulator
provides a 3D ray-tracer wave propagation model. It takes
into account the geographical data, electrical properties of
materials, the polarization of the antennas, the position of the
transmitters and receivers, the carrier frequency and the max-
imum number of interactions with the surrounding obstacles.

23
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
To realistically model node movement, we use the VANET-
Mobisim [40] software. Node speed is computed by this
software. The mobility model implemented is more realis-
tic than widely used ones [41][42][38]. Paths are deﬁned
in correlation and consistency with our environment model.
VANET-Mobisim is also easily interfaced with NS2. Speciﬁ-
cally, VANET-Mobisim uses a mobility ﬁle in XML format,
which contains all the detailed informations of the microscopic
and macroscopic models that govern mobility of nodes. The
mobility model used in this software takes into account the
environmental parameters of the mobile nodes (trafﬁc lights,
speed limits, etc.) and possible interactions between mobile
nodes. A node may thereby accelerate, decelerate according
to environment constraints.
The global parameters for the simulations are given in
Table IV.
TABLE IV.
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameters
Values
Network simulator
ns-2
Simulation time
180s
Simulation area
1000m*1000m
Maximum number of transmissions
4
Transmission power
0.1w
Data types
CBR
Data packet size
512 bytes
MAC layer
IEEE 802.11a
We also use a realistic model of the Munich town (urban
outdoor environment, see Figure 3), obstacles (building, etc.)
are printed red. Dots represent nodes. Other real environments
could be used in a more comprehensive study.
As routing protocols, we compare AODV-st, the standard
AODV protocol [6], to the three enhanced ones presented in
Section III.
Figure 3.
Simulation environment when number of nodes=60. Obstacles are
printed red.
C. Simulation results
In this section, we study the impact of mobility on
performance of the four protocols. 60 mobile nodes move
in the Munich town environment (Figure 3). Their average
speeds range from 4m/s to 20m/s. 10 simultaneous end-to-
end transmissions are initiated during 165s. As performance
parameters we rely primarily on average end-to-end delay of
data packets, PDR and Routing Overhead (RO). End-to-End
Delay concerns only successfully delivered packets. PDR is
the ratio of the number of successfully delivered data packets
over the number of sent data packets. Routing overhead is
the number of routing protocol control packets. It permits
to evaluate the effective use of the wireless medium by data
trafﬁc.
In Figure 4, we present data transmission delay evolution
according to the average node speed. These results show that
AODV-new-timer outperforms the standard AODV and the
two PR-metric based ones (AODV-BL-PR and AODV-sum-
PR). The good performance of AODV-new-timer is explained
by the fact differend waiting times are reduced and the near
real time knowledge of neighborhood avoids node to process
obsolete paths. Node implementing AODV-new-timer detects
links breakage quickly. For QoS-based AODV (AODV-BL-
PR and AODV-sum-PR), determining QoS routes requires
substantial time and with node mobility, established routes
become obsolete quickly. Thus, they are less efﬁcient in delay
parameter than AODV-st.
PDR evolution according to node speed is presented in
Figure 5. Here again we see the same trends. The AODV-
new-timer is better than the three other protocols. PDR values
are higher than 58%. The paths established by the QoS
protocols are longer than those established by the standard
protocol. Their average path length is 3.4 against 2.6 for the
standard protocol. In situations of mobility, long paths are more
vulnerable. Also, over long paths, intra-interferences are more
important as intermediate node may not receive a packet and
retransmit another at the same time. These contribute to the
poor performance in PDR and delay for these QoS protocols
compared to the standard one. We also note that the number of
packet loss on the ﬁrst attempt of data transmission is 20% of
total packet loss for AODV-st and PR-based ones against 13%
for AODV-new-timer. This is explained by the use of obsolete
path attempt by AODV-st and PR-metric based AODV.
Others criticism of blacklisting approach applied to AODV
(AODV-BL-PR) may be made. An analysis of trace ﬁles shows
that the percentage of transmission failures due to lack of
route is high (10%) with AODV-BL-PR. This is explained by
the fact the use of a threshold on the PR-metric to decide
whether forward a Route Request packet may lead to ignore
several alternative paths, thus reducing the reliability of the
entire network. We remind that with this protocol, the links
with PR-metric higher than 2 (equivalent to 3 transmission
attempts) are excluded from the route search process. Finally,
note that ignoring some bad links may induce a loss of network
connectivity. In [43], it is emphasized that blacklisting policy
could ﬁlter routing options severely, limiting the efﬁciency of
the routing algorithm if an improper threshold is chosen.
A thorough analysis of the simulation shows that the
majority of communications where source and destination

24
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
are far apart from each other have failed. Established routes
become obsolete even before the ﬁrst data packets arrive at the
destination.
These show that better neighborhood information control
is more important than taking into account link quality for
AODV efﬁciency.
Figure 4.
Delay evolution when speed increases.
Figure 5.
PDR evolution when speed increases.
Protocol’s performance in RO parameter is presented in
Figure 6. The high cost of AODV-new-timer is expected since
Hello and RREQ messages emiting frequency increased. Its
RO is, as expected, double that of AODV-st in a context of
low mobility (¡= 8m / s). This difference diminishes when
the average node speed increases. This is explained by the
fact that with AODV-new-timer, the recourse to route recovery
process and therefore the dissemination of REROR packets is
less. The better performance of QoS-based AODV compared
to standard one can be explained by better paths selection.
In addition, blacklisting approach of AODV-BL-PR limits the
dissemination of RREQ messages. For AODV-new-timer, the
RO may be very high in a dense network and thus may impede
the good performance of this protocol. A choice of timer
values, depending on the volatility of links, could help ensure
better compromise.
Figure 6.
RO evolution when speed increases.
We also note that the curves performance are not mono-
tonic. This denotes the complexity of the mastery of the
network topology in mobility context. The jitter is high and
raises problems for use of these networks in multimedia
communications, especially voice communications.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The performance of AODV Protocol held in the efﬁciency
of route discovery process. In an unstable links context, routing
load and jitter may be signiﬁcant. The main improvements
are to limit the dissemination of route request messages
and reduction of the frequency of route recovery process
solicitations. However, in a context of mobility, link quality
estimation procedures and better paths choose mechanisms
must be efﬁcient in terms of bandwidth and time consumption.
In our study, we tested the effectiveness of different QoS-
based methods under realistic wave propagation model and
realistic mobility model. For QoS metric, we use number
of retransmissions count-based metric. Although we used a
simple and effective method for link quality estimation, the
results show that taking into account the quality of links is
not effective for the MANET performances improvement. The
additional complexity, induced by QoS management, increases
delay and precipitated the obsolescence of the links.
To achieve better performance in high speed MANET
context, the real challenge is the effective control of node
neighborhood and accurate established routes lifetime and
waiting RREP packet timeout value.
A more comprehensive study of the problematic of on-
demand routing protocol performance could concern other real

25
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
environments (than Munich town one) and a reﬁnement of the
penalty coefﬁcient due to retransmissions.
A solution where the inventory frequency of the neigh-
borhood depends on the network dynamics might improve
the performance of on-demand routing approach in mobility
contexts.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank our colleagues of XLIM-SIC labo-
ratory of University of Poitiers for simulation tools developped
including Communication Ray Tracer (CRT) simulator.
We also thank the Polytechnic University of Bobo
Dioulasso for facilitating this paper drafting.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Y´el´emou and T. M. Dandjinou, “Problematic of QoS-based On-
demand Routing Protocols to Improve Communication in Mobility
Context,” in The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile
Communications, ICWMC 2014, Seville, Spain. IARIA, Jun. 2014, pp.
174–179.
[2]
I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, and J. J. N. Liu, “Mobile ad hoc networking:
imperatives and challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13 –
64, 2003.
[3]
F.
Sarkohaki
and
S.
Jamali,
“A
survey
of
routing
protocols
for
mobile
ad-hoc
networks
with
comprehensive
study
of
olsr,”
International
Journal
of
Computer
Science
and
Network
Solutions,
vol.
2,
pp.
1–26,
March
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.techrepublic.com/resource-library/whitepapers/a-survey-
of-routing-protocols-for-mobile-ad-hoc-networks-with-comprehensive-
study-of-olsr/
[4]
T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized link state routing protocol
(OLSR),” IETF Network Working Group, Tech. Rep. RFC3626, Oct.
2003.
[5]
S. Murthy and J. J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, “A routing protocol for
packet radio networks,” in Proceedings of the 1st annual international
conference on Mobile computing and networking, ser. MobiCom ’95.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1995, pp. 86–95. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/215530.215560
[6]
C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc on-demand distance
vector (AODV) routing protocol,” IETF Network Working Group, Tech.
Rep. RFC3561, Jul. 2003.
[7]
D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic source routing in ad hoc
wireless networks,” in Mobile Computing, T. Imielinski and H. F. Korth,
Eds., 1996, vol. 353, pp. 153–181.
[8]
V. D. Park and M. S. Corson, “A highly adaptive distributed routing
algorithm for mobile wireless networks,” IEEE Computer and Commu-
nications Societies, Annual Joint Conference of the, vol. 0, 1997.
[9]
F.
Shi,
D.
Jin,
and
J.
Song,
“A
survey
of
trafﬁc-based
routing
metrics
in
family
of
expected
transmission
count
for
self-organizing networks,” Computers and Electrical Engineering,
vol.
40,
no.
6,
pp.
1801
–
1812,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045790614001700
[10]
K. A. Al-Soufy and A. M. Abbas, “A path robustness-based quality
of service routing for mobile ad hoc networks,” in 2010 IEEE 4th
International Conference on Internet Multimedia Services Architecture
and Application(IMSAA).
IEEE, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[11]
Y. Chen, Z. Xiang, W. Jian, and W. Jiang, “A Cross-Layer AOMDV
routing protocol for V2V communication in urban VANET,” in 5th
International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, 2009.
MSN ’09.
IEEE, Dec. 2009, pp. 353–359.
[12]
S. Kim, O. Lee, S. Choi, and S. Lee, “Comparative analysis
of link quality metrics and routing protocols for optimal route
construction
in
wireless
mesh
networks,”
Ad
Hoc
Networks,
vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1343–1358, Sep. 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570870511000746
[13]
P. Esposito et al., “Implementing the expected transmission time metric
for OLSR wireless mesh networks,” in Wireless Days 2008 (WD08),
Nov. 2008, pp. 1–5.
[14]
N. Enneya, K. Oudidi, and M. Elkoutbi, “Enhancing delay in manet
using olsr protocol,” International Journal of Computer Science and
Network Security IJCSNS, vol. 9, no. 1, 2009.
[15]
M. Benzaid, P. Minet, and K. Al Agha, “Integrating fast mobility in the
OLSR routing protocol,” in 4th International Workshop on Mobile and
Wireless Communications Network, 2002, 2002, pp. 217 – 221.
[16]
A. Chintawar, M. Chatterjee, and A. Vidhate, “Performance analysis
of ad-hoc on demand multipath distance vector routing protocol with
accessibility and link breakage prediction,” in IJCA Proceedings on
International Conference and workshop on Emerging Trends in Tech-
nology (ICWET), 2011, pp. 1–6.
[17]
A. Khosrozadeh, A. Akbari, M. Bagheri, and N. Beikmahdavi, “New
AODV routing protocol with break avoidance,” in 2011 International
Symposium on Computer Science and Society (ISCCS).
IEEE, Jul.
2011, pp. 303–306.
[18]
W. Hamidouche, R. Vauzelle, C. Olivier, Y. Pousset, and C. Perrine,
“Impact of realistic mimo physical layer on video transmission over
mobile ad hoc network,” in 20th Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications Symposium, 2009.
[19]
M. Guenes, M. Wenig, and A. Zimmermann, “Realistic mobility and
propagation framework for manet simulations,” in NETWORKING
2007: Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, Wireless Networks, Next Gen-
eration Internet, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 4479.
Springer Verlag, 2007, pp. 97–107.
[20]
N. Alsharabi, L. Ping, and W. Rajeh, “Avoid link breakage in on-demand
ad-hoc network using packet’s received time prediction,” in Proceedings
19th European Conference on Modelling and Simulation, 2005.
[21]
J. Macker, D. Claypool, and N. Hughes, “Improving Routing Path
Stability in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks That Use a CDS Control Plane,”
in 2014 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), Oct.
2014, pp. 1099–1104.
[22]
K. Akunuri, “Design and analysis of a speed-aware routing protocol
for mobile ad hoc networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Missouri University of
Science and Technology, 2011.
[23]
M. Marina and S. Das, “On-demand multipath distance vector routing
in ad hoc networks,” in Network Protocols, 2001. Ninth International
Conference on, Nov. 2001, pp. 14 – 23.
[24]
T. Y´el´emou, “New approach to improve the robustness of AOMDV
protocol,” in 2013 10th International Multi-Conference on Systems,
Signals Devices (SSD), Mar. 2013, pp. 1–6.
[25]
L. Shi, A. Fapojuwo, N. Viberg, W. Hoople, and N. Chan, “Methods
for calculating bandwidth, delay, and packet loss metrics in Multi-
Hop IEEE802.11 ad hoc networks,” in IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference, 2008. VTC Spring 2008.
IEEE, May 2008, pp. 103–107.
[26]
M. Zuniga, I. Irzynska, J. Hauer, T. Voigt, C. A. Boano, and K. Roemer,
“Link quality ranking: Getting the best out of unreliable links,” in 2011
International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems
and Workshops (DCOSS).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–8.
[27]
D. Johnson and G. Hancke, “Comparison of two routing metrics
in
olsr
on
a
grid
based
mesh
network,”
Ad
Hoc
Networks,
vol.
7,
no.
2,
pp.
374
–
387,
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S157087050800053X
[28]
S. Su, Y. Su, and J.-Y. Jung, “A novel QoS admission control for
ad hoc networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, 2007.WCNC 2007.
IEEE, Mar. 2007, pp. 4193–4197.
[29]
B. Bakhshi and S. Khorsandi, “Complexity and design of qos routing
algorithms in wireless mesh networks,” Computer Communications,
vol. 34, no. 14, pp. 1722 – 1737, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366411001198
[30]
J. Ledy, H. Boeglen, A. Poussard, B. Hilt, and R. Vauzelle, “A Semi-
Deterministic channel model for VANETs simulations,” International
Journal of Vehicular Technology, vol. 2012, pp. 1–8, 2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijvt/2012/492105/
[31]
T. Y´el´emou, P. Meseure, and A.-M. Poussard, “Improving zrp perfor-
mance by taking into account quality of links,” in WCNC 2012 Paris,
France, April 2012.

26
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[32]
D. S. J. D. Couto, D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, and R. Morris, “a
high-throughput path metric for multi-hop wireless routing,” Wireless
Networks, vol. 11, pp. 419–434, Jul. 2005. [Online]. Available:
http://www.springerlink.com/content/x1l047934qu8h56u/
[33]
R. Delahaye, “Efﬁcient and realistic simulation of the physical layer
to aid routing in ad hoc networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Poitiers, 2007.
[34]
G. Parissidis, “Interference-aware routing in wireless multihop net-
works,” Ph.D. dissertation, University Paris VI, 2008.
[35]
P. Gupta and P. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 388–404, Mar.
2000.
[36]
K. Jain, J. Padhye, V. Padmanabhan, and L. Qiu, “The impact of
interference on multi-hop wireless network performance,” in 2nd ACM
MOBICOM 2003 Conference, San Diego, CA, Sep 19, 2003, vol. 11,
2005, pp. 471–487.
[37]
R. Hekmat and P. Van Mieghem, “Interference in wireless multi-hop ad-
hoc networks and its effect on network capacity,” Journal on Wireless
Networks (Proceedings of Conference on Ad hoc networking), vol. 10,
no. 4, pp. 389–399, Aug. 2004.
[38]
F. Bai, N. Sadagopan, and A. Helmy, “Important: a framework to
systematically analyze the impact of mobility on performance of routing
protocols for adhoc networks,” in 22th Annual Joint Conference of the
IEEE Computer and Communications, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 825–835.
[39]
L. Breslau et al., “Advances in network simulation,” COMPUTER,
vol. 33, no. 5, May 2000.
[40]
J. Haerri, F. Filali, and C. Bonnet, “Mobility models for vehicular ad hoc
networks : a survey and taxonomy,” in IEEE communications surveys
and tutorials, vol. 11.
IEEE-INST Electrical Electronics Engineers
INC, 2009, pp. 19–41.
[41]
Q. Zheng, X. Hong, and S. Ray, “Recent advances in mobility modeling
for mobile ad hoc network research,” in Proceedings of the 42nd annual
Southeast regional conference.
ACM, 2004, pp. 70–75.
[42]
X.
Hong,
M.
Gerla,
G.
Pei,
and
C.-C.
Chiang,
“A
group
mobility model for ad hoc wireless networks,” in Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM international workshop on Modeling, analysis
and simulation of wireless and mobile systems, ser. MSWiM ’99.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1999, p. 5360. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/313237.313248
[43]
O.
Gnawali,
M.
D.
Yarvis,
J.
Heidemann,
and
R.
Govindan,
“Interaction of retransmission, blacklisting, and routing metrics for
reliability
in
sensor
network
routing,”
in
IEEE
Conference
on
Sensor and Adhoc Communication and Networks, pp. 34-43. Santa
Clara, California, USA, IEEE., May 2004. [Online]. Available:
http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/0nw798m9

