43
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
6G Architecture: New Use Cases, New Needs and
New Challenges
Francine C´assia de Oliveira
Integration and Testing Department
Eldorado Research Institute
Campinas, Brazil
francine.oliveira@eldorado.org.br
Jo˜ao Victor Menino e Silva
Integration and Testing Department
Eldorado Research Institute
Campinas, Brazil
joao.menino@eldorado.org.br
Gustavo Iervolino de Morais
Electronic Devices Department
Eldorado Research Institute
Campinas, Brazil
gustavo.iervolino@eldorado.org.br
Ramon Magalh˜aes Nogueira
Integration and Testing Department
Eldorado Research Institute
Campinas, Brazil
ramon.nogueira@eldorado.org.br
Abstract—Reliable data communication is essential for con-
nections that are increasingly intelligent and automated. The
fifth generation of mobile networks offers major improvements
over the previous generation, 4G, but is still not capable of
offering a ubiquitous connection to meet the demands of the new
applications and needs that are emerging. On the basis of this,
the cellular network standard will require a new communications
network and this will come in the new generation of mobile
networks, called 6G. This new standard has been considered
a key enabler for the smart information society of 2030. The
6G networks are expected to deliver superior performance over
5G and satisfy new emerging services and applications that
integrate space, air, ground, and underwater networks to provide
ubiquitous and unlimited wireless connectivity. There is a huge
number of use cases that pose varying requirements, which
include extreme mobility, extreme low latency, ultra-high data
rates, high energy efficiency, enhanced security, as well as high
reliability. From this perspective, it is necessary to consider
some of the key features that can be fundamental for the
construction of the 6G network architecture. In this article, we
will list some main use cases like Digital Twins, Global Ubiquitous
Connectivity, Remote Communications, and others, that will need
the main 6G functionalities to work correctly and meet the
expectations of the main 6G requirements so that it is possible
to identify relevant points in the construction of a robust and
flexible network architecture.
Index Terms—6G network(s); use cases; architecture; applica-
tion; THz communication; energy efficiency; fog computing
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background
The growing demand for greater data traffic capacity, the
staggered growth in the number of users, technological ad-
vances, and new services drive the mobile communication
systems and thus the development of the 5G system of
International Mobile Telecommunications-2020 (IMT-2020)
[1] was initiated. In International Telecommunication Union-
Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R), the Working Party 5D
(WP5D), is responsible for the radio system that includes
the IMT-2000, IMT-Advanced, IMT-2020, and IMT-2030. For
IMT-2020, the WP5D created a process to be followed from
the beginning of the study of trends until the end of the
work on standards. The capabilities of IMT-2020 are identified
such that IMT-2020 is more flexible, reliable, and secure than
previous IMT and provides diverse services. IMT-2020 can
be considered from multiple perspectives, including the users,
manufacturers, application developers, network operators, ser-
vice and content providers. The WP5D commenced its work
on the recommendation “IMT Vision for 2030 and beyond”
in March 2021. The IMT Vision for 2030 and beyond is
being developed with the aim to drive the industries and
administrations to encourage further development of IMT by
defining the objectives of the future of the IMT, including the
role IMT could play to meet the needs of future societies.
Some of the objectives of the vision towards IMT for 2030
and beyond are: focus on the continued need for increased
coverage, capacity and extremely high user data rates, focus
on the continued need for lower latency and both high and low
speed of the mobile terminals, full support to the development
of an Ubiquitous Intelligent Mobile Society, focus on deliv-
ering on digital inclusion and connection with the rural and
remote communities, among others [2]. To meet the diverse
requirements of the upcoming decade, a robust, scalable, and
efficient network is thus necessary to be the key enabler for
achieving this objective; it will connect everything, provide
full dimensional wireless coverage, and integrate all functions,
including sensing, communication, computing, caching, con-
trol, positioning, radar, navigation, and imaging, to support
full-vertical applications.
B. Motivation
In fifth-generation networks, one of the main pillars in
their development was the interconnection of everything, but
applications involved with the Internet of Vehicles and Indus-
trial Internet, for example, may be far from being met with
such technology. Some questions are still unanswered, such

44
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
as: What will be the problems of 5G for application in the
industrial area? What will a green industry look like? Perhaps,
these and other questions challenge the capacity of 5G and,
probably, only 6G can solve.
Many white papers have addressed some aspects of the 6G
network. For example, new 6G applications and requirements
are discussed in [3], 6G enabling technologies are mentioned
in [4] and 6G enablers to drive Industry 5.0 are discussed
in [5]. However, it is still too early to say exactly what the
6G network architecture will look like as the network and
corresponding technologies are still under development.
Therefore, the main objective of this study is to analyze the
main use cases that will require a network such as the sixth
generation, and the indicators related to them that may directly
influence the construction of the 6G network architecture.
C. Paper Organization
The subsequent sections of this paper are organized as
follows: A synopsis of related work is given in Section
II, along with an analysis of relevant studies and literature.
Potential use cases in the context of 6G are examined in
Section III, providing insight into a range of applications.
In Section IV, the difficulties of Remote Communications
are examined, along with their complexities and obstacles.
In Section V, target indicators associated with the identified
use cases are analyzed with respect to their possible impact
on 6G network architecture. Section VI, which concludes
the study, provides a thorough summary of the structure and
contributions of the work by synthesizing the findings and
suggesting possible avenues for further research.
II. RELATED WORK
Several studies involving 6G architecture have been carried
out to meet the demands of a fully connected, intelligent,
and digital world. In [6], Huda Mahmood et al. propose an
architecture composed of seven functions that have function-
alities for essential enabling technologies. The objective of this
architecture is to allow the optimization of such functionalities
through dedicated network components.
According to Purbita Mitra et al., [7], 6G networks aim for
ubiquitous intelligence and high-speed wireless connectivity
in air, space and sea. This will require a super fast service
with data speeds close to around 1000 Mbps. Marco Giordani
et al. [8] have an analysis that suggests that meeting these
high demands will require new communication technologies,
network architecture, and deployment models. Finally, Bariah
et al. gave a comprehensive overview of 6G in [9], identi-
fying seven disruptive technologies, associated requirements,
challenges, and open research questions.
So far, a considerable number of papers have explored
possible applications and solutions for the architecture of 6G
networks. Therefore, the present related work analyzes factors
that may influence the evolution of the 5G network to 6G
or the construction of a new network architecture with the
purpose of fulfilling the requirements specified by the IMT-
2030 for the next decade of technological evolution.
III. USE CASES
The 5G, through the Massive Machine-Type Communi-
cations (mMTC) and Ultra Reliable Low Latency Commu-
nications (URLLC) use cases, has resulted in a significant
increase in the number of connected devices. New applications
in vertical industries emerge every day, bringing a signifi-
cant impact on people’s daily lives. Internet of Things (IoT)
solutions will continue to emerge and there are several use
cases whose strict requirements 5G can not meet, such as
Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), haptic internet,
and telemedicine, among others. The sixth generation mobile
network, 6G, should support and improve the connectivity and
operation of such applications.
Therefore, many use cases will require requirements that
can only be met with sixth-generation technology. Some of
these cases are listed below.
A. Digital Twins
With the increasing number of connected “things”, in 6G,
a self-sustainable system should be proposed, which can be
intelligent and operate with minimal human intervention. One
technology, that presents itself as a strong candidate for such
a requirement, and has received great attention, is the Digital
Twins. It is a virtual representation of the elements and
dynamics of a physical system [10]. In an ideal scenario, a
Digital Twin will be indistinguishable from the physical asset,
both in terms of appearance and behavior, with the added
benefit of making predictions [11]. Figure 1 illustrates this
representation of the virtual elements in relation to a physical
system. Advances in other technologies make Digital Twins a
powerful solution and contribute to its advancement.
For example, recent advances in Machine Learning enable
Digital Twins to analyze data and make decisions to be
applied to the physical entity. This data can come from a
network of sensors, from historical data or even from other
Digital Twins (through a twin-to-twin interface). In other
words, automation and intelligence will be created in the cyber
world and delivered to the physical world through 6G wireless
networks [12].
Another enabler for the Digital Twins has been the sig-
nificant advances in cloud solutions. The transformation of
a physical system into a Digital Twin is mainly based on the
concept of decoupling. To enable Digital Twin for 6G with de-
coupling, Software Defined Networking (SDN) and Network
Function Virtualization (NFV) could be promising candidates
[9], which are heavily dependent on cloud solutions.
Digital Twins consist of three parts - the physical part, the
digital part and the connection between the two for two-way
communication. For this two-way communication, there is a
unanimous opinion in the research community that the sixth
generation (6G) mobile network will play a significant role
[13], given that the Digital Twins technology requires a fast
and reliable communication network.
In addition to the contribution of 6G, many benefits can
be achieved through the technology of Digital Twins. Since
the Digital Twin “mimics” the real physical environment and

45
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 1. Representation of the virtual elements in relation to a physical system
[12]
can learn and make decisions through artificial intelligence
algorithms, there are several aspects in the research and
development of 6G communication systems that could benefit
from the application of this technology.
There are several network domains, such as Radio Access
Network (RAN), Network Edge, Radio Resource Management
(RRM), Edge Computing, Network Slicing, etc., that can
significantly improve their performance using Digital Twins
technology [14].
B. Human-Centric Immersive Communications
Through the ages, human beings have evolved their cogni-
tive capacity through the use of all the senses in relationships
with other individuals and with nature, therefore, the search for
a better communication experience has been constant since the
invention of the first communication systems. In smartphones,
every year, the screen resolution is improved to the limit of
human perception, which is quite interesting, but it has the
limiting factor of having to enter data through only touches
on the screen. Therefore, in order to provide an immersive
experience, in which the human being can use senses in a
more accurate way, new technologies such as AR and VR, as
well as holographic communications have been emerging in
recent times.
Through them, it will be possible to offer new forms of
interaction between human beings and their devices and, con-
sequently, new forms of human-to-human interaction. Com-
munication that until then was carried out strictly through a
smartphone, mostly with touches on the screen, can evolve
so that it is possible to enter data through gestures and even
through nerve impulses generated by the brain. Obtaining data
will also be improved and synesthesia becomes even more
present through, for example, the combination of sounds and
three-dimensional elements that can be inserted and merged
with the user’s perception of the real world through glasses,
ocular lenses, and devices in-ear audio. For such technologies
to be offered as good user experiences through the 6G network,
ultra-high data rates are required, in the order of Tbits/s, which
is currently impossible to achieve with the 5G network. In
addition to the very high rate, another fundamental require-
ment for such teleoperations involving the senses and human
perception is very low latency. This parameter is necessary in
order to avoid dizziness and fatigue when obtaining tactile and
visual feedback in real time [12].
C. Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0 is the enhancement of Industry 4.0 and brings
new goals with resilient, sustainable, and human-centric ap-
proaches in a variety of emerging applications, for example,
factories of the future and digital society. It is a quest to
leverage human intelligence and creativity in connection with
intelligent, efficient systems, the use of cognitive collabora-
tive robots to achieve zero waste, zero defects, and mass
customization-based manufacturing solutions.
The enabling technologies of Industry 5.0 are multiple
systems resulting from the continuous convergence of tech-
nologies and paradigms that unite physical spaces and cy-
berspaces. Successfully working the symbiotic relationship be-
tween multiple complex systems and supporting technological
frameworks together can only enable the true multidimensional
potential of Industry 5.0 functions [4]. These Industry 5.0 tech-
nology enablers are Human-Machine Interaction, Real-time
Virtual Simulation and Digital Twin, Artificial Intelligence-
native Smart Systems, Data Infrastructure, Sharing and Ana-
lytics, and Bio-inspired Technologies, among others.
The relationship between 6G and Industry 5.0 is expected
to meet with the intelligent information standard that provides
high energy efficiency, very low latency, high reliability, plus
capacity of traffic.
D. Global Ubiquitous Connectivity
As it is known, legacy mobile communication systems
aimed to provide connectivity with a focus on dense urban
areas, resulting in many sparsely populated regions lacking
adequate connectivity and basic Information and Commu-
nication Technology (ICT) services. However, especially in
countries with vast territorial expanses, a significant portion
of the population resides in remote areas. This is particularly
intensified in countries that are major agricultural and agribusi-
ness producers, where a large part of the population chooses to
develop their production in more suitable locations, generally
distant from major urban centers, as is the case in Brazil, for
example.
Besides the extensive terrestrial territories, it is essential to
remember that over 70% of the planet’s surface is covered by
water, making the development of communication systems in
these areas equally crucial. However, achieving total global
coverage with adequate capacity, high-quality service (QoS),
and affordable cost is still far from reality. Nevertheless, it

46
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
is of maximum importance for mobile systems to develop
in these areas to avoid significant digital divides among
people worldwide. This development is necessary not only for
enhancing security with improved geolocation and emergency
response methods, but also for enhancing consumer goods
production through the use of IoT devices, for instance.
In summary, providing means of global connectivity through
resilient infrastructure is essential for enhancing security,
production, and overall quality of life. These purposes align
with the Sustainable Development Goals defined by the United
Nations (UN) [15], which aim to provide ubiquitous Internet
access for anyone or any device anywhere. However, it is
technically impossible for terrestrial networks to cover re-
mote areas such as oceans, deserts, and high mountainous
regions, and furthermore, providing communication services
to sparsely populated areas is not attractive to major players
in the industry.
Attaining ubiquitous global coverage necessitates overcom-
ing challenges spanning political, market, and chiefly technical
issues. Technically, the development of 5G in Releases 15, 16,
and 17 initiates the addressing of concerns regarding architec-
ture interoperability with various technologies. However, the
call for global coverage surpasses the current definitions of
these Releases and can only be tackled with the establishment
of 6G Networks. Simultaneously, the analysis of 3GPP Release
18 is focused on enhancing coverage for handheld devices in
the sub-6 GHz band with added antenna gain losses in the
device. Combining the attenuation due to long propagation
distances with the reduction in antenna gain within the de-
vice yields a diminished signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in both
Downlink (DL) and Uplink (UL) directions. Increasing trans-
mission power, whether in the device or satellite, stands as a
solution. However, the utilization of a legacy waveform design
from 3GPP NTN yields an inefficient solution with increased
complexity due to peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) and
out-of-band (OOB) power leakage [15].
Hence, currently, the best alternative for achieving total
coverage of the planet Earth is through the use of satellites.
Geostationary satellites (GEO), despite being expensive to
deploy and having a capacity of only a few gigabits per second
(Gbps) per satellite [16], may not be suitable for common uses,
but they can be harnessed for critical applications, such as in
the maritime and aviation sectors. Medium Earth Orbit (MEO)
and Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites can be a viable option
for everyday uses, given the possibility of building low-cost
satellite constellations and providing highly profitable global
communication services [17].
In other words, satellites will not only collaborate with
existing terrestrial networks but will also be integral to the
architecture of the 6G network, with common management
besides other network elements. Satellite constellations can
be formed, and furthermore, other elements can contribute
to ubiquitous coverage, such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAVs), drones, balloons, and aircraft, each serving different
roles within the system, such as gateways, relays, or even radio
base stations [18].
E. Pervasive Intelligence
The dissemination of mobile devices and the emergence of
new intelligent devices such as cars, drones, IoT devices, and
robots, for example, lead to significant growth in over-the-
air intelligent services. As the use of these devices continues
to advance, the need for artificial intelligence technologies to
collaborate in providing fundamental functions like Simulta-
neous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), facial, speech, and
image recognition, natural language processing, and motion
detection, among many others, becomes increasingly essential.
However, AI services require high computational capabilities
that may not always be available to the devices intending to use
them. Therefore, 6G presents itself as an excellent alternative
to offer generalized AI services, falling under the AI-as-a-
Service model [19].
A particularly promising scenario for the use of pervasive
intelligence can be identified in the utilization of humanoid
robots as cooperative partners. These robots aim to physically
resemble human beings to perform risky functions, arduous
tasks, and other daily life activities. An example where perva-
sive intelligence can be observed is in humanoid robots like
Atlas, developed by Boston Dynamics [20].
Such robots and other devices can utilize computational
resources offered through the 6G network to spare their own
resources and optimize computational load, thereby increasing
energy efficiency. By receiving processed instructions from
a central core provided via 6G, they can save their own
resources, prolong battery life, and preserve computational
capacity for more critical functions.
In addition to handling intensive computational tasks, perva-
sive intelligence also enables the execution of real-time AI op-
erations. This is particularly advantageous as it overcomes the
latency limitations associated with cloud computing, enabling
quick decision-making and immediate responses to real-time
conditions.
IV. REMOTE COMMUNICATIONS
Connectivity in remote areas has been a challenge for many
years. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the
importance of connectivity more than ever before. The pan-
demic accelerated the transition to remote work and learning,
but unfortunately, it left many people out of this digital age.
according to the state of broadband 2022 report [21], in 2019,
54% of the world’s population was using the internet, with
this number growing to 66% in 2022. However, there are still
many people around the world who do not have access to the
Internet, especially in rural and remote areas.
The numbers from the mobile economy 2023 report [22]
show that there are still 3.5 billion disconnected people, and
thus excluded from the digital age. The majority of these
individuals live in developing countries, especially in Sub-
Saharan Africa and India.
The exclusion of these individuals from the digital age has
a significant impact on their lives, as connectivity plays a
crucial role in a wide range of activities, spanning sectors
such as education, health, business, and public administration.

47
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
One field that has shown remarkable advancements is the
e-health sector, as documented in successful cases in the
future of virtual health and care reports [23]. A notable
case in India, where there was a significant 300% increase
in the number of teleconsultations between March and May
2020. Consequently, these initiatives contribute to reducing
disparities and enhancing the quality of life in rural and remote
regions.
It is believed that 6G will be developed taking these needs
into account, in order to enable the population in rural and
remote regions to be integrated into the digital age, facilitating
their participation in the opportunities offered by this new era.
However, for this to become a reality, it is necessary to delve
into the analysis and research of a set of solutions, in order
to address the challenges that contribute to limited internet
connectivity in these remote areas.
A. Lack of Energy Sources
Many remote or rural regions face challenges in access-
ing the electrical grid, making the provision of energy for
telecommunications networks is a difficult task. In the context
of 6G, potential solutions may involve the use of generators
or, preferably, the adoption of renewable energy sources such
as solar or wind. However, it is important to note that this
approach may lead to an increase in deployment costs and
make the network more susceptible to failures. For this reason,
other lines of research include the development of energy-
efficient equipment to mitigate these challenges.
B. Spectrum Availability
One of the biggest barriers to network deployment in
rural areas is spectrum licensing, as participating in spectrum
auctions is difficult for small ISPs [24]. Additionally, spec-
trum frequency regulation in remote areas adheres to national
standards, although the possibility of flexibility could be con-
sidered, given that many frequency bands remain underutilized
(unallocated) in these isolated locations [25]. Therefore, it
might be necessary to have two sets of regulations: one for
urban areas and another for remote and rural areas.
C. Maintenance and Operation, Access Difficulty, and Quali-
fied Workforce
Understanding the inherent complexities of maintaining
and operating telecommunications networks in remote regions
presents a significant challenge, both in practical and financial
terms. This complexity arises from the difficulty of accessing
such areas due to the often-present topographical adversities
in remote locations, which lack proper road infrastructure,
making transportation to these points challenging.
Furthermore, this scenario is exacerbated by the scarcity
of qualified workforce, as the regions in question often face
financial constraints inherent to their situation, frequently be-
ing situated in developing nations. Possible solutions can stem
from advances in Self-Organizing Networks (SONs), which
can be employed to automate as many resources as possible,
encompassing various network components and engineering
phases [26].
By automating network management tasks, SONs can con-
tribute to improving network performance and user experience
in remote and rural areas, while also reducing the need for
manual intervention and maintenance. Moreover, the digitiza-
tion of these remote areas could enhance the level of skills in
that region, bringing new opportunities to the population and
possibly encouraging the government to invest in education in
that area.
D. Critical Infrastructure
Another challenging issue concerns the lack of infrastruc-
ture in these areas. The deployment of cables, fibers, and even
communication towers faces obstacles due to terrain charac-
teristics. Consider, for example, the complexity involved in
deploying fiber optic networks in the Amazon region, aiming
to provide connectivity to an isolated indigenous community.
Various alternatives have been discussed as potential solu-
tions, among which the utilization of existing infrastructure
stands out, such as those used in TV and radio transmissions
[24]. Another strategy involves the adoption of Integrated
Access And Backhaul (IAB) technology to replace the use
of fiber optics, which proves to be a cost-effective solution
when compared to fiber optics. IAB offers a more flexible
implementation approach. Based on a wired connection to
the core network, the IAB donor can provide communication
access to mobile users and act as a wireless backhaul for IAB
nodes. These IAB nodes are capable of providing network
service access to the mobile user as well as backhaul traffic
[27], as illustrated in Figure 2.
Fig. 2. IAB structure [27]
E. Low Return on Investment/High Cost/Low Income of the
Target Population
Each of the mentioned points above requires a considerable
allocation of resources for their resolution, resulting in a
relatively reduced return on investment (RoI), as the target

48
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
population often consists of individuals with less favorable
socioeconomic conditions. As a result, national operators often
lack interest in investing in such areas, therefore, new business
plans and mechanisms that facilitate the entry of local and
micro-operators will be necessary. To reduce costs, integrating
various solutions is feasible.
The discussion about the use of Non-Terrestrial Networks
(NTNs) has gained prominence, as well as Device-to-Device
(D2D) connections, which ensure coverage in the network’s
peripheral regions. Non-Terrestrial Networks (NTNs) encom-
pass Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), High Altitude Plat-
form Stations (HAPSs), and satellites (such as a Low Earth
Orbit (LEO) constellation). These solutions could provide con-
nectivity both in the front (fronthaul) over vast geographical
areas and in the back (backhaul), potentially replacing the use
of fiber optic networks.
V. TARGET INDICATORS FOR 6G
Each new use case presents highly specialized and de-
manding requirements that the 5G network lacks the capacity
to meet and work with. Figure 3 illustrates the comparison
between the requirements of 5G and 6G, where the vertices
of the inner polygon represent the Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs) of 5G, while the vertices of the outer polygon represent
the KPIs of 6G. In this image, we can see a noticeable
improvement in all the majorly considered KPIs.
Fig. 3. Comparison between 5G and 6G requirements [21]
Nonetheless, different use cases demand distinct KPIs.
For example, Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communications
(URLLC) applications require the lowest possible latency, with
the other KPIs not being as important. In contrast, Massive
Machine Type Communications (mMTC) applications demand
high connection density and energy efficiency, with the other
KPIs being less relevant. Figure 4 shows the significance of
each KPI for different use scenarios.
Furthermore, Figure 4 shows a fresh use case that hasn’t
been discussed yet. As we’ve seen, the deployment of infras-
tructure faces significant challenges in remote and rural regions
due to the high costs involved. This situation could give rise
to a new usage scenario in 6G, in addition to the well-known
eMBB, URLLC, and mMTC. This new element, represented
as the fourth pillar, would involve ”basic internet connectivity”
[28]. This approach would provide inferior performance in
various KPIs but would still ensure minimum connectivity for
users in remote and rural areas.
Fig. 4. Four pillars for 6G [28]
In order to understand how the new 6G network should
be designed, some target indicators will be presented that
exemplify the needs of this new generation of networks.
A. Latency
As shown, several new end-user and vertical industry appli-
cations tend to emerge with the advancement of technology,
for example, autonomous vehicles, Virtual Reality, Augmented
Reality, and holographic communication should be common
applications in the future. These new use cases tend to require
the same Key Performance Indication (KPI) as seen in 5G, but
with new target values, for example, higher throughput, lower
latency and better reliability.
Latency was a critical KPI in 5G and is expected to continue
to be a concern in 6G networks, given that many applications
are dependent on this KPI. On 5G, the minimum user plan
latency requirement is 4ms for enhanced Mobile Broadband
(eMBB) and 1ms for Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communica-
tions (URLLC). This value is expected to be further reduced
in 6G, to 100 µs or even 10 µs. In addition to air interface
latency, 6G must also consider End To End (E2E) latency [28].
E2E latency is trickier to manage due to the myriad network
elements involved, but 6G should overcome this challenge.

49
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Reliability
As with 5G, ultra-reliable, low-latency communications
requirements will continue to guide the future 6G network.
Although the 5G system has created an environment for a
more secure system, its reliability mechanisms are strictly
connectivity-oriented, therefore, the handling of failures in the
application layer is left to the application itself. From the point
of view of mobile networks, any instance outside its domain
is considered outside the scope of treatment, but with 6G this
should change.
In addition to enhancements to existing 5G security mech-
anisms, one of the most promising mechanisms for the sixth-
generation system is Make-Before-Break-Reliability (MBBR).
With it, it is possible to promote an interaction between
the application servers and the mobile network, in order to
detect failures. In short, MBBR gives the mobile network
the possibility of previously detecting problems and security
flaws in the application servers and transferring a problem-
free copy to a redundant application server. In this way,
the communication sections between the end device and the
application will receive treatment from the 6G network, which
will surely promote another layer of reliability for the system,
making it a truly ultra-reliable network [12].
C. Terahertz Communications
Communications in Terahertz work between 100GHz and
10THz and, compared to millimeter waves, they bring great
potential for high-frequency connectivity, enabling high data
rates, in the order of hundreds of Gbps, which is what is
expected from 6G.
On the other hand, the main problems in adopting this
type of communication are directly linked to problems of
propagation, molecular absorption, high penetration loss and
major challenges related to antennas and Radio Frequency
(RF) circuits [30].
In the case of millimeter waves, the propagation loss can
be compensated using antenna arrays and spatial multiplexing
with interference limitation.
Terahertz communications can be maximized by operating
in frequency bands that are not severely affected by molecular
absorption. And, finally, because these are very high frequen-
cies, for indoor scenarios, it will be necessary to enable new
types of RF solutions and ultra-small scale antennas.
Based on the characteristics of this type of transmission,
the 6G network architecture will be directly impacted. For
example, density and high data rates will increase demands on
the capacities of the transport network, which must provide
more fiber access points and greater capacity than current
network backhauls. Furthermore, the wide range of different
communication media available will increase the heterogeneity
of the network, which will have to be managed [7].
To overcome these challenges, most of the conventional
resource allocation algorithms are designed using high-speed
fiber backhaul links, which are not applicable due to geo-
graphic limitations in historic buildings.
Fortunately, the very short wavelength in the THz band
allows the use of an ultramassive array of antennas, i.e.
containing 256, 512 or even 1024 antennas in the transmitter,
which can provide a high beamforming gain to compensate for
the loss of propagation. Meanwhile, precoding with multiple
data streams can be used to provide multiplexing gain to
further improve the spectral efficiency of THz systems. In the
THz band, hybrid precoding that combines digital and analog
domain signal processing is promising, as the number of RF
chains is substantially less than that of full digital precoding,
while achieving superior performance [31].
A good comparison of the key THz propagation character-
istics and their impact on THz systems, is depicted in Table
1 [32].
TABLE I
THZ WAVE PROPAGATION CHARACTERISTICS AND IMPACT ON THZ
SYSTEMS
D. User-Experienced Data Rate
The user-experienced data rate, as the name suggests, is
the throughput that users will perceive in the vast majority of
their interactions with the system. This indicator is important
because the majority of revenue for operators still comes from
regular users and their smartphones, making it essential to
offer high data rates.
In the 5G context, in a dense urban scenario, the user-
experienced data rate is 100 Mbps for downlink and 50 Mbps
for uplink. For 6G, it is expected to provide 1 Gbps or more
in the downlink, which is ten times faster than 5G.
It is also important to note that users have a 95% chance of
receiving this data rate at any time and in any location within
the coverage area. The remaining 5% is allocated to moments
of network overload or regions where the signal level is not as
favorable, such as at the cell edge, for example. Furthermore,
measuring the perceived performance by the user at the cell
edge is also crucial as it can reflect factors such as appropriate
site density, system architecture, and optimizations, among
others. These indicators are valuable for operators, as they
can provide adequate coverage and optimize operational costs
[33].
E. Energy Efficiency
One of the most discussed aspects currently is the reduction
of carbon emissions in the atmosphere, and although the
implementation of a mobile system does not generate a direct
impact in this scenario, the energy efficiency of the system is

50
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
certainly a factor to be taken into account, as part of the energy
used to power mobile systems may come from non-renewable
and polluting sources.
During the deployment of 5G, energy consumption was a
closely observed aspect by the industry and standardization
organizations, resulting in a significant reduction in energy
required per bit compared to previous systems. As for 6G,
this indicator suggests that there will likely be an increase in
energy efficiency by an order of 10 to 100 times compared to
its predecessor [33].
F. Fog Computing
Related to the topic mentioned above, there is another Target
Indicator, which is called Fog Computing.
The Fog Computing has great importance in relation to
energy efficiency, especially in cases of Massive IoT type
communications where the majority of devices in IoT networks
are battery powered with limited computational and commu-
nication resources.
This technology can provide storage and computational
services for 6G networks and allows edge devices to perform
computing and storage operations closer to the edge [33]. One
of the great strengths of Fog Computing is the inclusion of
decentralized computing services compared to the centralized
computing offered by the traditional cloud.
Additionally, improved latency can be achieved as data and
tasks are accessed and analyzed closer to end devices. The Fog
Computing also improves the use of the frequency spectrum
and increases network capacity.
Still on energy efficiency, in order to maintain the energy
supply of any device, it is necessary to have the collaboration
of other devices that can be called helper nodes. The function
of helper nodes is to perform tasks on behalf of other devices.
This process of sharing resources is called task offloading.
Tasks are divided into tasks executed by any device and
offloaded tasks that are executed by auxiliary devices. In
offloaded tasks, there is an important point, which is the
time restriction or maximum time limit for completing the
task. Task offloading can improve latency through parallel
processing of tasks, but it can also, unlike, increase latency
through uplink transmission of the task to task helper nodes
and downlink transmission of the result to the local device
[35].
IoT networks that are based on Fog Computing do not have
a standard architecture and can be represented through layers.
Although the three-layer architecture is the most commonly
used, there are proposals for architecture based on four and
six layers.
In the three-layer architecture, there is a cloud layer, fog
layer, and edge layer, and the resources are distributed in a
hierarchical manner, that is, servers in the cloud layer with
more resources, nodes in the fog layer with mid-features, and
edge devices with fewer features.
In addition to layer-based architectures, it is possible to
consider three other types: a) Clustered Architecture, b) Cen-
tralized Architecture, and c) Distributed Architecture. The
Clustered Architecture is widely used in Wireless Sensor Net-
works (WSNs) as sensor nodes are grouped together in clusters
of different sizes. In each cluster, there is a master node that
controls the flow of information. All other nodes forward their
data to the master node, which aggregates all the data and
sends it to the fog node. In this type of architecture, there
is a reduction in cluster transmissions, improving the energy
efficiency of the system. Figure 5 illustrates this architecture.
In the centralized architecture, there is also the existence of
the master node, called Fog Cluster Head (FCH), and member
nodes, called Fog Cluster Members (FCM). Master nodes
and member nodes are selected according to the geolocation
between the FCH and FCMs and through internal policies.
In a distributed architecture, there is no formation of clus-
ters, and nodes can be selected according to their availability
and also according to internal policies.
Fig. 5. Clustered Architecture to Fog Network [34]
G. Communication on Smart Surfaces
With the need to increase spectral and energy efficiency,
increase data rates and higher frequencies, the use of massive
MIMO, which is already a reality in fifth generation networks,
will continue to exist in 6G. However, for sixth-generation
networks, massive MIMO must work with smart surfaces that
are matrices capable of controlling and amplifying wireless
signals in targeted environments. These surfaces allow inno-
vative forms of communication, as the use of radio frequency
and holographic MIMO is possible [36].
H. Edge AI
In sixth-generation networks, the use of Artificial Intelli-
gence will be imminent considering, for example, the possible
creation of a Self-Sustaining Network (SSN) that can manage

51
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
resources, control the network, and maintain, autonomously,
the high KPIs of the network. These and other functions
enabled in 6G through the use of AI will be complemented
by the use of AI at the edge, by running AI and learning
algorithms on devices to provide distributed autonomy [36].
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this article, an overview of 6G was presented, the
expectations of society as a whole for the coming years
in relation to this new technology, the preparation of the
ITU in the construction of IMT-2030, and also a comparison
of requirements with 5G. The study was directed towards
researching some of the new use cases that will be introduced
with the arrival of 6G, in order to present its objectives,
characteristics, and necessary requirements for its operation.
The Digital Twins use case makes it clear that machine
learning, cloud solutions, and fast and reliable communication
will be some of your key requirements. The Human-centric
immersive communications use case presents needs such as bit
rates in the order of Tbits/s and very low latency. The Industry
5.0 use case presents the requirements already mentioned in
the previous use cases as a basic need. The challenge seen
in Global Ubiquitous Connectivity has already begun to be
addressed in 5G networks, however, to achieve truly ubiquitous
global coverage, the insertion of both medium and low-orbit
satellites into the 6G network architecture must occur. In the
case of Pervasive Intelligence, the use of humanoid robots that
come physically close to a human being will be one of the
most promising scenarios. The use of computational resources
offered by 6G will be a great opportunity for these robots
to be more energy efficient. Finally, in the case of remote
communications, the great expectation is that 6G will allow the
digital era to be introduced into rural and remote populations.
After examining these use cases, the requirements, also known
as target indicators, were discussed, confirming the need for
a revised, rather than entirely new, network architecture. This
is particularly evident in the case of remote communications
use, where infrastructure implementation will face significant
challenges. This could lead to the emergence of a new pillar
for 6G dedicated to guaranteeing minimum connectivity for
remote and rural users. With ultra-low latencies, in the order
of 10 micros, ultra-reliable networks, and transmissions in the
order of Terahertz, it is expected that new network elements
will be introduced, as well as the communication structure
between them will be modified. An indicator that will also re-
quire a stable and consolidated network architecture is the data
rate experienced by the user, as even with new applications and
services, use cases will continue to demand increasingly higher
rates so that the user experience is unique. Finally, energy
consumption is one of the most important aspects observed
since 5G, therefore, energy efficiency must be considered as
a point of extreme attention when building sixth-generation
networks. To this end, one of the technologies that is already
expected to contribute to this end is Fog Computing, which can
provide storage and computational services for 6G networks
and allow edge devices to perform computing and storage
operations closer to the edge. The 6G is expected to have
intelligent and distributed network management in such a way
that it can handle all demands privately and securely. All
this must occur so that the success of the 6G deployment is
possible and that all the desired objectives are achieved.
REFERENCES
[1] O. Francine C´assia, M. Gustavo Iervolino, S. Jo˜ao Victor Menino, N.
Ramon Magalh˜aes, ”Use Cases and 6G Architecture: New Needs and
Challenges,”International Conference on Networks, Venice, Italy, 2023.
[2] ITU-R, “IMT traffic estimates for the years 2020 to 2030,” Report ITU-R
M.2370-0, July 2015.
[3] L. Zhang, Y. Liang and D. Niyato, “6G Visions: Mobile ultrabroadband,
super internet-of-things, and artificial intelligence,” China Communica-
tions, vol. 16, no. 8, 2019, pp. 1-14.
[4] J. Zhu, M. Zhao, S. Zhang and W. Zhou, ”Exploring the Road to 6G:
ABC - Foundation for Intelligent Mobile Networks,” China Communi-
cations, vol. 17, no. 6, 2020, pp. 51-67.
[5] S. Zeb et al., “Industry 5.0 is Coming: A Survey on Intelligent NextG
Wireless Networks as Technological Enablers,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 200, 2022.
[6] N. H. Mahmood et al., “A Functional Architecture for 6G Special-
Purpose Industrial IoT Networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol.
19, no. 3, 2023, pp. 2530-2540.
[7] P. Mitra et al., “Towards 6G Communications: Architecture, Challenges,
and Future Directions,” 2021 12th International Conference on Comput-
ing Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2021.
[8] M Giordani, P. Michele, M. Marco, R. Sundeep and Z. Michele,
“Towards 6G Networks: Use Cases and Technologies,” IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 3, 2020.
[9] L. Bariah et al., “A prospective look: Key enabling technologies,
applications and open research topics in 6G networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 174792–174820, 2020.
[10] L. U. Khan et al., “Digital Twin Enabled 6G: Vision, Architecture
Trends, and Future Directions,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.
60, no. 1, 2022.
[11] A. Rasheed, O. San and T. Kvamsdal, “Digital Twin Values, Challenges
and Enablers from a Modeling Perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 2020.
[12] W. Tong and P. Zhu, “6G The Next Horizon,” Cambridge University
Press, 2021.
[13] N. P. Kuruvatti, A. H. Mohammad, H. Bin, F. Amina and D. S.
Hans, “Empowering 6G Communication Systems With Digital Twin
Technology: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp.
112158–112186, 2022.
[14] Z. Zhang et al., “6G Wireless Networks: Vision, Requirements, Archi-
tecture, and Key Technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
vol. 14, pp. 28-41, 2019.
[15] M. Matinmikko-Blue et al., “White Paper on 6G Drivers and the UN
SDGs,” arXiv:2004.14695 [cs, eess], Apr. 2020, arXiv: 2004.14695.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14695
[16] S. Chen, Y. Liang, S. Sun, S. Kang, W. Cheng and M. Peng, “Vision,
Requirements, and Technology Trend of 6G: How to Tackle the Chal-
lenges of System Coverage, Capacity, User Data-Rate and Movement
Speed,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 218–228,
Apr. 2020.
[17] Z. Qu, G. Zhang, H. Cao and J. Xie, “LEO satellite constellation for
Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18391–18401, 2017.
[18] Y. Hu and V. O. K. Li, “Satellite-based Internet: A tutorial,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 154–162, Mar. 2001.
[19] K. B. Letaief et al., “The roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless
networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, Aug. 2019.
[20] Boston Dynamics. Accessed: Jul. 29, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bostondynamics.com/atlas
[21] ITU - International Telecommunication Union. The State of Broadband.
Geneva: ITU, 2022.
[22] GSMA Intelligence. The Mobile Economy 2023.
[23] ITU - International Telecommunication Union. The Future of Virtual
Health and Care.
[24] A. Chaoub, ”6G for Bridging the Digital Divide: Wireless Connectivity
to Remote Areas,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 29, no. 1, pp.
160-168, Feb. 2022.

52
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[25] H. Saarnisaari et al., ”A 6G White Paper on Connectivity for Remote
Areas,” ArXiv abs/2004.14699, 2020.
[26] A. Chaoub et al., ”Self-Organizing Networks in the 6G Era: State-of-
the-Art, Opportunities, Challenges, and Future Trends,” 2021.
[27] Y. Zhang et al., ”A Survey on Integrated Access and Backhaul Net-
works”. 2021.
[28] E. Yaacoub, E. M. S. Alouini. ”A Key 6G Challenge and Opportunity -
Connecting the Base of the Pyramid: A Survey on Rural Connectivity,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, pp. 533-582, 2020.
[29] W. Jiang et al., “The Road Towards 6G: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE
Open Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334-366, 2021.
[30] Q. Zhang, W. Ma, Z. Feng and Z. Han., “Backhaul-Capacity Aware
Interference Mitigation Framework in 6G Cellular Internet of Things,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, pp. 10071-10084, 2021.
[31] L. Yan, C. Han and J. Yuan., “Hybrid Precoding for 6G Terahertz
Communications Performance Evaluation and Open Problems,” 2nd 6G
Wireless Summit, 2020.
[32] H. Tataria et al., “6G Wireless Systems: Vision, Requirements, chal-
lenges, Insights, and Opportunities,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 109.7,
pp. 1166-1199, 2021.
[33] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi and H. D. Schotten, ”The Road
Towards 6G: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE Open Journal of the
Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334-366.
[34] U. M. Malik et al., ”Energy-efficient fog computing for 6G-enabled
massive IoT: Recent trends and future opportunities,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 14572-14594, Aug. 2022.
[35] S. Luo et al., “Incentiveaware micro computing cluster formation for
cooperative fog computing,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2643–2657, 2020.
[36] W. Saad and M. Chen, ”A vision of 6G wireless systems: Applications,
trends, technologies, and open research problems,” IEEE Network, vol.
34, pp. 134-142, 2019.

