A new Wireless Sensor for Intravenous Dripping Detection 
 
Paul Bustamante1,2, Gonzalo Solas1, Karol Grandez1, Unai Bilbao 
Electronics & Communications Department 
1CEIT and 2Tecnun (University of Navarra) 
Manuel Lardizábal 15, San Sebastian, Spain 
pbustamante@ceit.es, gsolas@ceit.es, kgrandez@ceit.es 
 
Abstract— Nowadays the use of wireless technologies provides 
a great benefit to the society. This article shows a wireless 
sensor network for Intravenous Dripping System, which can 
detect when an intravenous liquid, provided to patients in 
hospitals, run out, as well as detecting obstructions in the 
catheter. This way, the attention in sanitary centers is more 
efficient and immediate, as the observation of the state of the 
container will not need human supervision. Also a novel 
algorithm has been simulated in order to improve the network 
with its own mobility. 
Keywords- Wireless Sensor, Dripping, Network, Device, low 
power consupmtion. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The reduction of costs that the wireless technology is 
experiencing has incremented the number of applications 
which are able to implement this technology, in which 
medicine is one of the fields and is also known as "eHealth". 
This has caused many companies to dedicate their research 
into the development of wireless sensor platforms for generic 
use, which entails having complex operating systems, 
meaning a high consumption of energy. 
The sensor network we are proposing has been developed 
focusing on the application, the detection of the intravenous 
dripping, for which the cost and the energy consumption 
have been optimized. 
This sensor network is formed by different wireless 
devices, which are placed in the drip chamber of the patients, 
and by a central device located in every room of the sanitary 
center. The wireless device consists of four modules: the 
sensor module, the radio module, the feeding module and the 
microprocessor. 
It is possible to emphasize that this article includes the 
study of the dripping detection techniques, as well as the 
development and implementation of the sensor and the base 
station. In this moment, the project is focused on the 
implementation of the location and routing algorithms of the 
sensor network. 
A. State of art 
There are different techniques for dripping detection; 
therefore a practical study on the effectiveness of these 
techniques has been carried out, in order to detect the 
dripping within the intravenous drip chamber. This will 
allow us to choose the most suitable method for our sensor.  
As a reference of the different detection methods, several 
patents dealing with all the ways of dripping detection have 
been consulted and tested. These methods can be divided in 
the following sections: ultrasounds [1] [2], piezoelectric 
materials  [3], applying capacitive electrodes  [4] and optical 
methods  [5] [6] [7], which can be described follow. 
1) Ultrasonic method 
This dripping detection method consists of the detection 
of the tension variation produced by a drop that crosses a 
beam of ultrasounds. The ultrasound emitter generates a 
wave at a frequency of 25 KHz, which is detected by the 
receiver. The effect produced by the crossing of a drop 
between the emitter and receiver has been analyzed. The 
scheme of the assembly is shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 1 Ultrasonic method 
It has been observed that the amplitude of the tension in 
the receiver varies depending on the obstacles that are 
between emitter and receiver. 
This method may present some more disadvantages, like 
the fact that when the patient moves, moving the dripping 
chamber at the same time, the ultrasonic detection may be 
inaccurate, or even not work. 
2) Piezoelectric method 
Sheets of piezoelectric material have been used for the 
implementation of this method (see Figure 2). The 
piezoelectric material has the characteristic of varying the 
voltage between its tips due to some mechanical deformation 
50
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

to which it is exposed. Thus, external vibrations will be able 
to be detected by a minimum deformation in this material. 
 
Figure 2 Measurement assembly with piezoelectric material 
The technique of using piezoelectric materials can be 
optimized in order to obtain the dripping detection. However, 
we can see that the external vibrations affect the measures, 
thus making this method invalid for the mobile dripping 
systems. 
3) Capacitive electrodes 
The capacitive electrodes method consists in the 
detection of the capacity variation between two copper sheets 
produced by the dielectric change generated by the crossing 
of a drop through the generated field. In Figure 3 the 
assembly can be seen. 
 
Figure 3 Measurement assembly of capacitive electrodes 
The capacity between electrodes follows this equation: 
 
d
A
k
C
.
.
ε0
=
 
(1) 
Where: 
C = capacity in Faradays. 
A = area of copper sheet in m2. 
d = distance between sheets in meters. 
k = dielectric constant of the inter-sheet material. 
ε0 = permitivity in free space (8.85x10-12 F/m). 
In order to ease the calculations when the materials 
between the plates are different, the capacity also could be 
defined as: 
 
el
A
C
= ε0
 ανδ 
'
...
'
'
2
2
1
1
n
n
e
l
l
l
l
ε
ε
ε
+
+
+
=
 
(2) 
Where le is the equivalent thickness, εn’ is the relative 
permitivity of the material and ln the length. If we consider 
that the media is isotropic, homogenous and linear 
k = 'ε
. 
Having in mind the material of the drip chamber 
(polyurethane) and making the suitable operations, the 
capacity between the electrodes varies a bit with the passage 
of the drop, which makes the detection circuits more 
complex. 
4) Optical method 
The optical methods try to detect a variation in the 
tension level in a phototransistor or photoelectric cell, 
produced by the deflection of the beam of light generated by 
the passage of the drop. To achieve that, visible LEDs 
(Light-emitting Diode) of diverse colors, infrared LEDs and 
lasers have been used as emitters, whereas, phototransistors 
and photoelectric cells have been used as receivers. In Figure 
4 one of the assemblies of the optical method can be seen. 
Figure 4 Method of optical measurement 
Using these optical methods the dripping detection 
through the intravenous drip chamber is possible. The use of 
this method for the implementation of our sensor has been 
chosen, which has fundamentally lower cost, minor circuital 
complexity and low energy consumption, because the sensor 
will be battery-fed. 
B. Aims of the system 
The overall objective of the system is the dripping 
detection of all the patients in a sanitary center and to contact 
with a control center, so that the personnel in charge 
51
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Op
Op
Comparator 
(uP)
attending to the patients will be more efficient. To do that, 
the system is equipped with wireless sensors for dripping 
detection and central devices in charge of receiving and 
redistributing the signals received by the wireless sensors. 
Besides, the system is optimized to minimize the energy 
consumption as well as the cost. The energy consumption 
optimization is done in each module, achieving a 
considerably long battery life. 
There are other similar thematic articles which are not 
centered in the energy consumption  [8]. 
+
V/2
Vs
Vref
Vs+Vref
II. 
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
The hardware architecture of the wireless device has 
been divided in four modules: the sensor module, the radio 
module, the feeding module and the microprocessor. In 
Figure 5 the scheme of this new platform can be observed. 
As it is possible to see, in order to save energy, the sensor 
module, in the left part of the figure, is fed by a switch, 
which is activated by the microprocessor when it is desired 
to make a measurement. 
Figure 5 Sensor Scheme 
The hardware design, at electronic scheme level as well 
as at PCB “layout” level, has been made using the OrCAD 
tool  [9]. 
In the next paragraphs we will do a brief description of 
the functionalities of each module: 
A. Sensor module 
This module consists of two stages: on the one hand we 
have the sensorial stage, composed by the emitting LED and 
the phototransistor, and on the other hand is the stage of 
preparation and amplification of the detected signal. 
The study of dripping detection techniques has 
determined that the beam of light used for the sensor is the 
optical one. The passage of the drop turns aside the beam and 
the light intensity that arrives at the phototransistor 
decreases, so a small fall of tension takes place. 
That tension difference is the signal we will have to 
prepare and amplify for its insertion into the microprocessor. 
For that purpose, a double operational amplifier is used; one 
of them is used to stabilize the reference tension and the 
other to amplify the variation of tension produced by the 
drop. In Figure 6 the block diagram of this module can be 
seen, where the comparator part is done inside the 
microprocessor, which have two comparators. 
On one hand, the reference level is introduced to one of 
the pins of the internal comparator of the microprocessor and 
on the other hand, the reference signal plus the amplified 
signal is introduced in the other pin. 
Figure 6 Signal Preparation 
B. Radio module 
The radio used for the wireless communication is the 
CC1000 of Chipcon  [10]. The handling of the radio is carried 
out by the microprocessor of the serum sensor, to that 
purpose, we connect 6 pins of the microprocessor to PALE, 
PDATA, PCLK, DCLK, GAVE and CHP_OUT/LOCK pins 
of the CC1000 radio. 
In order to achieve the objective of low power 
consumption of the wireless device, the radio remains in low 
consumption mode most of the time, only changes to TX 
mode to transmit strictly necessary messages, as they are the 
warning of dripping end and low battery. 
The sensor has a button to activate the configuration 
mode of the wireless device. In that configuration mode the 
wireless sensor communicates with the central device asking 
for one unique ID. This way, the central device assigns one 
unique ID to the sensor, and it is known what room it 
belongs to. Thus, the switch insertion problems are avoided 
and any sensor can be operative under any central device of 
the different rooms. 
C. Microprocessor 
The microprocessor module is the core of the system. It 
receives the dripping signal and determines if the intravenous 
infusion system is dripping or not. The microprocessor also 
controls the battery level of the device.  
However, the microprocessor changes the operation 
mode into configuration mode if it detects an interruption 
produced by the configuration button. 
The 
microprocessor 
also 
controls 
the 
radio 
communication; in such way that the first routine it must do 
is configuring the radio, which means, to choose the correct 
frequency, the correct power and so on. Another process is to 
check the information of the received signals, and to send the 
corresponding message to the central device using the 
designed communication protocol.  
The energy saving is very important in the wireless 
sensor device, so the microprocessor also is in charge of 
increasing the energy saving using a listening algorithm. To 
do that, it is able to switch-off the sensor module when the 
52
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

dripping monitoring is not important. This software saving 
obtains a great increase of battery life. 
For the design of the wireless device, the microprocessor 
PIC16F688 of Microchip has been used [11], which is made 
with the new nanoWatt technology, so it has a very small 
consumption in “running” mode, around 300uA with 4 MHz 
clock, and in “Sleep” mode it consumes near 80nA.  
In the next figure, Figure 7, an image of the prototype of 
the wireless sensor device can be seen. 
Figure 7 Wireless sensor device prototype 
D. Feeding module 
The feeding module is in charge of providing adapted 
tensions to each part of the sensor and also controls the 
battery level. When the battery level is low, it warns to the 
microprocessor so it sends an alert signal of low battery, then 
the corresponding person changes the battery of the device. 
The battery life in a wireless sensor is the key for its 
acceptance in the market, so here is a study of the lithium 
battery load duration of the CR2 of Panasonic; its rated load 
is 750mAh. 
Figure 8 shows the obtained results of the evaluated 
battery during 100 hours with a continuous unloading current 
of 10mA. It is observed that both voltages in the graph agree 
at any moment. During the first 80 hours the voltage 
provided by the battery is stable and superior to 2.5V. With 
the applied unloading cycle, around 30.000 unloading cycles 
each 24 hours are considered, which supposes about 100.000 
cycles in 80 hours. These consumption maximums have been 
of 25mA during 25ms and 10mA during 2.5s. Therefore, the 
energy consumed in these 80 hours is of 730mAh 
approximately, which is equivalent to a battery yield of 93%. 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Curve of unloading of the battery 
III. 
SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
A. Software implementation of the Wireless Sensor Device 
The correct implementation of software is a key point 
when communicating all the modules described in the 
hardware section. The chosen language to program the 
microprocessor is C.  
The software developed to be embedded in the platform 
has a modular scheme. This design allows the software being 
independent from the platform and also gives flexibility. 
The whole software structure is divided in 4 layers as it is 
depicted in Figure 9. The layers are separated by dotted lines 
and a short description for each one is given below: 
• 
Physical level: is the lowest level and it depends on 
the hardware directly. The modules present in this 
level are corresponding to the physical modules of 
the node; these are analog and digital sensors, Serial 
Parallel Interface (SPI bus), Timers, Memory 
Access, etc. 
• 
Controller level: this layer is the interface between 
controller and application. The functions developed 
in this level permit the application level to invoke 
controller functions. The ADC (Analog Digital 
Converter) module converts analogical signals from 
the analog sensors to digital, and the SPI allows 
communications of the CPU with the CC1000 RF 
chip. In this layer are also included the set of RTC 
(Real Time Clock) functions. 
• 
Interface level: this layer contains the main functions 
that the sensor node performs during its duty cycle. 
These functions range from reading ADC channels 
or communicating through the SPI interface, to 
sending and receiving data from RF chip and access 
to the comparator module. Programmed interrupt 
routines functions are also developed in this layer. 
• 
Application level: this is the top level layer and 
executes related actions according to interruptions 
received (external switches or internal interruptions). 
 
 
 
53
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

Switch On
Conf. Radio
ID
Conf.Mode
no
Dripping 
Detection
yes
Dripping End
Energy saving
no
Warning via 
Radio
yes
Battery 
Detection
Warning via 
Radio
Low Battery
yes
no
yes
Push Button
no
 
Time
Time
100%
< 50%
Figure 9 Embedded Software 
In Figure 10 the flow chart of the Application layer can 
be seen, which shows the wireless device operation, 
summarized in the following lines: once the device is ON, 
the program sets up the radio to operate at 868.3 MHz and 
also sets up other conditions like power output, etc. Later the 
wireless device asks for the unique ID to the central device 
and keeps it in memory. This unique ID will identify it 
throughout the session. It would be possible to change the 
unique ID in the same session by pressing the configuration 
mode button. 
ON
OFF
Time
ON
OFF
50%
ON
OFF
Figure 10 Software diagram 
When the whole set up is done the microprocessor is 
pending of three tasks. One of the tasks is the dripping 
detection and warning of the end of dripping in case it is 
necessary.  
Apart from that, the microprocessor is pending to see the 
battery state to warn about the need of change if it is low. 
Finally, the microprocessor is pending of the external 
interruption generated by the configuration mode button 
pulsation. 
B. Energy saving algorithms 
The end of the dripping detection in the intravenous 
systems is not essential to be immediate, so a margin period 
from the end of the dripping to the renewal exists. This 
margin makes it possible to accomplish a listening period to 
verify if the intravenous system is dripping or if it has 
stopped. 
The listening periods make that the time when the sensor 
module is ON to be minimized, which implies an energy 
saving. 
Figure 11 shows that the energy consumption can be 
reduced to 50% (or less), making listening and extinguished 
periods equitable o minors. 
Figure 11 Energy Saving algorithm 
Making studies had determined that more energy can be 
saved if during the listening periods we count the number of 
drops. Thus, if during listening we count a fixed number of 
drops, for example 3, we already can know that the dripping 
exits, so we do not have necessity to continue listening the 
dripping the rest of the listening period, then the saving is 
increased in more than a 50%, depending on the dripping 
frequency (first graphic in Figure 11). 
C. Protocol Implementation 
Figure 12 shows the composition of the data bytes that 
are sent from WS (Wireless Sensor) to the Room Base 
Station (RBS). The number of bytes to send is 18, which can 
be described in the next paragraphs: 
• 
Preamble: is composed by 32 bits and it allows to 
the RF chips to start the communication. I our case 
the double word chosen for preamble was 
0xAAAAAAAA. 
• 
ID: there are 2 bytes (16 bits) reserved for the ID, 
which can be unique for the devices. 
• 
The Payload is composed of 64 bits (8 bytes) as 
shown in the figure. The content of the payload is 
the following bits: 
54
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

- 
The Time: each sensor has a Real Time 
module and it serve to know the exact time 
at which sensor has an alarm. 
- 
Status bits are the most relevant, and are 
composed for the status of the dripping 
system (empty or not), the status of the 
battery, etc. 
- 
Reserved: there are 16 bits reserved for 
future applications. 
• 
CRC: is used to control that the data that is send to 
the RBS station reach this target. 
Figure 12 Protocol Implementation 
D. PC application 
Figure 13 PC Program Application 
The PC application is a windows based program, which 
was designed only to test the devices. This environment has 
been developed in Visual C++ platform and has the 
following functionalities: 
• 
It allows knowing how many wireless sensors (WS) 
are in the system. 
• 
To see when each WS is empty or not, in which case 
it sends an alarm to the Room Base Station (RBS) 
located nearer. In that case, the PC program can 
represent it using colors (in our case, red color), 
which means that the dripping chamber is empty and 
will be replaced immediately. 
• 
To configure the sensors: set the date and some 
configuration parameters in the node, like the 
frequency channel for wireless communication, 
power of transmission, ID, etc. 
• 
To store the information in a local database for 
further analysis 
IV. 
NETWORK TOPOLOGY 
Prior to describing the network topology of the dripping 
detection wireless sensor network, a separation between two 
kinds of dripping systems has to be done. 
In every hospital we can find patients which cannot move 
and are lain down on the bed all the time. Apart from those, 
there are also patients which can move around and walk 
during the day, in any moment, and with a high degree of 
freedom. 
Each of these patients may need an intravenous dripping 
system. Thus, two systems of this kind can be found in 
hospitals currently: 
• 
Static intravenous dripping system: these are located 
in each room, next to the beds, and are used by those 
patients which cannot move and spend all the 
hospitalization time in bed. 
• 
Mobile Intravenous dripping system: these are used 
by those patients who have the ability to move 
around, and consist of a human-height-size metallic 
bar, equipped with small rollers or wheels. On top of 
it is where the serum bag and the dripping detection 
system are located. 
In both cases the need of automatic detection of a run put 
of intravenous solution is present. As a consequence, a 
different network topology has to be defined for each case, 
determined by the mobility of the patient. 
A. Static network topology 
As mentioned before, the static intravenous dripping 
systems are those which are located in each room of the 
hospital, next to the beds in which the patients lie down. 
Figure 14 shows a picture of one of these systems. And there 
is one for each patient, so it can be established a one-to-one 
equivalence between patients and dripping systems. This 
eases the identification of the dripping systems which need 
to be replaced. 
Figure 14 Static intravenous dripping system 
55
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

The implemented static network topology can be 
observed in Figure 15. The wireless sensor devices (WS) 
communicate via RF with the central devices of each room 
(RBS). RBS devices are in a LAN (Local Area Network), 
communicated with the central server in which the control of 
the dripping state of all the intravenous systems will be 
carried out. 
The configuration mode of WS sensors makes it possible 
to a sensor from a room to be transferred to another one and 
the system will continue working in the correct way, because 
the changed WS will contact with the new RBS in the 
present room. 
 
Figure 15 Diagram of the System 
B. Mobile network topology 
As stated before, the mobile intravenous dripping 
systems are those which can be carried along the hospital 
corridor by patients capable of moving around. Figure 16 
shows a picture of one of these systems. 
Figure 16 Mobile intravenous dripping system 
For the case of the mobile system, simulations have been 
carried out. The simulated network topology for this case can 
be seen in Figure 17. 
The diagram represents a patient carrying a mobile 
intravenous dripping system along a hospital corridor. The 
dripping system is equipped with a wireless sensor, and 
along the corridor, several Base Stations (BS) are located. 
The mayor challenge in this case is to achieve a 
continuous and seamless connectivity, in order to be ale to 
carry out two functions: 
• 
Send an alert of intravenous liquid replacement in 
any moment, and anywhere the patient is in that 
moment. 
• 
Localize the patient in the hospital, using the Base 
Station Identifier of the BS to which it is connected 
in that exact moment. 
Figure 17 Diagram of the Mobile system 
V. 
MOBILITY 
This section describes the mobility algorithm designed 
for the mobile intravenous dripping system, as well as the 
simulations carried out in order to validate the system. 
Traditionally, in the field of wireless sensor networks, 
only three types of mobility were defined: 
• 
Node mobility: is the case in which the wireless 
nodes themselves are mobile. The network must be 
capable of reorganize itself frequently enough to be 
able to function correctly. 
• 
Sink mobility: the most interesting case involving 
sink mobility is the one in which the sink isn’t part 
of the sensor network. 
• 
Event mobility: in applications like event detection 
and in particular in tracking applications, the cause 
of the events or the objects to be tracked can be 
mobile. 
The application presented in this research work 
corresponds to the first type of mobility listed above. 
A. State of the Art in node mobilty 
Nowadays, the wireless sensor node mobility principles 
are studied mainly under the umbrella of MANET (Mobile 
Ad-hoc Network)  related research work. 
A mobile ad hoc network (MANET), sometimes called a 
mobile mesh network, is a self-configuring network of 
mobile devices connected by wireless links. Each device in a 
MANET is free to move independently in any direction, and 
56
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

will therefore change its links to other devices frequently. 
Each must forward traffic unrelated to its own use, and 
therefore be a router. The primary challenge in building a 
MANET is equipping each device to continuously maintain 
the information required to properly route traffic. 
The limited resources in MANETs have made designing 
an efficient and reliable routing strategy a very challenging 
problem. An intelligent routing strategy is required to 
efficiently use the limited resources while at the same time 
be adaptable to the changing network conditions such as 
network size, traffic density, and network partitioning. 
One of the most popular methods to distinguish mobile 
ad hoc network routing protocols is based on how routing 
information is acquired and maintained by mobile nodes. 
Using this method, mobile ad hoc network routing protocols 
can be divided into proactive routing, reactive routing, and 
hybrid routing. 
In a reactive routing protocol, routing paths are searched 
only when needed. A route discovery operation invokes a 
route-determination procedure. The discovery procedure 
terminates when either a route has been found or no route is 
available after examination for all route permutations. In a 
mobile ad hoc network, active routes may be disconnected 
due to node mobility. Therefore, route maintenance is an 
important operation of reactive routing protocols. 
For the research work presented in this paper, a similar 
strategy to that used by reactive routing protocols has been 
chosen. As the wireless sensor moves along the coverage of 
different base stations, the active route or link is determined 
and selected reactively, based on the signal power received 
from the base stations. 
INITIALIZATION
ESTABLISH LINK
Is there a
new primary BS?
BUILD NEW 
RSSI 
DATABASE
SET NEW 
PRIMARY BS
NO
SET NEW 
LINK
YES
SET PRIMARY 
BS
BUILD  RSSI 
DATABASE
Measure RSSI values
Sort RSSI values
Primary_BS_id = Set 
primary Base Station 
(RSSI database)
link_id = Set link 
(node_id, 
Primary_BS_id)
(New_primary_BS_id ≠ 
Primary_BS_id)
link_id = Set link (node_id, 
New_primary_BS_id)
(Primary_BS_id = 
New_primary_BS_id)
Wait 1 sec
New_primary_BS_id 
= Set primary Base 
Station (RSSI 
database)
B. Design of the algorithm 
Figure 18 shows the flow diagram which determines how 
the mobility algorithm operates.  
The determination of the active link is based on the 
received signal strength. Among all the received signals 
coming from the base stations, the wireless node selects that 
which has the higher received power. 
The algorithm, after the initialization stage, measures the 
received power of all the signals coming from the reachable 
base stations, and with that it builds a data base, including 
the identification of the base station and the received signal 
strength. With that information, the algorithm is able to 
identify which of the base station has the highest received 
signal strength, which will be used by the next stage of the 
algorithm. 
The next stage establishes the link using the information 
provided by the previous steps of the algorithm. The whole 
process is repeated every second, in order to update the 
status of the connection. 
This algorithm allows the achievement of the two main 
objectives determined before: 
• 
It allows the mobile wireless sensor to be 
permanently connected to the hospital LAN, and 
thus, send an intravenous–liquid-replacement alert 
anytime and anywhere the patient is. 
• 
It allows the localization of any wireless sensor in 
the hospital, due to the characteristic of each of them 
being permanently attached to a base station. 
Looking at the identifiers of the wireless node and 
base station that form a certain link, the task can be 
performed. 
Figure 18 Flow diagram of the mobility algorithm 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this section we will summarize the most important 
conclusions which can be extracted from this project. It is 
necessary to emphasize the following aspects obtained with 
the present design: 
• 
Reduction in consumption in comparison to other 
wireless devices with the same characteristics. 
• 
Low cost of the device. 
• 
The device size, the sensor dimensions are 
considerably smaller. 
57
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

• 
Network forming flexibility, being able to use any 
sensor in any room. 
• 
Great 
contribution 
in 
the 
improvement 
of 
effectiveness and security in the health care of the 
patients. 
• 
Easy scalability of the system. 
Regarding the mobility algorithm, there are two main 
tasks pending, which are planned as future work. On the one 
hand, obtaining concrete parameter measurements from the 
simulations, e.g. bitrate, number of lost packets, or switching 
time. 
On the other hand, the implementation of the mobility 
algorithm is planned. It will be carried out using the sensor 
nodes described in this paper, and real life measurements are 
going to be done using a backbone network deployed along a 
concrete area of a building. 
We also can mention the great ease of the system 
evolution. The future work can be focused on these topics: 
• 
Location systems. 
• 
Use of the wireless sensor itself as a node, therefore 
they could resend signals from other nodes. 
• 
Greater advantage of the processing capacity of the 
wireless sensors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Drip Managing Device. JP08098884. 
[2] 
Ultrasonic Air and Blood Foam Detector. US4068521. 
[3] 
Indirect Piezoelectric Drop Counter And Method. US4583975. 
[4] 
Drip Monitoring Device. JP07289635. 
[5] 
Method And Apparatus For Electrical Signal Coding. GB8900132. 
[6] 
Intravenous Drip Rate Control Device. US4493710. 
[7] 
Device For Monitoring And Controlling An Intravenous Infusion 
System. EP0588427. 
[8] 
Wireless Sensor Network for Patient IV Monitoring .Wenfeng Li and 
OnChing Yue. Mobile Technologies Centre (MobiTeC). The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong. Shatin, Hong Kong, China. 
[9] 
ORCAD www.orcad.com (last access: July 2010) 
[10] Chipcon AS, Gaustadalléen 21, NO-0349 Oslo, NORWAY 
www.chipcon.com (last access: July 2010) 
[11] Corporate Headquarters Microchip Technology Inc. 2355 West 
Chandler Blvd. Chandler, Arizona, USA www.microchip.com (last 
access: July 2010) 
 
58
International Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/networks_and_services/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Article part of a special issue on Wireless Sensor Networks

