Highlighting the Essentials of the Behaviour of Reactive Systems  
in Test Descriptions Using the Behavioural Atomic Element 
 
 
Lars Ebrecht 
German Aerospace Center (DLR) 
Institute of Transportation Systems 
Braunschweig, Germany 
lars.ebrecht@dlr.de 
Karsten Lemmer 
German Aerospace Center (DLR) 
Institute of Transportation Systems 
Braunschweig, Germany  
karsten.lemmer@dlr.de
 
 
Abstract - The work described in this paper depicts an 
approach on how to close the lack of structure for test 
specifications, test descriptions and test data representations. 
On the example of a test data representation with the 
eXtensible Markup Language (XML), it will be shown how to 
form the structure using the behavioral atomic element and 
two testing patterns, i.e., for test stimuli and test reactions. The 
patterns are described using Petri net semantics. The 
scalability and flexibility of the approach, i.e., enabling the 
consideration of domain specific information, will also be 
shown on the example of the testing format. The pros and cons 
for using non-black box information in test descriptions and 
reference black box behavior specification for reactive systems, 
like actions, tasks and processes as well as system states in 
addition to the interface events, will be discussed in this paper 
at the end. The main achievement is a scalable, platform- and 
implementation-independent Test description using the meta-
model described by the patterns. 
Keywords - Reactive systems; Validation and Verification, 
Real-time behaviour Pattern; Test Pattern; Validation Pattern; 
Test specification 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Black box test specifications mostly consist of stimuli 
and reactions mixed and alternated in any order according to 
the functional requirements to be covered. In some cases test 
steps are sporadically inserted in order to indicate actions, 
processes or changes inside the system under test (SUT), 
e.g., here a safety-critical distributed reactive system - a train 
control unit. Concerning the test creation and evaluation the 
practice shows that it is very useful to add this information. 
These non-black test steps enable a better understanding of 
certain situations as well as figuring out specific system 
features and functionalities. Consequently, no order or any 
order concerning the use and mixture of stimuli, reactions, 
internal processes and system states of a reactive system is 
fixed by the application of the behavioral atomic element as 
generic pattern for the behavior of reactive systems and 
black box tests. Further it will be shown that the behavioral 
atomic element does not restrict the test description too 
much. It creates moreover a scalable and concerning the 
consideration of domain specific information, flexible as 
well as consistent and transparent the behavior description 
for reactive systems. The introduction and demonstration of 
the approach is done on the example of a test description for 
a train control onboard unit. 
A. Context of the work and application example 
The test description that is used as application example in 
this paper, addresses the European Train Control System 
(ETCS). 
ETCS 
comprises 
two 
main 
safety-critical 
distributed real-time components, i.e., the ETCS onboard 
unit (OBU) located on each train and the Radio Block Center 
(RBC) on the trackside. The RBC mainly supervises the 
location of the trains for a certain area of a track in order to 
provide movement authorities to the trains in that area. The 
OBU uses the information got from the RBC mainly to 
supervise the train movement, i.e., the maximum allowed 
speed and distance allowed to travel. All the functional 
requirements telling how and when to do what are specified 
in the European wide standardized System Requirement 
Specification (SRS) (Subset-026 [5]). In order to check if an 
OBU fits the SRS, i.e., the behavior, all the interaction and 
way of exchanging information via different physical 
interfaces with the track, the functional requirements have 
been analyzed and assigned to features and test cases. The 
test cases have been selected, parameterized and combined to 
form virtual train trips, called test sequences, in order to 
emulate the start of mission, train movement with certain 
specific conditions as well as the end of the virtual trip. 
Thus, the technical conformity and interoperability of the 
OBU will be checked against SRS (Subset-076 [6]). 
The conformity and interoperability tests of Subset-076 
are used in independent laboratories like the Railway 
Simulation and Testing laboratory (RailSiTe® [14]). Only 
giving some rough figures to the modular and distributed test 
environment, the RailSiTe contains different modules for the 
simulation of train dynamics and track properties as well as 
different physical black box hardware interfaces, i.e., high 
frequency signals, digital I/O, TTL, GSM-modem-serial-
connection, camera and robot for a touch screen display 
acting as man machine interface of the OBU [1].  
Concerning the tests applied in this test environment 
there is a separation of the logical and functional behavior on 
the one hand and the physical interface behavior, i.e., the 
signal generation and emulation, on the other hand. The test 
53
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

and reference description represent the logical and functional 
behavior that are used by different interface modules to 
encode the information and to build the physical signal in 
order to stimulate the SUT, i.e., the OBU. The emulated train 
dynamics, i.e., the acceleration and braking, are logically and 
mathematically described in the test and reference behavior 
description.  
B. Structure of the paper 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II depicts 
related work and the differentiation of the approach descri-
bed in this paper to other present approaches for the test 
specification and behavioral description for reactive systems. 
The following Section III introduces the atomic element for 
the behavior of reactive systems and the two testing patterns, 
i.e., for test stimuli and test reactions that are described using 
Petri net semantics [13]. Section IV represents the main 
section of the paper introducing the structure of the test 
description and test data representation with the eXtensible 
Markup Language (XML) [8] followed by the demonstration 
of scalability and flexibility concerning the consideration of 
domain specific information. The last Section V will discuss 
and conclude the presented approach and results. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There exist various ways and standards for modeling and 
describing the behavior as well as tests for reactive systems. 
Beside the continuous signals in the electrical engineering or 
control theory domain, there are several standards coming 
from the software engineering domain, e.g., the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML), the System Modeling Language 
(SysML), the UML Testing Profile (UTP), the Testing and 
Test Control Notation (TTCN-3). The approach presented in 
the following does not touch continuous signals in the way 
they are described by Matlab / Simulink, LabView or similar 
tools or approaches.  
The presented approach is more related to the formal 
mathematical and software engineering domain. In this 
domain the main standards are listed above. The UML [3] 
and SysML [2] specify how to describe systems and 
processes within a user-friendly representation in form of 
different diagrams with certain associated graphical symbols 
and elements. Both do not include a clear and formal concept 
for the behavioral description of reactive systems. More or 
less activities, operations, message exchanges and states are 
spread over the Activity, the Sequence and the State diagram 
without any concrete order and relationship specific for the 
reactive system behavior. 
The UML Testing Profile (UTP) enables the description 
of black box tests [11]. You can describe test contexts, test 
configurations and test components. For the behavioral part 
of a test description the UTP offer test cases, test case 
parameters, stimuli, observations and test data as well as test 
routines and test procedures [11]. However, there is no 
comparable approach of a Meta model like it is defined by 
the behavioral atomic element. There are pre- and end-
conditions of operations and invariant system properties 
without any concrete mapping to figure out the relation to the 
behavior of a reactive system as well as having an atomic 
element. 
The Testing and Test Control Notation (TTCN-3) of the 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) is 
an additional standard for the black box test description. It 
mainly focuses on the implementation, execution and 
evaluation of black box tests [4][12]. The semantics of flow 
graphs, especially the flow graph frame that consists of start 
node, basic node and an end node [4], are not consequently 
used as generic basic concept for the behavioral description 
of reactive systems like it will be shown in the following 
with the atomic element. 
III. 
THE BEHAVIOURAL ATOMIC ELEMENT AND RELATED 
TEST PATTERN 
In the following, the behavior of a reactive system is 
understood and described by the behavioral atomic element 
[10]. The element comprises the system configuration, i.e., 
system states (S_i), in- and out-going events (e.g., periodical, 
synchronous and asynchronous events) (E_j), sequential and 
parallel activities, operations or processes (A_k, AS_k).  
In the middle of Figure 1.  the pattern of the atomic 
element is depicted using the Petri net semantics [13]. The 
Petri net representation indicates the activity A_k as 
transition encapsulated by at least one in-coming event E_i, 
potential out-going events E_o as well as the starting state 
S_s and end state S_e of the functionality. The events and 
states are shown as places. The “b” represent a condition that 
enable the specification of further trigger conditions, e.g., 
temporal conditions, for the activation of the activity A_k. 
This is called the compact representation of the atomic 
element. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Basic Patterns describing the atomic behaviour of reactive 
systems, test stimuli and test reactions 
Figure 1.  shows a second detailed and unfolded 
representation of the atomic element that depicts the activity 
AS_k as place. In comparison to the compact representation 
the unfolded one highlights the activity. So, the activity is 
indicated as a meta-state, i.e., the system configuration might 
change or might be in-between two stable system states also 
having the possibility of further investigations concerning 
the description of in-coming and out-going events. Thus, the 
unfolded representation of the atomic element emphasizes 
the system activity enormously. The whole configuration 
enforces the understanding of the system behavior by 
54
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

relating events together with states and the activity to a 
specific functionality.  
The consideration of system states, events and activities 
improve the transparency and understandability of the 
system behavior. Even if this seems to be like a grey box 
test, this is not the case due to the fact testing the SUT via 
the black box interfaces and without referring to internal 
interfaces or structures like sub-classes or modules. On the 
very left side of Figure 1.  the pattern describing the events 
stimulating the SUT (E_s) is shown in comparison to the 
pattern of managing reactions (E_r) coming from the SUT on 
the very right side of Figure 1.  
Time is considered as a global discrete variable in 
addition to system states, event occurrences and process 
durations. Of course concerning non discrete real-time you 
will have to consider the WKS-Sampling-Theorem as well as 
accuracy aspects like jitter with proper tolerance borders and 
intervals. 
A. Test scenario defined by the atomic element and the 
testing and validation patterns 
For a better understanding one very easy scenario 
demonstrates the use and interaction of the three patterns 
mentioned before concerning a common situation, i.e., 
testing a SUT with a certain test environment (TE) (see 
Figure 2. ). In the middle there is a UML [3] sequence 
diagram showing the TE and the SUT. From the TE the 
stimulation E_s is triggered stimulating the SUT in the sense 
of a certain in-coming event E_i. After the reception of this 
event the operation A is started maybe emitting the result or 
confirmation or response with an outgoing event(s) E_o that 
is taken into account as reaction E_r from the SUT. In the 
background the Petri net representation is shown separated in 
TE side on the left and the SUT side on the right.  
  
 
Figure 2.  Test scenario: Test environment (TE) stimulating the system 
under test (SUT) in order to check function A 
IV. 
APPLICATION OF THE ATOMIC ELEMENT TO THE TEST 
DESCRIPTION 
In the previous section, the behavioral atomic element 
has been described that define the functional behavior of a 
reactive system as well as the other two test and validation 
patterns for the stimulation of a SUT as well as for receiving 
reactions from a SUT, here a train control unit (OBU). Now, 
it will be demonstrated how these patterns are used to form a 
test description and reference behavior on the example of a 
test data representation by an XML-schema [7]. The XML-
schema defines the structure of an XML [8] file assigned 
acting as instance of that schema.  
In the first subsection, the overall structure and content 
will be roughly depicted. The second subsection shows the 
application of the behavioral atomic element in detail. The 
last two subsections explain how the patterns enable a 
scalable and customizable use of the test description. 
A. Overview and structure of the test description format 
The highest level of the overall structure includes four 
elements 
(General, 
StartingConditions, 
StepList 
and 
EndConditions). The element General contains the ID of the 
test sequence, a title, description, a substructure for the test 
sequence release and modification history table beside a link 
to a set of features and test cases. Out of the set of test cases 
some will be selected, instantiated and concatenated with 
others in a test sequence. Accordingly specific starting 
conditions will be fixed and stored in the StartingConditions 
element. As shown in Figure 3.  this item comprise two 
generic and two domain specific sub-elements. The Sub-
element Variable and Set allow defining variables and sets of 
variables with concrete values, intervals or enumerations in 
order to describe the system state and system variables. 
M_MODE and Location represent customized entries for the 
mode of an ETCS onboard unit (OBU), e.g., no power, 
standby, full supervision, shunting, etc., and the other 
comprises several variables defining the train location, i.e., 
the orientation of the train and travelled distance in relation 
to certain waypoint in the track. There exist further 
application domain specific entries in the starting that are not 
mentioned here. 
The 
EndConditions 
element 
is 
similar 
to 
the 
StartingConditions element and describes accordingly the 
system state reached at the end of a test sequence. Between 
the starting and end conditions there is the StepList element 
located. This element takes the main role in the overall 
structure. As displayed in the Figure 3.  it contains a list of 
steps that can be one of three following kinds, i.e., a state, an 
action event or an action. Besides, each step has a unique 
step ID and can be grouped, e.g., in the case of test case 
associations or sequential or parallel ordered steps. In 
Subsection IV.D it will be explained more in detail how the 
group element can be used to describe conditions and 
relationships over different steps for domain specific aspects 
and dependencies. Last but not least you can define variables 
in the SignatureVariableList that interconnect steps in order 
to exchange data among different steps. 
The three kinds of the step as main element mentioned 
before are used to describe the behavior as defined by the 
atomic element. For each step it has to be chosen if the step 
describe a system state or an action event, i.e., a stimulus to 
be triggered by a test environment or a reaction coming from 
the SUT, or an action that is assumed to be active in the 
SUT. In the following section it will be explained how these 
55
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

three different elements will be connected in order to satisfy 
the behavioral atomic element. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Overal structure of the test data representation defined by an XML-Schema [7]
B. Details of the test data description according to the 
behavioural atomic element 
The beginning of a function should be a system state. As 
depicted in Figure 4.  a state is defined by several variables 
contained in the VariableList substructure or by sets of 
variables in the Set element similar to the starting and end 
conditions described before. Furthermore a state has an 
identifier (ID), a name and a textual annotation. 
A State is followed by an action event, i.e., one or more 
in-coming events stimulating the SUT. Action events are 
divided in in-coming, i.e. stimuli (E_i) and out-going events, 
i.e., reactions (E_o). All action events are described by an 
ID, a name, the event direction and interface, a description 
and related data (see Figure 4. ). The Data sub-element 
comprises two alternatives, a reference to another action 
event and a set of elements composed of the action event 
trigger, duration, delay, function name and a function 
parameter list. The first alternative is used for the case if a 
step specifies for instance an optional packet that should be 
included in an event together with other packets, which are 
specified by other steps. In this case it is possible to include 
this packet together with the other ones in one action event 
whereby the data are only included in one step and the other 
refer to this action event. The second alternative represents 
the usual case where an event is triggered by, e.g., the 
location of the train, the time elapsed from the beginning of 
the simulation, an other action event or a set of variables 
defining a certain system state. The Duration and the Delay 
element contain a variable type describing the time for the 
generation and transmission and possible delays related to 
the trigger point. The function-name is used to determine 
runtime commands or routines of the test environment using 
all the variables and its values contained in the element 
ParameterList. 
The last of the three main elements, the Action, depicts 
an action or task of the SUT. It is similar to the ActionEvent 
element. It has an ID, name and description and contains a 
substructure for the related data. Except from the 
ActionTrigger element the Data element is equal to the one 
of the action event. In comparison to the action event the 
action is triggered by one or more in-coming events that have 
to be received before. 
Due to the fact that you want to violate the specified rules 
and conditions of a behavior in some cases testing a SUT, it 
is not forbidden to mix the three main elements also against 
the behavioral atomic element what represent an abnormal 
situation. You can ever check and identify these violations 
applying checks to the test and reference behavior descrip-
56
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

tion finding deviations in relation to the behavioral atomic 
element in order to check if you wanted to do so or not.
 
 
Figure 4.  The atomic element builds the generic structure for a test and reference behaviour description 
C. Scalability of the  behaviuor description 
The application of the atomic element enables on the 
higher abstract level as well as on the lower detailed level the 
possibility to combine test sequences with matching starting 
and end conditions [9], this not very astonishing, but also for 
concrete functionalities according to matching of post and 
pre states (compare with Figure 1. ). So, small functional 
units can be consistently combined, i.e., an action belonging 
to a certain functionality including its trigger event(s) as well 
as the starting and end state. Test cases only containing 
starting and end conditions and black box message passing in 
between having a lack of building sup-units for smaller 
function inside bigger ones like the atomic element cramping 
events and an action by system states. Thus, there is the same 
consistent approach for test sequences over test cases until 
the steps included in a test case. 
57
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

D. Differentiation of the atomic element considering 
domain and user specific relations and dependencies 
The most popular group for test steps is the association to 
a test case. Black box stimuli and reactions are related to test 
cases and these for itself to features in order to manage the 
system complexity in principle. Beside the step order like 
sequential, parallel or strict execution or occurrence defined 
in the Control element (refer to Figure 5. ), there is the need 
to specify domain and user specific relationships and 
dependencies. In the context of testing an OBU there is the 
need to describe a logical order for a certain type of events, 
i.e., Balise messages. One Balise message contains one up to 
eight Balise telegrams emitted by a passive discrete device 
that is in principle comparable with RFID tags only that 
additionally Balises include some more safety mechanisms 
in order to avoid copying telegrams. A Balise message has to 
be consistent, that means that the telegrams have to receive 
in the right and continuous order and completely, i.e., all of 
the telegrams. This association is described by the Special-
Groups element. This element comprises an ID, name, group 
order, parent group for hierarchical dependencies and the 
group instance, in case that there more than one group 
occurrences. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Vertical differentiation of the test steps
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The contribution introduced the behavioral atomic 
element described as Petri net acting as pattern for a Meta 
model and forming a test data representation and reference 
behavior description. Beside, two other testing and validation 
patterns complete the scenario testing a reactive system with 
a certain test environment on a logical abstract level. Mostly, 
test descriptions and specification consider more or less 
mainly test stimuli and reactions of a system under test. The 
presented approach does not only depict the application of 
the atomic element to a test data representation, it also 
figures out how this reference behavior description can cope 
with domain specific requirements and dependencies as well 
as enabling a scalable, consistent and transparent reference 
behavior description highlighting the essentials of the 
behavior of a reactive system, i.e., system states, in-coming 
events or trigger events, actions or operations and out-going 
58
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

responses. Thus, the consistency and transparency of the test 
specification for any reactive system is improved by the 
definition of proper behavioral units and functions with the 
help of the behavioral atomic element. The presented XML 
format defined in the Schema is currently used to automate 
the test execution and evaluation in the rail simulation and 
testing laboratory RailSiTe®.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Many thanks to the group rail technology, especially to C. 
Preuk and C. Torens for the feedback and review comments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Torens and L. Ebrecht, Remote Test: A Framework for Testing 
Distributed Systems, Proc. International Conference on Software 
Engineering Advances (ICSEA2010), Aug. 2010. 
[2] 
Object Management Group, „OMG Systems Modelling Language“, 
Ver. 1.2, June 2010, www.omgsysml.org/#Specification (23.08.10).  
[3] 
Object Management Group, „Unified Modelling Language“, Super-
structure Specification, Ver. 2.3, May 2010, www.omg.org-
/spec/UML/2.3/ (23.08.10). 
[4] 
ETSI, ES 201 873-1, „Testing and Test Control Notation - Part 1: 
TTCN-3 Core Language,“ Ver. 4.2.1, May 2010, webapp.etsi.org-
/workprogram/Report_WorkItem.asp?WKI_ID=29256 (23.08.10). 
[5] 
ERA, „ERTMS/ETCS – Class 1, System Requirement Specification 
Subset-026 (SRS)“, Version 2.3.0d, 21 Apr. 2009.  
[6] 
ERA, ERTMS/ETCS – Class 1, „Technical Specification for Inter-
operability: Subset-076-6-3 (Test Sequences)“, Version 2.3.1, 19 Oct. 
2009.  
[7] 
XML Schema, W3C, http://www.w3.org/XML/Schema (23.08.10). 
[8] 
T. Bray et al., W3C, XML, www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-xml-200811-
26, 26 November 2008 (23.08.10). 
[9] 
L. Ebrecht, M. Meyer zu Hoerste and K. Lemmer, “The Basic 
Concept for the Formal Test Description - Horizontal Composition 
and Vertical Differentiation of the Atomic Element,” Proc. Formal 
Methods for Automation and Safety in Railway and Automotive 
Systems (Forms/Format), GZVB, Jan. 2007, pp. 447–457. ISBN 13: 
978-3-937655-09-3. 
[10] L. Ebrecht and K. Lemmer, “Konsistente Verknuepfung von 
Aktivitaets-, Sequenz- und Zustandsdiagrammen - Darstellungsunab-
haengige und formale Semantik zur Verhaltensbeschreibung von 
Echtzeit-Systemen,” Proc. Mobilitaet und Echtzeit - PEARL. 
Informatik Aktuell. Springer, Dec. 2007, pp. 49–58. ISBN 978-3-540-
74836-6. 
[11] Object Management Group. (July 2005). UML Testing Profile, Ver. 
1.0-05-07-07, www.omg.org/technology/documents/formal/test_pro-
file.htm (23.08.10). 
[12] J. Grabowski. TTCN-3 - A new Test Specification Language for 
Black-Box Testing of Distributed Systems. In: Pro-ceedings of the 
17th International Conference and Exposition on Testing Computer 
Software (TCS 2000), Washington D.C., www.swe.informatik.uni-
goettingen.de/publications/JG/Grabowski.pdf, Jun 2000 (23.08.10).  
[13] Billington, Jonathan ; Reisig, Wolfgang: Application and Theory of 
Petri Nets, Springer, 1996, ISBN 3-540-61363-3 
[14] RailSiTe DLR homepage, www.dlr.de/fs/en/desktopdefault.aspx/-
tabid-1235/1688_read-3254/ (23.08.10) 
59
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

