Optical Watermark Pattern Technique using Color–Difference Modulation 
 
Kazutake Uehira and Hiroshi Unno 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
e-mail: uehira@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— We propose a new optically written watermarking 
technique that produces a watermark pattern by modulating 
color difference. The illumination that contains such a 
watermark is projected onto an object. An image of the object 
taken by the camera contains the same watermark, which can 
be extracted by image processing. Therefore, this technique 
can protect portrait rights of real objects. We conducted a 
simulation where one-bit binary data were embedded in blocks 
that consisted of 8 x 8 pixels using the phase of the highest-
frequency component. The simulation results revealed that a 
watermark pattern produced by modulating color difference 
could be accurately read out. 
Keywords-Watermark pattern, information embedding,  portrait 
right. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Digital watermarking has been widely used to protect the 
copyright of digital content, which includes images printed 
from digital data. This is to prevent the illegal use of images 
copied by digital cameras or scanners. However, printed 
images or other real objects that have a high value, such as 
paintings in museums, do not contain watermarks in 
themselves, and images taken of these with cameras can 
easily be utilized without copyright.  
We developed a technique that can prevent the illegal use 
of images of real objects that do not have watermarks [1] [2] 
by using illumination that contains an embedded watermark 
pattern invisible to the naked eye. An image taken of an 
object illuminated with the watermark pattern by a camera 
would also contain the pattern.  
We embedded the watermark pattern in the illumination 
by modulating its brightness, as documented in our previous 
study. In this current study, we produced a watermark pattern 
by modulating color differences and evaluated its readability 
from the captured image by comparing it with the previous 
method that modulates brightness.   
II. 
EMBEDDING WATERMARK PATTERN IN THE 
ILLUMINATION 
Figure 1 outlines the basic concept underlying our 
watermarking technique using light to embed a watermark. 
An object is illuminated by a projected light that contains an 
invisible watermark. A photograph taken of the object 
illuminated this way would also contain the watermark. The 
watermark can be extracted in the same way as that in 
conventional watermarking techniques for digital content. 
Figure 2 illustrates the procedure for applying a 
watermark and reading it from a captured image. 
The color difference signal Cb of Luminance, Chroma-
blue and Chroma-red (YCbCr) signal was used to produce 
the watermark. Figure 2 (a) shows the original data of Cb as 
a frequency domain. The original data is divided into 
numerous  blocks, each of which consists of 8 x 8 pixels. 
Each block has only the highest frequency component (HC) 
Highest frequency 
component (HC) 
Positive value for "1" 
Negative value for "0" 
Block 
i-DCT 
Information to be embedded  
Read out 
Captured image 
  
Camera  
Light source 
Light 
10010110 
Binary data 
Optically projected 
watermark pattern  
Real object 
©2017UEHIRA 
©2017UEHIRA 
Figure 2. Procedure for watermarking 
Figure 1. Basic concept underlying proposed 
h
l
 
(b) Cb in space domain  
Luminance of the projected 
light L(x,y) 
(c) R(x,y) 
DCT 
(d) Captured image I(x,y) 
(e) Cb in frequency domain 
Sign of the highest frequency component 
(HC) is checked to read the information 
(a) Original data in frequency domain 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

in both the x and y directions to express one-bit binary data. 
If the sign of the HC in a block is positive, it is expressed as 
“1”, and if it is negative, it is expressed as “0”. This original 
data in the frequency domain is converted into a signal in the 
space domain by making an inverse discreet cosine 
transform (i-DCT) (Fig. 2 (b)). Y and Cr signals are constant. 
After converting the YCbCr into an Red, Green and Blue 
(RGB) signal, the RGB signal is input to a projector, and the 
watermark pattern is projected onto the object.  
The captured image of the object I(x,y) is given as a 
product of the reflectance of the object surface R(x,y) and 
luminance of the projected light L(x,y), as shown in (1). 
{
0}
( , )
( , )
( , )
L
R x y L x y
I x y
+
=
     (1) 
where L0 is a bias luminance, such as one produced by room 
light. 
A captured image is first converted into a YCbCr signal, 
and then Cb is converted into a signal in the frequency 
domain by DCT. Finally, the embedded data is read out by 
checking the sign of the HC of the Cb for each block.  
 The watermark pattern in the light and in the captured 
image cannot be seen by the human visual system because it 
is modulated at the highest frequency and the amplitude of 
the modulation is small.  
III. 
SIMULATION 
We simulated the captured images of objects using (1). 
We used RGB signal as L(x,y), assuming that the brightness 
of the RGB component of the projected light was 
proportional to the component of the RGB signal. As for the 
objects R(x,y), we used three standard images shown in 
Figure 3. 
HC in the original data was changed from 1 to 20 as an 
experimental parameter, while Y, Cr, and L0 were set to 
constant values of 200, 0, and 40, respectively. For reference, 
we embedded a watermark pattern by modulating Y. In this 
case, Cb and Cr were set to zero, and L0 was set to 40. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 4 shows the accuracy with which the binary data 
was read out. The accuracy is indicated by the percentage of 
the data read out correctly from the entire data. The results 
show that the accuracy when modulating Cb is higher than 
that when modulating Y with values over 99% for HC values 
set over 2  
Figure 5 shows the captured images simulated using (1) 
when HC was set to 5. We could not see any watermark 
pattern in the images. These results indicate that we can 
satisfy both invisibility and readability of embedded data by 
using certain HC ranges. 
V. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
  We developed a technique that can embed an invisible 
watermark pattern into captured images of real objects using 
illumination that contains the pattern. We embedded the 
pattern into the illumination by modulating color difference. 
We demonstrated from the simulation that an accurate 
reading of the watermark information is possible by 
modulating color difference, and embedded watermarks 
could be invisible.  
In the future, we will examine the detailed conditions for 
invisibility of watermarks.   
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Uehira and M. Suzuki, “Digital watermarking technique 
using brightness-modulated light,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
ICME2008, pp. 257–260, 2008 
[2] Y. Ishikawa, K. Uehira, and K. Yanaka, “Practical Evaluation 
of Illumination Watermarking Technique Using Orthogonal 
Tranforms,” Journal of Display Technology,  Vol. 6, No. 9, 
pp. 351–358, 2010 
(a) 
Image A 
(b) Image B 
(c) 
Image C 
Figure 3. Images used as objects in the simulation.  
Figure 4. Accuracy in reading out binary data 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
Accuracy (%) 
0 
5 
10 
HC 
Figure 5. Simulated captured images (HC=5) 
Image A (Modulating Y) 
Image A (Modulating Cb) 
Image B (Modulating Y) 
Image B (Modulating Cb) 
Image C (Modulating Y) 
Image C (Modulating Cb) 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

