Temporal Patterns: Smart-type Reasoning and Applications
Dineshen Chuckravanen
Jacqueline W. Daykin
Department of
Computer Science
Aberystwyth University
(Mauritius Branch Campus)
Mauritius
Email: dic4@aber.ac.uk
Email: jwd6@aber.ac.uk
Karen Hunsdale
Department of
Applied Management
Winchester Business School
University of Winchester
UK
Email: Karen.Hunsdale
@winchester.ac.uk
Amar Seeam
Department of
Computer Science
Middlesex University
(Mauritius Branch Campus)
Mauritius
Email: a.seeam@mdx.ac.uk
Abstract—Allen’s interval algebra is a calculus for temporal
reasoning that was introduced in 1983. Reasoning with quali-
tative time in Allen’s full interval algebra is nondeterministic
polynomial time (NP) complete. Research since 1995 identiﬁed
maximal tractable subclasses of this algebra via exhaustive
computer search and also other ad-hoc methods. In 2003, the full
classiﬁcation of complexity for satisﬁability problems over con-
straints in Allen’s interval algebra was established algebraically.
Recent research proposed scheduling based on the Fishburn-
Shepp correlation inequality for posets. We describe here three
potential temporal-related application areas as candidates for
scheduling using this inequality.
Keywords–Allen’s interval algebra, artiﬁcial intelligence; qual-
itative temporal reasoning; scheduling; smart-type reasoning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Temporal reasoning is a mature research endeavor and
arises naturally in numerous diverse applications of artiﬁcial
intelligence, such as: planning and scheduling [1], natural
language processing [2], diagnostic expert systems [3], be-
havioural psychology [4], circuit design [5], software tools
for comprehending the state of patients in intensive care units
from their temporal information [6], business intelligence [7],
and timegraphs, that is graphs partitioned into a set of chains
supporting search which originated in the context of story
comprehension [8].
Allen [9] introduced an algebra of binary relations on
intervals (of time), for representing and reasoning about time.
These binary relations, for example before, during, meets,
describe qualitative temporal information which we will be
concerned with here. The problem of satisﬁability for a set
of interval variables with speciﬁed relations between them is
that of deciding whether there exists an assignment of intervals
on the real line for the interval variables, such that all of the
speciﬁed relations between the intervals are satisﬁed. When the
temporal constraints are chosen from the full form of Allen’s
algebra, this formulation of satisﬁability problem is known
to be NP-complete. However, reasoning restricted to certain
fragments of Allen’s algebra is generally equivalent to related
well-known problems such as the interval graph and interval
order recognition problems [10], which in turn ﬁnd application
in molecular biology [11][12][13].
TABLE I. [14] THE SET B OF THE THIRTEEN BASIC QUALITATIVE
RELATIONS DEFINED BY ALLEN.
Basic Interval Relation
Symbol
Endpoint Relations
X precedes (before) Y
p (≺)
X+ < Y −
Y preceded-by (after) X
p ^ (≻)
X meets Y
m
X+ = Y −
Y met-by X
m ^
X overlaps Y
o
X− < Y − < X+ < Y +
Y overlapped-by X
o ^
X during Y
d
X− > Y −, X+ < Y +
Y includes X
d ^
X starts Y
s
X− = Y −, X+ < Y +
Y started-by X
s ^
X ﬁnishes Y
f
X− > Y −, X+ = Y +
Y ﬁnished-by X
f ^
X equals Y
⌘
X− = Y −, X+ = Y +
A. Allen’s Interval Algebra
Allen’s [9] calculus for reasoning about time is based on
the concept of time intervals together with binary relations on
them. In this approach, time is considered to be an inﬁnite
dense ordered set, such as the rationals R, and a time interval
X is an ordered pair of time points (X−, X+) such that X− <
X+.
Given two time intervals, their relative positions can be
described by exactly one of the members of the set B of 13
basic interval relations, which are depicted in Table I; note
that the relations X− < X+ and Y − < Y + are always valid,
hence omitted from the table. These basic relations describe
relations between deﬁnite intervals of time. On the other hand,
indeﬁnite intervals, whose exact relation may be uncertain, are
described by a set of all the basic relations that may apply.
The universe of Allen’s interval algebra consists of all the
binary relations on time intervals which can be expressed as
disjunctions of the basic interval relations. These disjunctions
are written as sets of basic relations, leading to a total of
213 = 8192 binary relations, including the null relation Ø (also
denoted by ?) and the universal relation B (also denoted by
>). The set of all binary relations 2B is denoted by A; every
temporal relation in A can be deﬁned by a conjunction of
disjunctions of endpoint relations of the form X < Y, X = Y
and their negations.
The operations on the relations deﬁned in Allen’s algebra
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

are: unary converse (denoted by
^), binary intersection
(denoted by \) and binary composition (denoted by ◦), which
are deﬁned as follows:
8 X, Y :
Xr^Y
$ Y rX
8 X, Y :
X(r T s)Y
$ XrY V XsY
8 X, Y :
X(r ◦ s)Y
$ 9Z : (XrZ V ZsY ),
where X, Y, Z are intervals, and r, s are interval relations.
Allen [9] gives a composition table for the basic relations.
Fundamental reasoning problems in Allen’s framework
have been studied by a number of authors, including Golumbic
and Shamir [15] [16], Ladkin and Maddux [17], van Beek [18]
and Vilain and Kautz [19].
B. Posets and the Fishburn-Shepp Inequality
We now consider novel research proposed in [20], namely
to specify heuristics for scheduling based on representing a
collection of intervals of time with constraints as a poset, and
applying the Fishburn-Shepp inequality to guide a scheduling
algorithm. In [20], applications are sought for this approach:
we address this ﬁrst step here by describing potential applica-
tions which are also related to smart-type reasoning. First, we
commence with overviews of the scheduling problem and the
Fishburn-Shepp inequality.
Generally, a schedule of tasks (or simply schedule) is the
assignment of tasks to speciﬁc time intervals of resources,
such that no two tasks occupy any resource simultaneously
– additionally, a requirement can be that the capacity of
resources is not exceeded by the tasks. A schedule is optimal
if it minimizes a given optimality criterion. However, our
ultimate interest is in providing an algorithm to solve, or
schedule, temporal constraint satisfaction problems; since we
also consider indeﬁnite qualitative temporal information, the
solution may assign events simultaneously to intervals.
Let Q be a ﬁnite poset (partially ordered set) with n
elements and C be a chain 1 < 2 < · · · < c. For (Q, C), a map
! : Q ! C is strict order-preserving if, for all x, y 2 Q, x < y
implies !(x) < !(y). Let λ : Q ! {1 < 2 < · · · < n} be a
linear extension of Q, that is, an order-preserving injection.
A poset Q is equivalently a directed acyclic graph (DAG),
G = (V, E); for temporal reasoning, the vertices represent time
intervals, and edges between vertices are labeled with relations
in Allen’s algebra which satisfy the partial ordering. For
scheduling problems, a linear extension λ of Q (or G) can be
used to schedule tasks: λ must respect interval constraints, that
is relations between comparable elements. Algorithmically, a
linear extension of a DAG, G, can be determined in linear time
by performing a depth-ﬁrst search of G; while G (Q) can be
represented by an adjacency matrix.
The Fishburn-Shepp inequality [21] [22] is an inequality
for the number of extensions of partial orders to linear orders,
expressed as follows. Suppose that x, y and z are incomparable
elements of a ﬁnite poset, then
P(x < y)P(x < z) < P((x < y) ^ (x < z))
(1)
where P(*) is the probability that a linear extension has the
property *. By re-expressing this in terms of conditional
probability, P(x < z) < P((x < z) | (x < y)), we see that
P(x < z) strictly increases by adding the condition x < y.
The problem posed in [20] concerns applying the Fishburn-
Shepp inequality to efﬁciently ﬁnd a favourable schedule under
speciﬁed criteria, where a naive scheduling algorithm is also
given together with an illustrative example. However, our focus
here is in introducing application scenarios. The rest of the
paper is structured as follows.
In Section II, we describe various applications in temporal
reasoning that include applications in smart homes, applica-
tions in intelligent conversational agents, and also applications
in exercise physiology followed by Section III which describes
conclusion and future work.
II.
APPLICATIONS IN TEMPORAL REASONING
A. Applications in Smart Homes
Buildings consume a considerable amount of energy.
Managing that energy is challenging, though is achievable
through building control and energy management systems.
These systems will typically monitor, measure, manage and
control services for the lighting, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC), security, and safety of the building.
They also permit a degree of scheduling, albeit they are often
limited by static programming and may have no awareness
incorporated of external events. For example, a building’s
HVAC system may heat rooms that are unoccupied as the
setpoint has been programmed to be a certain temperature for
a speciﬁed interval of the day. Clearly this is quite inefﬁcient,
and though motion detectors can play a role in actuating lights
during periods of room occupancy, maintaining a comfortable
indoor climate using similar sensors to detect people cannot
provide the same beneﬁts. Furthermore, the indoor climate
is impacted by outdoor thermodynamic processes, as well as
internal heat gains which can be unaccountable (e.g., people,
mobile equipment, etc). However, most modern non-residential
building’s energy management systems will be conﬁgured to
turn building services on and off throughout the day using
a pre-programmed schedule (e.g., a repeating daily pattern of
heating use) and can also employ intelligent start-up controllers
with external temperature compensation to delay the turning
on of heating for example. Modern heating controllers (i.e.,
programmable thermostats) in homes can also have setpoints
conﬁgured in a daily schedule (e.g., 6-8am: increase setpoint
to 20◦C, representing a waking-up phase; 9am - 4pm: heating
deactivated or set to a maximum (e.g., 15◦C); and from 5pm
- 6pm: 21◦C, representing a heating-up phase to anticipate
arrival of an occupant from a workplace, and so forth).
Aside from heating control, homes can now also em-
ploy smart home systems to perform some degree of energy
management and appliance automation. These systems are
becoming more commonplace, particularly as the Internet of
Things (IoT) paradigm is gaining more traction, whereby
humans are bypassed, and machine to machine communication
takes place (e.g., Smart Homes communicating with Smart
Grids [23]). This gives rise to smart automation and reasoning
where decision making can take place and determine when
home appliances can be scheduled, particularly in the case of
peak-load shaving [24] or demand response optimization [25].
In these cases, consumption patterns can be shifted to times
of lower cost electricity. Appliance scheduling can be further
classiﬁed by, for instance, their minimum required periods of
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

operations, whether or not their operations can be interrupted,
and if a human occupant is involved (i.e., in climate control
scenarios). For instance, washing machines will have varying
periods of operation depending on the program (wash, spin,
dry) and cannot (typically) be interrupted if scheduled. Heating
or cooling systems will have optimum start-up times to turn
on in anticipation of occupants requiring the temperature of
the house to be at a preset setpoint upon arrival. The Internet
of Things has even enabled this particular scenario to be
inﬂuenced by the distance an occupant is from the home or
building, whereby the driving time is estimated via tracking
of a Global Positioning System (GPS signal) [26]. In [27],
driving patterns were analysed, and a programmable thermostat
augmented with GPS control enabled energy savings of 7%.
The emerging Internet of Things in this respect will be
responsible for huge volumes of temporal pattern data (i.e.,
timestamped sequences of events, be it a change in temper-
ature, or a light being turned on and off, or the duration of
activity of an entertainment system, etc), thus also incorpo-
rating quantitative temporal information. In the smart home,
the ability to detect user behaviour or house activities from
this kind of temporal pattern data can provide a better under-
standing of how to identify patterns of energy use and thus
determine when or how to gain energy savings. Naturally, the
accumulative savings factor is increased many-fold in the smart
city concept. Temporal pattern event detection inspired by
Allen’s relations has proved useful in smart environments: for
anomaly detection in assisted living applications [28], and in
activity monitoring [29]. In these examples, intervals represent
the sensed data (cooking would imply the stove being on while
an inhabitant is present in the kitchen [30]). Such kinds of
recognition are useful for determining normal behaviour of
elderly occupants, and thus, for instance, detecting any onsets
of dementia [31].
Clearly, efﬁcient, or ideally optimized, scheduling of events
can lead to enhanced savings of time and energy – it is with this
goal that we propose applying the Fishburn-Shepp inequality,
possibly to a speciﬁed subset of events in a larger complex
system.
B. Applications in Intelligent Conversational Agents
Intelligent conversational agents (CA) enable natural lan-
guage interaction with their human participant. Following an
input string, the CA works through its knowledge-base in
search of an appropriate output string. The knowledge-base
consists of natural language sentences based on a speciﬁc
domain. Through the use of semantic processing using a lexical
database with grouped sets of cognitive synonyms, word
similarity is determined, with thus the highest semantically
similar ranked string returned to the user as output.
Scripts consist of contexts that relate to a speciﬁc theme
or topic of conversation. Each context contains one or more
rules, which possess a number of prototype natural language
sentences. An example of a scripted natural language rule is
shown below, where s is a natural language sentence and r is
a response statement.
<Rule-01>
s: I am having problems accessing my email account.
r: I’m sorry to hear that. Have you tried contacting IT support?
One such CA, as proposed by O’Shea et al. ([32] [33] [34]),
uses semantics as a means to measure sentence similarity.
The CA is organized into contexts consisting of a number of
similarly related rules. Through the use of a sentence similarity
measure, a match is determined between the user’s utterance
and the scripted natural language sentences. Similarity ratings
are measured in the range from 0 to 1, in which a value of
0 denotes no semantic similarity, and 1 denotes an identical
sentence pair. The highest ranked sentence is ﬁred and its
associated response is sent as output. The following algorithm
describes the application:
1. Natural language dialogue is received as input from the
user.
2. Semantic-based CA receives natural language dialogue
from the user which is sent to the sentence similarity measure.
3. Semantic-based CA receives natural language sentences
from the scripts ﬁles which are sent to the sentence similarity
measure.
4. Sentence similarity measure calculates a ﬁring strength
for each sentence pair which is returned and processed by the
semantic-based CA.
5. The highest ranked sentence is ﬁred and its associated
response is sent as output.
Natural language interaction between two participants (hu-
man or otherwise) can be modeled using Allen’s interval
algebra: the intervals of speech could satisfy the basic relation
p, if one speaks before the other, or the relation o if their
speech overlaps, and so on. In terms of scheduling a set of
speech events with speciﬁed relations, that is constructing a
linear extension by applying the Fishburn-Shepp inequality,
we envisage an application for the learning impaired which
schedules the events sequentially to reduce confusion from
simultaneous speech. This could then be integrated with a CA
facility.
C. Applications in Physiology
In exercise physiology, the study of complex rhythms
arising from the peripheral systems (for example, the cardio-
vascular system) and the central nervous system of the human
body is important to optimize athletic performance while using
a suitable type of pacing. Pacing plays an important part during
athletic competition so that the metabolic resources are used
effectively to complete the physical activity in the minimum
time possible, as well as to maintain enough metabolic re-
sources to complete that task [35]. Moreover, according to
the Central Governor Model (CGM) [36], there is a central
regulator that paces the peripheral systems during physical
activity to reach the endpoint of that physical activity without
physiological system failure. This central governor model of
fatigue is a complex integrative control model which involves
the continuous interaction, in a deterministic way, among all
the physiological, and that of the central systems.
In this context, the decision making process involved when
an athlete changes his or her pacing strategy during a particular
race (and especially during endurance exercise) seems quite
complex. However, the change in the decision making process
could be simply explained by the basic relations in Allen’s
interval algebra. Consider the following scenario where an
athlete or runner needs to complete a 20-km race. An experi-
enced runner will subconsciously be aware of the amount of
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

energy resources they will need during the race so that they
can effectively complete the race without catastrophic failure.
During the race, there are both exogenous and endogenous
factors which will inﬂuence the optimal performance of the
runner, and therefore she or he has to make important decisions
as to when, or when not, change their pacing during the race so
that they can complete the race in the minimum time possible.
For instance, there may be three major changes in the pat-
terns of the running speed, power output, or pacing strategies
that the runner could adopt for a long distance race such as
the 20-km race [37]. Initially, on the ﬁrst stage of the race, he
or she will accelerate from a resting standing (or crouching)
position to reach a constant optimal speed as determined by
the runner’s physical ability; meanwhile their heart rate (HR)
will accelerate as well as their volume of oxygen consumption
(VO2). In the second stage, they will maintain the same
constant running speed for most of the race while their heart
rate will be quite steady; moreover, the volume of oxygen
consumption will be kept practically constant throughout the
race. Finally, in the third stage of the race, the runner will
accelerate or sprint in order to complete the race, which will
at the same time, increase their heart rate as well as the rate
of volume of oxygen consumption.
This represents one possible scenario that may occur during
a race, which illustrates that Allen’s temporal relations can be
exploited to more clearly express the complex decision-making
processes related to the human body during physical exertion,
and hence allow for scheduling the pacing strategy adopted
by a runner during a particular race. Furthermore, smart-type
devices can be worn by an athlete which can also feed into
the decision-making process in real time.
III.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Previous research in temporal pattern reasoning surround-
ing smart homes has largely focused on activity recognition
of inhabitants, and gaining an understanding from sensor data
retrieved from indoor environments (such as electricity, tem-
perature, light, or motion). The Internet of Things, however,
will provide further dimensions of data from people (wearable
sensors, tracking of GPS, etc.). This kind of outdoor data will
provide additional context to the smart home and enable it to
make better and more informed decisions as to how to actuate
and control building services.
For example, returning to the case of augmented heating
control using GPS - an occupant leaves the house and goes
for a short jog (automatically disabling the heating as they
leave) - as they run their own body temperature rises. The
wearable sensors will be monitoring their temperature and
their GPS coordinates. As they return and approach their
home, the augmented heating control with the GPS system
will turn on the heating, but will also take into account the
occupant’s current body temperature, and accordingly apply
the appropriate heating control strategy (i.e., reducing the
return-to-home setpoint from a previously higher setting and
actuation time). In this case, the quantitative temporal informa-
tion between arrival and heating activation will be lengthened
as the temperature setpoint requirement will be reduced. This
is just one of a myriad of possibilities that can be realized
from the abundance of potential sensor data generated from the
Internet of Things. We believe the relation between indoor and
outdoor sensing (as well as any other sensing source for that
matter) and reasoning strategies requires further exploration,
and as part of our future research strategy we will investigate
smart home event and action temporal reasoning from multiple
data streams beyond enclosed indoor scenarios. In particular,
smart-type scheduling is a key factor in energy-related issues.
We envisage enhanced synergy in the smart-environment
by integrating intelligent conversational agents. Useful re-
sponses to even simple sentences such as Where are my keys?
can have impact on human energy and stress levels and allow
for more efﬁcient use of time.
To date, physiological research into pacing strategies has
focused on the amount of energy resources that are available
for a runner to complete a long distance race. We propose
that the future area in which the exercise physiology ﬁeld
should endeavour to concentrate more on, is the optimal time
in switching between the different types of pacing strategies, so
that a race is completed successfully and in the minimum time
possible without homeostatic failure. In order to achieve this,
the various changes in pacing, namely, increasing, constant
or decreasing pace, depends on each individual’s resource
capacity and endurance for each type of pacing so as to
achieve the target in the least possible time. Moreover, we
suggest that the decision-making process underlying the choice
of the various pacing strategies can be informed through the
application of Allen’s algebra, and the resulting scheduling
can be applied to promote and improve world elite athletic
performance.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. F. Allen, “Temporal reasoning and planning.in j.f. allen, h.a. kautz, r.n.
pelavin and j.d. tenenberg (eds.),” in Reasoning about Plans.
Morgan
Kaufman, 1991, pp. 1–67.
[2]
F. Song and R. Cohen, “The interpretation of temporal relations in
narrative,” National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-88),
1988.
[3]
K. N¨okel, Temporally distributed symptoms in technical diagnosis.
Springer Science & Business Media, 1991, vol. 517.
[4]
C. H. Coombs and J. Smith, “On the detection of structure in attitudes
and developmental processes.” Psychological Review, vol. 80, no. 5,
1973, p. 337.
[5]
S. A. Ward and R. H. Halstead, Computation structures.
MIT press,
1990.
[6]
J. Juarez, M. Campos, A. Morales, J. Palma, and R. Marin, “Ap-
plications of temporal reasoning to intensive care units,” Journal of
Healthcare Engineering, vol. 1, no. 4, 2010, pp. 615–636.
[7]
H.-U. Krieger, B. Kiefer, and T. Declerck, “A framework for temporal
representation and reasoning in business intelligence applications.” in
AAAI Spring Symposium: AI Meets Business Rules and Process
Management, 2008, pp. 59–70.
[8]
A. Gerevini, L. Schubert, and S. Schaeffer, “Temporal reasoning in
timegraph i–ii,” ACM SIGART Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 3, 1993, pp. 21–25.
[9]
J. F. Allen., “Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals,” Com-
mun., vol. 26, no. 11, 1983, pp. 832–843.
[10]
I. Pe’er and R. Shamir, “Satisﬁability problems on intervals and unit
intervals,” Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 175, no. 2, 1997, pp.
349–372.
[11]
M. C. Golumbic, H. Kaplan, and R. Shamir, “On the complexity of dna
physical mapping,” Advances in Applied Mathematics, vol. 15, no. 3,
1994, pp. 251–261.
[12]
R. M. Karp, “Mapping the genome: some combinatorial problems
arising in molecular biology,” in Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁfth annual
ACM symposium on Theory of computing.
ACM, 1993, pp. 278–285.
[13]
I. Mandoiu and A. Zelikovsky, Bioinformatics algorithms: techniques
and applications.
John Wiley & Sons, 2008, vol. 3.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

[14]
B. Nebel and H.-J. B¨urckert, “Reasoning about temporal relations: a
maximal tractable subclass of allen’s interval algebra,” Journal of the
ACM (JACM), vol. 42, no. 1, 1995, pp. 43–66.
[15]
M. C. Golumbic and R. Shamir, “Algorithms and complexity for
reasoning about time,” in AAAI, 1992, pp. 741–747.
[16]
G. Martin Charles and R. Shamir, “Complexity and algorithms for
reasoning about time: A graph-theoretic approach,” Journal of the ACM
(JACM), vol. 40, no. 5, 1993, pp. 1108–1133.
[17]
P. B. Ladkin and R. D. Maddux, On binary constraint networks. Kestrel
Institute Palo Alto, CA, 1988.
[18]
P. Van Beek, “Reasoning about qualitative temporal information,”
Artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 58, no. 1-3, 1992, pp. 297–326.
[19]
M. B. Vilain and H. A. Kautz, “Constraint propagation algorithms for
temporal reasoning.” in Aaai, vol. 86, 1986, pp. 377–382.
[20]
J. W. Daykin, M. Miller, and J. Ryan, “Trends in temporal reasoning:
Constraints, graphs and posets,” in International Conference on Math-
ematical Aspects of Computer and Information Sciences.
Springer,
2015, pp. 290–304.
[21]
P. C. Fishburn, “A correlational inequality for linear extensions of a
poset,” Order, vol. 1, no. 2, 1984, pp. 127–137.
[22]
L. A. Shepp et al., “The xyz conjecture and the fkg inequality,” The
Annals of Probability, vol. 10, no. 3, 1982, pp. 824–827.
[23]
K. M. Tsui and S.-C. Chan, “Demand response optimization for smart
home scheduling under real-time pricing,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 3, no. 4, 2012, pp. 1812–1821.
[24]
G. T. Costanzo, J. Kheir, and G. Zhu, “Peak-load shaving in smart
homes via online scheduling,” in 2011 IEEE International Symposium
on Industrial Electronics.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1347–1352.
[25]
J. Zhu, F. Lauri, A. Koukam, and V. Hilaire, “Scheduling optimization
of smart homes based on demand response,” in IFIP International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Applications and Innovations.
Springer, 2015, pp. 223–236.
[26]
A. B. John Krumm, “Learning time-based presence probabilities,” in
Pervasive
2011.
Springer
Verlag,
June
2011.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/learning-
time-based-presence-probabilities [retrieved 2/2017].
[27]
M. Gupta, S. S. Intille, and K. Larson, “Adding gps-control to traditional
thermostats: An exploration of potential energy savings and design chal-
lenges,” in International Conference on Pervasive Computing. Springer,
2009, pp. 95–114.
[28]
V. Jakkula and D. J. Cook, “Anomaly detection using temporal data
mining in a smart home environment,” Methods of information in
medicine, vol. 47, no. 1, 2008, pp. 70–75.
[29]
J. Ullberg, A. Loutﬁ, and F. Pecora, “Towards continuous activity
monitoring with temporal constraints,” in Proc. of the 4th Workshop
on Planning and Plan Execution for Real-World Systems at ICAPS09,
2009, pp. 3833–3860.
[30]
F. Palumbo, J. Ullberg, A. ˇStimec, F. Furfari, L. Karlsson, and
S. Coradeschi, “Sensor network infrastructure for a home care mon-
itoring system,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 3, 2014, pp. 3833–3860.
[31]
P. C. e. a. Roy, “A possibilistic approach for activity recognition in
smart homes for cognitive assistance to alzheimers patients,” in Activity
Recognition in Pervasive Intelligent Environments. Springer, 2011, pp.
33–58.
[32]
K. O’shea, Z. Bandar, and K. Crockett, “Towards a new generation
of conversational agents using sentence similarity,” in Advances in
Electrical Engineering and Computational Science, L. N. in Electri-
cal Engineering, Ed.
Sio-Long Ao and Len Gelman, Ed. Netherlands:
Springer, 2009, vol. 39, pp. 505–514.
[33]
K. O’shea, Z. Bandar, and K. A. Crockett, “Application of a semantic-
based conversational agent to student debt management,” in World
Congress on Computational Intelligence, I. International, Ed.
Con-
ference on Fuzzy Systems, Barcelona: 978-1-4244-6917-8, 2010, pp.
760–766.
[34]
K. O’shea, “An approach to conversational agent design using sentence
similarity measures,” International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2012, pp. 558–568.
[35]
H. Ulmer, “Concept of an extracellular regulation of muscular metabolic
rate during heavy exercise in humans by psychophysiological feedback,”
Experimentia, vol. 52, 1996, pp. 416–420.
[36]
E. Lambert, A. St Clair Gibson, and T. Noakes, “Complex systems
model of fatigue: integrative homeostatic control of peripheral physio-
logical systems during exercise in humans,” B J Sports Med, vol. 39,
2004, pp. 52–62.
[37]
D. Chuckravanen and S. Rajbhandari, “Management of metabolic
resources for a 20-km cycling time-trial using different types of pacing,”
Journal of Human Sport and Exercise, vol. 10, no. 1, 2015, pp. 95–103.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

