Patterns as Formulas: 
Patterns in the Digital Humanities 
 
Johanna Barzen and Frank Leymann 
Institute of Architecture of Application Systems 
University of Stuttgart 
Stuttgart, Germany 
e-mail: {barzen, leymann}@iaas.uni-stuttgart.de 
 
 
Abstract—During the last years, in particular due to the Digital 
Humanities, empirical processes, data capturing or data 
analysis got more and more popular as part of humanities 
research. In this paper, we want to show that even the complete 
scientific method of natural science can be applied in the 
humanities. By applying the scientific method to the humanities, 
certain kinds of problems can be solved in a confirmable and 
replicable manner. In particular, we will argue that patterns 
may be perceived as the analogon to formulas in natural science. 
This may provide a new way of representing solution-oriented 
knowledge in the humanities.  
Keywords-pattern; pattern languages; digital humanities; 
formalisation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A fundamental aspect of the scientific method (i.e., the 
method of the natural sciences) is repeatability. Repeatability 
allows to gain two key goals of research: objectivity and 
solvability.  
Repeatability is the basis for verifiability of research 
results. Verifiability allows to establish objectivity in the 
sense of not having to rely on trusted authorities (i.e., well-
accepted domain experts) expressing their subjective insights 
as research results. As a consequence, everybody can re-enact 
and track the way a research result has been achieved.  
Often, a research result itself that has been obtained by 
applying the scientific method has an aspect of repeatability 
too. A corresponding result is represented as a procedure to 
solve recurring problems of a certain kind. Such a result is 
often expressed as a formula, and the solvability of the 
problem is achieved by applying this formula.  
Also, the humanities, in particular the Digital Humanities 
[1], have domains in which objectivity and solvability (in the 
sense stated above) are important goals. As shown in the 
following, the scientific method may be applied in such 
domains to achieve both, verifiability of results as well as 
results that have a “solution character”.  
First, in Section II, we give evidence that the concept of 
patterns is a proper vehicle to establish the solvability facet of 
research results in the humanities. Second, in Section III, we 
show that applying the scientific method in data intensive 
domains of the humanities establishes the objectivity facet of 
research results. Section IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
PATTERN AS FORMULAS 
Solving problems in natural sciences by means of 
formulas is in close analogy to using patterns in other domains 
like architecture [2] or software engineering [3][4], for 
example. Applying a formula means to follow a certain 
proceeding: identifying the intent to solve a specific problem, 
determining the solution sketch and apply it to the actual 
context of the problem to be solved to result in the concrete 
solution of the problem. 
A. Example: How to Solve Quadratic Equations 
Assume that one has the intent to solve the problem of 
determining the roots of the following quadratic equation (1): 
 
x2 + 5x + 4 = 0 
(1) 
 
What is done first is to consult a formulary to find the 
sketch of how to solve arbitrary quadratic equations ax2 + bx 
+ c = 0 and the quadratic formula (2) 
  
x1,2 = −b±
b2 − 4ac
2a
 
(2) 
 
for solving (1) is found, i.e., for determining the roots x1 and 
x2. 
Next, the context of the problem to solve the specific 
equation x2+5x+4=0 needs to be determined, i.e., the actual 
coefficients (3) of the concrete equation have to be 
determined: 
 
a=1, b=5, c=4 
(3) 
 
After understanding the sketch and the context, the 
corresponding quadratic formula (2) and the actual 
coefficients (3) have to be combined, i.e., the coefficients a, 
b, c in the quadratic formula (1) have to be substituted by the 
actual values a=1, b=5, and c=4. Together, the solution 
description (4) of the problem has been determined: 
 
x1,2 = −5 ±
52 − 4⋅1⋅4
2⋅1
 
(4) 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

 
This results in the concrete solution of the original 
problem, i.e., the roots of the quadratic equation (1), see (5): 
 
x1=-1, x2=-4 
(5) 
 
B. Using a Formula Means Applying a Pattern  
This proceeding of determining the roots of a quadratic 
equation can be described by a document that follows the 
template of a pattern (as introduced in [2][3][4]): First, a 
pattern has a name that uniquely identifies the problem to be 
solved. Second, it specifies the intent of solving the particular 
problem (e.g. finding the roots of a quadratic equation). Then, 
it describes in a sketch how to solve the problem (i.e., the 
quadratic formula). Next, it lays out how to determine the 
context in which the solution can be applied. Finally, the 
solution works out how the before-mentioned information is 
put together to solve the problem. Figure 1 depicts these 
elements of the corresponding pattern document (where the 
context-section and the solution-section are combined). Note, 
that these ingredients of the pattern document make use of 
only the essentials of a pattern template: pattern languages 
typically capture more information [2][3][4].  
C. Example: Solving a Costume Design Problem 
Patterns are used in different domains in the humanities. 
But the term “pattern” is often rather problematic because of 
the different meanings it refers to [5]. But used in the sense 
introduced by C. Alexander [2], patterns are a convincing tool 
to capture knowledge and make this knowledge easily 
accessible. In the MUSE (MUSE - MUster Suchen und 
Erkennen, engl.: pattern search and identification) project [6], 
patterns are used to document solutions of costume design 
problems in films.  
 
 
 
This project is about solving a problem from the 
humanities (more specifically from the media studies), 
namely proving the existence of a costume language and 
providing such a costume language for several genres. The 
individual costumes found are documented as patterns (see 
Figure 2); note, that the pattern content shown is just an 
example and not yet a verified pattern. 
As before, the pattern document begins with the name of 
the problem. It describes the intent of solving the problem. 
The sketch presents the essentials of the solution, and the 
context describes the circumstances of applying the solution. 
Finally, the solution discusses in details how the costume is 
built – in this case, a figure depicts all the primitives of the 
costume and the order in which they are worn.  
By following the pattern, a solution to a certain costume 
design problem is constructed: just like following the pattern 
for solving quadratic equations. Thus, using patterns in the 
humanities to express research results brings the power of 
applying formulas to the humanities, i.e., it establishes the 
solvability facet of research result in the humanities.  
III. 
THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD  
In a nutshell (and admitting, this is a very simplified view), 
the scientific method consists of the following steps [7][8]: 
observation, data capture, data analysis, and formalization (or 
abstraction).  
An observation can be based on planned experiments, 
systematically watching phenomena in nature etc. Often, 
observations are caused by a hypothesis resulting from 
theoretical reasoning. Data capturing refers to the stringent 
logging of information resulting from observations. Data 
analysis takes a close look to the captured data in order to find 
regularities. By means of abstraction or formalization found 
regularities are finally expressed as laws or formulas. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Using a Formula as Applying a Pattern 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
A. Example: Determining Planetary Motion 
Historically, Tycho Brahe observed celestial positions of 
planets (especially Mars) and captured the corresponding data 
in logs [9]. Johannes Kepler analyzed this data [9] and inferred 
Kepler’s Laws of planetary motions [10]. For example, the 
first Kepler Law is: “The orbit of each planet is an ellipse with 
the sun in one of its foci.” Kepler also formalized his laws, 
i.e., he abstracted his laws as mathematical formulas. The first 
Kepler Law, for example, is formalized as (6) 
 
r =
p
1+ε cosθ
 
(6) 
 
Thus, as Figure 3 depicts, the discovery of Kepler’s Laws 
of planetary motions follows the proceeding of the scientific 
method sketched above: observation, data capture, data 
analysis, and formalization (or abstraction).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Example: Determining Costume Languages 
The problem of determining costume languages has been 
described in [11]. In [12], a method (called the MUSE 
Method) has been described for deriving costume languages. 
This method is a refinement of the (simplified) scientific 
method sketched in Figure 3: The left-hand side of Figure 4 
shows the MUSE method as described in [12] (ignoring 
aspects not relevant in the context of this paper), the right-
hand 
side 
shows 
the 
scientific 
method, 
and 
the 
correspondence between steps in the MUSE method and steps 
in the scientific method are indicated as arrows.  
In the MUSE method, characters of a film corpus are 
identified. This is done by watching the corresponding films 
– which means that observation is taking place. While 
watching the films, the cloths of the identified characters are 
described – which is data capturing. Based on the captured 
data about clothes, costumes are identified – which is data 
analysis. Identified costumes are then abstracted into patterns 
– which can be considered as formalization as argued above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A Costume Described by a Pattern 
 
2 
High School Queen 
The High School Queen costume is used to represent the 
clothing of a beau*ful girl who “rules” the high school.  
The costume consists of the following costume primi*ves: 
Necklace, Bracelet, Earrings, Underpants, Strapless Bra, Mini 
Skirt, a Tight Top, and Pumps. 
 
Problem 
Intent 
Sketch 
Solu4on 
The High School Queen occurs in high school comedies. 
 
Context 
Figure 3.  Principle Proceeding in Deriving Kepler's Laws 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
An overall software system that supports the MUSE 
method has been build, and that system is applied in the 
domain of film studies in the humanities [13]. In particular, 
the discovery of costume languages is supported. This system 
allows to describe films, their characters and the cloths of the 
characters via a graphical user interface and stores this data in 
a database. The structure of this database as well as the 
domains of its central attributes are modeled by taxonomies 
and ontologies [12][14]. The analysis of the data is supported 
by means of data warehouse and OLAP (Online Analytical 
Processing) technologies [15], as well as by means data 
mining technologies [16]. The representation of the abstracted 
patterns and their relations (i.e., the resulting pattern 
language) is stored in a pattern repository [13].  
The software system can be used to verify research results, 
thus, contributing to objectivity: Everybody can browse the 
captured data to assess its quality; the captured data can be 
analyzed over and over again to confirm the discovered 
regularities within the cloths of the films; the patterns 
reference the costumes they have been abstracted from, which 
support to track the abstraction of similar cloths to costume 
patterns. The latter, by the way, does also contribute to 
solvability: a pattern does not only describe abstractly the 
structure of a certain costume but also provides a set of 
concrete cloths to realize this costume.  
Formalization in MUSE goes even beyond describing 
research results as patterns. Cloths themselves as well as their 
constituents are considered as words of formal languages [12]. 
This allows, for example, to check whether newly discovered 
cloths are in an already established tradition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
This brief contribution argued in favor of applying the 
scientific method in the humanities. In doing so, repeatability 
of research results – especially the facets of objectivity and 
solvability – will be emphasized. Patterns have been presented 
as an analogon to formulas as an integral part of the scientific 
method.  
It has been shown how the scientific method has been 
applied in the film studies. The scientific method in general, 
and the MUSE method in particular is currently being applied 
in musicology [17] - in an effort called MUSE4Music. 
There are important implications of applying the scientific 
method to domains or in ways it has not been established for, 
and these implications are independent from the fact whether 
the scientific method is applied in the humanities or in natural 
sciences. In order to ensure repeatability, the data as well as 
the algorithms used to analyze this data to achieve the results 
must be published [18]. This is by far not yet widely accepted 
because the data and algorithms are often considered 
proprietary or a “production secrete” for achieving research 
results. This is an obstruction that has to be overcome. 
NOTE 
This paper has been pre-published as a technical report of 
University Stuttgart no. 2016/01. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Burdik,  J. Drucker, P. Lunenfeld, T. Presner, and J. 
Schnapp, “Digital_Humanities” Cambridge/London: The MIT 
PRESS, 2012. 
[2] 
C. Alexander, “The Timeless Way of Building,” New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979.  
Figure 4.  The MUSE Method as Scientific Method 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

[3] G. Hohpe and B. Woolf, “Enterprise Integration Patterns,” 
Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
[4] C. Fehling, F. Leymann, R. Retter, W. Schupeckand, and P. 
Arbitter, “Cloud Computing Patterns,” Wien: Springer, 2014. 
[5] D. Dixon, “Analysis Tool or Research Methodology: Is There 
An Epistemology for Patterns?” in D. Berry (ed.): 
Understanding Digital Humanities, Pilgrave Macmillan 2012, 
pp. 191-209. 
[6] Available 
from: 
http://www.iaas.uni-
stuttgart.de/forschung/projects/MUSE/indexE.php 
[7] S. Charey, “A Beginners Guide to Scientific Method” (4th  
Edition) Boston: Wadsworth, 2011. 
[8] T. Hey, S. Tansley, and K. Tolle (Ed.), “The Fourth Paradigm: 
Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery” Microsoft Research 
2009.  
[9] F. Hund, “Geschichte der physikalischen Begriffe (engl. 
History of physical terms),” Mannheim: Bibliographisches 
Institut, 1972. 
[10] M. 
Schneider, 
“Himmelsmechanik 
(engl. 
Celestial 
Mechanics),” Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1981. 
[11] D. Schumm, J. Barzen, F. Leymann, and L. Ellrich, “A Pattern 
Language for Costumes in Films” Proceedings of the 17th 
European Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs 
(EuroPLoP), pp. C4-1–C4-30, 2012. Available from: 
http://www.europlop.net/sites/default/files/files/proceedings/E
uroPLoP2012_companion_proceedings.pdf 2017.01.28 
[12] J. Barzen and F. Leymann, “Costume Languages As Pattern 
Languages” in Proceedings of Pursuit of Pattern Languages for 
Societal Change (PURPLSOC) - Preparatory Workshop, 
Krems: epubli GmbH, pp. 88-117, 2014. 
[13] C. Fehling, J. Barzen, M. Falkenthal, and F. Leymann, 
“PatternPedia - Collaborative Pattern Identification and 
Authoring” in Proceedings of Pursuit of Pattern Languages for 
Societal Change (PURPLSOC) - Preparatory Workshop, 
Krems: epubli GmbH, pp. 252-305, 2014. 
[14] J. 
Barzen, 
“Taxonomien 
kostümrelevanter 
Parameter: 
Annäherung an eine Ontologisierung der Domäne des 
Filmkostüms (engl. Taxonomies of costume relevant 
parameters: approaching an ontology of the domain of the film 
costume),” University Stuttgart, Technical Report 2013/04, 
2013. 
Available 
from: 
ftp://ftp.informatik.uni-
stuttgart.de/pub/library/ncstrl.ustuttgart_fi/TR-2013-04/TR-
2013-04.pdf 2017.01.28 
[15] M. Falkenthal et al, “Datenanalyse in den Digital Humanities – 
Eine Annäherung an Kostümmuster mittels OLAP Cubes 
(engl. Data analysis in Digital Humanities - an approach to 
costume patterns using OLAP Cubes),” in Proceedings 
Datenbanksysteme für Business, Technologie und Web (BTW 
2015), Bonn: Lecture Notes in Informatics, pp.663-666, 2015. 
[16] M. Falkenthal et al, “Pattern Research in the Digital 
Humanities: How Data Mining Techniques Support the 
Identification of Costume Patterns” Computer Science - 
Research and Development, Vol. 22 (74), Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2016, DOI 10.1007/s00450-016-0331-6. 
[17] J. Barzen et al., “The vision for MUSE4Music. Applying the 
MUSE method in musicology“, Computer Science - Research 
and Development, Vol. 22 (74), Heidelberg: Springer, 2016, 
DOI 10.1007/s00450-016-0336-1. 
[18] F. Leymann, “Linked Compute Units and Linked Experiments: 
Using Topology and Orchestration Technology for Flexible 
Support of Scientific Applications” Software Service and 
Application Engineering – LNCS7365, Springer, pp. 71-80, 
2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

