Study Setup Optimization -
Providing Solutions with Patterns
Artur Lupp∗, Alexander G. Mirnig∗, Andreas Uhl† and Manfred Tscheligi∗
∗Center for Human-Computer Interaction, University of Salzburg, Austria
Email: name.surename@sbg.ac.at
†Department of Computer Sciences, University of Salzburg, Austria
Email: uhl@cosy.sbg.ac.at
Abstract—This paper proposes the use of the contextual user
experience (cUX) pattern approach for reﬁning a study concept
involving biometric image data. While the concept of a study may
be clear from the beginning, external inﬂuences can not always
be predicted beforehand. While designing a study concept for a
thesis about the acquisition, inspection, and evaluation of Near
Infrared (NIR) iris biometry images, certain problems arose, e.g.,
how to deal with the environmental light, which material to use
for 3D printing or the problem of picking the right questionnaire.
We used the cUX pattern approach to provide solutions in the
form of patterns for the occurred problems during the reﬁnement
process of the study setup.
Keywords–design patterns; pattern reuse.
I.
INTRODUCTION & RELATED WORK
In this paper, we will present three patterns, created to
provide solutions for problems encountered during the im-
provement of a study setup. Patterns, in general, are a well
acknowledged method in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI),
providing reliable solutions for speciﬁc problems. They can
be advantageously used to ease the communication between
experts with different levels of expertise or even alternate
disciplines. This is particularly useful in interdisciplinary areas,
such as HCI research and design. Patterns were ﬁrst introduced
by Christopher Alexander [1][2] as a means to capture working
solutions for reoccurring problems in the ﬁeld of architecture.
His methodology was adopted by Gamma et al. [3] for
Software Engineering and related disciplines, and has been
used as a tool in these domains since. Patterns were adopted
to supplement guidelines and other general means of guidance,
because such approaches are often either too simplistic or
high level [5][4]. Pattern solutions are ﬁrmly embedded in the
context their problems occur in. This makes a speciﬁc pattern
less reapplicable, i.e., only when the problem contexts match
to a sufﬁcient degree. But it also makes the solutions they
describe more speciﬁc, as well as practice relevant, and lends
them to be used by novices and experts [6]. Patterns have
been adopted by other domains as well, such as Web Design
and HCI [7][8][9] and also suggested as a general, discipline-
independent knowledge transfer tool [10].
In section 2, we will shortly describe the study setup we
wanted to improve, followed by an overview of the approach
we used for pattern creation. We will show how we discovered
and summarized the problem statements for each pattern and
give an insight to the pattern creation process.
Section 3 will illustrate three solution patterns with the
following Titles:
1)
Choosing the Right Light Sources to Examine NIR-
Images Differences
2)
Lens Holder Construction for a Mobile Phone
3)
Finding and Adjusting the Right Usability Question-
naire
Apart from the Title, each pattern is divided into six sections.
The Intent provides a short description and is followed by the
Problem statement, which is, in our case, a question. After
stating the problem, a Scenario is presented that is used as
an example, for which a Solution is provided. The solution is
backed up by Examples, usually illustrated with images. The
pattern ends by providing Keywords, matching the subject of
the pattern. Last, we will discuss our ﬁndings in Section 4 and
conclude this work in Section 5.
II.
APPROACH
We wanted to improve and optimize an existing study
setup, dealing with biometric images. These biometric images
had to be analyzed afterwards, with respect to image quality.
The setup was divided into several steps. During the ﬁrst step,
test subjects have to capture videos with a customized Nexus
5 mobile phone. The IR-blocking ﬁlter was removed from the
rear camera image sensor, to enable NIR image capturing. The
built-in rear camera image sensor is a Sony Exmor R IMX 179.
The sensor offers an Red-Green-Blue (RGB) sub pixel layout
with 3264x2448 (8 MegaPixel) pixels and a sensor size of
5.68mm (1/3.2”), leading to an effective pixel size of 1.4µm.
The pixel size is decent for a mobile phone released in 2013.
Therefore, taking images or videos in twilight conditions is
possible. However, a brighter environment is preferred due to
less image noise. Each test subject had to record at least three
frontal face videos using two different ﬁlters / lenses, mounted
on the mobile phone, which takes a lot of time. Afterwards,
the test subjects had to ﬁll in a questionnaire. Due to the
time consuming video capturing process, the questionnaire
needed to be short, while still maintaining a decent reliability.
We proposed patterns to reﬁne the study concept using an
approach similar to the pattern generation process for car user
experience patterns described in detail by Mirnig et al. [11],
with some minor changes. The ﬁrst mandatory step in our
approach was to analyze the study concept and the associated
setup to extract the problem statements. This was done by
organizing a workshop with the person responsible for the
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

study concept and a group of HCI researchers accustomed
with the pattern generation process. During the workshop, the
study setup was explained as follows: Study participants have
to capture three frontal face videos: one without any lens, for
NIR and visible light images, one with the IR-blocking ﬁlter
/ lens and one with the NIR-only lens. As it is possible to
extract high quality images from high resolution videos, it
was decided, to capture only videos instead of pure frontal
face images. The two different lenses forced the researcher
responsible for the study, to change them after every recording,
due to the current lens mounting method. To ensure a variety
of captured videos, the test subjects had to record the videos in
different light environments, which where not yet deﬁned. The
ﬁnal step was the acquisition of data, relating to the usability of
the video recording process. As the video capturing procedure
was time consuming, the data acquisition had to be fast, whilst
still reliable. This workshop brought up the following three
main problems:
1)
Which light sources and ambient environments need
to be considered, to ensure a diversity of captured
image or video data usually acquired during real life
usage?
2)
How can the lens / ﬁlter changing process be im-
proved?
3)
What questionnaire should be used to provide reliable
results while not using much time to ﬁll out?
For each of the three problems, a draft pattern was created.
The draft pattern initially did not provide any ﬁnal solutions.
Thus, the draft pattern was iterated for the ﬁrst time, in a
second workshop. The original draft pattern was reworked,
with respect to the feedback from the ﬁrst iteration. This
iteration resulted in a reﬁned version of the pattern. Each
iteration improved the pattern to a certain degree. After the
second iteration and rework phase, the pattern was ﬁnalized.
It is noted that, depending on the experience of the involved
experts, more iterations are necessary to create a good pattern.
The ﬁnal pattern should provide an adequate solution for the
predeﬁned problem statement. In our case, two iterations were
sufﬁcient.
In the next section, we will present the three solution
patterns we generated. Each pattern provides a solution for
a certain problem statement, previously mentioned in this
section.
III.
SOLUTION PATTERNS
A. Choosing the Right Light Sources to Examine NIR-Images
Differences
Intent: There are several variables one needs to take into
account when taking pictures or videos with a mobile phone.
Due to the usually small built-in image sensor in mobile
phones, sufﬁcient environmental light is a crucial point. In-
sufﬁcient light leads to higher image noise, which is generally
not preferred. However, to analyze a wide area of possible
real life conditions, selecting different environments for image
capturing is important. This pattern presents three possible
scenarios covering the most important lighting conditions.
The scenarios were selected to provide images with a quality
sufﬁcient for subsequent analysis in mind.
Problem: Which scenarios are needed in order to acquire
analyzable data, covering indoor, as well as outdoor, lighting
conditions that enable NIR image acquisition?
Scenario: The study needed special image acquisition
scenarios to reﬂect actual real life scenarios as closely as
possible. Additionally, the ambient light in at least one of
the scenarios had to cover the NIR wavelength (>= 700nm)
spectrum to enable NIR imaging.
Solution: To cover most real life scenarios of possible
image capturing conditions, we proposed three scenarios: one
outdoor scenario using passive sunlight to enable NIR imaging
and two indoor scenarios, using different light environments
to challenge the imaging sensor of the mobile phone.
•
Outdoor (variable ambient light conditions) - The
outdoor scenario is and should be variable. In this
condition, the sun is providing the ambient light.
Therefore, the image quality is depending on time,
weather, and location. To ensure the best possible
conditions for NIR image acquisition, daylight is nec-
essary. Therefore, image acquisition in this scenario
should be done during daytime. An example of the
outside condition is shown in Figure 2.
•
Indoor (dim light) - The indoor scenario using a
dim light source is intended to challenge the image
sensor. The passive artiﬁcial light provides sufﬁcient
luminosity for images to be taken, as pictured in
Figure 3. Nevertheless, the provided light is dark
enough to force the image sensor to use a higher
sensitivity setting (this is also referred to as ISO,
which is derived from the International Organization
for Standardization standard describing camera sensi-
tivity settings), thus, resulting in more image noise.
Note, that image noise is not desirable in general, but,
if the main concept of the study is to analyze the whole
range of possible image qualities, it is mandatory to
include this unfavorable condition.
•
Indoor (bright light) - In contrast to the dim light
indoor scenario, the bright light indoor scenario uses
a very bright artiﬁcial white light source to illuminate
the frontal face area. This scenario complements the
previously mentioned scenarios. The bright artiﬁcial
light, covers the spectrum visible to the human eye
(from about 390 to 700nm), and provides a decent
environment needed to capture regular frontal face
images and can be observed in Figure 4. However,
conventional light sources are usually not suitable for
NIR imaging, as they do not cover the spectrum above
700nm (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. Philips TL5 HO 49W 865 Lamp [12] - Photometric Data.
Examples: This section shows nine sample images. They
are grouped by the three proposed scenarios. Each group
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

consists of three images: NIR only, NIR & visible light, and
visible light only.
Figure 2. Outdoor - NIR only, NIR & visible light, visible light only (from
left to right).
As mentioned in the solution section, the outdoor scenario
provides sufﬁcient light. This scenario provides the best NIR
image quality, as the sunlight covers a wider spectrum com-
pared to conventional light sources.
Figure 3. Indoor (dim light) - NIR only, NIR & visible light, visible light
only (from left to right).
The indoor scenario with a dim passive light source tends
to induce image noise and is not optimal for NIR imaging.
Figure 4. Indoor (bright light) - NIR only, NIR & visible light, visible light
only (from left to right).
The last scenario provides a direct illumination of the facial
area. It is very favorable for images captured in the visible
spectrum, e.g., due to reduced image noise.
Keywords: NIR, visible light, wavelength, spectrum, image
acquisition, illumination
B. Lens Holder Construction for a Mobile Phone
Intent: This pattern describes steps-by-step the construc-
tion of a lens holder for the Nexus 5 mobile phone.
Problem: Is it possible to create a method or item to
reduced the lens change time and make the whole process
more comfortable?
Scenario: Two different ﬁlters / lenses are each to be
mounted on the mobile phone using a clip. This is very time
consuming and elaborate. To ease the transition from one lens
to another, they had to be mounted on a movable holder, with
the possibility to be mounted on the mobile phone.
Solution: A custom made movable lens holder, mounted
on a hard shell mobile phone case. The following points are
describing a step-by-step guide to construct a lens holder for
a mobile phone case:
•
First, get a hard shell mobile phone case to work
with. The case should be made of a robust material,
e.g., polycarbonate. The easiest way to obtain a good
mobile phone case is either by buying it or by printing
one using a 3D printer. Note, that the camera lens of
the mobile phone should not stick out of the case,
when it is mounted on the phone, as it will be tough
or impossible to rotate the custom made lens changer
afterwards.
•
Measure the phone case and the lens width, length, and
depth. Measurements should be taken as precisely as
possible.
•
Sketch the available items (i.e., lenses and phone
case), with the measurements from the previous step.
•
The sketch is then used to ﬁgure out, how to arrange
the lenses in a way, that allows them to cover the
camera lens of the phone when the lens changer is
being rotated.
•
With the lenses arranged, pick a focus point between
them. This is the pivot point of the lens changer. In
our case, its the small circle in between the two bigger
ones, as illustrated in Figure 6.
•
Craft a paper prototype of the lens holder. Sketch the
lens changer with the exact measurements and cut
it out. This prototype can be used to simulate the
ﬁnished product. Try it out, and see if it ﬁts your
expectations, as depicted in Figure 5.
•
Digitize the sketch and construct a 3D model. Note
that it may be beneﬁcial to add some room to move,
especially if using a 3D printer that is not 100% ac-
curate. An example of the digitized model is pictured
in Figures 6 and 7 (left).
•
Print the 3D model with a material that allows editing
with tools (i.e., a ﬁle or a multifunction rotary tool)
later on. In this case, PVC was used.
•
Deburr the edges whilst occasionally trying to ﬁt in the
lenses. When everything ﬁts accordingly, proceed with
the next step. If anything is odd or needs reﬁnement,
redo the 3D modeling and print the item again.
•
Drill the pivot point holes into the 3D printed item, as
well as in the phone case, to combine them later on.
•
Temporarily mount the printed lens holder to the
phone with a screw, as shown in Figure 7 (right).
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

•
Double check if everything is according to your needs.
•
Finally, install the lenses into the lens holder and
mount it to the phone case. See Figure 8 for the ﬁnal
result.
Figure 5. Sketch of the lens holder with exact measurements and radius.
Figure 6. Digitized 2D model of the sketched lens holder.
Figure 7. 3D model of the lens holder (left), already printed lens holder with
installed lenses/ﬁlters (right).
Figure 8. Final lens holder mounted on the phone case.
Examples: Figure 9 holds a QR Code that is linked to a
video showing the lens holder in action, whereas Figure 10 is
picturing the effect of the different lenses on image acquisition.
Figure 9. YouTube Video - Nexus 5 Lens Holder Case [13].
Figure 10. NIR, NIR and visible light, visible light only by using
IR-blocking lens (from left to right).
Keywords: NIR, lens holder, phone case, PVC, polycarbon-
ate, 3D modeling, 3D printing
C. Finding and Adjusting the Right Usability Questionnaire
Intent: This pattern tries to guide you how to ﬁnd the right
usability questionnaire for your needs and how to adjust it to
your certain needs.
Problem: There are a couple of usability and user expe-
rience questionnaires available. Which one should be picked
and how is it possible to adjust them to your needs?
Scenario: Due to our study setup, we want a short ques-
tionnaire that can be ﬁlled out quickly on paper. Thus, it needs
to have fewer items, while maintaining statistical reliability
(reliability values of 0.70 or more).
Solution:
•
Deﬁne
The ﬁrst step, before even choosing a questionnaire,
is to deﬁne what you want to evaluate. Try to think,
which aspects a questionnaire needs to fulﬁll in or-
der to beneﬁt your research. These aspects should
come directly from the research questions which are
investigated in the study. For example, if there is
a research question regarding intention to buy after
using a system, then a questionnaire on intention to
buy or one with intention to buy as a subscale is
needed. Deﬁne your research questions ﬁrst, then look
for the appropriate questionnaires. Include only those
aspects or constructs which pertain to your research
questions.
•
Consider
It takes longer to ﬁll in a questionnaire with complex
items, especially if there are a lot of items. It is
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

usually difﬁcult to hold a participant’s attention for
more than 15 minutes in most questionnaire situations
(most important for online questionnaires). Thus, it
is recommended to keep the complexity and number
of items such that a comfortable amount of 10-15
minutes total for ﬁlling in the questionnaire is reached.
Use open questions only when they can not be re-
placed by any other item, as they require more thought
by the participant and take longer to ﬁll in as a result.
•
Choose
After it is clear what to evaluate and how big the
scope should be, before creating a questionnaire, try to
search for common and reliable questionnaires ﬁtting
your needs.
Here is a small example of reliable questionnaires used
to evaluate, e.g., usability and technology acceptance:
◦
Questionnaire for User Interface Satisfaction
[14]
◦
Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use [15]
◦
Nielsen’s Attributes of Usability [17]
◦
Computer System Usability Questionnaire [18]
◦
Practical Heuristics for Usability Evaluation
[19]
◦
Pardue Usability Testing Questionnaire [20]
◦
System Usability Scale (SUS) [21]
◦
Technology Acceptance Model [16]
If none of the common questionnaires ﬁt your needs
perfectly, either pick one that satisﬁes most of them
or create your own. If you need to create your own
questionnaire skip the next step and proceed to ”Cre-
ate”.
•
Customize
After choosing a common questionnaire that ﬁts your
need, it may be necessary to customize it slightly.
Customizing existing questionnaires, however, should
be done with caution. If such a customization changes
the meaning of a validated questionnaire’s items, then
the questionnaire requires revalidation. Customization
most often happens to make a questionnaire easier to
understand by the intended target audience or when
they are translated to other languages. Here is an
example extracted from the SUS questionnaire: ”I
found the system unnecessarily complex”. Sometimes,
e.g., when working with children, they might not
know the word ”complex” however they usually know
the term ”hard to understand”. Thus, changing the
question to ”I found the system unnecessarily hard to
understand” would be legitimate. However, changing
the question or the meaning completely is not and
would reduce the tests reliability. The same is true
for translations, which should ideally be done or
at least double-checked by a native speaker of the
target language. Sometimes, which happens especially
with larger multi-purpose questionnaires, such as the
Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
(UTAUT) [23] or others, individual items might not
make much sense for the study at hand. For ex-
ample, the aforementioned intention to buy from an
acceptance questionnaire would not make sense when
applied to the evaluation of third party web interface,
which can not be bought and is not intended to. Items,
or even whole constructs, can and should be omitted
in such cases. This also means, however, that not all
calculations between constructs can be done like in
the full questionnaire. Any omissions made should
be kept to the necessary minimum and need to be
explicitly stated when disseminating the results, in
order to ensure comparability with other studies using
the same questionnaire or subscale.
In general, the optimal questionnaire has to provide enough
statements or items covering the most common shades of
opinions about the to be evaluated subject.
Examples: An example of the translated SUS questionnaire
(translated by David Wilﬁnger et al. [22]) that was used in the
study setup, is presented in Figure 11.
Figure 11. SUS questionnaire (German)
Keywords: questionnaire design, SUS, TAM, test theory,
usability
IV.
DISCUSSION
Using the cUX pattern approach to create easy-to-use
solutions, allowed us to adjust and improve the overall study
concept and setup in several ways. Apart from that, we also
acquired a deeper insight into the pattern creation process
overall. This gave us a chance to notice certain weak points
in the creation process, which, when improved, would help to
generate better patterns. As mentioned at the end of Section
2, each iteration and the following rework phase, reﬁnes
the pattern. The pattern is increasing in quality, with every
feedback received during the iteration process. Bottom line,
the more iterations processes a pattern runs through, the better
it gets. In our case, we had a constant collaboration during
the creation process of the patterns, which enabled us to get
on demand feedback, if necessary. Due to active collaboration,
we had the possibility of continuous iterations, allowing us to
interplay between problem statements and solutions.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Usually, problem statements are deﬁned in the beginning
and changes can only be made during workshops. Solutions,
however, are provided during the ﬁst iteration, at the very
earliest. Therefore, modiﬁcations can be made only after
receiving feedback. Until then, the work on the pattern is on
hold. The interplay showed us a huge advantage, due to the
possibility to reﬁne the problem statement, while at the same
time, adjusting the solution. This induced the improvement of
both the problem statement and the related solution leading
to a higher quality pattern. The problem, however, was the
recurring chance to rephrase the problem statement at any time.
Thus, it was tempting to rephrase the problem statement to
ﬁt a certain solution, even when it was only covering a part
of the statement. This behavior is not desired at all. Pattern
are supposed to provide proven solutions. In the beginning,
after describing the problem statements, we did not know
if we could cover that criteria with our suggested solutions.
However, we evaluated our patterns regarding that point, by
trial and error. Each and every solution we provide in our
patterns was tested before it was adopted into the patterns.
This was, as well, only possible due to the interplay and
instant feedback and, therefore, can not be applied in general.
However, we found that this way of veriﬁcation improved the
provided solutions to a high degree.
The next point we want to discuss, is the use of a Topics
section proposed by the cUX pattern approach. Topics, in this
case, are predeﬁned keywords, used to show scope of the
problem and additionally, address one or more user experience
factors. We willingly omitted that section, as we saw no need
for them in our created patterns. Topics may be beneﬁcial
to organize a collection of patterns, providing a variety of
solutions for a large main ﬁeld. Each pattern can be assigned
to at least one of the topics. However, in our case, we only
had three problem statements that we wanted to address. Thus,
creating a system in which we want to organize our patterns
seemed unnecessary. Therefore, it was sufﬁcient enough to
provide keywords only at the end of the patterns. The keywords
provide research topics and ﬁelds that may be related to the
pattern and may be used to get more insight into certain areas
covered or not sufﬁciently covered in the patterns.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presents how patterns created by utilizing a
slightly modiﬁed cUX patterns approach can be used to opti-
mize a study setup for biometric image analysis. The pattern
solutions were successfully used to optimize the study setup in
question and document these for future applications. However,
future work will have to focus on reapplying these patterns
and reﬁne them further, in order to provide more thorough
solutions and to provide solutions, which have worked in
more instances (i.e., as well-proven solutions, as should be
the case for genuine patterns). The three patterns can be used
to inform future study setups with solutions regarding (a)
choice of the right lighting conditions, (b) construction of a
custom lens holder, and (c) choice (and adaptation) of the right
questionnaire for the study’s purpose and research questions.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Alexander, ”A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction,”
Oxford University Press, New York, USA, 1997.
[2]
C. Alexander, ”The Timeless Way of Building,” Oxford University
Press, New York, USA, 1979.
[3]
E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, ”Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.” Pearson, 1994.
[4]
A. Dix, G. Abowd, R. Beale, and J. Finlay, ”Human-Computer Inter-
action,” Prentice Hall, Europe, 1998.
[5]
M. J. Mahemoff and L. J. Johnston, ”Principles for a Usability-Oriented
Pattern Language,” In Proc. Australian Computer Human Interaction
Conference OZCHI98, IEEE Computer Society, 1998, pp. 132-139.
[6]
D. May and P. Taylor, ”Knowledge management with patterns,” Com-
mun. ACM 46, 7, July 2003, pp. 94-99.
[7]
J. Borchers, ”A Pattern Approach to Interaction Design,” AI & Society,
12, Springer, 2001, pp. 359-376.
[8]
A. F. Blackwell and S. Fincher, ”PUX: Patterns of User Experience,”
Interactions, vol. 17, no. 2., NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 27-31.
[9]
M. Obrist, D. Wurhofer, E. Beck, A. Karahasanovic, and M. Tscheligi,
”User experience (ux) patterns for audio-visual networked applications:
Inspirations for design,” in Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending Boundaries, ser. NordiCHI
10. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 343-352.
[10]
A. G. Mirnig and M. Tscheligi, ”Introducing a General Multi-Purpose
Pattern Framework: Towards a Universal Pattern Approach,” Interna-
tional Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 8, 2015, pp.
40-56.
[11]
A. G. Mirnig et al., ”User Experience Patterns from Scientiﬁc and
Industry Knowledge: An Inclusive Pattern Approach,” in PATTERNS
2015, Seventh International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and
Applications. IARIA, 2015, pp. 38-44.
[12]
Philips MASTER TL5 HO 49W/865 UNP/40 - Product Page. Available:
http://bit.ly/2kDgmOV [Accessed: 11 - Jan - 2017]
[13]
YouTube Video - Nexus 5 Lens Holder Case. Available: https://youtu.
be/J3dParRRQJg [Accessed: 11 - Jan - 2017]
[14]
J. P. Chin, V. A. Diehl, and K. L. Norman, ”Development of an
Instrument Measuring User Satisfaction of the Human-computer Inter-
face,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 1988, pp. 213218.
[15]
F. D. Davis, ”Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User
Acceptance of Information Technology,” MIS Q., vol. 13, no. 3, pp.
319340, Sep. 1989.
[16]
F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, ”User Acceptance
of Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models,”
Manage. Sci., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 9821003, Aug. 1989.
[17]
J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1993.
[18]
J. R. Lewis, ”IBM Computer Usability Satisfaction Questionnaires: Psy-
chometric Evaluation and Instructions for Use,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput.
Interact., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 5778, Jan. 1995.
[19]
G. Perlman, ”Practical Usability Evaluation,” in CHI 97 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY,
USA, 1997, pp. 168-169.
[20]
H. X. Lin, Y.-Y. Choong, and G. Salvendy, ”A proposed index of
usability: a method for comparing the relative usability of different
software systems,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 16, no.
45, pp. 267277, 1997.
[21]
J. Brooke, ”SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability evaluation
in industry, vol. 189, no. 194, pp. 47, 1996.
[22]
D. Wilﬁnger, M. Pirker, R. Bernhaupt, and M. Tscheligi, ”Evaluating
and Investigating an iTV Interaction Concept in the Field,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh European Conference on European Interactive
Television Conference, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 175178.
[23]
Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, ”User
Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Uniﬁed View,” MIS
Q., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 425478, Sep. 2003.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

