Visualizing Multiple Websites with Views of Structural Growth, Dynamic 
Performance and Peer Comparison 
Simon Fong, Ho Si Meng, Ma Cheng I 
Department of Computer and Information Science 
University of Macau 
Macau SAR 
ccfong@umac.mo, smho@dsej.gov.mo, iris.ma@venetian.com.mo 
 
 
Abstract—Website visualization is an important research topic 
in data analytics that has its practical applications in 
performance management reports and navigational problem 
diagnosis. Researchers from their previous works studied 
different forms of visualization mainly as 3D linked graphs. In 
this paper, we propose an innovative tree model that 
represents website structures as radial and concentric circles of 
nodes, and users’ interactions with the websites as staggered 
threads. These two types of visualization, when used together, 
effectively express the growth of a website in a static view and 
the usage of its services in a dynamic view respectively. 
Furthermore, the proposed techniques could be placed 
collectively together for visualizing websites comparatively 
across different countries or regions as an ecosystem of forest 
of trees. This paper presents this new concept as well as the 
features of the custom-made simulator programmed in Java. 
Keywords-Website visualization; Web ecosystem. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Website 
visualization 
refers 
to 
some 
graphical 
representation 
of 
website 
information 
such 
as 
the 
hierarchical structures, the usage data and the natures of the 
contents etc. The graphical display, which visually conveys a 
conceivable kind of relations among the data, helps the user 
to build a mental model about the websites. This mental 
model is supposedly more effective to be understood about 
the insights of the website, than the traditional lengthy 
reports and/or simple displays of tree structures like site-map.  
Tree layouts have a long history in visualizing websites 
as node-link diagrams. Nodes that represent webpages are 
directly linked with edges that represent the hyperlinks. Web 
structure visualization in form of tree layouts has been a 
popular application in evaluating web usability [1]. The tree 
graph visually displays the possible click-paths through 
which users can navigate along a website. Another 
application is to monitor the growth of a website, by visually 
checking over the document structure and the amount of the 
contents in a form of tree, ensuring that the growth in all 
directions is balanced. A balanced growth means information 
is evenly distributed across different sections and pages of 
the website for an all-rounded development. 
In the pioneer works [2], websites were commonly 
represented by Cone Tree and Kam Tree, in Figure 1 (a) and 
(b). Cone Tree has a root node placed at the apex of the cone 
dangling from it are the child nodes that lined up uniformly. 
Cone Trees usually are in 3D, so viewing the child nodes on 
the other side of the baseline requires spinning the tree like a 
carousal. It is difficult for the child nodes to be labeled in a 
Cone Tree. To overcome this difficulty Kam Trees were later 
invented where the root node is on the most left of the graph 
and the child nodes are stretching across to the right. 
Focus+context technique was proposed too for making use 
of inherent perspective projection in the 3D environment. 
Cone and Kam Trees are known to be ideal for visualizing 
some medium sized website of around 100 notes, with more 
of a focus view on a specific piece of information on the tree. 
Any detail of a tree can be faithfully displayed. They are 
however not suitable for visualizing an overall website 
structure because a compact and zoom-out view may be 
preferred over a potentially very large number of nodes of a 
website. 
 
 
(a) Cone Tree                            (b) Kam Tree 
 
 
(c) Hyperbolic Browsers 
Figure 1.  (a) Cone Tree - Courtesy of katsiafas.com; (b) Kam Tree – 
Courtesy of ifs.tuwien.ac.at; (c) Examples of Hyperbolic Browser [4] 
Hyperbolic Browser [3], in a nutshell, maps a tree 
structure of any size within a bounded circle so that the 
whole Euclidean plane can always be viewed entirely. In 
other words, a large number of nodes (hence a large website) 
can be represented in a single snapshot of hyperbolic display. 
Relational information among the nodes and links can be 
shown through coloring or label placement schemes. 
Hyperbolic Browser still is limited by space constraints. 
37
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

II. 
WEBSITE STRUCTURE AS RADIAL TREE PATTERN 
In this paper, we extended the hyperbolic tree 
representation into a radial tree pattern by adding in different 
colors and sizes of the tree nodes that cluster to a common 
parent node. The concept derives naturally from the 
hierarchy of a site-map where any parent node of the tree 
embraces a cluster of child nodes, and child nodes of the 
child nodes across several subordinate levels. All these nodes 
would be visualized collectively by the same color originated 
from the topmost parent node. In this case, colors represent 
different major categories of webpages in a website. This is 
important for website evaluation because the distribution of 
the colors indicates whether the major categories of website 
grow in balance or not. Furthermore, the sizes of the nodes 
symbolize the amounts of information carried by the 
corresponding web pages. The combination of colors and 
sizes allows a user to visually check if the website has any 
biased proportion of information (in terms of weights 
represented by sizes of nodes) and number of web pages (in 
terms of spread of colors represented by the numbers of the 
nodes). Any too heavily biased part of the website can be 
early identified and the development could be subsequently 
rectified. Moreover the same radial tree pattern can be used 
to show the popularity of each section or each page of the 
website, for the radial tree pattern essentially is representing 
the whole website structure. Popularity in the context of a 
website is expressed as the number of hits or page views on 
each page. Similar to the concept of heat map, hot spots of 
the website can be shown in different colors. When these two 
modes are used together, managers can evaluate how much 
resources are invested in various parts of the website 
contents and how well they are favored by frequent visits. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Radial Tree Patterns; Above – the pattern is showing the static 
structure of the website with different weights at each categories of pages; 
Below – the same pattern now uses coloring to show the popularity of each 
part of the website. 
This visualization scheme would be particularly useful 
for organization or a government that wants to evaluate a 
collection of their websites vis-à-vis. For example, an e-
government portal usually consists of many departmental 
websites, each of which operates as an individual site that 
has its own team to update the information and used by 
different segments of citizens. In this case, multiple websites 
could be monitored comparatively as a row of radial tree 
patterns. At one glance, the user can spot the strength or 
weakness of each site from observing over its structure and 
weights of contents, as well as popularity. If the patterns are 
collected over a long time, the growth of these websites can 
be longitudinally studied and visually compared too.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Visual comparison of Radial Tree Patterns of two websites; 
Left – The website of Education and Youth Affairs Bureau of Macao 
showing complex and large structure with six levels. It contains more than 
900 pages. The node color is indicating the page size. Most pages are in 
pink having little content.; Right – The website of Fundo de Segurança 
Social, Macau with simple and small structure having five levels. It 
contains nearly 100 pages. Few pages but heavy in contents. 
The Radial Tree Patterns are technically programmed in 
Java with a visualization toolkit called Prefuse. A prototype 
is implemented from our previous project WebVS [5]. 
III. 
WEBSITE VISITS AS FUZZY RULES PATTERN 
While Radial Tree Patterns are useful for illustrating the 
full view of a website and the information pertained at 
different parts of the website, they fall short in visualizing 
the association of parts of the websites being visited. This 
association is also known as clickstream in Web mining 
where a temporal sequence of visits over a series of 
webpages frequently occurred. Many research papers in the 
literature [6] have been focusing on this problem. 
Visualization of such associations is implemented here along 
with Radial Tree Patterns because dynamic usages of the 
website that are represented by web visits complement with 
the growth of website structures and contents as a holistic 
approach. Importantly, this holistic approach inspires website 
visualization to a higher level – collective and comparative 
visualization of websites as a forest of trees. Essentially the 
information from the growth of website structure and from 
the dynamic usages of the website serves as input values for 
modeling parameters of a forest of tree (FOT). A sample of 
the fuzzy association rules from WebVS is shown in Fig. 4. 
38
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

 
Figure 4.  Visualizaton of fuzzy association rules that illustrate which 
parts of the website are often visited together at different time periods. 
As a metaphor, the growth of a website structure is 
similar to the growth of a biological tree, that spans outwards 
of their branches and leaves. The longer the establishment of 
a website in history, the taller and bigger the representative 
tree is. Metaphorically speaking again, the dynamic usage of 
a website is analogous to its vital power that promotes the 
growth the website, hence its representative tree growth. This 
is based on the assumption that organizations or companies 
would only invest on the website expansion provided that the 
website maintains its popularity and thus its worthiness. And 
the investment is proportional to the rating of popularity of 
the website measured by hits and page views. Likewise, 
websites will be left dormant if few people are using them, 
so are their representative trees withering for a slow death. 
IV. 
FOREST OF TREES FOR WEBSITES COMPARISON 
Given the information from static website structures and 
dynamic usage, which in turn have already been visualized, 
an innovative modeling scheme of a forest of trees is 
proposed in this paper. The performance information from a 
website are mapped to the growth of a tree that represents the 
website. Table 1 below shows the basic parameters used in 
modeling FOT. The visualization program is custom 
developed by using Java and SExI-FS (Spatially Explicit 
Individual-based Forest Simulator, in full name) from World 
Agroforestry Center. 
TABLE I.  
MODELING PARAMETERS IN SEXI-FS 
SExI-FS parameters 
Mapping of web performance indices to the 
modeling parameters 
DBH (Diameter at 
Breast Height) 
Height = Age (history of website in years) 
DBH = Logarithmic function of (general 
performance of the website as measured by users 
feedback/satisfaction, and/or web visits) 
Crown Porosity 
Amount of information on the website 
Survival Probability 
Growth = DBH performance. If growth = 0 or 
below a threshold, survival probability = 
sustainability of cost for maintaining the website 
Mortality Modifier 
Economic factors that affect the web operations 
Secondary Mortality 
Probability 
Political factors that affect the growth of the 
websites 
Light Sensitivity 
Minimum Light Level: The min level for a tree 
so that the tree can be grown -default 0.15 
Imperata 
Competition Factor 
Dynamic usage of the websites in relation to the 
rival websites 
The modeling of the FOT is geographically based, where 
one tree and its position represent a particular website 
respectively and the trees are established over different 
countries or regions. The prime usefulness of visualizing a 
FOT is for comparing websites of different regions in the 
perception of different trees in a forest. Tall and strong trees 
symbolize prosperous websites that are developing well as 
shown by their well appearance, and they are receiving 
abundant nutrients for growth by the high usage of the users. 
For an example of comparing e-Government websites 
over an Asia-Pacific region, as shown in Figure 5, the 
representative trees are growing at their respective countries 
and they take different shapes and sizes. Some e-
Government websites, as presented by their trees are tall 
(because of long history) but relatively thin in the branches 
and leaves. That means these websites though have a long 
history of establishment, their service functions and contents 
are relatively sparse, which is typical for developing 
countries. In contrast, some modern cities have their e-
Government websites represented by sturdy tree with lush 
leaves – they are the websites with good functionalities, rich 
information and popularly used by their citizens. 
The FOT is still in progress of being developed, as many 
technical challenges still imposed. They are basically the 
detailed mapping of the performance variables from the 
dynamic usage and association rules of the website. In an 
abstract level, mapping the structure and simple well-being 
variable of a tree from the Radial Tree Pattern to a cone tree 
in FOT is straightforward. However, when the whole 
modeling is put to function as an ecosystem, many 
dependent variables exist and they need to be precisely 
calculated and mapped from the detailed operational 
variables (KPI’s) of a website. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Website visualization has long been studied by 
researchers via a variety of visualization models from 3D to 
hyperbolic browsers. The purpose of website visualization 
traditionally is limited to allow interactive inspection of 
navigation paths of the site as represented by nodes and links 
in the graph. In this paper we proposed a new model that 
serves slightly different purposes for website visualization. 
Radial Tree Patterns were used to show the integrity of the 
website structures, as well as the popular spots of the website 
by allowing users to visualize the nodes in different colors 
and sizes. While colors represent homogeneity of categories 
of web pages, size of the nodes reveal how much contents 
there are in the webpages. The extent of the balanced growth 
of a website can be observed from the tree pattern, as well as 
the distribution of popularity received by the web visitors.  
Instead of visualizing a website individually, a novel 
simulation model is proposed and formulated for comparing 
multiple websites as a forest; each tree represents a website 
in a specific region. The trees of the forest are visually 
compared in terms of their appearances which are derived 
from performance variables. For future work, we will fine-
tune the mappings of the variables from individual trees to 
FOTs. The forest will be simulated as an ecosystem that 
depicts competitions and dependencies among the websites. 
39
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

REFERENCES 
[1] Chi Ed., Pirolli P., and Pitkow J., "The Scent of a Site: A 
System for Analyzing and Predicting Information Scent, 
Usage, and Usability of a Web Site", Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
volume 2, Issue 1, April 2000, pp. 161-168. 
[2] Robertson G.G., Card S.K., and Mackinlay J.D., "Information 
Visualization Using 3D Interactive Animation", Comm. ACM, 
vol. 36, no. 4, 1993, pp. 57-71. 
[3] Lamping J. and Rao R., "Laying Out and Visualizing Large 
Trees Using a Hyperbolic Space", Proc. 7th Symp. User 
Interface Software and Technology (UIST 94), ACM Press, 
New York, 1994. 
[4] Neumann P., "Focus+Context Visualization of Relations in 
Hierarchical Data", Diplom Thesis, Faculty of Computer 
Science, Universität Magdeburg, Germany, September 6, 
2004, pp. 25. 
[5] Ho S.M. and Fong S., "Visualizing e-Government Portal and 
Its Performance in WEBVS", The 5th International 
Conference on Digital Information Management (ICDIM 
2010), July 2010, Thunder Bay, Canada, pp. 315-320. 
[6] Baldini P. and Giudici P., "Improving Web Clickstream 
Analysis: Markov Chains Models and Genmax Algorithms", 
Mathematical Methods for Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, IGI, 2008, pp. 233-243. 
 
Figure 5.  An example of the Forest of Tree visualized by SExI-FS. The graphic shows different e-Government websites are visualized as trees with 
different shapes and sizes.  
 
Figure 6.  Top down view of the Forest of Trees, where the crown of the tree represents the population of the users the website is supposed to serve.  
 
Figure 7.  Side view of the Forest of Trees, where the height of the tree trunk represents the age of the website, the sizes of the branches denote the number 
of services or website categories are available and the density of the leaves represents the amount of information on those webpages.  
40
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

