A Pattern Collection for Privacy Enhancing Technology 
Cornelia Graf1, Peter Wolkerstorfer1, Arjan Geven1, Manfred Tscheligi1,2
(1) CURE 
Center for Usability Research & Engineering 
 Modecenterstraße 17 / 2  
1110 Vienna 
+43.1.743 54 51 
{last name}@cure.at  
(2) ICT&S Center 
University of Salzburg 
Sigmund-Haffner Gasse 18  
5020 Salzburg 
+43.662.8044.4811 
manfred.tscheligi@sbg.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract— Patterns are a useful approach to describe, organize 
and present solutions and best practices for design problems. 
Although much work can be found concerning either patterns 
or privacy, work focusing on patterns for Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies (PET) is very rare. This paper describes the 
development of User Interfaces Patterns for PET and the 
benefit of using them. We used different proven approaches 
and guidelines and merged them for creating efficient and 
useable patterns for PETs. Anyhow, some of our patterns were 
not tested much with end-users, so further tests will be 
necessary to prove worth of the patterns. Nevertheless we 
maintain that our patterns will support the development of 
PET UIs. In this paper, we provide a short overview of the 
whole pattern collection and present two patterns in detail. 
Keywords- patterns; privacy; user interfaces desing; privacy 
enhancing technologies; pattern development; pattern approach. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Patterns provide solutions that have been successfully 
used for many years for specific problems. This paper 
describes the development of patterns for different User 
Interfaces (UI) for PETs and presents two of them more 
detailed. In current literature, patterns for PETs are very rare; 
approaches concerning patterns for privacy enhancing 
technologies are presented by [6], [10], [15], [16], [17] and 
[18].  
The usage of PETs for privacy protection is a very 
important aspect for users’ online life. Therefore, the lack of 
patterns concerning UIs for PETs is a big deficiency, for 
developers and designers as well as end-users. To help 
designers and programmers when dealing with the creation 
of UIs for privacy enhancing technologies we developed 
twelve patterns for PETs.  
In the following Section, we will give an overview about 
the current research in the field of privacy patterns. Section 
III presents the development of our patterns approach and 
gives an overview of the PET patterns. In Section IV, we 
describe two of them in detail. In the last Section, we will 
discuss our approaches and give an overview about our 
future research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In literature, much work can be found concerning either 
privacy or patterns but our literature research showed a lack 
of work concerning patterns for PETs. 
Goldberg [3], [4] and Goldberg et al. [5] presented an 
overview about currently existing privacy enhancing 
technologies and gave an outlook of future PETs. 
Schumacher [17] presented two patterns, one deals with 
protection against cookies and the other one with 
pseudonymous mailing. 
Schümmer [18] pointed out another privacy pattern 
approach, which covers the filtering of personal information 
in collaborative systems. These patterns address how to 
protect personal data from transmission to others and how to 
filter information received from others.  
Other research concentrated on privacy protection and 
anonymity. Hafiz [6] presented a collection of privacy design 
patterns, which addresses anonymity solutions for various 
domains. Romanosky [15] developed three patterns, which 
describe how users can protect their privacy in web-based 
activities. 
Another topic concerns patterns, which are related to 
privacy policies. Sadicoff [16] introduced a pattern 
especially for affording user awareness for privacy policies 
of network sites. The approach of Lobato [10] dealt with the 
development of user-friendly privacy policies. 
In this paper, we present some patterns we created to 
support designers and developers when working on the 
development of UIs for PETs.  
III. 
PET PATTERNS 
Since the observing of privacy should be one main goal 
in users’ online behavior, it is necessary to provide PETs for 
supporting them. Our current work deals with the 
development of different user interfaces for privacy 
enhancing technologies. As patterns provide useful and 
proven approaches for design problems we decided to use 
them for the development of our PET UIs. However, while 
we looked for patterns and proven approaches we concluded 
that only few patterns for privacy enhancing technologies are 
available and that they were not adaptive for our 
requirements. Hence, we decided to work not only on UIs for 
PETs but furthermore on development of patterns for 
assisting future PET developers.  
The main requirement was to develop PET-UIs, which 
present 
the 
complex 
techniques 
of 
PETs 
in 
an 
understandable way to end-users. Another important 
requirement was to support users to protect their privacy in 
an active way. To achieve this we worked on solutions to 
72
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

make users aware of privacy related topics in web, like 
private data are requested, and so on. The online life of users 
can include many different use-cases of the Web; to cover all 
this use-cases with PETs it was necessary to develop several 
patterns for different tasks, i.e., support when creating a 
password, displaying if the privacy policy of a website 
matches with the preferred privacy settings and so on. 
Furthermore, we developed basic approaches for supporting 
users’ privacy-behavior in the Web in privacy related way, 
i.e., information about visible private data in collaborative 
workspaces.  
Our pattern approach should support the usage of best 
practice solutions for defined PET problems. Furthermore, 
they shall assist designers and developers as a guideline 
when creating UIs. This shall guarantee usable and 
consistent UIs in PET software. It should also enable 
capturing sharing and structuring of PET development 
knowledge inside the project team. 
A. Pattern Development 
Since we did not find feasible patterns for the needs of 
our UIs, we developed patterns by ourselves. A crucial factor 
when developing patterns is that each pattern must be 
consistent with the other patterns. The reason for this need 
for consistency is that a pattern describes not only a solution 
for a special problem but furthermore a solution for a special 
problem in a domain [8]. This means all patterns must veer 
toward the same purpose; - in our case, all patterns have to 
support the creation of user interfaces for PETs. 
Additionally, patterns are not allowed to contradict other 
patterns in the same domain. To create patterns, which 
complement one another in a meaningful way, we created 
our patterns during an iterative design process, which starts 
with the definition of the problem each pattern shall solve.  
As a next step, we looked for approaches in literature and 
if guidelines on how to handle this problem already exist. 
We also integrated the knowledge, the experience and results 
which we gather in a predecessor project into the PET 
Patterns (e.g., [12]). This knowledge contains e.g., the 
observation that users try to get rid of intrusive privacy 
warnings by changing to more “generous” privacy 
preference settings.  
Another point of interest were different guidelines of the 
European Union (EU) which describe privacy related 
concerns or approaches for supporting user perception of 
information ([2] e.g., Art. 25, Art. 7a, Art. 29 “Working 
Party”) – these guidelines are commonly known as 
“European Data Protection Directive (DPD)”. 
Finally yet importantly, we looked for already proven 
approaches for our defined problems and adapted or merged 
them to create useable solutions. The most important 
approaches for the development of our patterns were: 
 
- The multi-layered presentation approach, which is 
presented in Art. 29 Working Party [2]. This article 
recommends providing information in a multi-layered 
format under which each layer should offer 
individuals the information needed to understand their 
position and make decisions.  
- Dynamic tooltips, which are based on the idea of 
motion design [7]. In motion design motion graphic 
are used for supporting the interactive system.  
- An adaption of the “nutrition label for privacy” 
presented by Kelley [9]. Kelley adapted the nutrition 
label from the food domain and used it for displaying 
privacy policies to user.  
- In addition, we also applied to the approach of Patrick 
[11], which lists four categories of human factors 
requirements for privacy interface design. 
 
During the development, we combine guidelines and 
already proven approaches from the HCI. This grants already 
proven methods for the presented PET patterns.  
For example, we used the multi-layered presentation 
approach and merged it with dynamic tooltips to inform 
users that private information is required. The “Dynamic 
Privacy Policy Display” which bases on this approach will 
be presented in Subsection IV.A.  
Furthermore, we customized the “nutrition label for 
privacy” for a policy matching display. This display shall 
show users if and how much their preferred privacy settings 
matches with the policy of a website.  
Experts first evaluated the outcomes of this merging 
through heuristic evaluation methods. Within this evaluation, 
they reviewed the outcomes based on classical usability 
principles. If this expert based analysis supports the design of 
the patterns we started with the next step – the end-user 
testing, otherwise we reworked the patterns. The goal of the 
end-user testing is, to look if the presented UI solutions of 
our patterns are understandable for end-users.  
The end-user testing was done in several steps. If any 
problems were uncovered, we adjusted the pattern. This end-
user testing is not completed yet, it will be continued in the 
further design of the patterns.  
The goal of the patterns is to present complex technical 
PET mechanisms in an understandable way for users. The 
patterns will help designers and developers to create usable 
and supportive interfaces for PETs. For better usability of the 
patterns for designers and programmers we grouped the 
patterns, this shall provide a more efficient search for 
patterns for a special problem.  
We classified our patterns through affinity diagramming 
[1] to grant designers and developers an efficient way to look 
through the patterns for solutions for PET concerning 
problems. The idea of grouping patterns can be also found at 
e.g., Welie [20] and Tidwell [19]. 
We didn’t have categories in the beginning of the affinity 
diagramming; instead we analyzed the content and theme of 
each pattern and put related/similar patterns next to each 
other. In the end, we get three groups, which we named after 
the topic the patterns addresses.  
 
Group 1: 
“PET Interaction” contains patterns, which 
are related to workflows and interaction paradigms.  
Group 2: 
“PET patterns for privacy 
policies” 
includes patterns concerning the displaying of 
privacy policies.  
73
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

Group 3: 
 “PET Visualization” is related to the 
depiction of privacy information and to icons, 
which shall support a better visualization.  
B. Patterns Structure 
We based our patterns on the structure used by Welie 
[20] and extended it by a star rating, which illustrates the 
number of end-user testing we did with the pattern. Each 
Pattern consists of the following elements: 
 
Title: The Name of the Pattern 
Rating: A 0 to 5 star rating. It shows how much end-user 
tests were done.  
- 
Zero stars mean that there weren’t any end-user 
tests done with it. 
- 
One star mean that low level HCI knowledge is 
included (in form of usability principles) 
- 
Two stars mean that at least the user-feedback of 
two users was integrated. 
- 
Three stars mean that more than two preliminary 
user evaluations have been done. 
- 
Four stars means that a pattern is in a draft state 
and only misses a final iteration round. 
In Section IV, we will present two patterns with 4-
stars rating. 
- 
Five stars mean that much end-user testing was 
done and the results prove the content of the 
pattern; such patterns can be seen as final. 
Problem: Summarizes and outlines the existing problem.  
Solution: Brief description of the solution. 
Use when: This group outlines the situation the pattern is 
best applied in.  
How: More detailed insight into the solution 
Why: Presents why the solution is needed and how to the 
user benefits from it. 
Related Patterns: Refers to other patterns similar to the 
presented one. 
 
From our point of view, this structure displays patterns in 
a plain way even for persons who never worked with 
patterns before and the appending of the star rating provides 
a first glance impression of how much end-user testing was 
done.  
C. Overview of PET-Patterns 
We developed twelve patterns for PET. Although all 
patterns are related to privacy, they can be clustered into 
different subgroups as described above.  
In the following, we will give an overview of the three 
groups and the patterns related to them.  
 
1) PET Intercation 
The patterns in this group are related to workflows and 
interaction paradigms in PETs. This group has to offer 
elements, which can and shall be used in PETs to inform 
user about different topics concerning the approval of his 
data in the web. Patterns for following topics are attributed to 
PET Interactions:  
a) Secure Passwords (****) 
Secure passwords are a main concern for personal 
privacy protection.  
This approach should help users to create and choose 
secure passwords by giving appropriate and dynamic 
feedback.  
b) Informed Consent (****) 
Users should fully understand what will happen if they 
release personal data in the web.  
This UI solution should be used every time when the user 
needs to disclose personal data.  
c) Privacy Aware Wording ( ) 
Users shall clearly understand the content and the terms 
of privacy policies. This approach should be used every time 
when a privacy policy will be displayed to a user. 
d) Credential Selection (**) 
This pattern should be used to make it easy for a user to 
select the appropriate credential and to inform him which 
data will the recipient have after the transmission.  
 
2) PET Patterns for Privacy Policies 
The patterns in this group are related to workflows and 
interaction paradigms in PETs. This group has to offer 
elements, which can and shall be used in PETs to inform 
user about different topics concerning the approval of his 
data in the web.  
Following patterns can be found in this group: 
a) Privacy Policy Display (***) 
The goal of this display is to provide the user information 
about why what information by whom is requested.  
It should be used whenever personal data are required 
from the user.  
b) Dynamic Privacy Policy Display (****) 
This pattern is presented in Section IV.  
Display a tooltip to the user when his attention is 
required for privacy matters, e.g., person data are requested 
by a website.  
c) Policy Matching Display (**) 
Provide the user a possibility to compare each privacy 
policy with his preferred privacy settings. This approach 
should be used when a user contacts a service side or when 
the entry of personal data is required.  
 
3) PET Visualization 
PET Visualization offers suggestions on how to display 
privacy-related topics like “who sees which data” to the user. 
The patterns in this group shall help designers to present 
this “who sees which data”-topic in an understandable way 
to users. 
This group contains following patterns:  
a) Privacy Icons (*) 
Icons are able to speak for themselves, so icons are a 
great solution to aid written text. These icons should be used 
74
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

for PET software to support the user when he reads privacy 
information.  
b) Icons for Privacy Policies ( ) 
Icons are able to speak for themselves, so icons are a 
great solution to support a user when he reads a privacy 
policy. These icons should be used together with privacy 
policies. 
c) Privacy 
Awareness 
Panel 
in 
Collaborative 
Workspace (****) 
This pattern is presented in Section IV.  
The developed privacy panel shall users make aware of 
data (like IP or location) which are visible to others in a 
collaborative workspace. It should be used by collaborative 
workspace providers to help user protecting their privacy. 
 
In the previous Section, we presented our patterns 
collection. The offered patterns cover various aspects of 
users’ life. Through expert evaluation and previously done 
end-user tests, the patterns prove their worth for PET 
development. Furthermore, the multi-stage user tests showed 
that our solutions are understood by end-users. Therefore, we 
were able to fulfill our main requirement, an understandable 
presentation of the complex techniques of PETs to end-users. 
The second requirement was making users aware of privacy 
related topics. This requirement is integrated in different 
patterns, like “Secure Password” or “Policy Matching 
Display”.  
IV. 
PRESENTATION OF SELECTED PATTERNS 
In the following Section, we will explain two selected 
patterns. First the “Dynamic Privacy Policy Display”, which 
shall attract users’ attention when needed, e.g., when private 
data are required; the second deals with an information panel 
for private data displaying in collaborative workspaces, it is 
called 
“Privacy 
Awareness 
Panel 
in 
Collaborative 
Workspaces”.  
We decided to present these two patterns because both 
are currently rated with four stars. This means that the 
patterns are still in draft state but only the final iteration 
round with end-users is missing. We think that these two 
patterns are good examples for the PET-Patterns we 
developed.  
The presented patterns shall support user when login, 
reading and working on the web.  
In accordance with Article 25 EU Directive 95/46/EC [2] 
individuals need to be informed about which of their data are 
processed, who is processing them and why. Therefore, it is 
necessary to inform users in an understandable way about 
what happened to their data and suggest possible 
consequences to them.  
A. Dynamic Privacy Policy Display (****) 
Problem 
Users need to be well informed about possible 
consequences when releasing personal data upon certain 
actions such as login, registration, payments, etc. Art. 25 
requires that data subjects are at least informed about what 
personal data are processed, by whom (i.e., the identity of the 
controller), and for what purposes [2].  
Solution 
The multi-layered presentation approach by the Article 
29 Working Party [2] can be implemented by dynamical 
information “tooltips” informing the user about the nature of 
the data disclosed and possible consequences. The dynamic 
information need to be adapted to the context of the website 
it is used in. It should only include relevant security and 
privacy information and have a unique standard layout 
making it easy to recognize.  
Figure 1: Prototype for Dynamic Display of Information 
 
Figure 1 shows a prototype for dynamic display of 
information. When the mouse is moved nearby the interface, 
the privacy disclaimer in the top appears on the login-
interface. This prototype was used for usability tests in 
Austria. To reduce the bias of the language it was designed 
in German. 
Use when 
Dynamic privacy policy displays can be applied to small 
interfaces (e.g., login) or when the credential selection 
contains information that needs the user's attention.  
How 
The information should be provided to the user where it 
is needed. Therefore the tooltip should appear on demand 
(i.e., need of information). This could be for example in a 
login dialog as soon as the user navigates the mouse into the 
concerning part of the interface (cf. Figure 1). The tooltip 
should then be made visible to the user and contain all 
necessary information for making an informed decision.  
Why 
Because of peripheral viewing, the user is able to 
recognize visual change (i.e., motion) even when on the 
border of the field of view. The user will recognize each 
visual change and might automatically connect it to danger. 
Hence, he will immediately notice the visual change and 
direct the attention to it. Using this approach, it is 
increasingly unlikely that the user might oversee the privacy 
indications.  
75
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

Motion design is a known research area in the field of 
usability; thereby motion graphics are used as functional 
elements in interactive systems. According to Jacob [7], it 
decreases the cognitive load and creates user inputs – but 
only when applied correctly. Tooltips instead of pop-ups 
create a sense of seriousness (e.g., windows tooltips), 
whereas pop-ups are nowadays connected with error 
messages or unwanted advertisements. The physical 
connection between the tooltip and the Login dialog displays 
a certain attachment (i.e., that the tooltip is connected to the 
login dialog).  
Research we did on the displaying of privacy preferences 
has shown that users recognize dynamic privacy policy 
display interfaces much better than static privacy policy 
displays. So 100% of our participants indicated to having 
recognized the dynamic box (visible in Figure 1), on the 
other hand, only 43% noticed a static display.  
Related Patterns 
- 
Privacy Policy Display 
 
B. Privacy Awareness Panel in Collaborative Workspaces 
(****) 
Problem 
The problem with users’ awareness for privacy in 
collaborative workspaces, e.g., forums or wikis, is twofold. 
First, the users can contribute under self-chosen nicknames 
instead of using their real names, which leads to a higher 
perceived anonymity of the users. However, providers of 
collaborative workspaces have more information about a 
user’s real identity (e.g., IP address). Secondly, in 
collaborative workspaces, users disclose information – 
personal and non-personal – to an unknown audience. They 
have no idea how many and what kind of people can access 
their contributions. Both harm the person’s privacy, even if 
the person is unaware of this. 
Solution 
In a so-called privacy-awareness panel, the audience is 
made transparent to the user, i.e., who can access his/her 
contribution (all internet users, registered users …). It is also 
pointed out that providers have additional information about 
the user. Hence, the privacy-awareness panel helps users to 
better understand their level of anonymity and private sphere 
within the collaborative workspace and based on this they 
can make better-informed decisions whether they want to 
disclose personal information in their contributions.  
Use when 
The approach should be used with every collaborative 
workspace.  
How 
First, it should be made clear to users which persons will 
be able to access their contributions. Second, users should 
know that providers get additional information about them 
for instance their IP addresses, browser versions, location 
information etc. and thus that they are not completely 
anonymous in the forum, wiki or other collaborative 
workspaces. 
Further information about the Privacy Awareness Panel 
can be found in Poetzsch et al. [13]. 
Why 
To allow users to make better informed decision whether 
they want to disclose personal data in their contributions to 
collaborative workspaces.  
Related Patterns 
- 
Privacy Options in Social Networks  
- 
Selective Access Control in Forum Software  
- 
Privacy Enhanced Group Scheduling 
 
In the preceding Section, we presented two selected PET 
patterns from our collection. 
The first presented pattern should be used every time 
when it is necessary to catch user’s attention, e.g., when a 
user might oversee the privacy indications.  
The second one, the privacy awareness panel, should be 
applied in every collaborative workspace to inform users 
which of their private data are visible to whom e.g., the 
provider.  
Through implementation of these approaches, users will 
be better informed about what will happen to their private 
data and therefore be able to make informed decisions when 
dealing with their private data in web.  
We advise that these approaches should be used every 
time to support users in making privacy aware decisions, 
although the patterns misses the final iteration round they 
prove their value during tests with end-users.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented the development of UI 
patterns for privacy enhancing technologies. Furthermore, 
we have given an overview of the developed PET patterns 
and presented two of them in detail.  
All the patterns in our collection have the same goal, 
helping designers and developers of PETs creating useable 
and understandable interfaces for end-users.  
The merging of best practice solutions from HCI and 
different guidelines permitted us creating patterns for PETs 
with already proven solutions. Furthermore, the iterative 
development approves permanently improvements of the 
patterns. In a first step, experts evaluated each pattern and 
detected usability problems were remodeled. 
Through end-user tests, we are able to identify user’s 
problems of the different patterns and can therefore fix the 
uncovered usability problems in further version of the 
pattern. Furthermore, the patterns were rated with a star 
rating, which shows how much end-user testing has been 
done with each pattern. End-user testing has already been 
carried out with most of the pattern; only two have not yet 
been evaluated with end users. Four patterns are currently 
rated with four stars, so there is just the final iteration 
missing. However, for all patterns of our collection further 
user evaluations will be necessary.  
76
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

Yet, results of end-user tests we made till now showed 
that we are able to fulfill our main requirement, the 
development of an understandable presentation of PETs for 
end-users. Anyhow, we maintain that the usage of our 
pattern collection for development of UIs for PETs will 
support users when dealing with private data in the web.  
Future research will contain further usability testing of 
our presented patterns and based on the results of the tests a 
reworking and expansion of the UIs and patterns will be 
needed. The knowledge we gather from these evaluations 
will be continuously integrated into our existing patterns but 
it will also be necessary to create new patterns for new 
requirements.  
The complete pattern collection can be found at [14]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to our PrimeLife partners for support, help and 
input while creating the patterns. 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Community's Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n° 
216483. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Beyer. and K. Holtzblatt, “Contextual design: Defining customer-
centered systems”. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998. 
[2] European Parliament, “Directive 95/46/EC of the European 
Parliament” , 1995. available at: http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31995L0046:
EN:HTML; Last accessed : 2010-08-09 
[3] I. Goldberg. “Privacy-enhancing Technologies for the Internet, II: 
Five Years Later”. In Workshop on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 
2002, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2482, pp. 1–12. 
[4] I. Goldberg, “Privacy Enhancing Technologies for the Internet III: 
Ten Years Later”. In Acquisti A., Gritzalis S., Lambrinoudakis C., di 
Vimercati S. D. C. (eds.) Digital Privacy: Theory, Technologies, and 
Practices, Chapter 1. Auerbach, 2007. 
[5] I. Goldberg, D. Wagner, and E. A. Brewer, “Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies for the Internet”. In COMPCON '97, pp. 103–109, 
February 1997. 
[6] M. Hafiz, “A collection of privacy design patterns”. In Proc.of the 
2006 Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs. PLoP '06. pp. 1-
13.  
[7] F. Jacob, “Ästhetik und UX: Das Potential von Serious Motion 
Graphics“, Xtopia 2008. 
[8] D. Khazanchi, J.Murphy, and S. Petter , “Guidelines for evaluating 
patterns in the IS domain”. MWAIS 2008 Proc., Paper 24. 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/mwais2008/24; Last accessed : 2010-08-09  
[9] P. G. Kelley, J. Bresee, L. F. Cranorand and R.W. Reeder, “A 
"nutrition label" for privacy”. In Proc.of the 5th Symposium on 
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS '09). pp. 1-12.  
[10] L. L. Lobato and E. B. Fernandez, “Patterns to Support the 
Development of Privacy Policies”. First International Workshop on 
Organizational Security Aspects 2009 , pp.744-749 
[11] A.S. Patrick and S. Kenny, “From Privacy Legislation to Interface 
Design: Implementing Information Privacy in Human-Computer 
Interaction”. Privacy Enhancing Technologies Workshop (PET 2003), 
Dresden/Germany, 2003, pp 107-124.  
[12] J.S. Pettersson, S. Fischer-Hübner, N. Danielsson, J. Nilsson, M. 
Bergmann, S. Clauß, Th. Kriegelstein, and H. Krasemann, “Making 
PRIME usable”. In Proc. of the 2005 Symposium on Usable Privacy 
and Security (SOUPS '05), vol. 93. pp. 53-64.  
[13] S. Pötzsch, P.Wolkerstorfer and C. Graf. Privacy-Awareness 
Information for Web Forums: Results from an Empirical Study. 
NordiCHI 2010, 16.–20. October 2010, Reykjavik. 
[14] PrimeLife Project, http://www.primelife.eu; Last accessed : 2010-08-
09 
[15] S. Romanosky, A. Acquisti, J. Hong, L. F. Cranor, and B. Friedman, 
“Privacy patterns for online interactions”. In Proc.of the 2006 
Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs (PLoP '06). pp. 1-9.  
[16] M. Sadicoff , M.M. Larrando-Petrie, and E.B. Fernandez, “Privacy 
aware network-client pattern”. In Proc. of the 12th Conference on 
Patterns Language of Programming (PLoP’05), 2005. Available at: 
http://hillside.net/plop/2005/proceedings/PLoP2005_msadicoff0_0.pd
f. Last accessed: 2010-08-09 
[17] M. Schumacher, “Security patterns and security standards - with 
selected security patterns for anonymity and privacy”. In Proc. of the 
European Conference on Patterns Language of Programming 
(EuroPLoP'02), 2002. 
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/schumacher03security.html. Last accessed : 
2010-08-09 
[18] T. Schümmer, "The Public Privacy -- Patterns for Filtering Personal 
Information in Collaborative Systems," In Proc. of the Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘04) 2004. Available at: 
http://www.pi6.fernuni-hagen.de/publ/CHI2004.pdf; Last accessed: 
2010-08-09 
[19] J. Tidwell, “Designing interfaces.” - Sebastopol, Calif. [u.a.] : 
O'Reilly 2005. 
[20] M.v. Welie, “Patterns in Interaction Design”. Available at: 
http://www.welie.com/patterns/index.php; Last accessed : 2010-08-09 
 
77
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

