Using Patterns to Guide Teachers and Teaching Materials Evolution 
!
!
George Moroni Teixeira Batista, Mayu Urata, Mamoru 
Endo and Takami Yasuda 
Graduate School of Information Science 
Nagoya University 
Nagoya, Japan 
tenno.kun@gmail.com 
mayu@gsid.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
endo@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
yasuda@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
!
Katsuhiro Mouri 
Astronomy Section 
Nagoya City Science Museum 
Nagoya, Japan 
mouri@nagoya-p.jp 
!!
Abstract - Computer-novice teachers can face various problems 
when using e-Learning systems. Computers and the internet 
are a vital part of our lives nowadays, and teachers cannot 
avoid using this kind of technology in reaching their students. 
The problem became more interesting when we try to find 
how can the teachers that have little experience with 
computers be helped to handle this technology? Usually 
institutions that have e-Learning platforms have separated 
technical group to operate the technology, however it takes too 
much time for the contents to be updated, and the students that 
really needed the updates may never see it. The employment of 
utilisation patterns can help teachers learn from the teaching 
experiences of their colleagues that have more experience with 
computer as they use the system, allowing them to evolve and 
become better professionals by learning, for example, how 
their colleagues are overcoming device or system interface 
barriers. The implementation of a system that allows the 
teachers themselves create and update content in real-time, 
allowed the teachers to adjust teaching materials which were 
out of context for the students, making them easier to 
understand in time for the students that really needed. 
Keywords-e-Learning; teaching; materials; evolution; 
pattern. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This research background began with the ELO (Escola de 
Línguas Online) project. The project was started in August 
2007 by three undergraduate students from the Department 
of Foreign Languages and Translation of Brasilia University 
in Brazil. As stated by Boggs and Jones [1], "the Internet is a 
professional development tool for teachers", and they should 
take advantage of what this kind of technology has to offer. 
Following this idea, the objective of the project was to create 
an online platform for the Japanese language course to allow 
the students to interact, do activities online and review the 
content of the face-to-face lessons. After approximately six 
months the project was accepted by the University and 
became an official University project with the support of the 
Department’s teachers. Afterwards, the other languages 
taught in the department were incorporated into the project: a 
total of seven languages, Japanese, English, Spanish, 
Portuguese, French, German and Italian. The development 
team had eight members, there were twenty-five teachers 
with the help of two tutors each in a total of fifty-five 
lectures, and there were more than four thousand users. 
Standard CMS (Content Management System) software 
like Moodle were used at the beginning of the project, but 
there were several problems, especially with the content 
editing interface. Another problem faced by teachers was the 
fact that they could not update or make versions of the 
teaching materials to make them more suitable for the 
requirements of their real classes. To solve these problems, 
an original system was created using the Adobe Flex 
framework for the content navigation and edition. The 
system allows the teachers to edit the content in a 
WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) interface in 
real-time, create versions, and share and manage teaching 
materials. 
In the current stage of the research, we are also focusing 
on the possibility of using the system in different fields of 
study. To achieve this, we began working with the Nagoya 
City Science Museum in Japan. The Museum produces many 
kinds of content for visitors, for the Museum website, and for 
journals and magazines. Because of the great variety of the 
Museum’s public, it also needs a system to create and 
manage the different versions of the content, as stated by 
Iwazaki et al [2]; also, having a different theme every month, 
the Museum needs to create different versions of the contents 
to match the different themes and guide each type of visitor 
to the right place. This makes the Museum a good 
environment in which to test and evaluate the system content 
management features. 
Until now the research focused on the creation of the 
editing interface and the database to store and manage the 
versions of the teaching materials. However, since many 
teachers were using computers for the first time, or had very 
little experience, those features were not enough to help them 
learn how to handle the technology. Therefore, to achieve 
that goal, we are now focusing on the creation of utilisation 
patterns that the users can use as guidelines to help them to 
learn about the system features, gain editing skills, and make 
decisions to solve problems based on the experience of other 
users, helping them to become better teaching professionals. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

This paper is divided in six sections, this section is the  
Section 1, the introduction. In Section 2, there will be the 
description of the research objectives. In Section 3, the 
system concept will be explained. The Section 4 describes 
examples of teaching materials evolution patterns, and how 
the users can use them to learn more about the system. The 
Section 5 is about the evaluation tests and its results. Finally, 
in the Section 6, the conclusion about the current stage of the 
research and what is expected to be done from now is 
discussed. 
II. OBJECTIVE 
The research objective is to define patterns of utilisation 
that allows users to improve their abilities by observing other 
users’ experiences; the other users’ experiences can be 
observed through the visualisation of content evolution 
patterns stored in the system database. As stated by Aral [3], 
"social influence as part of a dynamic system in which a 
variety of feedback loops continuously affects behaviour in a 
constantly evolving fashion". Other users’ feedback can 
allow the users to become better professionals as they apply 
what they get from that feedback to their work. 
In this research, we created a DTMS (Dynamic Teaching 
Materials System). The system can be used to create teaching 
materials that can be edited in real-time even during the 
classes. This allows the users to easily apply the necessary 
updates to the contents as soon as they receive feedback or 
realise something from their own experience. All the updates 
and versions of the contents are stored in the database, as 
well as the contents’ evolution patterns, and they can be 
accessed and used by other users. 
III. SYSTEM CONCEPT 
In the beginning of the project, we tried using standard 
CMS software, like Moodle [4], Joomla [5], eFront [6] and 
Dokeos [7]. They were good for managing course access and 
user accounts, but the interface was too complicated for most 
of the users to create content or even to navigate. Since many 
of the teachers were using computers for the first time, or 
had too little experience, this kind of problem was 
unavoidable. Additionally, it was also observed that, as stated 
by Jones and Lynch [8], "web-based systems need to be 
adapted and evolve following an educational context that is 
continually changing”; teaching materials need to be updated 
continuously, to prevent them from became outdated for the 
new students every semester, but this was very difficult as 
the teachers could not perform the updates by themselves 
because of the interface; or, as in the case of interactive 
content, they needed to know some programming language 
to make the necessary changes. 
The teachers needed at least four features: a WYSIWYG 
interface that could create interactive and multimedia 
content, real-time editing to allow the updates to reach the 
students who really needed them, content version 
management for the different types of classes and students, 
and all the necessary functions to edit and manage the 
content in one screen, because teachers do not have time to 
spend navigating through the platform during class. We 
could not find a standard CMS that had all the required 
features at the same time, and the feature of editing the 
content in the same screen in which the content is being 
visualised was not to be found in any of the CMS we tested. 
Additionally, as stated by Alexander [9], the fact of teachers 
cannot handle new technologies can become a great barrier 
in the development of e-Learning projects. Further as stated 
by Roberts, Romm and Jones [10], nowadays technologies 
like computers are a basic part of students daily life, and 
teachers should be able to handle them; however, since it is 
not their speciality, we had to find a way to help teachers to 
learn how to handle the technology. 
To solve the problems we propose an original system for 
the content edition and version management, the DTMS. As 
stated by Gillani [11], since language teachers are not 
information technology specialists, the editing interface 
needed to be very simple, allowing the users to do almost 
everything with just the mouse, or even to create, interactive 
content without programming languages; the simplicity of 
the new editing interface allows the users to make updates in 
real-time, in the same screen they use to show the content to 
students; no navigation is needed, and all the updates and 
versions are stored in the database. As stated by Krug [12], 
"it is really important to make the interface uniform in order 
that the users do not get lost in some parts of the application 
due to the different patterns of navigations or the menus”. 
This approach was used to create menus to access contents, 
which helps stop the users from getting lost in the long link 
lists and other different navigation patterns in the Moodle 
interface. 
Technologies like Java, PHP, Adobe Flash, and Adobe 
Flex were tested, and the Adobe Flex framework was the 
technology that best fitted the requirements of the project; 
because Flex is free, most web browsers come with the 
necessary plugin by default, and the users do not need to 
download, install, or configure anything by themselves. The 
database was created with MySQL [13] and the connection 
between the Flex [14] interface and the database is in PHP 
[15]. 
A teaching material created using the DTMS is called a 
dynamic teaching material because it can be easily changed 
to become more suitable to the learning environment. A 
teaching material like a book is static: if it needs some kind 
of update the owner will have to buy another book that is a 
newer version of the book he/she already has; however the 
DTMS allows the user to create teaching materials that are 
dynamic. The teaching material itself can be updated, and 
more importantly, the teachers using the system can make the 
necessary updates themselves according to the necessities 
they have during classes; they do not need to wait for the 
book editors and publishers to release an updated version 
that maybe solve the problems they were having. In other 
words the dynamic teaching materials can evolve to meet the 
needs of the teachers and their students in real-time, in such a 
way that the updates will not be too late for the students that 
really need them. 
System features for user feedback tasks, are still being 
developed. However, the teachers can basically use the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

system to create content that looks like  slides, as shown in 
Figure 1. The user can insert text, tables, arrows and other 
graphic shapes, as well as images and videos from his/her 
own computer or from the internet using the search feature as 
shown in Figure 1, which allows the user to search images 
and videos from inside the system interface. 
!
!
 
Figure 1. System’s editing interface. 
All the elements inserted in the slide can be configured to 
be interactive, responding to mouse clicks, drag and drop, 
and can also influence each other. For example, if the user 
drops a word in to another element, the element that received 
the drop can change to an image that represents the meaning 
of the word. The entire configuration is done through the 
system’s GUI (Graphical User Interface), and no 
programming language is required. After the slides are 
completed, they can be grouped in folders called “books”, 
and the “books” can also be grouped in folders called 
“courses”. That way the teacher can create the slides as if 
they are book pages, and group the books he/she wants to 
use as teaching materials to create a complete course. 
The system utilisation process can basically be divided 
into three phases: the creation phase, the sharing phase and 
the teaching phase, as shown in Figure 2. 
!
!
 
Figure 2. Dynamic Teaching Materials System. 
The three phases are connected, creating a utilisation 
cycle that restarts after the third phase. In the case of a 
teacher, for example, the three phases cover the user activity 
from the preparation of the teaching materials to the 
utilisation of the teaching materials in the classes and getting 
feedback. 
In the creation phase, the user can create a new original 
teaching material, or choose one that another user has 
already created, and edit it if necessary. The user can create 
or choose the teaching material version that is most 
appropriate for his/her teaching skills, the kind of lesson he/
she pretend to do, and the kind of students who are going to 
participate. When creating teaching materials the users can 
make a variety of multimedia and interactive content, or 
something simpler like just text and images; it depends on 
his/her editing skills and what he/she thinks that is more 
appropriate. Even if the system has many editing features 
and an easy to use interface, the teaching materials 
instructional design is up to the user; the system cannot 
automatically help with this part since the system cannot 
predict the kind of situation in which the content will be 
used. However, before creating something new, the user can 
use the search feature to see if someone has already created 
the kind of content he/she needs, and use it as a template to 
help get some design ideas. 
After finishing the content creation or editing, the users 
can tag the contents when saving it in the database. Tags are 
used for search, and also to help other users understand the 
scope of the teaching material; for example, the topic of the 
teaching material, the language, whether it is interactive, and 
the target students. Since each update and version of the 
content can have individual tags it helps the user searching 
for the content to choose the right version of the right 
content. 
The second phase, the sharing phase, starts once the 
teaching material is saved in the database. As soon as the 
content is in the database it is being shared and can be 
accessed by anyone in the system. Users can access any 
content in the system database to study, use as a teaching 
material in the classroom, use as a template to create a new 
teaching material and so on. All the content created and 
stored in the system's database fall under the creative 
commons licence “Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 
4.0 International”; everything can be shared and adapted, and 
the system keeps track of the authors of every version of all 
content automatically. In the database table, the content has 
columns to store the author's ID, the ID of the original 
content if the content is a version, and for updates it stores 
the ID of the first release of the content, and a date for every 
entry in the database. With this data the system can show 
who created the content, when the content was created, list 
all the updates, when the updates occurred, show all the 
different versions of the content, and who created the 
versions and when. This gives a complete view of what has 
happened to the content from its first release to the current 
time. 
The teaching phase is the moment when the users 
actually use the content created using the DTMS to teach in a 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

face-to-face class or online. In this phase the user can check 
if the teaching material is really suitable for his/her class 
style and target students. During the class the teacher can stll 
make changes in real-time if there is some problem found, 
createing a live update that will be available to the other 
users as soon as it is saved, like any other content in the 
system. During or after the class, the user can get feedback 
from other users and students about the content and the way 
it was used; this feedback can be comments during the class, 
emails sent to the user, or even comments in the comment 
space inside the DTMS interface. The user can make 
improvements in the content based on that feedback, 
allowing the content to evolve as it is used by him/her or by 
other users. When making improvements to the content the 
user starts to edit the content again, and that restarts the cycle 
from the creation phase again. 
Inside the system interface, feedback occurs as in an 
online social networking system, where users can comment 
on the contents, mark what they liked, mark their favourite 
contents; and the system also stores the number of times each 
content was accessed. Combining this data with the historic 
view of the content updates, the system can show the users 
the pattern of the content’s evolution, where they can see 
which version of the content was more popular, more 
accessed, the way it was used, if the user feedback, 
especially comments, had some influence in the subsequent 
updates or creation of new versions, and so on, showing how 
the content started, changed over time, what caused those 
changes, and what the public response was. 
IV. EVOLUTION PATTERNS 
The DTMS already allows the teaching materials to 
evolve by being adapted to the learning environment as 
necessary for the users. Now, we are trying to find a way to 
use the content evolution pattern to help the users evolve, 
learning more editing skills and content utilisation 
techniques by observing other users experience. This can 
allow the users to create better content and also update the 
old content to make them better using new acquired skills, 
making the contents evolve as well. As stated by Jones, 
Sharonn, and Power [16], the utilisation of patterns 
emphasises the experience and reuses it to help the users and 
the development team to learn from what happened in the 
past and be more prepared for possible problems, allowing 
them to evolve. 
The teaching material evolution pattern is basically how 
the content is changed over time to try to solve the problems 
faced by the users using it. Since the same content can be 
used in different situations, it can face different problems and 
it can result in the creation of different versions, one for each 
problem solution. The teaching material can also be used by 
different teachers, and even if they face the same problem, 
the way they will try to solve the problem may vary, also 
resulting in different versions, one for each solution. This 
information is what compounds the teaching material 
evolution pattern. In other words, the teaching material 
evolution pattern shows the problems faced by each version 
or update of the teaching material and how it changed to try 
to solve the problems being faced. 
The evolution pattern visualisation and some feedback  
features are still in development; however it is possible to 
exemplify the dynamic teaching materials evolution pattern 
and how the users can use it to learn more, by observing 
what has already happened naturally to some contents, 
Figure 3 demonstrates the evolution pattern of the content 
shown in Figure 1. 
!
!
 
Figure 3. Content evolution pattern with users’ comments. 
The content “A0” starts as a simple content with 
sentences using the new vocabulary students are learning in a 
Japanese class; the content also has images to illustrate the 
meaning of the sentence or its main word. When using the 
content in the class, the teachers had to add more examples 
to help with the explanation, and it generated the content’s 
first update, “A1”. After some time, the “user1” made a 
comment saying that some of the images used in the content 
were not clear, and to solve that problem the teacher changed 
the images to ones that were more easy to understand, 
generation the second update. After that the teacher decided 
to add more examples with text and images, but there were 
too many examples with images to show them all at the same 
time, so the teacher decided to put only the text and use the 
mouse-over interaction feature to show only the image of the 
sentence being read, thus saving space on the screen to 
contain all the examples at the same time. 
After the third update, a different teacher liked the 
content “A3” and wanted to use it in his classes for children; 
however he thought that he needed more images for the 
children, so the he used the content “A3” as a template to 
create the content “B0”, a version with the same texts but 
different images to make the content more suitable for 
children. The fourth update was made by changing some of 
the images to animations, for the best understanding of 
words like action verbs. After the fourth update, the “user2” 
made a comment stating that the examples should be 
arranged by categories; to solve that the teacher simply 
changed the positions of the examples on the screen to put 
the examples of the same category together, generating the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

fifth update. After that,“user3”, an English teacher, made a 
comment saying that the content could be good for English 
classes as well, and then he created an English version of the 
content translating the example sentences but keeping the 
images. 
In this evolution pattern sample, we can see how the 
content changed over time and why the updates happened, 
when the content was updated in real-time to meet 
necessities during classes as in update 1, or updates because 
of user feedback like update 2, or updates because the author 
himself/herself detected a problem like in update 3. We can 
also see how the content was adapted to be used in different 
situations with different target students by other users. 
Another example of a content evolution pattern can be 
seen in the context of the Nagoya City Science Museum, 
where the next evaluation tests are going to be held. In the 
case of the Museum there will be, for example, content to 
explain about the observation of stars (see Figure 4). The 
Museum curator needs to use the sky simulator function to 
generate the starry sky image and then apply filters to show 
only the necessary stars in the right size, form constellations 
connecting stars, and input some text labels for more detailed 
explanations about the stars movement or visible time 
periods, for example. 
!
"
!
Figure 4. Content naming visible stars in the night sky 
Once the content is saved in the database it can be reused 
as a template to create new content or updated if needed. For 
example, if the curator needs to show the same constellations 
but on a different day or time, he does not need to create 
everything from the scratch, he can just load the content that 
already has the necessary identifications and explanations, 
and simply reload the position of the stars for the new day or 
time, creating a new version of the content for a different 
date. Most of the content in the Museum is created in 
Japanese, but since the number of foreign visitors is high, the 
curators also need to create English and/or Chinese versions 
of the contents. 
In this case, the changes that can happen are not 
necessarily improvements in the content, but adaptations to 
make it usable in different situations. The evolution pattern 
can show, for example, how the labels of the stars needed to 
be moved when changing the date; thus the curators can try 
to find better ways to place the labels. 
The utilisation patterns being used as user guidelines 
should have the best practices for the users on two sides: the 
side of the user who created the content, and the side of the 
user who is observing the content’s evolution pattern, in a 
way in which the content’s author can really transmit his/her 
experience in an intelligible manner, and in which the other 
users can understand how to access the data stored in the 
database to actually see the evolution pattern. To help the 
users to better transmit their experiences and use the 
evolution patterns to learn and evolve, we suggest a 
utilisation patter based on the following points: 
•
Before creating new content, search the database to 
see if an other user has already created the necessary 
content; the user can create a version of another 
user’s content to best fit his/her needs if necessary. 
•
Every time a user creates or updates a content, he/
she should at least use tags that describe the topic of 
the content, the target students and the content type. 
•
The author can use individual tags to show the 
differences between content updates and versions. 
•
Pay attention to the feedback of other users; they can 
highlight problems not yet found, or even show 
better ways to use or edit the content. 
•
Every time a user makes an update or a version of a 
content, he/she should write a comment explaining 
the objective of the update, what kind of problem he/
she wanted to solve with the changes, as in the 
Figure 3 example updates list. 
•
The user comments are linked to the specific update 
that was being accessed by the user; it is useful to 
observe how the comments influenced the 
subsequent updates and versions. 
•
Before creating new content, use the search to see 
how other users are creating the same kind of 
content; the comments in the previous updates can 
reveal about possible problems faced by the users, 
and the updates themselves can show how the author 
tried to solved the problem. This can help prevent 
the same kind of problem from happening again. 
•
Take the time to see versions of your own content 
created by other users; they might contain hints on 
how to solve problems, as well as new edition and 
utilisation techniques. 
•
Whenever possible, give feedback to the author; it 
helps him/her to understand the pros and cons of his/
her work. 
There will be evaluation tests to finish defining the 
utilisation patterns that can help the users as guidelines for 
evolution, and also to make adjusts to the interface and check 
if there any new functions are necessary for the system. 
Since the beginning of the ELO project the development 
team was working side-by-side with the users to see exactly 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

what they needed, and built the system based on the 
necessities that the users faced in their work. As stated by 
Vianna, Vianna, Adler, Lucena and Russo [17], having the 
development team enter the context of the users is very 
important in allowing the creation of something really 
original, and in the case of the Nagoya City Science 
Museum, we expect to keep doing the same kind of 
collaborative work, checking the real needs the Museum 
curators have in order to create the necessary contents. 
V. EVALUATION TESTS AND RESULTS 
From the beginning, the system has been developed in  
collaborative work between the development team and the 
users; whenever possible there have been interviews and 
reunions conducted between the users and the development 
team to discuss the system’s performance, what is good, 
what needs to be fixed and why the changes are needed. 
The first test environment can be seeing in Table 1; the 
test was performed at the beginning of the ELO project when 
all the languages of the Department were being incorporated 
into the system. The teachers gave their evaluation of the 
system in interviews after using it in face-to-face classes and 
in online support activities. The test was focused on new 
navigation patterns for using the system in the face-to-face 
classes, what kind of teaching materials the teachers really 
needed to create or edit, and to evaluate the necessity of 
tutors in helping teachers prepare and set up the necessary 
equipment to use the system in the classroom, especially in 
the case of teachers with little experience with computers. 
TABLE I. BRASILIA UNIVERSITY FIRST TEST ENVIRONMENT 
!
The new content interface that implemented a new 
navigation pattern solved the problem the teachers and 
student were having in navigating the platform to access 
other contents. Before with the standard Moodle interface, 
the users could view the courses and the contents inside the 
courses as lists of links, but sometimes the lists became too 
long and it was difficult to find the contents, difficult to see 
which one was used in the class for revision, and also 
difficult to see which contents were related. The new 
interface had all the content in one screen, accessed by 
menus and submenus, organised by topic, which no need to 
navigate to different pages or areas of the online platform. 
The new interface also helped the teachers when using the 
system in face-to-face classes because the projectors had a 
screen resolution smaller than the normal displays, usually 
800x600 pixels, and the new interface was designed to fit 
this smaller size; since no navigation was needed after 
entering the course page, the teachers had all they needed on 
the screen, saving time when showing the contents. 
Even the teachers who had experience with computers 
stated that the support of the tutors to set up the equipment in 
the classroom was essential, since in Brasilia University the 
number of classrooms equipped with computers and other 
multimedia equipments is very low; almost every time, the 
teachers had to bring the equipment and set it up in normal 
classrooms, which is very time-consuming to do alone, and 
is unfeasible taking into consideration the total time for the 
class. 
Regarding the types of teaching material needed by the 
teachers, the most required types for the face-to-face classes 
were text with images to illustrate the meaning of new 
vocabulary, animations or videos to illustrate action verbs 
and dialogue examples; for grammatical explanation the 
most popular contents were interactive contents that, for 
example, showed how the use of different grammatical forms 
changed the meaning of the sentence as the user moves the 
mouse cursor through the available options. The test results 
were very good for the stage of development that was 
focused on solving the problems the teachers were having 
with the Moodle interface. 
The second test was conducted with a smaller group, just 
six Japanese teachers, twelve tutors, and one hundred and 
forty students in nine lectures. The test was conducted from 
July 2009 to December 2011, and focused on the real-time 
content editing interface, the creation of content versions, 
and how to store the versions on the database. During the 
period of the first test, the teachers made the instructional 
design of the contents, but most of the content was 
developed by tutors that had experience with computer, or 
were trained by the development team.  
The system had good approval from the language 
teachers; they made comments like "the system was really 
good because we can do almost everything with just some 
mouse clicks", "the real-time editing makes the system work 
like an electronic blackboard" and "the possibility of creating 
different versions of the teaching materials in real-time 
solves the problem of teaching materials which are out of 
context for the students”. However we still had some 
problems because at that time the system did not yet have a 
content search engine; to use the content, the teachers needed 
to know the content name or the ID number to load it from 
the database. It was difficult for the teachers to know which 
content had versions and which version was the best to be 
used in their classes since the system did not have an 
interface to show the relationship between the contents’ 
versions. 
Test period
from February 2008 to April 2009.
Development 
Team
8 members.
Languages
Japanese, Spanish, French, English, Italian, 
Portuguese and German. Total of 7 languages.
Lectures
55 lectures, graduate and undergraduate level.
Teachers
25 teachers.
Tutors
2 per teacher, total of 50 tutors
students
2907 students
Total of users
2982 users
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

After fixing the problems found by the tests, the current 
development stage is focused on content version 
management, the interface for showing the relationship 
between the content versions and the interface for showing 
the evolution pattern of the content. Future tests of the 
system will be done in collaboration with the Nagoya City 
Science Museum. We have already had some meetings with 
the Museum curators to discuss the necessary new functions 
and create a database structure that can store the changes and 
track the different versions of the contents. The next test will 
focus on the creation of different versions of the content, 
storing the creation process, and trying to define the best 
interface to show the evolution patterns of the contents, in a 
way that the users can see it, understand what has happened 
to the content and learn from the content authors' experience. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The development of the system still has a long way to go. 
With the results of the tests done up to now, it is possible to 
say that the system has successfully accomplished the 
interface tasks of an easy to use real-time editing interface, 
creating an environment that allows teaching materials to 
evolve, and can also be used in different fields of study. All 
the problems faced by the teachers at the beginning of the 
project were solved with the implementation of the new 
content editing interface. The system allows the users to edit 
content, update it in real-time and create versions of the 
content, so that it can be used in different learning situations. 
However the content management part is still in its initial 
development, especially the interface. 
The content search function that was one of the requests 
after the first test has also been completed, allowing the users 
to search for content using keywords, and even allow them to 
search for the content’s previous updates and different 
versions. This is a useful feature but is not enough to show 
the evolution pattern of the contents to the users. The system 
features for user interaction and content feedback are also 
still in development. As stated by Grant, Facer, Owen and 
Sayers [18] and by Paiva [19], communication is a very 
important part of the learning process; hits is not just 
between teachers and students, but can also be applied to the 
situation of users learning new techniques from each other to 
use the system, and is what makes these features key to 
promoting the evolution of the contents and users. 
After the implementation of the feedback features, the 
system needs to be tested to define the utilisation patterns 
that allow users to use the evolution patterns of the dynamic 
teaching materials as a learning tool to improve their abilities 
to edit and use teaching materials based other users 
experiences. After the implementation of all the features, the 
system should allow the users to create and share teaching 
materials, use those contents to teach, and interact with one 
another, giving feedback about the content they edit and use. 
Through these interactions, users can learn from one 
another’s experience and help each other to evolve, 
becoming better teaching professionals who are more 
prepared for the different situations they may face during 
work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Numbers 25280131, 24800030, and THE HORI SCIENCES 
AND ARTS FOUNDATION. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Boggs and D. Jones, “Lessons learnt in connecting schools 
 
to the internet”, Australian Educational Computing, Vol. 9, 
 
No. 2, pp.29–32, Australian Council for Computers in  
 
Education, 1994. 
[2] K. Iwazaki, et al. "Possibility and the Trial based on 
 
"connection" between the Science Museum and Universities 
 
or Visitors : Development of Exhibitions for the 50th  
 
Anniversary Event of the Nagoya City Science Museum", 
 
Journal of the Japan Information-culture Society, Vol.20, No.
 
1, pp.10-17, May 2013. 
[3] S. Aral, “Identifying Social Inﬂuence: A Comment on Opinion 
 
Leadership and Social Contagion in New Product Diffusion”, 
 
Marketing Science Articles in Advance, pp. 1-7, 2010. 
[4] <moodle.org/> 2015.02.16. 
[5] <www.joomla.org> 2015.02.16. 
[6] <www.efrontlearning.net/> 2015.02.16. 
[7] <www.dokeos.com/> 2015.02.16. 
[8] D. Jones and T. Lynch, “A model for the design of web-based 
 
systems that supports adoption, appropriation, and evolution”, 
 
Murugesan, S. and Deshpande, Y. (Eds.): Proceedings of the 
 
1st ICSE Workshop on Web Engineering, 1999, pp.47–56, 
 
Los Angeles. 
[9] S. Alexander, “e-Learning developments and  
 
experiences” (2001) <web.uct.ac.za/org/fawesa/ 
confpaps/alex.pdf> 2014.06.05. 
[10] T. Roberts, C. Romm, and D. Jones, “Current practice in web-
 
based delivery of IT courses”, APWEB 2000, Xi’an, China, 
 
2000, pp.27–29. 
[11] B. Gillani, “Learning Theories and the Design of E-Learning 
 
Environments”, University Press of America, United States of 
 
America, 2003. 
[12] S. Krug, “Don't Make Me Think! A Common Sense Approach 
 
to Web Usability”, 2nd ed., New Riders, Berkeley, California 
 
USA, 2006. 
[13] <www.mysql.com/> 2015.02.16. 
[14] <www.adobe.com/products/flex.html> 2015.02.16. 
[15] <php.net/> 2015.02.16. 
[16] D. Jones, S. Sharonn, and L. Power, “Patterns: using proven 
 
experience to develop online learning”, Proceedings of 
 
ASCILITE ‘99, Responding to Diversity, Brisbane: QUT, 
 
1999, pp. 155–162. 
[17] M. Vianna, Y. Vianna, I. Adler, B. Lucena, and B. Russo, 
 
“Design thinking Business innovation”, 1st ed., MJV Press, 
 
Rio de Janeiro Brazil, 2012. 
[18] L. Grant , K. Facer, M. Owen, and S. Sayers, “Opening 
 
Education: Social Software and Learning”, Futurelab, United 
 
Kingdom, 2006. 
[19] V. Paiva, “Letramento digital através de narrativas de  
 
aprendizagem de língua inglesa”, in English: “Digital literacy 
 
through English language learning narratives” CROP., Vol. 
 
12, pp. 1-20, (2007) <www.veramenezes.com/crop.pdf> 
 
2014.07.18. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-393-3
PATTERNS 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

