Diffusion Patterns of Social Network Posts
Alexander Gubanov
Yuliya Mundrievskaya
Center of Applied Big Data Analysis
Tomsk State University
Email: derzhiarbuz@yandex.ru
muo@data.tsu.ru
Ida M. Pu
Department of Computing
Goldsmiths, University of London, UK
Email: idapuone@gmail.com
Abstract—Social network posts as an efﬁcient means of com-
munication directly reﬂect users’ interests and engagements.
Despite challenges there are strong interests in understanding how
social network posts efﬁciently spread information. In this article
some diffusion patterns of social network posts are explored.
The information spreading via post chains based on partial
data of popular social network is studied to gain insights of
the problem of information diffusion. Mathematical models for
information cascades are proposed and future research directions
are discussed.
Keywords–information diffusion; posts; reposts; walls; social
networks; social media; probability; mathematical modelling
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social networks are real world systems where people
(referred to as actors) interact with each other. Actors are
represented as nodes of the network, and their interactions are
represented as ties between them. Social networks appear in
forms of social networking websites (online platforms) main-
tained by serving institutions (services), such as Facebook,
Twitter, Telegram, etc. In this paper, we focus on diffusion
issues of posts of messages based on the data from the on-line
social network “Vkontakte”.
The “Vkontakte” [1] is one of the largest social networks
on the previous-soviet space with 80-100 millions visitors
daily. Nodes of the network represent users (individuals or
groups), and ties can be a mutual (undirected) link, such as
friendship or/and directed link, such as subscribing. Users
exchange information by means of private messages or/and
public posts. Posts are publications in texts or/and multimedia
(images, sound and videos) on webpages. Recurrent posts are
referred to as reposts of the original post, and the dedicated
display areas for posts are referred to as walls. Figure 1 shows
a screenshot as an example of the wall and users’ posts on the
Vkontakte site.
Posts on the wall are also queued in a newsfeed (poster)
and become visible on devices of subscribed users (users for
short hereafter). Any post can be reposted by other users,
and appears on their walls and in newsfeeds of subscribers
(as friends or/and followers). With such iterative processes,
multiple chains of posts are formed and information is spread
like epidemic.
As a social media website, users can also interact with
each other via the platform. They can, for example, leave
comments on posts, vote for the favourite, exchange dialogues,
etc. At the backend of the website, the notions of walls, posts
and newsfeeds are evolved as self-sufﬁcient software agents
Figure 1. An example of the wall and posts (1:wall, 2:post, and 3:repost)
empowered by technologies allowing communications across
different platforms.
Posts, as an efﬁcient means of communication, reﬂect
users’ interests and engagements directly. Few businesses do
not want to understand them. Despite challenges there are
strong interests in understanding how posts spread information.
In this article, we model the spread of the posts based on the
data of this social network in order to help eventually answer
interesting questions, such as the followings:
1) Why do people spread a piece of information? Is it
because they like a given piece of news or is it because
they just intend to be similar to their social surroundings?
2) How can we classify a piece of information by its spread-
ing behaviour? Can we decouple properties of information
from the properties of network?
3) How can we classify people by their contribution in
information spreading? For example, how can we ﬁnd
someone whose role in information spreading is signif-
icantly different from the average (e.g., opinion leaders,
non-conformists, information brokers, etc.)?
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-783-2
PATTERNS 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

To answer these questions, different approaches are con-
sidered. The use of network information can vary in existing
work. Some approaches discard information about network
structure ([2], [3]), some assume that links are unobserved or
irrelevant and should be reconstructed ([4], [5]), or is assumed
to be correct and fully observable ([6], [7]). Inﬂuence of
social conformism (or social pressure), is ﬁrstly covered by
threshold models [8] then accounted in several models [7].
The modelling techniques are also vary: there are machine
learning approaches, such as [3], statistical [9], probabilistic
([7], [4]), and game theoretic models [10], etc. Also the roles
of different nodes in information spreading (especially opinion
leaders) are often studied by analysis of network structure and
topic content analysis ([11]–[12]).
Despite efforts, we could not ﬁnd an approach that can
be applied directly to solve our research problems which
tend to be more localised in nature, practical and richer in
social contexts. Most of the known approaches are useful to
predict wide information epidemics on explicit, simple and
large networks, such as Twitter, but not readily for Vkontakte.
In case of local information (for example, the signiﬁcant events
in a city of average size) the social network can be small (about
a hundred of reposts for one post), the number of data can
be insufﬁcient and the observed ties in the network can be
incomplete or not perfectly relevant.
Known
statistical
and
mean-ﬁeld
approximation
ap-
proaches, commonly used for prediction of epidemic out-
breaks, are not useful here, because the speciﬁc of local
information can be subjective and exclusive, e.g. interesting
only a certain group of people. The assumption that N (number
of nodes) is inﬁnite is not applicable for a local cluster. The
common assumption of an average infection rate for everyone
in the network and the impact of the node depending only
on its network characteristics (degree, centrality, etc.) is also
wrong in practical settings.
Social contexts are over simpliﬁed in models. For example,
high degree nodes do not necessarily mean richer information
sources. Nodes (users) can be faked by bots and ties (friend-
ships) can be commercialised, biased, or true friendships can
be hidden from newsfeeds. Results handled well in some visual
approaches may not necessarily be easily obtained in other
probabilistic models.
Hence, it would be inappropriate to use a model assuming
that the network is known and relevant (IC, SIR and so on).
On the other hand, we cannot discard the network information
since the amount of data we possess is relatively small. For
small datasets, machine learning approaches are not very
useful.
Finally, the real local cascade usually has a group of
completely isolated nodes (i.e., that are disconnected from any
other nodes) in the cascade, and we should assume that they
got the information through unobservable ties. Of course, we
cannot discard them, neither. As we can see, after all, our small
objects are not necessarily simple.
Our goal is to develop a sensitive tool for working with
such type of information, that could give us insights to answer
the interesting questions above.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section II
brieﬂy describes a model of information cascades. Section III
explores the patterns of information spreading using visualisa-
tion techniques. Section IV proposes a model of information
diffusion. Section V provides the summary and directions of
further development.
II.
INFORMATION CASCADE
Information cascade is a phenomenon in which a number of
actors make same decisions in a sequential fashion. It is a two-
step process in which a Yes-No decision is required by each
actor whose decision can be inﬂuenced by others. Information
cascades occur when the external information from previous
participants overrides one’s own private judgement.
In our model we assume the followings:
1) Each actor decides what to repost and whether or not to
repost.
2) The limited action space is (repost, notrepost).
3) The actions of reposts are sequential in chronological
order.
4) Each actor observes the reposts so far.
5) An actor cannot directly observe what other actors are
in favour of but (s)he can infer that they like the posts
enough if they repost it.
Our modelling is based on two parts: the underlying
network of relations (the network) and information cascade
(cascade) on this network.
A. Network
The nodes in our network model are identiﬁers of users
and/or groups of users. The links/edges between nodes rep-
resent connections/relationships in social network, undirected
for “friendship” and directed for “subscribing”, corresponding
to the model of undirected graph and digraph respectively.
It is impossible to model the entire social network in the
real world because of its huge size and data availability. Hence,
for a speciﬁc post we restrict the network by nodes that have
made a repost or liked the post and their friends. Such a
network is referred to as the underlying network (network for
short) for speciﬁc information cascade.
To build the network we use the Vkontakte public Appli-
cation Program Interface (API). Due to the privacy policy of
Vkontakte that allows users to hide their information, about
30 percents of nodes are actually “hidden”. It means that we
do not know whether or not they have made a post. Also we
do not know all incident links of them (but some links can be
reconstructed from other nodes).
The network is modelled as a graph G = {U, E}, where
U is a set of user node identiﬁcations (ui) and E is a set of
links (ui, uj) between a pair of nodes, where i = 1, · · · , N and
j = 1, · · · , N, and N is the number of nodes in the network.
To distinguish a user and group, ui can be positive or negative.
The positive ui is used to represent an user, and the negative
ui represents a group of users.
B. Cascade
The information cascade is a sequence of moments when
post appeared on user’s walls. It is deﬁned as a sequence of
the pairs {(ui, ti)}1≤i≤M, where ui denotes a node from the
network and ti is a timestamp of the moment when repost (or
original post) on the wall of this node is appeared. M is the
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-783-2
PATTERNS 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

total number of nodes that are “infected” by the information,
i.e., that having the post on their wall. This data is also
collected using the public Vkontakte API.
It is Vkontakte’s policy, however, to forbid general public
viewers from accessing any repost chain. Hence, we have no
explicit information about information spreading path.
C. Spreading issues
Processes of information spreading are widely studied often
using a Twitter social network as the source of experimental
data. For every retweet (analog of repost in Vkontakte) it is
known exactly, who retweeted whose tweets, so it is possible to
build an explicit graph of information propagation. This graph
is always a tree. Analysis results of such graphs are used to
identify spreading parameters (for example, the intensity of
“infection”) and important nodes (opinion leaders). But this
“exactness” also conceals one signiﬁcant trait of how people
spread the information. Sometimes people choose to manifest
something due to its respectable source. Their decision of a
repost (or retweet) may not necessarily be purely driven by
their inner motives, but also by the apparent positive responses,
such as the big number of surroundings who translate the
same piece of information. It is a common behaviour involving
opinions, social norms, and trusts, etc. [13].
We assume that the fact of repost (retweet) from some node
does not mean that it is a merit of only this node. It can be
the cumulative contribution of all nodes made the post which
was seen by the reposting user before. It can not be substituted
by deﬁning individual infection rates or probabilities as ([14],
[4]). However, some models [7] takes it into account. We do
it also.
III.
PATTERN OF SPREADING
The ﬁrst step in analysing the spreading of posts is vi-
sualisation of the pattern of spreading. This visual technique
is useful for practice, also the patterns can be analysed using
structural network analysis (measuring centrality, modularity,
etc) which is widely covered by appropriate software (for
example Gephi). As long as the pattern of spreading is directed
aperiodic graph, some bibliometric techniques can also be
used, for example main path analysis [Batagelj2014].
The pattern is a way to display the combination of informa-
tion cascade and underlying network, so the researcher could
see key properties of both to be able to make conclusions. It
is acyclic oriented graph Gp = {Up, Ep, Dp} with weighted
nodes where Up ⊂ U is a set of infected nodes (i.e., having
a post or repost on their walls). There are M nodes in Up.
Ep = {(ui, uj) : (uj, ui) ∈ E : ui ∈ Up, uj ∈ Up, ti < tj} is
a set of ordered pairs of nodes from Up, representing directed
edges such that there is a link between uj and ui (in general
it means uj is a friend of or subscribed on ui) in underlying
network and ui made the repost earlier than uj. So the edge
represents a potential act of information propagation, because
uj is able to see ui’s post in the newsfeed before it decides
to make reposts. There is also Dp = {dui}1≤i≤M, a set of
weights for nodes, where dui is the degree of ui in underlying
network. The example can be seen in Figure 2 and Figure 3.
Figure 4 shows the pattern of spreading of real posts. The
size of the node is deﬁned by its degree in underlying network
(i.e., the number of neighbours the node could inﬂuence). The
Figure 2. Underlying network
Figure 3. Green is a pattern of spreading
colour becomes darker as the number of outgoing edges on
patterns increases (the darker it is in red, the more neighbours
are actually inﬂuenced). Note that in this case we use only
mutual links for users (Vkontakte is more friendship-style
than subscriber-style network and the most of links between
users are mutual/undirected). Hence, there is no need to deﬁne
different in- and out- degrees in the underlying network.
In the ﬁgure, we can see the separate cluster of users (1),
the nodes that seems to be information brokers or inﬂuencer
in their cluster (like 2, which has not very high degree, but
probably affected a lot of neighbours), the nodes that have no
inﬂuence at all (3, it has high degree, but infects nobody). Also
there is a group of isolated nodes (4) that means that they got
the information through inobservable path (private messages
or hidden users).
Although the patterns of spreading help researchers make
hypotheses and explore intuitive solutions, mathematical mod-
els are necessary for rigorous analysis and prediction.
IV.
MODELS OF THE INFORMATION DIFFUSION
On-line social networks are set up mainly for information
diffusion. A number of widely used dynamic models are
known as infection models (SI, SIR, SIS) [15] of social con-
tagion. They are considered as good for describing diffusion
of certain types of information, such as hot news, memos,
rumours and in other situations when people become infected
regardless his will.
Another type of information spreading model, known as
the threshold model, describing a situation when each node
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-783-2
PATTERNS 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Figure 4. Pattern of spreading
makes a decision to spread the information based on social
reinforcement (e.g. social norms or opinions) and susceptibility
to information strongly depends on how many neighbours are
infected. ([13], [8]).
We build our model as a development of probabilistic SI
model for networks. For each edge between an infected and
susceptible node, there is a probability of passing the infection
during each small time interval ∆t that is proportional to ∆t+
o(∆t). Our goal is to deﬁne this probability.
The SI model is continuous and the time delay in the edge
matters. It is interesting that there is a discussion about how
important it is to take this delay into account. Some authors
[3] insist that in real world social networks this delay is too
noisy and it is better to discard it, while other authors [16]
think that it is a very important measure and should be taken
into consideration.
In our model we took into account the minimum amount
of properties of the process that are crucial for its description.
On one hand, we consider every data available and try to use
the information about known connections between users also.
On the other, we respect the fact that the information is not
necessarily completely relevant. Some connections are hidden
or inobservable.
A. Model parameters
The model has four parameters: namely, observed infection
rate θ, conformism level (threshold) κ, decay (or obsolence, a
kind of recovery rate analogue) δ and unobserved infection
rate ρ.
The ﬁrst is the infection rate θ. In classical network SI
model the probability of susceptible j′th node to be infected
during small time interval ∆t is equal to
nj(t)θ∆t + o(∆t)
(1)
where nj(t) is a number of infected neighbours at the
moment t.
The second is conformism κ deﬁning a threshold: a fraction
of node’s neighbours that should be infected to signiﬁcantly
increase the chance of infection of the node. It is a modiﬁer for
infection rate depending on the number of neighbours infected
and a total number of neighbours. Thus, the probability of
infection during small time interval is
nj(t)τκ(j, t)θ∆t + o(∆t)
(2)
where τκ(j, t) is threshold function, for example
τκ(j, t) =
(
1, nj(t)
Nj
⩾ κ
ϵ, nj(t)
Nj
< κ,
(3)
where Nj is total number of neighbours that node j has
and ϵ is small.
Note nj(t) and τκ(j, t) depend on t and will not write this
dependence below. Here can also be used different function
which ascends or descends being regulated by κ.
The third is a background parameter ρ, which deﬁnes
the intensity of contagion through unobservable channels.
To handle this infection process we take a classical non-
network ST/SIR model’s assumptions that each node connects
to all other nodes. The assumption is that the number of all
information sources (observed and unobserved) is proportional
to the number of observed sources. The probability of infection
should then be
(ρNI(t) + njτκ(j)θ) ∆t + o(∆t),
(4)
where NI
′(t) is an overall intensity of contagion (NI(t) is
a number of nodes infected at time t).
The last parameter is a decay δ. As the older posts have
less chance to be seen in one’s newsfeed, the infection rate for
each infected node should decrease over time. There can be
different types of decay, for the exponential one the probability
of contagion during ∆t is

 X
i∈A(t)
ρe−δ(t−ti) + τκ(j)
X
i∈Aj(t)
θe−δ(t−ti)

 ∆t + o(∆t),
(5)
where A(t) is a set of all infected nodes at time t, Aj(t)
is a set of infected neighbours of node j at time t and ti is
the moment at which node i was infected.
Note, that using step decay function (i.e., that equal to
1 until some moment, and 0 after) gives a classic SIR model
recover behaviour. In this case setting θ to 0 gives an infection
equation for non-network SIR model, and setting ρ and κ
to 0 gives an infection equation for network SIR model.
However, if step recover function is good for describing bi-
ological infections, it is unsuitable for information, so gradual
exponential decay is more preferable. Note that if theta, rho
and kappa characterise the post, delta is a property of the
social network. Thus, we can assume that it is the same for
every publication. This assumption is helpful when we start to
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-783-2
PATTERNS 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

estimate parameters not just for one information cascade, but
for the set of cascades.
As long as our model is a kind of SI, not SIR (as there
is no recovery, the post stays on the wall forever, or if it was
removed, we have no information about it) the equation (5)
deﬁnes the model behaviour. The initial condition is a set A(0)
of nodes that was infected at the time t = 0.
B. Detecting signiﬁcant nodes
In general every node has its own parameters θ (inﬂuence)
and κ (conformism). It would be very useful to estimate all of
them. Indeed, we cannot identify all individual θ’s and κ’s for
each node because of small amount of data.
The common practical question is “What the most inﬂu-
ential node is?”. Or “What the less conform node is?”. Thus,
we should ﬁnd one or several nodes whose parameters are
differ the most from the average. We propose to use greedy
algorithms. The algorithms search for the node for which
increased θ makes the model better (higher likelihood). Then
the second one, etc. The same is for decreased θ’s and κ’s.
Using such kind of approach should help us to ﬁnd most
“distinctive” nodes without overestimating the model.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we deﬁned an object of study, obtained the
data and formulated research questions. We considered several
existing approaches and found that they cannot be applied
directly to our cases. Patterns of spreading visualisation gave
us intuitions on what is the object of research looks like and al-
lows to make some decisions and hypothesis for practical use.
The four parameter model of information spreading provides
opportunities to answer several questions about an essence of
information. The different roles of the nodes, however, still
need to be considered. The next step of our studies is to
estimate model parameters and then to develop a procedure
to detect nodes whose behaviours signiﬁcantly differs from
average.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Jacqueline W. Daykin for helpful
discussion, the anonymous reviewers for valuable comments,
and ﬁnancial supports for the research, The ﬁrst author would
also like to thank the overseas scholarship that allows his
research visit to Goldsmiths, University of London.
REFERENCES
[1]
On-line social network “Vkontakte”. [Online]. Available: https://vk.com
[2]
A. Najar, L. Denoyer, and P. Gallinari, “Predicting information
diffusion on social networks with partial knowledge,” in Proceedings
of the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web, ser.
WWW’12 Companion.
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2012, pp. 1197–1204. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2187980.2188261
[3]
S. Bourigault, S. Lamprier, and P. Gallinari, “Representation learning
for information diffusion through social networks: An embedded
cascade model,” in Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, ser. WSDM’16.
New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp.
573–582. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2835776.2835817
[4]
M. Gomez-Rodriguez, L. Song, H. Daneshmand, and B. Sch¨olkopf,
“Estimating diffusion networks: Recovery conditions, sample complex-
ity & soft-thresholding algorithm,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 17, no. 90, 1 2016, pp. 1–29.
[5]
M. Rodriguez, D. Balduzzi, and B. Sch¨olkopf, “Uncovering the tempo-
ral dynamics of diffusion networks,” vol. abs/1105.0697, 05 2011.
[6]
M. Kimura and K. Saito, “Tractable models for information diffusion
in social networks,” in LNCS, 09 2006, pp. 259–271.
[7]
C. Lagnier, L. Denoyer, E. Gaussier, and P. Gallinari, “Predicting infor-
mation diffusion in social networks using content and user’s proﬁles,”
in Advances in Information Retrieval, P. Serdyukov, P. Braslavski,
S. O. Kuznetsov, J. Kamps, S. R¨uger, E. Agichtein, I. Segalovich, and
E. Yilmaz, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013,
pp. 74–85.
[8]
M. Keuschnigg, Granovetter (1978): Threshold Models of Collective
Behavior, 01 2019, pp. 239–242.
[9]
V. Krishnamurthy, S. Bhatt, and T. Pedersen, “Tracking infection
diffusion in social networks: Filtering algorithms and threshold bounds,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Net-
works, vol. 3, no. 2, June 2017, pp. 298–315.
[10]
C. Jiang, Y. Chen, and K. J. R. Liu, “Evolutionary dynamics of
information diffusion over social networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, vol. 62, no. 17, Sep. 2014, pp. 4573–4586.
[11]
A. Farzindar and W. Khreich, “A survey of techniques for event
detection in twitter,” Computational Intelligence, vol. 31, 09 2013.
[12]
Q. Li, A. Nourbakhsh, S. Shah, and X. Liu, “Real-time novel event
detection from social media,” 04 2017, pp. 1129–1139.
[13]
C. Kadushin, Understanding social networks: Theories, concepts, and
ﬁndings.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
[14]
K. Saito, M. Kimura, K. Ohara, and H. Motoda, “Learning continuous-
time information diffusion model for social behavioral data analysis,”
in Advances in Machine Learning, Z.-H. Zhou and T. Washio, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 322–337.
[15]
M. E. J. Newman, Networks.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
[16]
A. Guille and H. Hacid, “A predictive model for the temporal
dynamics of information diffusion in online social networks,” in
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide
Web, ser. WWW’12 Companion.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2012, pp. 1145–1152. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2187980.2188254
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-783-2
PATTERNS 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

