Finding and Implementing Patterns for Creative Spaces 
 
Christian Kohls 
Department of Computer Science 
TH Köln 
Gummersbach, Germany 
e-mail: christian.kohls@th-koeln.de 
 
 
Abstract— Ideation and design thinking are important skills 
that should be acquired in higher education to prepare 
students 
for 
modern 
work 
requirements. 
We 
have 
implemented several workspaces at our university that foster 
creative work by providing tools, materials and an inspiring 
atmosphere. To make the spaces fit to the goals of creative 
thinking we have identified good practices as design patterns. 
The patterns are based on existing solutions and have led and 
justified our design decisions. In this article we will discuss the 
benefits of the pattern approach to find meaningful solutions. 
The mining process will be outlined and some of the resulting 
patterns are presented. Finally, we will reflect how the patterns 
have helped us to achieve our goals. The patterns can be used 
by other universities and companies to create similar spaces as 
each pattern describes the solution in a generative way. 
Keywords-design patterns; innovation; creative space 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We planned to create several spaces for innovate work at 
our campus. The motivation was to increase the creative 
potential in student projects. Thus, the space should be 
enabling in a sense that it provides all the tools for design 
thinking, including ideation tools, building materials for 
rapid prototyping, ways to investigate the problem domain 
and test ideas as they are developed. The appropriate 
methods should be supported by both classic and digital 
tools. Moreover, students should learn the methods while 
they are using them. Creative spaces should be both enabling 
and educating. In addition, creative spaces should be 
efficient, i.e., no setup time, no boring meetings where only a 
few dominant persons speak, and low thresholds to use tools 
and technology that make the creative process more 
effective. The rooms should also be exciting and help 
students to experience their university as a place of 
innovation. The spaces should promote project-based and 
skill-driven learning, establishing a result-oriented “maker 
culture”. Our goal is to create four different spaces, each 
addressing different activities: an innovation space for 
generating ideas, a thinking space for retreat and reflection, a 
maker space for prototyping and testing, and a planning 
space for managing projects. The need for different spaces 
for the various activities is based on the pattern Ecosystem of 
Workspaces [1], see Figure 1, and the design principles for 
creative spaces [2].  
Our means to get there is to do identify existing patterns 
and develop new patterns for creative space. We use the 
design pattern approach to generalize and analyze existing 
good solutions.  
 
 
Figure 1. Ecosystem of Workspaces 
 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
discusses related work, including the impact of creative 
space 
for 
university 
development, 
existing 
design 
frameworks and the design pattern approach. Section III 
describes the mining process along with example patterns.  
Section IV reflects on the lessons learnt and how one can test 
the patterns both qualitatively and quantitatively. Section V 
draws conclusions and outlines future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
  In this section we explore the design of creative spaces in 
universities and compare frameworks and design patterns as 
planning tools. 
A. Impact of creative space for university development     
The importance of interior design in academic teaching 
contexts has been highlighted recently. The Horizon Report 
[3] has picked up this topic in recent years, again and again, 
under the themes “Maker Space,” “Bring your own device,” 
“Flipped Classroom,” “Internet of Things,” “Wearables,” 
and “Redesigning learning spaces”. An approach to these 
concepts should be of strategic importance. A commission of 
experts of the “Hochschulforum Digitalisierung” (Panel for 
digitization in higher education) concludes that “maker 
spaces and creative spaces” and “digital collaboration tools” 
are among the key technologies of a digital university.   
B. Existing room concepts and design frameworks 
There are several frameworks that deal with the design of 
innovative spaces and spaces that blend classic and digital 
tools. For example, the TACIT framework is derived 
directly from a blended space approach [4] by identifying 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-612-5
PATTERNS 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

key elements, such as territoriality, awareness, control and 
interaction. Another framework for understanding the role 
of the physical environment in innovation focusses on the 
related goals of such spaces [5]. The framework 
distinguishes between strategic and symbolic goals, 
innovation efficiency and effectivity, enhanced teamwork, 
stronger involvement of stakeholders and expanding 
entrepreneurial skills on a general level. It operationalizes 
these objectives and differentiates between factors for the 
planning of the space as well as factors for the evaluation of 
the degree of attainment. There is also a conceptual 
framework for spaces to foster and sustain innovation that 
compares the criteria of different frameworks [6]. All of 
these frameworks have in common that they name important 
principles, criteria and directives for planning and testing. 
However, when it comes to the concrete design of a new 
space, they remain very general and often too abstract. 
Therefore, in our view, the design pattern approach of 
Alexander et al. [7][8] seems to be a better alternative. It 
keeps the general reasoning but provides tangible and 
holistic advice to implement solutions. 
C. Design Patterns 
The idea to capture balanced patterns of good design has 
its origin in the field of architecture. Christopher Alexander 
wanted to create a language which helps ordinary people to 
participate and express their wishes and demands in the 
design of towns, buildings and constructions [7][8]. The 
approach was adapted in many other fields, especially in the 
domains of software design [9] and software education 
(Pedagogical Pattern Project). There have been several 
patterns on education and e-learning [10]-[12]. According to 
Alexander, “each pattern describes a problem which occurs 
over and over again in our environment, and then describes 
the core of the solution to that problem, in such a way that 
you can use this solution a million times over, without ever 
doing it the same way twice [8].“ As such, patterns capture 
the essence of recurrent good solutions. They describe both 
the solution form and the process to generate this form. 
Likewise, “an e-learning pattern captures the regularities of 
good practices in order to reuse the proven methods, 
scenarios and content forms in new contexts addressing new 
design tasks. The core idea is to not reinvent the wheel but to 
preserve what has been successful in the past. Beside the 
explicit description of good (successful) pedagogical 
methods, tools, media formats, resources, and scenarios 
design patterns reason about the adequate use of such 
solutions [13].” Patterns clearly state the design problem and 
design solution in a structured way and provide a 
“comprehensive set of design ideas [14].” They can be used 
to discuss different aspects of design expertise and provide a 
lingua franca for joint course design [15].  
The reflective analysis of patterns requires that a 
description of patterns discusses how and why a solution 
works. A form or intervention is neither good nor bad in 
itself but produces different consequences depending on the 
context. Patterns are never seen in isolation but capture the 
environments in which they work, often by relating to other 
patterns. Patterns can describe specific actions to overcome 
existing seams. But more important, they explicitly state 
what the problem of the existing seam is. Problems are 
discussed by analyzing conflicting forces from different 
perspectives, i.e., social, technological, political, and 
economical factors. This integrates 
the views and 
requirements from different stakeholders and makes the 
relations between different levels explicit. For example, 
choosing a specific social media strategy can open new 
options as well as limiting the learner’s choice. The 
curriculum can drive decisions on both the level of the 
learning 
organization 
as 
well 
as 
the 
individual 
teacher’s/learner’s behavior. Individual interests can conflict 
with organizational strategies but also support new ways of 
collaboration. There are already some pattern languages 
about creative collaboration, presentation and learning [16].  
III. 
PATTERNS FOR CREATIVE SPACE 
We will first describe the pattern mining process. Then, 
we will discuss the identified pattern categories and present 
some examples. 
A. Pattern mining 
Identifying and documenting design patterns is called 
pattern mining. There are different approaches for pattern 
mining [17]. The approach taken here is a typical mix of 
methods of inductive and deductive research:  
• Deriving requirements and factors from frameworks  
• Analysis of existing good practices for interior design  
• Visits to tradeshows and exhibitions, browsing product 
brochures, explore existing rooms 
• Testing of classic and digital tools  
• Participatory design sessions with later users of the 
space (students, docents)  
• Evaluation of different design options with mockups 
 
In the process of identifying the general forms of the 
patterns, the findings from general frameworks can be 
considered as the driving factors. Moreover, we found 
recurring structures in case studies of existing facilities:   i-
Land [18], ICE [19], and iRoom [20]. Furthermore, 
numerous analog tools (e.g., methods cards, innovation 
games) and digital tools (e.g., iPads with pen, touch screens, 
tabletops) were tested in the laboratory or at exhibitions. 
Various design options for the room were played with, for 
example using mockups to explore the optimal size for a 
center table that should be used as a “stage” for the creative 
process. Various pattern candidates have emerged from this 
analysis. Pattern candidates that we can support empirically 
by several examples and that we can explain plausibly using 
establishes theories, have been selected to plan the rooms.  
B. Pattern categories 
The identified patterns can be characterized and clustered 
into categories of different problem groups: work materials 
and tools, atmosphere, session management, navigation and 
blended interaction. The first category is about the materials 
and tools that should be available in creative spaces. Since 
we cannot always predict which materials will be needed in a 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-612-5
PATTERNS 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

creative session, an abundance of materials should be 
available to give users freedom of choice. Boxes with work 
materials are frequently found in design thinking contexts. 
The room should provide several THOUGHT TRIGGERS 
that provide impulses for ideas. Examples are random 
images, story cubes, and stimulus words both in physical and 
in digital form. For visualization, we provide A BUNCH OF 
PENS AND PAPERS as well as digital tablets and 
interactive whiteboards. CURIOUS THINGS are unusual 
objects to stimulate lateral thinking. Such objects can be 
spread around or hidden as a surprise element in containers 
(SURPRISE). Furthermore, various project templates 
(WORK TEMPLATES, e.g., Business Model Canvas) 
should be provided for analytical processes. The filled out 
templates can be digitized automatically and possibly trigger 
other actions (TEMPLATE TO ACTION), e.g., automatic 
sorting into various digital lists (such as pros and cons), or 
using drawings within other programs (games, living 
mockups). Figure 2 shows some example materials and 
tools. 
 
 
Figure 2. Materials and tools 
 
The atmosphere of the room also plays a special role in 
creative work. For this reason, we have identified many 
patterns in the physical space, such as ambience, plants, 
high-quality furniture, bar stools and workbenches, sofas, 
pictures and sound. QUALITY FURNITURE suggest to use 
high quality and extraordinary furniture. In a valuable 
environment, people feel more valued. The space should 
support different MOODS with illumination and sound. We 
also need a PLACE OF RETREAT, where participants can 
relax and let the mind wander (phase of incubation). To 
avoid distractions, the room should have NO CABLES, be 
SOUNDPROOF BY CHOICE and have only soft angles.  
Session management requires solution patterns to save 
sessions, restore them and take them into other (physical) 
rooms without seams, i.e., the transfer is automatically 
supported by cloud based solutions that can show the same 
content in different rooms. A backup functionality must be 
available for data security. To retrieve lost data back, restore 
functionality must be given. The rollback enables the 
applications and systems to return to a prior state. This is 
often a standard feature in online tools such as Google Docs 
or Wikipedia. Nevertheless, we consider the explicit 
documentation to be important as a model for the design of 
new tools. ROOM RESET refers to a quick way to reset all 
systems and return them to their original state. This solution 
is very important to avoid revealing work results to the 
wrong eyes, i.e., if the next work group enters the room all 
prior writings should disappear. Room reset features are 
often found in software systems for interactive whiteboards 
(such as SMART Boards, Microsoft Surface Hub). If a group 
of users returns to the room a week or a month later, they 
should continue to work where they had stopped. Hence, it 
must be possible to access a history to prior results. All 
devices in the room are restored to this state and provide the 
same set-up of the last event (ACCESS TO OLD 
SESSIONS). Since there are several independent innovation 
rooms, we need a way to take the complete session to 
another room. This is also relevant for break-out sessions. 
This leads to the pattern CROSS-ROOM INTERACTION.  
The navigation space must also be considered in a 
creative room concept. There are different solutions that help 
users to find orientation inside the room - for example, some 
analogue and digital tools are self-explanatory. However, in 
a space that offers many possibilities, not everything can be 
grasped at first sight or is intuitively usable. For orientation 
and guidance, we can use TANGIBLE INSTRUCTIONS 
such as menu cards with brief instructions, overview maps or 
“cookbooks” that provide step-by-step guidance and 
highlight which building blocks are useful. Using QR codes, 
these physical elements can in turn call up video instructions 
for smartphones or wall displays. Icons of digital user 
interfaces should be fully self-explanatory. Users should see 
at first glance which action is trigged if a button is pressed. 
Objects in the room need to be placed in such a way that 
users are encouraged to use them. For example, Lego bricks 
and sticky notes should not be hidden in a cabinet. They 
should be accessible right away and offer a high affordance.  
Perhaps the most interesting category is Blended 
Interaction, as it is concerned with solutions that enable a 
seamless integration of the physical and digital world. The 
pattern PHYSICAL TO DIGITAL regards physical actions 
and artefacts that can be digitized immediately. When a user 
sketches with a pencil on a digital surface or a sheet of paper, 
it is to be digitized immediately by a touch-sensitive surface 
or a camera. The complementary pattern is DIGITAL TO 
REAL. Objects created in the digital space should not remain 
only digital but are brought in to the real world. Examples 
are projections onto physical objects, walls or on the floor, 
the printing with photo or 3D printers, as well as the 
controlling of robots or Raspberry Pi modules. Moreover, 
physical objects are used as simple triggers for interaction 
between the digital and physical world (PHYSICAL 
OBJECTS TRIGGER ACTIONS). An example is digitizing 
a sketch by pressing a physical button. Rooms that contain 
several digital devices need some means to connect them and 
share data (DEVICE ORCHESTRATION). Examples are: 
sending brainstorming items from smartphones to interactive 
walls, sketch characters or labyrinths on tablets and use them 
on game arcades, or selecting the content for large displays 
using small interactive tablets. One step further, we can 
orchestrate the connected devices to one large unit 
(COUPLED DEVICES). This way several independent 
devices can be connected to form a larger contiguous 
workspace. Examples are: dual projections of interactive 
whiteboards controlled by one computer, small info screens 
that connect to a large info screen, interconnected wall 
screens, tablets on a coffee table forming a temporary 
interactive tabletop.  
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-612-5
PATTERNS 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

C. Pattern examples 
This section contains two detailed pattern examples and 
three short pattern overviews as additional examples.  
 
1) Hybrid Space (Pattern) 
The dichotomy of digital and non-digital artefacts is 
resolved in a hybrid space by seamlessly bridging different 
types of artifacts, making digital data touchable and 
graspable, 
enhancing 
physical 
objects 
with 
digital 
information and digitizing physical objects. 
Context: We live in the real physical world, digital and 
connected devices are ubiquitous. Very often both worlds 
exist in their own space, and are only superficially 
interrelated. Things we can sense (feel, touch, see, hear, etc.) 
are more meaningful to us. We like to tinker with real things. 
Very often we either work in the physical world only or in 
the digital world only. 
Problem: Working in the physical world limits the way of 
sharing and manipulating objects – the digital has much 
more to offer. However, the digital world limits the richness 
of interactions to a predefined set. Moreover, the digital 
world lacks the embodiment of actions, such as playing and 
tinkering with objects physically with your hands (or other 
body parts) and arranging them spatially in a natural way.  
Forces: Ease of use. Interaction with objects is easier 
when they are real and tangible. Digital objects can be easily 
manipulated, edited, shared and distributed.  
Representations. Objects of the real world often can be 
represented as virtual objects (for example a sticky-note can 
be a real piece of paper or a virtual object). Physical object 
of our world can be augmented with additional information 
and functions using digital tools. The mode of optimal 
representation depends on what you want to do with the 
object. Do you want to touch it? Move it in real physical 
space? Or do you want to share it across remote locations 
and work on it with remote participants? Very often both is 
needed. 
Solution: Therefore, merge both physical and digital 
space into one hybrid space where real world objects can be 
digitized and represented in virtual space, and the digital 
space can be brought into the real world using tangible 
objects and devices. 
Both the physical and digital worlds have their own 
strengths and weaknesses. To empower the best of both we 
need to enrich both worlds with each other seamlessly. Every 
smartphone is capable of digitizing physical objects by 
simply making a photo. Special apps can support the 
extraction of meaningful information: identifying single 
sticky notes, mapping whiteboards to images, recognizing 
objects and gestures. Document cameras can quickly scan 
2D documents and 3D objects and send them to digital work 
spaces. Objects of the real world can also trigger the display 
of meaningful digital information. For example, a QR code 
or a specific layout on book pages or playing cards can start-
up programs or blend in additional information. This 
additional information can appear on the smartphone screen 
(augmented reality) or on additional screens. On the other 
hand, the information of the digital world can be projected 
into the real world. Each smartphone becomes a window to 
the digital world. Projectors can display information on walls 
and even on objects. Physical objects can be enriched with 
small displays or other outputs (audio, motion) based on 
digital processes. Objects in the physical world are always at 
hand (you don’t have to turn on a computer), and many 
actions are more natural in the real world. For example, 
feeling the surface and weight of objects gives you direct 
clues how to hand and work with them. Setting up new 
arrangements is fast, straight-forward and requires no 
training. Writing and drawing on paper still provides a richer 
experience than most digital tools offer. The interaction of 
surface properties, pen type, layers of color etc. is still a 
richer experience.  
You may expect: The real and digital worlds merge. 
Benefits of the digital world are mapped to real world 
objects. Real world objects can be represented seamlessly in 
the digital world, thus making sharing and manipulation 
easier.  Information can be mapped to real world objects, 
allowing rich learning experiences. Tinkering with objects – 
real and digital – is encouraged and creative learning is more 
likely to happen. 
However: To make the transfer between both worlds 
seamless, a lot of hardware and software is needed. Thus, the 
experience is often bound to special rooms. It requires a lot 
of knowledge about methods and technology to unleash the 
full potential. While playing with things is a good and 
encouraging experience, it can also lead to using the 
technology for the sake of using technology.  
Examples:  Document cameras to scan objects and show 
them on an interactive whiteboard, apps to photograph sticky 
notes and bring them to the digital world, 3D printers to 
make virtual objects tangible, digital twins (computerized 
companions of physical assets), or putting cards on a scanner 
and map the content to virtual objects.  
 
2) Orchestrate digital devices (Pattern) 
Context: Each device has different strengths. If you 
switch between the appropriate tools you can use the benefits 
of each of them. Some are good for drawing, others for 
showing or interacting. In a room with several devices, users 
should always choose the tool that fits best to the task. Since 
tasks often lead to different activities, users may want to 
switch digital tools seamlessly. 
Problem: Using different tools in isolation may offer the 
best of each world. However, it does not offer new ways of 
collaboration. It limits collaboration, because switching from 
one tool to another interrupts the flow of working and 
thinking.  
Forces: There are two types of devices, the ones which 
are used individually and the ones that are used together. 
Devices offer different functions, haptic characteristics, etc. 
Tools which are ideal for inputs aren’t equally ideal for 
outputs and the other way around. At the one hand a large 
display is very hard to control by touch or even with the 
mouse pointer, at the other hand a small display is not 
suitable or appropriate to present information to groups of 
people. Each device has its own affordances. Which device 
is the best, may change in the work process. Then it’s 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-612-5
PATTERNS 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

important to switch between the devices seamlessly without 
losing the work results that have been created to that point.  
Solution: Orchestrate digital devices in such a way that 
you can seamlessly use and transfer objects between them. 
That way users can freely choose where to display, create, 
edit and use objects. This choice can depend on individual 
preferences or different modes of usage. 
You can connect different devices using the patterns for 
ad-hoc connection. To share data between devices you have 
to run them either in a local WIFI or connect them via a 
cloud service. The devices need a shared (and protected) data 
storage, e.g., a place where one device can upload files such 
as images, and another device can download the files. To 
notify other devices about new available data, the devices 
need to observe this shared file space or listen to events. One 
implementation option is a central event server that 
distributes events and notification. One tool can upload a file 
and notify the event server. For example, someone could 
draw a picture on an interactive whiteboard and save it to a 
specific location on the file system. A local process observes 
the folder and uploads the drawing. It also notifies other 
devices that a new drawing is available. Tools that are 
interested in this kind of data can automatically download 
the file and use it for their own purposes (e.g., use the 
drawing as a sprite in a game or a new screen in app mock-
up).  
You may expect: Open interfaces enable device 
orchestration and inter-device communication.  
However: The devices have to use the same application 
or a compatible software to be able to orchestrate. Not all 
hardware and software vendors provide open APIs for 
seamless sharing, and often a hack is needed. 
 Examples: Users draw app mock-ups on a large digital 
whiteboard that allows to edit several screens at the same 
time. The sketched screens can be compiled to a Living 
Mockup that runs on tablets or smartphones instantly. 
Tablets can be used as interactive wall pictures. They can 
offer different actions or methods. Users choose a specific 
method on the wall tablet and large working templates are 
open on a digital whiteboard automatically. Users draw on a 
tablet and the drawn elements become game sprites on an 
arcade machine instantly. 
 
3) Thought Triggers (Pattern Overview) 
Problem: You need a push into a new direction. 
Forces: We tend to step into the same direction. We 
might be preoccupied and biased by your known solutions. 
Old thought patterns need to be disrupted. There is a need for 
external source to disrupt your thought patterns.  
Solution: Use textual or visual stimulus as thought 
triggers: Ask different questions, take in a new perspective, 
or restructure your problem. 
 
4) Sticky Notes (Pattern Overview) 
Problem: High effort to change structures makes 
exploration less likely. 
Forces: Add ideas quickly, parallel. Move categories and 
concepts. Spatial arrangement implies meaning. Explore 
alternatives. Easy setup, use everywhere. 
Solution: Use sticky-notes to write down your ideas. 
This pattern description is a good example for a solution 
that is well known. However, the description makes the 
underlying problem and benefits explicit. It does not simply 
recommend sticky notes but explains why this tool works.  
 
5) Playfulness (Pattern Overview) 
Problem: Your thoughts are constrained by conventions 
and fear of breaking rules. 
Forces: Positive feelings make you more creative and 
productive. Be less serious. Turn expectation upside down. 
Seek ambiguity, connect unrelated concepts, draw new 
analogies. Get rid of order, rules and assumptions. Allow 
exploration without consequences. 
Solution: Put yourself and your team into a mood of fun 
and playfulness. 
IV. 
LESSONS LEARNT IN USING THE PATTERNS 
 This section discusses how design patterns have helped 
to plan, create and use creative spaces. We also draw 
conclusions for the use of patterns in general. 
A. Understanding of forces and consequences 
During the planning process, the patterns helped us to 
check concrete technologies with regard to the properties we 
had required. The lower abstraction layer created by patterns 
helps to make concrete implementation decisions and to 
justify them. By discussing the consequences of a design 
pattern, not only the positive effects but also possible 
limitations become transparent. For example, there are some 
patterns that may have a negative impact on users' sense of 
privacy, such as automatic speech analysis and cameras in 
the room. Through the explicit naming of subsequent 
problems it is possible to search for further solutions.  
B. Justification for design decisions 
Patterns also help to convey the elements of the space 
better to address other stakeholders. The forces provide solid 
justifications for design decisions – even for unconventional 
elements. For example, the use of Lego bricks and 
innovation card games may confuse some people. The 
patterns, however, explain what has driven us to use these 
elements: their combinatory qualities to explore, the 
playfulness to challenge assumptions, and their inspiring 
potential.  
C. Manage complexity 
Furthermore, the patterns have helped break up a 
complex spatial composition into individual components that 
can be considered nearly independent while still fitting into 
the overall concept. The harmonious interaction is ensured 
by cross-references between the patterns.  
D. Identification of deficits 
To some extent design patterns also reveal technological 
deficits. The design pattern DEVICE ORCHESTRATION is 
indeed not an utopia but derived empirically from concrete 
examples of linking devices. Yet the interplay of all digital 
devices in the room is currently not fully implemented due to 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-612-5
PATTERNS 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

missing protocols and technical interfaces. Nevertheless, 
DEVICE ORCHESTRATION remains a valid solution. It is 
just that the implementation is more complex and cannot be 
implemented for all devices in the short term. For many 
devices and systems, it is a missing solution. Similar 
constraints as well as unexpected potentials have been 
uncovered by identifying the patterns. 
E. Empirical support  
Patterns that are not sufficiently empirically confirmed 
yet are considered as proto-patterns, that is proposals for a 
better future. However, most of the identified patterns are 
based on existing space solutions and usage concepts. 
Nevertheless, only future will show whether the rooms are 
accepted and used as we intended. The actual use will thus 
lead to a confirmation or falsification of the patterns 
inductively determined. So far we have observed that the 
rooms are highly frequented and students ask for more of 
such facilities. At the moment we are running a quantitative 
survey about the user experience. A questionnaire covers the 
activities, satisfaction and outcomes of a session.  We are 
also measuring the use of tools and their impact on the 
design results qualitatively. Since most design projects 
require written reports about the process, we are able to 
analyze how the room was used. Moreover, many design 
sessions are led by facilitators who can observe how students 
explore and use the room. Based on these findings, the 
patterns will be refined and adapted.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The identified design patterns have been implemented to 
a large extent for the innovation rooms we have designed. 
They have proved to be a very good planning tool. The 
design patterns are based on the observation, analysis and 
experimentation with existing solutions. They do not replace 
the mentioned frameworks, but make them a step more 
concrete and thus empirically verifiable. The frameworks 
also provided a theoretical foundation for the establishment 
of the solutions. Our next goal is to put all our patterns into 
an action-oriented booklet and a deck of cards. So, through 
experience it will be easier to close the gap of missing 
system components. New transformation projects will 
benefit, respectively. The patterns help not only in the 
concrete design process but provide arguments why certain 
interventions for a more creative work environment of the 
students are conducive.   
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Quillien, “Clever Digs. How Workspaces Can Enable 
Thought,” Ames, IA: Culicidae Press, 2012. 
[2] C. Kohlert, and S. Cooper, “Space for creative thinking: 
Design principles for work and learning environments,” 
Munich: Callwey, 2017. 
[3] S. Adams Becker, M. Cummins, A. Davis, A. Freeman, C. 
Hall Giesinger, and V. Ananthanarayanan, “NMC Horizon 
Report: 2017 Higher Education Edition,“ Austin, Texas: The 
New Media Consortium, 2017. 
[4] D. 
Benyon, 
and 
O. 
Mival, 
“Blended 
Spaces 
for 
Collaboration”, Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), vol. 24, no. 2-3, pp. 223-249, 2015. 
[5] J. Moultrie, M. Nilsson, M. Dissel, U.E. Haner, S. Janssen, 
and R. van der Lugt, “Innovation spaces: Towards a 
framework for understanding the role of the physical 
environment in innovation,” Creativity and Innovation 
Management, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 53-65, 2007. 
[6] F.O. Bustamante, J.I.P. Reyes, M. Camargo, and L. DuPont, 
“Spaces to foster and sustain innovation: Towards a 
conceptual 
framework,” 
Engineering, Technology 
and 
Innovation/International 
Technology 
Management 
Conference (ICE/ITMC), IEEE, p. 1-7, 2015. 
[7] C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, M. Silverstein, M. Jacobson, I. 
Fiksdahl-King, and S. Angel, “A pattern language: towns, 
buildings, construction,” New York: Oxford University Press, 
1977.  
[8] C. Alexander, “The timeless way of building,” New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979. 
[9] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, ”Design 
Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software,”  
Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1995. 
[10] B. Bergin, “Fourteen Pedagogical Patterns,”. In M. Devos and 
A. Rüping (Eds.), EuroPLoP 2000, Proceedings of the 4th 
European Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs,  
pp.1-40, Konstanz: Universitätsverlag Konstanz, 2001. 
[11] P. Avgeriou, S. Retalis, and A. Papasalouros, “Patterns for 
Designing Learning Management Systems,” In D. Schütz and 
K. Marquardt (Eds.), EuroPLoP 2003, Proceedings of the 9th 
European Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs, 
pp.115-132, Konstanz: Universitätsverlag Konstanz, 2004. 
[12] C. Köppe, “Towards a Pattern Language for Lecture Design: 
An inventory and categorization of existing lecture-relevant 
patterns,” EuroPLoP 2013, Proceedings of the 18th European 
Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs, Irsee, 
Germany: ACM, 2013. 
[13] C. Kohls and J. Wedekind, “Perspectives on patterns,” C. 
Kohls and J. Wedekind (Eds.), Investigations of E-Learning 
Patterns: Context Factors, Problems and Solutions, pp.2-18, 
Hershey: Information Science Pub, 2011. 
[14] P. Goodyear, “Educational design and networked learning: 
Patterns, pattern languages and design practice,” Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 82-101, 
2005. 
[15] Y. Dimitriadis, P. Goodyear, and S. Retalis (Eds.), “Design 
Patterns 
for 
Augmenting 
E-Learning 
Experiences,”  
Computers in Human Behavior, Special Issue on Design 
Patterns for Augmenting E-Learning Experiences, vol. 25, no. 
5, 2009.  
[16] Y. Harashima, T. Kubota, and T. Iba, “Creative education 
patterns: designing for learning by creating,” EuroPLoP 2014, 
19th European Conference on Pattern Languages of 
Programs, New York: ACM, 2014. 
[17] C. Kohls, and S. Panke, “Is that true? Thoughts on the 
epistemology of patterns,” PLoP 2009, Proceedings of the 
16th Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs, New 
York: ACM, 2009. 
[18] N.A. Streitz, J. Geißler, T. Holmer, S.I. Konomi, C. Müller-
Tomfelde, W. Reischl, and R. Steinmetz, ”i-LAND: an 
interactive 
landscape 
for 
creativity 
and 
innovation,”  
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp. 120-127, New York: ACM, 1999. 
[19] D. Benyon, and O. Mival, “Blended spaces for collaborative 
creativity,” 
Proceedings 
of 
Workshop 
on 
Designing 
Collaborative Interactive Spaces, AVI2012, 2012. 
[20] B. Johanson, A. Fox, and T. Winograd, “The interactive 
workspaces project: Experiences with ubiquitous computing 
rooms,”, IEEE pervasive computing, vol. 1,  no. 2, pp. 67-74, 
2002 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-612-5
PATTERNS 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

