The Privacy Research Community in Computing and Information Technology
Charles Perez∗, Karina Sokolova∗
∗PSB Paris School of Business, Chair D3 Digital, Data, Design,
Paris, France
email:{c.perez, k.sokolova}@psbedu.paris
Abstract—The technologies of information and communications
are part of our day to day activities. From computers to
smartphones and with the success of social media and the Internet
of Things (IoT), we are now surrounded and fully part of a digital
society that produces a big amount of data. In this context,
privacy is raising importance in computing and information
technology. In this article, we propose a study of the privacy
research community. We examine over 13,646 articles published
on privacy during the last ten years. We focus our analysis on
co-authorship and identify the dynamics and key researchers of
this domain.
Keywords–Privacy, Information Technology, Bibliometry, Com-
puter science, Survey, Co-authorship graph
I.
INTRODUCTION
In European Union, privacy is considered to be a funda-
mental human right. During the last decades, with the rapid
evolution of technologies, personalized services and big data,
the interests in privacy rapidly grows and the privacy research
community seems to expand. With the European legislation
evolution and an introduction of “Privacy by Design” (PbD)
notions applicable to all information systems [1], privacy
research starts to englobe information system research and
computer science: researchers currently work on bridging the
gap between legal notions and information systems engineers
to propose adapted solutions for modern systems design and
evaluation [2]. Modern technologies, such as World Wide
Web, mobile systems [3][4], Internet of Things (IoT) [5], data
treatment and sharing [6] strongly impacts privacy research
ﬁeld and community. With the popularization of digital social
networks and sharing services, user behavior regarding privacy
evolves: privacy research ﬁeld expands with the notions of
user education, visibility and transparency [7][8]. Privacy
becomes a large multidisciplinary research ﬁeld treating legal
and technological aspects, privacy models [9], design patterns
[10], Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PET) [11][12][13],
effective user interface [14], and much more. However, in our
knowledge, no bibliometric research has been yet conducted
on the study of the privacy research ﬁeld community.
In this paper, we investigate the computing-related privacy
research ﬁeld by exploring the evolution of the community
and co-authorship over the last 10 years. Our research is
based on a set of 13,646 articles collected from the well-
known Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) digital
library in October 2016. We provide a set of statistics on this
particular ﬁeld and apply social network analysis techniques
to better understand the evolution of this research community
and identify the most relevant contributors.
The article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
methodology used for data collection, general data analysis
metrics and the co-authorship analysis. Section 3 highlights the
obtained results: general dataset metrics and interpretation as
well as co-authorship graph analysis results. We also compare
the obtained results with the state-of-the-art works on other
research communities. Section 4 presents related works and
section 5 concludes this article.
II.
METHODOLOGY
A. Data collection and preprocessing
We collected 13,646 publications from the ACM digital
library [15] in October 2016 using the import.io software and
a crawler setup for this purpose. All articles were published be-
tween years 2006 and 2016 and are a collection of conference
proceedings and journal articles published by the ACM digital
library and partner publishers. All of the collected articles
mention ’privacy’ either in the title, keywords or the abstracts.
The following features were collected about the articles: the
title, the abstract, the list of authors, the list of keywords,
the number of downloads (6 weeks, 12 weeks and overall),
the number of citations, the publisher and the publishing date
(month and year).
When working with human generated data and scientiﬁc
articles in particular, a few preprocessing steps are required for
preprocessing. For example, it is a common observation that
the same author is mentioned using different strings in different
articles: ”Heather Ritcher Lipford” and ”Heather Richter Lip-
ford”, ”Ren`e Mayrhofer” and ”Rene Mayrhofer”, ”Alvaro A.
Cardenas” and ”Alvaro Cardenas” are observed in our dataset.
To homogenize the authors’ names, we ﬁrst performed the
following preprocessing steps using Regular Expressions: 1-
Remove dots, 2-Replace dashes by simple spaces, 3-Remove
all diacritical marks (e.g., ’`e’ becomes ’e’), 4-Remove titles
and honoriﬁcs.
From the preprocessed authors list, we calculate the Leven-
shtein distance [16] between author names to measure potential
misspellings that could not be detected by the four aforemen-
tioned techniques. Note that the Levenshtein distance between
two strings is measured as the minimum number of basic
operations (i.e., deletions, insertions or substitutions) needed to
transform the ﬁrst string into the second string. We found that
most of errors (90%) can be detected by matching authors that
have a Levenshtein distance below 2. A manual investigation of
potential matches was performed to avoid any abusive match.
Asian names were often found to be false positives due to the
names’ shortness (e.g., ”Yun Zhang” and ”Jun Zhang”). After
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

resolving the entity disambiguation problem with authors, we
ﬁnally obtained a total of 16,766 distinct authors for the 13,646
articles.
B. Dataset general statistics
1) Global measures: From the obtained dataset, we com-
pute a set of metrics to have a vision of the broadness of the
research ﬁeld and its overall weight and interest. Given the
total amount of contributors denoted A and the total quantity
of contributions denoted N, we compute the average number
of contributions per author ⟨Na⟩ and the average number of
authors per contribution ⟨An⟩.
Since we analyze the last ten years of the ﬁeld, we
want to highlight the evolution of the ﬁeld over time. For
this purpose, we have computed a set of dynamic metrics,
such as the number of articles per year y (denoted Ny), the
number of authors per year (denoted Ay), the distribution of
authors regarding their number of contributions and the authors
publishing lifetime.
Concerning the distribution of authors regarding their num-
ber of contributions, we verify if our dataset respects the
Lotka’s law [17]. This law states that the number of researchers
publishing exactly X contributions is a fraction of the number
of authors publishing only one. This fraction is expressed by
the equation 1.
Y = C
Xk
(1)
Where X is the number of publications, Y the relative fre-
quency of authors with X publications, and k and C are
constants depending on the speciﬁc ﬁeld. It is admitted that
the k parameter for bibliometrics is generally about 2.
The authors publishing lifetime La for a given author is a
duration (measured in years) when the authors considered to
be part of the research ﬁeld. The lifetime La of an author in
the research ﬁeld is deﬁned by equation 2.
La = 1 + (tout(a) − tin(a))
(2)
Where tin(a) is the year of its ﬁrst contribution in the domain
(arrival time when the author is considered to be the new
author) and tout(a) the year of its last contribution (leaving
time). We also measure the average authors lifetime denoted
⟨La⟩.
C. Co-authorship analysis using graph theory
We propose to analyse the collaborations between authors
by creating a co-authorship graph. In a ﬁrst part, the graph
is analyzed at the broad scale to obtain a general vision of
the research ﬁeld. In a second part, we deeply investigate
the position of authors in the graph and characterize the
importance of contributors using centrality metrics.
1) Graph construction and general metrics: The undirected
weighted co-authorship graph is denoted G(N, E) where each
author is a node nϵN of the graph and each edge between two
nodes is created when two authors are found to be co-authors
of the same article. The edge is weighted by the number of
the authors’ collaborations: more the authors collaborated, the
higher is the edge weight. In order to build the graph using the
raw data harvested by import.io, we converted a list of authors
of each article into a set of edges between all co-authors of
the article using Talend Open Studio ’Extract, Transform and
Load’ (ETL) software.
First, we calculate density, clustering coefﬁcient, degree
distribution and average path length of the co-authorship graph
to capture some general statistics of the privacy research ﬁeld.
The density of the graph reveals the probability that two
given researchers of the privacy ﬁeld collaborate together. It
is measured as d = 2|E|/|N||N−1| where |E| is the number of
observed edges and |N| the total number of nodes.
The local clustering coefﬁcient reveals how likely the co-
authors of a given author are also co-authoring papers together.
It is measured as shown in equation 3.
Ci =
2Li
ki(ki − 1)
(3)
Where Li represents the number of links between the ki
neighbors of node i. The local coefﬁcient of clustering equals
0 if neighbors are not collaborating at all and 1 if all neighbors
are collaborating with each other (they form a complete graph).
The average clustering coefﬁcient captures the general vision
of how co-authors of a same author tend to collaborate at
the general scope of the graph/research ﬁeld. Average path
length, diameter, degree distribution and other metrics are
applied to the dataset but not discussed in this paper. For more
information on social network analysis metrics, the reader can
refer to [18]. All of the general metrics are compared to other
ﬁelds in order to highlight speciﬁcities of the privacy research
community.
In order to investigate the communities of researchers, we
apply the modularity based clustering algorithm [19]. Note that
all graph visualizations of this paper are performed using the
Gephi visualisation software [20].
2) Algorithms to identify key authors: We apply several
centrality algorithms to identify the key users of the graph.
Centrality deﬁnes the importance of a node depending on its
position in the graph [21]. We applied the following measure of
importance: degree, weighted degree, betweenness centrality,
closeness centrality and PageRank [22]. Degree measures the
number of distinct collaborators (number of edges). Weighted
degree highlights the number of collaborations (sum of edges
weights). Betweenness centrality measures how intermediate
a given node is in the graph. It is based on appearance of
a node in the shortest paths between any couple of nodes in
the graph. It can be interpreted as with a kind of diversity
in collaborations. PageRank is built on the hypothesis that
important authors are authors whose collaborators are also
important (high number of links). It is an iterative process.
III.
RESULTS
A. Dataset general statistics
The collected dataset contains 13,646 conference proceed-
ings and journal articles from the ACM digital library having
16,766 distinct authors. Most of the collected articles were
published by ACM (11,587 articles) and a minority was pub-
lished by partner publishers, such as IEEE Press (256 publica-
tions), IEEE Computer Society (176 publications), Australian
Computer Society Inc. (116 publications) and Consortium for
Computing Sciences in Colleges (102 publications).
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Fig. 1 highlights the number of the articles published every
year by the privacy community. The blue line highlights the
number of publications observed in our dataset; the orange
dashed line is a linear trend-line. We observe that the ﬁeld
gained regularly in popularity and particularly between years
2007 and 2009 probably due to smartphones that cause many
privacy and security concerns. We observe linear augmentation
in yearly publications: the privacy ﬁeld gains in the average
202 articles by year over the last ten years (R2 > 0.93).
Figure 1.
Evolution and trends in the number of published articles by year
over the last ten years
Fig. 2 shows the distribution of authors regarding the
number of articles they published (blue dots). A trend line is
displayed as dashed yellow line. We observe that the decrease
in publications by authors in the privacy community follows
the Lotka’s law with parameters C = 28, 424 and exponent
k ≈ 3. We note that the exponent k is closer to 3 than to 2 as
expected in well known bibliometrics datasets [17]. According
to [23], this observation reveals that the privacy research ﬁeld
is a particularly productive community that is overestimated
by the Lotka’s law with exponent k = 2 and instead tends to
follow the cube relationship (Y = C/X3).
Figure 2.
Research production in privacy ﬁeld (logarithmic scale)
Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the authors in privacy
community over the last 10 years. Fig. 3 shows the total
number of unique authors by year, new authors and leaving
authors. The new authors are the authors that publish their
ﬁrst article on the studied research topic at a given year. The
authors are considered to be leaving the community if no
article were published by the author after the given year. We
observed that 15% of researchers have a 2 years delay between
two publications, therefore we do not consider leaving authors
for the years 2014 - 2015 as they could still publish in the
near future and probably are still active in the community
(e.g., working/reviewing/waiting decisions of papers). Even if
the majority of authors are new authors, we observe that the
community of republishing authors grows linearly: each year,
the community gains authors and regularly keeps some of the
new authors.
Figure 3.
New, republishing and leaving authors by year.
Fig. 4 represents the number of authors according to their
community publishing lifetime L. The publishing lifetime
represents the number of years the author were observed in the
community. The upper score indicates the number of incoming
authors while the lower score indicates the number of leaving
authors. We observe that most of the privacy authors (86,5%)
had only a one year lifetime (L = 1), it means that the
majority of the new authors are also leaving authors. Those
authors could be researchers from different ﬁelds having short
collaborations with the privacy community researchers. Fig. 4
depicts the number of researchers that stayed in the community
more than a year. The minority of the authors leave the
community in two years and approximately the same amount
of authors were observed in the community during the full
study period. Most of the privacy researchers contributes in
the community for a period of 5 years (⟨La⟩ = 5).
We propose to have a closer look on the publication lifetime
of the top 5 authors chosen by their lifetime and the number
of published articles (Fig. 5). All the ﬁve authors are a part of
the community from at least 2006 and are active publishers till
2016. Elisa Bertino (grey line) is the most productive author
publishing in average 8 articles by year (publishing peak in
2009 with 18 published articles). Lorrie Faith Cranor (yellow
line) and Ahmad Reza Sadeghi (orange line) in average publish
5 articles per year. Ninghui Li (blue line), Adam Lee (cyan
line) and Ting Yu (green line) have an average publishing of
4 articles per year.
B. Co-authorship analysis
1) Large scale observations: Fig. 6 shows a global view of
the obtained graph G(N, E) composed of 16,766 nodes and
21,113 edges. One can observe a giant component that illus-
trates that most of privacy community has a core research com-
munity of collaborators and a set of isolated small connected
Figure 4.
Number of authors according to their publishing lifetime L
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Figure 5.
The publishing activity of the top 5 privacy authors for the last
ten years
Figure 6.
Privacy community co-authorship graph.
components (isolated collaborations). The giant component
consists of 6,959 authors (41.5% of the total author number)
and 11,373 collaborations (53,8% of total collaborations). An
interactive graph of a subset of the privacy research community
is available online at [24]. The density of the observed network
is measured as ≈0.00015, which is relatively low but not
surprising. This number illustrates that there is approximately
0.015% of chance that a random couple of researchers of the
community has ever co-authored an article.We also observe a
high number of connected components not belonging to the
giant component (about 2,632). Most of these components are
of size 2, 3 and 4 (small dots on the ﬁgure).
To get a better understanding of the speciﬁcities of the
privacy research ﬁeld, we propose to compare global char-
acteristics of the graph to well-known co-authorship graphs
of other research ﬁelds (i.e., Management, Physics and IT).
The comparison features are displayed in Table I: number of
authors, number of papers, average degree, main component
size, main component percent, clustering coefﬁcient, mean
authors per paper, mean papers per author. We observe that
Privacy research ﬁeld is the unique sample that has a higher
number of authors than the number of papers. This matches
with the mean authors per paper feature that is signiﬁcantly
high in our dataset. This indicates that researchers of privacy
research ﬁelds tend to publish with a higher amount of co-
authors. This is certainly a proof of the particular dynamic of
the ﬁeld. However, we note that the average degree (number
of collaborators by author) is relatively low compared to the
mean authors per paper. This may reveal diversity in behavior
between researchers (some having a very high number of
collaborators versus some having a very few collaborators -
see Fig. 7). The clustering coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly high
compared to the other research ﬁelds which reveals that if an
author x publishes with author y and author z, it is very likely
that y and z publishes also together. Note that this result is
also partly due to the high number of co-authors per papers.
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF CO-AUTHORSHIP FEATURES FOR DISTINCT
RESEARCH FIELDS
Privacy
Management
Physics
IT
Number of
authors A
16,766
10,176
52,909
11,994
Number of
papers N
13,646
11,022
98,502
13,169
Average
degree (col-
laborators
per author)
2.5
2.43
9.7
3.59
Main
component
size
6,959
4,625
4,4337
6,396
Mean
authors per
paper ⟨An⟩
3.32
1.88
2.530
2.22
Mean
papers per
author ⟨Na⟩
2.25
2.04
5.1
2.55
Main
component
%
41.5%
45.4%
85.4%
57.2%
Clustering
coefﬁcient
0.8
0.681
0.430
0.496
Reference
Our
study
[25]
[26]
[26]
2) Authors characterization: We have applied the follow-
ing centrality measures to the co-authorship graph: Degree,
Weighted degree, Closeness, Betweenness and PageRank. Ta-
ble II presents the top 5 authors according to the degree,
weighted degree and PageRank. Three researchers (Elisa
Bertino, Wei Wang, Adam Lee, Ahmad Reza Sadeghi) are
highlighted in bold due to their apparition in top 5 of the
three metrics. Table III shows top 5 authors according to the
closeness and betweenness centralities where we observe 4
authors in common: Elisa Bertino, Michael Reiter, Ari Juels
and Gene Tsudik (shown in bold).
The unweighted degree measures the total number of
distinct collaborators for each author. The maximum degree
of 68 is observed for Elisa Bertino; Ahmad Reza Sadeghi is
observed to be the second most collaborative author having
nearly half less collaborators (37 co-authors).
Fig. 7 shows the degree distribution representing the num-
ber of authors according to the number of unique collabo-
rators they had during the last 10 years. A relevant ratio of
authors (46%) collaborated with only 2 researchers and only
a very small portion of authors collaborated with more that
15 researchers (0.5%). It is, however, more common to have
a single collaborator (23.9%) than having three collaborators
(16%). Considering only the giant component of the graph,
most of authors have at least 3 collaborators and the average
degree rises to 3.2.
It is interesting to note that authors having the highest
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE II. TOP 5 AUTHORS ACCORDING TO DEGREE, PAGERANK AND WEIGHTED DEGREE MEASURES
Rank
Author
Degree
Author
Weighted degree
Author
PageRank
1
Elisa Bertino
68
Elisa Bertino
138
Elisa Bertino
0.0023
2
Ahmad Sadeghi
37
Adam Lee
74
Wei Wang
0.0013
3
Wei Wang
31
Ting Yu
68
Ahmad Sadeghi
0.0012
4
Adam Lee
31
Li Xiong
66
Adam Lee
0.001
5
Ninghui Li
29
Ahmad Sadeghi
64
Mahesh Tripunitara
0.0009
Figure 7.
Authors and the number of unique collaborators (Degree distribu-
tion of the graph G(N, E))
Figure 8.
Author graph ﬁltered by the node degree up to 25
number of collaborators do not collaborate with each other.
Fig. 8 depicts the graph where nodes were ﬁltered by degree
to only keep track of authors having at least 25 unique
collaborators. The size of the nodes shows the degree of the
node before the ﬁlter is applied, authors names are proportional
to the node size, the link shows the collaboration and the
node colors indicated the modularity class (modularity class
reﬂects the different clusters identiﬁed using the optimisation
based algorithm). Elisa Bertino co-authored with only one
researcher that has as many collaborators as herself (Ninghui
Li with 29 unique co-authors). Ahmad Reza Sadephi, Wei
Wang and Adam Lee both having 31 unique co-authors, Serge
Edelman (27 collaborators) and Li Xiong (26 collaborators)
never collaborate with each other.
The weighted degree represents the number of collabora-
tions and not only the number of collaborators. Comparing to
the degree ranking, we observe that Ting Yu and Li Xiong
replaces Wei Wang and Ninghui Li at the top 5. Even if those
authors have less unique collaborators (25 for Ting Yu and 26
for Li Xiong), their total quantity of collaborations is higher
(68 for Ting Yu and 66 for Li Xiong): it means that they prefer
long term collaborations with the same collaborators.
Fig. 9 represents the authors that collaborate the most
with each other (more than 9 collaborations). The thickness
of the edge corresponds to the edge weight and the node size
Figure 9.
The most collaborative authors.
corresponds to the node degree before ﬁltering. Ram Krishnan
and Ravi Sandhu co-authored 12 articles that is the maximum
value observed in our dataset. We observe that most of very
strong collaborations occurs between couples of authors. Also
we note that the privacy domain does not have any very
strongly collaborative communities of size 3 or more.
PageRank measures the prestige of the author in the
community. In our case, the top 4 authors are equivalent to the
top 4 authors ranked according to unweighted degree (Table
II). Mahesh Tripunitara replaces Ninghui Li on the ﬁfth place:
even if he has less collaborators and collaborations, he appears
to be connected to more prestigious nodes.
Betweenness centrality measures how authors appear in
between others. Regarding co-authorship, high betweenness
can reveal an interdisciplinary researchers that are part of/in
the middle between different communities (all belonging to
a possible different clusters). Elisa Bertino and Ahmad Reza
Sadeghi appear to be highly collaborative with a diversity
of collaborators in terms of communities. We observe that
Michael Reiter, Gene Tsudik and Ari Juels also appear in-
between nodes probably due to a variety in their collaborators’
interests (Table III).
Closeness centrality highlights the authors that are the
closest to all other authors in the co-authorship network. That
would highlight the authors that one would contact if one wants
to relate to all/any other author of the network. We observe
that the results are similar to the betweenness centrality: only
Ahmad Reza Sadeghi is replaced by Peng Ning (Table III).
IV.
RELATED WORKS
Social network analyses ﬁeld gained considerable atten-
tion in bibliometrics to measure the evolution of research
ﬁelds using graphs. Multiple types of bibliographical data
may be modeled and analyzed as a directed/undirected and
weighted/unweighted graphs. Thus, co-citation graph may be
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE III. TOP 5 AUTHORS ACCORDING TO BETWEENNESS AND
CLOSENESS CENTRALITIES
Rank
Closeness
Betweenness
1
Michael Reiter
Elisa Bertino
2
Ari Juels
Ahmad Sadeghi
3
Elisa Bertino
Michael Reiter
4
Gene Tsudik
Gene Tsudik
5
Peng Ning
Ari Juels
built linking articles or authors that cite/are cited by other
articles or authors; co-authorship graph links two authors if
they co-published at least one article together; keywords graph
links keywords that appears together in the same article, etc.
Co-authorship network is frequently used to study scientiﬁc
collaborations and highlight the key actors of the ﬁeld. New-
man [27] studied co-authors in biomedical research, physics
and computer science between 1995 and 1999 and highlighted
the similarities between those networks. The authors of [28]
studied mathematics and neuroscience between 1991 and 1998.
In [29], authors studied scientometrics research collaborations
(1980-2012). The authors of [30] analyzed all publications of
the ACM Special Interest Group on Management of Data (SIG-
MOD) conferences between 1975 and 2002. In [31], authors
analyses co-publications of ACM and IEEE conferences (1994
and 2000). Resent studies analyzed co-authors in computer
science [32], eParticipation [33], industrial ecology [34], front-
end of innovation [35] and digital heritage [36] to cite a few.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the privacy research ﬁeld
from a computing and information technology perspective.
We collected and analysed 13,646 publications published by
16,766 authors. We characterized this community with general
statistics but also by analysing the underlying co-authorship
graph. We show that the privacy research ﬁeld is growing
(up to 200 contributions by year), productive and strongly
collaborative (about 2.5 collaborations per author) having high
average number of authors per paper (3.32). Authors contribute
to the community for an average time of 5 years. Using the
co-authorship graph, we identiﬁed a set of authors that are key
players of the ﬁeld: Elisa Bertino, Wei Wang, Adam Lee and
Ahmad Reza Sadeghi. Despite a strong activity, we highlighted
that key authors of these ﬁelds do not often collaborate
together. This work can be extended by qualitative analyses
of the top communities and by topics evolution analyses.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Cavoukian, “Privacy by design: The 7 foundational principles,” 2009.
[2]
“Privacy and data protection by design – from policy to engineer-
ing,” European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
(ENISA), Tech. Rep., December 2014.
[3]
J. H¨akkil¨a and J. M¨antyj¨arvi, “Developing design guidelines for context-
aware mobile applications,” in Mobility ’06: Proceedings of the 3rd
international conference on Mobile technology, applications & systems.
ACM, Oct. 2006.
[4]
E. Chin, A. P. Felt, V. Sekar, and D. Wagner, “Measuring user
conﬁdence in smartphone security and privacy,” in Proceedings of the
Eighth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, ser. SOUPS ’12.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 1–16.
[5]
C. Perera, C. McCormick, A. K. Bandara, B. A. Price, and B. Nu-
seibeh, “Privacy-by-design framework for assessing internet of things
applications and platforms,” CoRR, vol. abs/1609.04060, 2016.
[6]
S. Yu, “Big privacy: Challenges and opportunities of privacy study in
the age of big data,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, 2016, pp. 2751–2763.
[7]
K. Sokolova, M. Lemercier, and J.-B. Boisseau, “Respecting user
privacy in mobiles: privacy by design permission system for mobile
applications,” International Journal On Advances in Security, vol. 7,
no. 34, December 2014, pp. 110–120.
[8]
F. Stutzman, R. Capra, and J. Thompson, “Factors mediating disclosure
in social network sites,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 27, no. 1,
Jan. 2011, pp. 590–598.
[9]
K. Harris, “Privacy on the go,” California Department of Justice, Jan.
2013, pp. 1–27.
[10]
M. Haﬁz, “A collection of privacy design patterns,” in Proceedings of
the 2006 Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs, ser. PLoP ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 1–13.
[11]
G. W. van Blarkom, J. J. Borking, and J. G. E. Olk, “Handbook of
privacy and privacy-enhancing technologies,” 2003.
[12]
G. D’Acquisto, J. Domingo-Ferrer, P. Kikiras, V. Torra, Y.-A. de Mon-
tjoye, and A. Bourka, “Privacy by design in big data: An overview
of privacy enhancing technologies in the era of big data analytics,”
arXiv.org, Dec. 2015.
[13]
Y.
Deswarte
and
C.
Aguilar
Melchor,
“Current
and
future
privacy
enhancing
technologies
for
the
internet,”
Annales
Des
T´el´ecommunications, vol. 61, no. 3, 2006, pp. 399–417.
[14]
L. F. Cranor, P. Guduru, and M. Arjula, “User interfaces for privacy
agents,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, vol. 13,
no. 2, Jun. 2006, pp. 135–178.
[15]
A. for Computing Machinery. Acm digital library. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org
[16]
V. I. Levenshtein, “Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions,
Insertions and Reversals,” Soviet Physics Doklady, vol. 10, 1966, p.
707.
[17]
A. J. Lotka, “The frequency distribution of scientiﬁc productivity,” 1926.
[18]
R. Alhajj and J. Rokne, Encyclopedia of Social Network Analysis and
Mining.
Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2014.
[19]
M. Newman, “Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in
networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 69, September 2003.
[20]
M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy. Gephi: An open source
software for exploring and manipulating networks. [Online]. Available:
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/09/paper/view/154 (2009)
[21]
L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clariﬁcation,”
Social Networks, 1978, p. 215.
[22]
L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The pagerank citation
ranking: Bringing order to the web.” no. 1999-66.
Stanford InfoLab,
November 1999, Technical Report, previous number = SIDL-WP-1999-
0120.
[23]
D. J. d. S. Price, Little science, big science.
New York: Columbia
Univ. Press, 1963.
[24]
K. Sokolova and C. Perez. Privacy co-authorship graph. [Online].
Available: http://www.charlesperez.net/privacy
[25]
J. F. Acedo, C. Barroso, C. Casanueva, and J. L. Galan, “Co-authorship
in management and organizational studies: an empirical and network
analysis,” Journal of Management Studies., vol. 43, 2006, pp. 957–983.
[26]
M. Newman, “Scientiﬁc collaboration networks. i. network construction
and fundamental results,” Rev. E, vol. 64, 2001, p. 2001.
[27]
——, Who Is the Best Connected Scientist: A Study of Scientiﬁc Coau-
thorship Networks, E. Ben-Naim, H. Frauenfelder, and Z. Toroczkai,
Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
[28]
A. L. Barabasi, H. Jeong, Z. Neda, E. Ravasz, A. Schubert, and
T. Vicsek, “Evolution of the social network of scientiﬁc collaborations,”
arXiv.org, Apr. 2001.
[29]
M. Erfanmanesh, V. A. Rohani, and A. Abrizah, “Co-authorship net-
work of scientometrics research collaboration,” Malaysian Journal of
Library & Information Science, 2012.
[30]
M. Nascimento, J. Sander, and J. Pound, “Analysis of SIGMOD’s co-
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

authorship graph,” ACM SIGMOD Record, vol. 32, no. 3, Sep. 2003,
pp. 8–10.
[31]
X. Liu, J. Bollen, M. L. Nelson, and H. Van de Sompel, “Co-Authorship
Networks in the Digital Library Research Community,” arXiv.org, Feb.
2005.
[32]
G. Cabanac, G. Hubert, and B. Milard, “Academic careers in Com-
puter Science - continuance and transience of lifetime co-authorships.”
Scientometrics, 2015.
[33]
E. Kaliva, D. Katsioulas, E. Tambouris, and K. Tarabanis, “Under-
standing researchers collaboration in eparticipation using social network
analysis,” Int. J. Electron. Gov. Res., vol. 11, no. 4, Oct. 2015, pp. 38–
68.
[34]
J. Kim and C. Perez, “Co-authorship network analysis in industrial
ecology research community,” Journal of Industrial Ecology, vol. 19,
no. 2, 2015, pp. 222–235.
[35]
G. H. S. Mendes and M. G. Oliveira, “Bibliometric analysis of the
front-end of innovation,” in 2015 Portland International Conference on
Management of Engineering and Technology (PICMET).
IEEE, Aug
2015, pp. 648–661.
[36]
S. M¨unster and M. Ioannides, “A scientiﬁc community of digital
heritage in time and space,” in 2015 Digital Heritage, vol. 2, Sept 2015,
pp. 267–274.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

