Analyzing User Patterns to Derive Design Guidelines for Job Seeking and 
Recruiting Website  
 
Yao Lu 
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)  
Lausanne, Switzerland 
e-mail: yao.lu@epfl.ch 
 
Denis Gillet 
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 
Sandy El Helou 
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)  
Lausanne, Switzerland 
e-mail: sandy.elhelou@epfl.ch 
 
 
           Lausanne, Switzerland 
                      e-mail: denis.gillet@epfl.ch 
 
 
Abstract—More and more competitive websites are targeting 
online job seeking and recruiting. In this paper, we discuss 
user pattern in an online job seeking website in Switzerland, by 
analyzing user profiles and actions. Then based on our 
findings, we derive design guidelines to improve both the 
interface usability and the efficiency of the embedded 
jobs/candidates recommender system.  
Keywords-patterns; job seeking; recruiting; Web design; 
recommender system; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, job seeking and recruiting websites are 
becoming more and more popular [1]. These websites not 
only provide a prospective platform for information 
gathering but also support rich interaction features 
leveraging user interests [2][3]. From a business point of 
view, it is crucial to understand user patterns and make use 
of them, in order to improve the provided services and 
satisfy the customers [4].  
Analyzing user patterns is widely used not only for 
identifying group related activities but also for user behavior 
prediction based on previous users [5][6]. Patterns preserve 
common problem-solving knowledge to give recurring 
solutions for user-friendly design [7]. Unfortunately, there 
are only a few studies on online user patterns and design of 
the job seeking and recruiting websites [8]. In this paper, we 
analyze user profiles and interaction patterns on a job 
seeking and recruiting website.   
Usually, users of job seeking and recruiting websites split 
into two main categories: employer and candidates. They 
participate in the job seeking and recruiting process by 
completing their profiles and performing different actions. 
By relying on usage statistics, graphical visualization and 
analysis, we derive typical user interaction and profile 
patterns for both user categories. Based on the discovered 
patterns, we generate design guidelines for jobs/candidates 
recommender system as well as for the website’s interface. 
The guidelines proposed in this paper have contributed to 
increasing the number of overall visits of company, 
candidates, and job profiles by 300% within the period of 
one month. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
gives a general description of the website’s dataset. Section 3 
discusses user profile and interaction patterns. Section 4 
provides guidelines for designing the interface and the 
embedded recommender system, based on the analyzed user 
patterns and the experience with our case study. 
II. 
DATASET INTRODUCTION 
The dataset used in our case study includes more than 
7,000 candidate users (40% of which have provided CVs), 
320 companies, and 7,000 jobs. The time span is from May 
2008 to the beginning of February 2012.   
Candidates, company, and job-related statistics are given 
below. 
A. Candidate Statistics 
• 
80% of the candidates live in Switzerland. 
• 
There are twice more male that female candidates. 
• 
The average age is 27, and 88% of the candidates are 
between 22 and 35. 
• 
98.5% of the candidates are university students or 
graduates. 
B. Company Statistics 
• 
One in six companies is a startup. 
• 
Most of the companies are located in Switzerland 
and Germany takes up another big part. 
• 
320 companies cover 50 industry branches. The 
biggest industry group is IT, Internet services, and 
computer hardware/software. The next biggest group 
is management consulting. 
C. Job Statistics 
• 
89% of the posted jobs are hosted externally and the 
rest is directly posted on the website (using 
predefined forms). 
• 
61.7% of the jobs are located in Switzerland and 
37.3% in Germany. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-221-9
PATTERNS 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

III. 
USER PROFILE AND INTERACTION PATTERNS 
In this section we discuss user profile and interaction 
patterns in our case study.  
A. Input Patterns in User Profiles 
Of most job seeking and recruiting websites, user profiles 
are important for both employers and candidates. Taking 
candidates for example, they can either input their 
information online or upload CV files. Meanwhile, many 
websites support users to import their profile from other 
websites like LinkedIn [9].  
Online profile forms contain specified fields. For 
candidates, the main profile fields typically consist of 
personal information (name, gender, birthday, etc.), 
educational 
background, 
and 
work 
experience. 
For 
companies and jobs, the main fields are location, industry, 
description, and requirements. Data processing is usually 
easier when dealing with structured and standardized profile 
information, as in our case study. Profile input patterns can 
be summarized as follows: 
• 
Almost all companies and jobs have their basic 
information filled, and 70% provide more details 
regarding offers and requirements. 
• 
Considering the candidates who filled their online 
forms, the profile completion rate is rather 
satisfying. 86% of these candidates input their 
personal information (name, gender, age). Moreover, 
99.7% of them input their education while only 
51.4% input their work experience (probably 
because most of them are graduating students). The 
completion rate for the different profile fields is 
illustrated in Figure 1. 
• 
There is a preference for uploading CVs rather than 
filling online forms. In our case study, the website 
was supporting CV upload from November 2009 to 
October 2011. During this period, 57% of the 
candidate profiles were uploaded PDF files. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Profile completion rate per field 
B. Similarity Patterns in User Profiles  
On many websites, there is a recommendation list of 
items similar to the one a user is visiting [10]. For example, 
when a candidate is visiting a job page, similar jobs (in terms 
of location, industry, description) are recommended to that 
candidate. Similarly, when an employer is on a candidate’s 
page, other candidates with similar profiles (in terms of 
educational background, skills, work experience) are also 
recommended to that employer. Figure 2 shows an example 
of similar job recommendation on LinkedIn [9]. A 
prerequisite to provide such features is to compute similarity 
between entities of the same type. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Similar job recommendation in LinkedIn[9] 
In this section, we discuss profile similarity patterns 
illustrated using similarity graphs. Profile similarity consists 
of measuring the extent to which two user profiles are similar 
in terms of content. We construct similarity graphs for all 
types of users. In these graphs, an edge connects two user 
profiles if they have a similarity higher than a minimum 
threshold. We discovered that the graph of candidates and 
employers follow different patterns. We use an information 
visualization tool named aiSee [11] to build and visualize 
graphs of job, candidate, and company similarity. The profile 
similarity measurement is shown in Figure 3. 
As it is illustrated in Figure 3， there are two types of 
profiles: structured and unstructured. Structured profiles 
consist of several predefined fields that can be filled online 
like name, age, and education.  Unstructured profiles, on the 
other hand, are uploaded with no standardized format (e.g. 
uploaded CV files). For structured profiles, the overall 
similarity consists of a linear combination of weighted field 
similarity in the case of fields having predefined values and 
normalized content-based similarity in the case of free text 
fields. Table 1 shows the fields in candidate’s profile we 
select and the weight assigned to each field. The choice of 
the fields and their corresponding weights are set after 
discussion with company representatives. For them, the 
educational background, the university, and the degrees are 
the most important fields since their target customers are 
graduating students. When it comes to companies and jobs, 
the industry field, geographic location, job title/position and 
its requirements are important fields to consider for 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-221-9
PATTERNS 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

similarity measurement [12]. When it comes to unstructured 
profiles, it is difficult to extract corresponding fields. So, 
when comparing two PDF files or one PDF file and one 
structured profile, both are parsed into unstructured data and 
LSA (Latent Semantic Analysis) is used to compute their 
similarity. Both structured and unstructured profiles have 
textual content (i.e. description fields in online filled forms). 
In this case, we also use LSA to compute similarity. More 
specifically, we call APIs provided by Salsadev [13]. 
Through the process described in Figure 3, we obtain 
similarity of structured online profiles and unstructured 
uploaded profiles.  
TABLE I.  
SELECTED FIELDS AND WEIGHTS OF CANDIDATES’ ONLINE 
PROFILES 
Field 
Weight (%) 
Field 
Weight (%) 
Gender 
5 
Age 
10 
University 
10 
Study Course 
20 
Diploma 
10 
Language 
5 
Work Experience 
20 
Qualification 
10 
Extracurricular 
10 
Total 
100 
 
Database
Un-
structured
Structured
Field Select
Weighted
Function
Salsadev
Similarity
PDF Server
Un-
structured
Similarity
Salsadev
Similarity
 
Figure 3.  Similarity computation process for candidate profiles 
Figure 4 displays the similarity graphs for all user types. 
In these graphs, nodes represent users, and edges connect 
similar users. Radial layout is used and users with higher 
number of incoming edges (i.e. those having more similar 
users) are located in the center. Ignoring users that have no 
edges (not similar to any other user), we observe that the 
graph of candidates follow patterns that are different from 
other user types (jobs or companies). That is, company graph 
and job graph consist of clusters of small dense graphs， 
while the candidate graph consists of big radial clusters. 
However, according to a preliminary evaluation, this 
difference in patterns does not affect accuracy in any 
significant way. The use of structured candidates’ CVs yields 
more accurate results than unstructured CVs.  
 
(a) Company similarity graph 
 
 (b) Job similarity graph 
 
(c) Candidate similarity graph 
Figure 4.  User similarity graphs 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-221-9
PATTERNS 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Reasons for the difference in similarity patterns are 
discussed hereafter. In the graphs of jobs (Fig. 4a) and 
companies (Fig. 4b), there are many small, dense graphs 
with a small number of nodes but most of them are 
connected to each other. But in candidates’ graph, there are 
big, radial clusters. Splitting the candidates similarity graph 
into a graph for structured candidate CVs and another graph 
for unstructured CVs, still displays the same pattern. This 
indicates that the patterns observed in candidate graphs are 
not due to dealing with unstructured CVs. On the other hand, 
a closer look at company and job graphs, shows that 
company and job nodes tend to cluster by their dominant 
factor. In our case, the dominant factor of company is 
industry. That is because we use location, industry, and scale 
to compute the similarity and, as it is described in section 2, 
most of the companies are located in Switzerland. As a 
result, it is the industry field that makes the difference, and 
contributes the most in forming clusters of similar 
companies. When it comes to jobs, the dominant factor is the 
company that posts them. It is not only because the same 
company usually offers jobs with similar requirements 
related to the company’s industry but also because job 
descriptions follow the same style and use the same set of 
terms. As a result, most jobs posted by the same company 
form one cluster. But when it comes to candidates, it is 
difficult to label clusters in the profile similarity graph. The 
main reason is that there is no dominant feature for 
candidates. There are much more fields considered for 
candidates than for companies (country, industry, scale) and 
jobs (company, location, title, description). In addition to the 
multiple fields contributing to the similarity pattern, many 
candidates have more than one input for each field. For 
example, they may have multiple interests, and may have 
studied in more than one university. Taking the field as an 
example, in our measurement, if two students have at least 
one field of study in common, they are considered as similar 
along this attribute. For example, if student A studies finance 
and business, student B studies finance and computer 
science, they are considered as similar in terms of their field 
of study. So a group of nodes with multiple, overlapping 
values are clustered. In contrast, companies and jobs usually 
have one value in most fields.  
In addition, candidate similarity is not necessarily 
transitive. Let us consider a student C that has studied 
computer science and graphic design. Ignoring all other 
fields, C is similar to B because they both studied computer 
science but C is not similar to A. It is also observed that the 
nodes in the center of a radial graph tend to have multiple 
backgrounds. This is due to the fact that there are more nodes 
similar to them along different directions.  
Based on the similarity patterns observed for profiles, 
potential discussions about the user classification, pattern 
improvement, and contribution to the recommendation will 
produce more interesting discoveries. We summarize some 
limitations exclusively relying on content-based analysis to 
produce recommendations: 
 
Candidates tend to mention multiple interests 
without the possibility to specify their order of 
preference. 
 
Two candidates with a high similarity in their 
profile may not attract employers in the same way. 
 
While computing profile similarity, it is impossible 
to set the field weights in such a way to satisfy 
every user, as all users have different priorities. For 
example, some candidates focus on employers in 
the same industry with their majors while other 
candidates are more concerned about the location 
of their jobs.  
To better understand the users, and deliver personalized 
jobs recommendation, it is deemed important to leverage 
users interest by examining how they interact with the 
website. Actions such as rating a job, liking/disliking a 
company, adding a company event or a candidate profile to 
one’s favorite list are useful indications of interest. In the 
next section, we discuss the user interaction patterns derived 
from logged user actions. 
C. User Interaction Patterns 
Job seeking and recruiting usually provide some social 
media features like connect, like, share, and recommend to 
friends. These features do not only help user discover interest 
and opportunities, but can also be exploited in recommender 
systems [14]. Figure 5 shows two screenshots from LinkedIn 
and Xing [15]. When it comes to our case study, the possible 
actions are summarized below: 
• 
Visit 
• 
Share 
• 
Like/Dislike 
• 
Rating 
• 
Recommend to friends 
• 
Add to favorite list (or bookmark) 
• 
Apply (for a job) 
 
 
Figure 5.  Social media features in LinkedIn and Xing[9][15] 
On the interface, most of the buttons to perform 
interactions and express interest are located in easy-to-use 
places. According to user action logs, the interactions are 
sparse and the majority of the users are anonymous.  
Interactions follow a long tail distribution [16]. In our case, 
taking visits as an example, 20% of the users contribute to 
more than 70% of performed visits. Figure 6 shows the long 
tail by ranking users by the number of their page visits. 
Meanwhile, majority of users are anonymous. According to 
data logged between May 2011 and February 2012, on a total 
of 1.4 million visits, only 2278 were contributed by logged in 
users, i.e. 98.3% of the visits are anonymous. Interestingly, 
from April 2011 to September 2011, the website allowed 
anonymous users to bookmark candidate, job, or company 
profile pages. The result was that anonymous users were 
responsible for 99.7% of the actions of bookmarking. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-221-9
PATTERNS 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

 
Figure 6.  Long tail of performed visits 
IV. 
WEB DESIGN GUIDELINES 
In this section, we provide a list of design guidelines 
based on the case study, and more specifically: the analysis 
of user profile, interaction patterns and the interface usability 
analysis. These guidelines can help in designing usable 
interfaces and job recommendation services for online job 
seeking and recruiting websites. In our case for example, 
applying the guidelines provided below, contributed to an 
increase of 300% in the number of visits within the period of 
a month: 
• 
Users tend to be anonymous which renders pattern 
analysis less personalized. So website registration 
should not be difficult or time consuming. Instead, 
low entry barriers should be adopted, and profiles 
could be filled progressively. User interest should be 
leveraged in a semi-automatic way by combining 
different techniques such as content-based and 
interaction-based analysis. 
• 
Mining 
user 
interactions 
on 
the 
website 
complements content-based profile analysis in 
deriving user patterns and delivering personalized 
recommendations. Social media features such as 
bookmarking, liking/disliking and rating should be 
used to encourage interactions and infer user interest. 
Nevertheless, when it comes to job recruiting 
websites, these features should be “built-in” and 
should not be imported from other sites such as the 
Facebook “like” button [17] or the Twitter “share” 
button [18]. The main reason for that is that 
candidates do not necessarily want that everyone in 
their social network know that they “liked” a job. 
Thus, using a Facebook button would discourage 
them from expressing interest. Last but not least, 
using external features prevents the website from 
being able to log the corresponding user actions and 
exploit them for data mining and recommendation 
purposes. 
• 
Obviously, the location of the interaction features is 
essential. Bookmarking or adding to favorites is 
deemed useful and widely used in many online sites 
(e.g. social sites, e-commerce, job seeking sites). 
Surprisingly, we had only very few records of such 
features in our study. Usability analysis showed that 
it was the feature’s inadequate position that 
dramatically affected its usage. Instead of being 
placed on the homepage, the user had to go to 
settings to find his/her list of favorites. So it was 
time consuming for candidates to perform extra 
actions to access it in order to bookmark a company 
or job page. 
• 
Based on observed patterns, users tend to upload CV 
files rather than fill online forms. Therefore, 
websites should provide various ways for users to 
provide 
their 
information, 
like 
online 
form, 
uploading, and file import from other existing sites. 
On the other hand, since it is easier to process 
structured data, incentives for filling online forms 
should be created for users. 
• 
Content-based profile analysis is not by itself 
sufficient 
to 
leverage 
user 
interests, 
while 
interaction-based analysis has the problem of sparse 
data, as reported earlier. To overcome each method’s 
limitations, a hybrid job recommender system, 
which combines the two techniques, should be 
adopted. All data types, including structured content, 
unstructured content, and recorded interactions 
should be explored. Using hybrid recommendation 
techniques help cope with the data sparseness and 
cold start problems. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, we analyze user profile and interaction 
patterns for an online job seeking and recruiting website.  
Based on our user pattern analysis, we provided guidelines 
for the design of the website’s interface and the embedded 
recommender system. In the future, we will continue to 
analyze the data from the website for further user pattern 
analysis. A user study will also be conducted to assess the 
impact of our design guidelines on the website’s usability 
and evaluate the accuracy of the embedded job/candidate 
recommender system. 
References 
[1] Jobvite 2011 Social Recruiting Survey. Dec. 2011.  
http://recruiting.jobvite.com/ 
[2] P. Lops, M. D. Gemmis, G. Semeraro, F. Narducci and C. 
Musto, “Leveraging the linkedin social network data for 
extracting content-based users profiles,” Proceeding of the 
fifth ACM conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys 
‘11), 
ACM, 
Oct. 
2011, 
pp. 
293-296, 
doi:10.1145/2043932.2043986 
[3] N. B. Ellison, C. Steinfield, and C. Lampe, “The benefits of 
Facebook “Friends”: Social Capital and College Students Use 
of 
Online 
Social 
Network 
Sites,” Computer-Mediated 
Communication, vol. 12, iss. 4, July. 2007, pp. 1143-1168, 
doi: 10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x. 
[4] Edmond H. Wu, Michael K. Ng, Andy M. Yip, and Tony F. 
Chan, “A Clustering Model for Mining Evolving Web User 
Patterns in Data Stream Environment,” Proceeding of 
Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning 
(IEDAL 2004), pp. 565-571, doi: 10.1.1.4.8132.  
[5] A. Ross, C. B. Owen, and A. Vailaya, “Models for User 
Access Patterns on the Web: Semantic Content versus Access 
History,” Proceedings of 5th Annual World Conference on 
the WWW and Internet (Webnet 2000), pp. 464-469, doi: 
10.1.1.117.7275. 
Users 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-221-9
PATTERNS 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

[6] S. Han, A. Goker, and D. He, “Web User Search Pattern 
Analysis for Modeling Query Topic Changes,” Information 
Processing & Management, vol. 38, iss. 5, 2002, pp. 727-742, 
doi: 10.1016/S0306-4573(01)00060-7. 
[7] I. Wentzlaff, and M. Specker, “Pattern-based development of 
user-friendly web applications,” Proceedings of ICWE '06 
Workshop proceedings of the sixth international conference 
on 
Web 
engineering, 
ACM, 
July. 
2006, 
doi: 
10.1145/1149993.1149996. 
[8] B. J. Jansen, K. J. Jansen, and A. Spink, “Using the web to 
look for work Implications for online job seeking and 
recruiting”, Internet Research, vol. 15, iss.1, 2005, pp. 49-66, 
doi: 10.1108/10662240510577068. 
[9] http://www.linkedin.com/ 
[10] B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan and J. Riedl, “Item CF 
Item-based 
Collaborative 
Filtering 
Recommendation”, 
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World 
Wide Web (WWW ‘01), ACM, May 2001, pp. 285-295, doi:  
10.1145/371920.372071. 
[11] http://www.absint.com/aisee/ 
[12] S. L. Rynes, R. D. Jr. Bretz, and B. A. Gerhart, “The 
Importance of Recruitment in Job Choice: A Different Way of 
Looking,” Personnel Psychology, vo. 44, iss. 3, Sept. 1991, 
pp. 487-521, doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6570.1991.tb02402.x. 
[13] http://www.salsadev.com/ 
[14] R. Rafter, Keith. Bradley, and B. Smyth, “Automated 
collaborative filtering applications for online recruitment 
services,” Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems, 
Springer-Verlag 
Press, 
Aug. 
2000, 
pp. 
363-368, 
doi: 10.1007/3-540-44595-1_48. 
[15] https://www.xing.com/ 
[16] A. Enders, H. Hungenberg, H Denker and S. Mauch “The 
long tail of social networking. Revenue models of social 
networking sites”, European Management Journal, vol. 26, iss. 
3, Feb. 2008, pp. 199-211, doi: 10.1016/j.emj.2008.02.002.  
[17] http://www.facebook.com/ 
[18] https://twitter.com/ 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-221-9
PATTERNS 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

