Embedding and Detecting Patterns in a 3D Printed Object 
 
Kosuke Nakamura, Masahiro Suzuki, Hideyuki Torii, 
Kazutake Uehira 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
e-mail: gorisan_manju@yahoo.co.jp,  
msuzuki@ctr.kanagawa-it.ac.jp,  
{torii, uehira}@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
Youichi Takashima 
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories 
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation 
Yokosuka, Japan 
e-mail: takashima.youichi@lab.ntt.co.jp
 
Abstract—This paper presents a technique for pattern 
embedding inside a real object fabricated with a 3D printer 
and a technique of detecting the pattern from inside the real 
object. The purpose of this technique is to hide information 
inside a real object by embedding patterns. The patterns are 
formed inside the object when the object is fabricated. The 
thermal conductivity of the pattern region differs from that of 
the other regions. Therefore, the pattern inside the object can 
be detected using thermography. In this study, we use plaster 
powder as the starting material, and the object is produced by 
sintering. However, the pattern region is formed by not 
sintering it, that is, the pattern region remains as powder. 
From the experiment, we find that we can detect patterns using 
thermography when the pattern size is 2 mm x 2 mm or larger, 
and we confirm the feasibility of this technique. 
Keywords-3D printer, information embedding, thermography, 
pattern detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 3D printer has become compact and inexpensive, 
and its use is expected to become widespread in the future.  
We proposed a technique that embeds patterns inside real 
objects fabricated by 3D printers that cannot be observed 
from the outside [1][2]. The embedded patterns express 
certain information, that is, this technique can embed 
information inside a real object. We also proposed a 
technique that can non-destructively analyze the pattern 
inside real objects and read embedded information [1] [2]. 
We expect that this technique will be useful for applications 
such as embedding descriptions of objects inside the objects 
themselves. Moreover, it is possible to embed  copyright 
information for the design data for a 3D object as a 
watermark. Related work was reported by K. D. D. Willis 
and A. D. Wilson [3]. They first made some product parts, 
one of which had visible pattern, and assembled these parts 
into one product such that patterned part was inside. 
However, with our technique, the product that includes 
patterns inside is formed as one unit, rather than several parts 
to be assembled later. 
In our previous studies [1] [2], we used plastic resin as 
the material of the object, and patterns were formed by 
making cavities inside the object fabricated with a 3D printer. 
We could detect the embedded pattern from the image 
captured by thermography by utilizing the difference in the 
thermal conductivity between the cavity and the plastic resin.  
This paper proposes a new technique to form patterns 
inside an object when using plaster as the material for 3D 
printing. This paper also presents an experiment we 
conducted to confirm the feasibility of the proposed 
technique.  
II. 
EMBEDDING AND DETECTING PATTERN IN AN OBJECT  
Figure 1 shows the basic concept of the technique we 
proposed. Since the pattern region is formed inside the object, 
it is invisible from the outside. The heat conductivity of the 
pattern region is lower than that of the other regions of the 
object. Therefore, if the pattern region is formed near the 
surface of the object, the pattern appears in the thermal 
image of the surface when the surface is heated because the 
heat  conduction from the surface to the inside is reduced by 
the pattern region. 
Figure 2 indicates the method we propose to form a 
pattern region whose heat conductivity is lower than the 
other regions. This technique required the use of an inkjet 3D 
printer. First, a layer of plaster powder was paved, and it was 
solidified by jetting binder onto this layer in accordance with 
3D data. However, the binder was not jetted on the powder 
in the pattern region. Therefore, the powder remained in the 
pattern region. This process was repeated. Finally, the 
(a) Forming powder layer and solidification following 3D data 
(b) Repeating forming powder 
layer and its solidification 
(c) Forming layers above pattern region 
Powder layer 
Solidified layer 
Nozzle 
Binder 
Pattern region 
Figure 1. Basic concept of technique we proposed. 
Pattern region 
Object fabricated 
with 3D printer 
Figure 2. Forming pattern inside object fabricated with 3D printer. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

pattern region was covered with a solidified layer. 
The arrangement of the patterns express information 
although they are invisible from the outside of the object. 
Thermography is used to see the pattern inside. First, the 
temperature of the surface of the object rises by heating the 
object. This results in heat conduction from the surface to the 
inside of the object. Heat conduction is reduced by the 
pattern region because its heat conductivity is lower than that 
of the solidified region. This causes the temperature of the 
surface area above the pattern to increase, and the 
temperatures of such areas become slightly higher than those 
of the other areas. Therefore, if we obtain the temperature 
profile of the surface of the object using thermography, we 
can determine the arrangement of the patterns, i.e., we can 
read out the information embedded in the object. 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
We evaluated the feasibility of the proposed technique. 
Figure 3 shows the sample used in the experiment, which 
was produced with an inkjet 3D printer. In this experiment, 
we embedded binary data using small rectangular patterns. 
That is, the existence or absence of a small rectangular 
pattern at 25 designated positions expresses “1” or “0”. The 
size of the pattern was changed as one of the experimental 
parameters. 
We investigated to determine if the embedded pattern 
could be detected in the sample image captured using 
thermography. If we could detect the pattern, we evaluated 
how small a pattern could be detected and how accurately 
the embedded patterns could be detected, that is, how 
accurately the embedded binary data could be read out.     
Figure 4 illustrates the experimental system. We used 
two 500-W halogen lamps to heat the object surface. The 
lamps were placed at a distance of 10 cm from the sample. 
Thermography with a resolution of 160 x 120 pixels was 
used to capture a thermal image of the surface of the object. 
The temperature resolution of the thermography was 0.1 
degrees. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 5 shows part of the image captured by 
thermography. The embedded patterns can be seen in the 
image. The pattern in the dotted-line circle is that of Group A. 
Table 1 indicates the accuracy for reading out 25 binary 
data for each group. For Groups A and B, we achieved an 
accuracy of 100%, that is, embedded information could be 
read out with an accuracy of 100% when we used a pattern 
with a size of 2 x 2 mm or more.  
V. 
 CONCLUSION 
  This paper proposes a new technique to form powder 
shape patterns inside an object fabricated with a 3D printer 
using plaster as the material. The purpose of this technique is 
to embed information using powder shape patterns and 
detecting them in the object. From the experiment using 
thermography, we confirmed that the embedded patterns can 
be detected from the outside and the embedded information 
could be read out correctly when patterns with a size of 2 x 2 
mm or more are used. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Suzuki, P. Silapasuphakornwong, K. Uehira, H. Unno, and 
Y. Takashima, “Copyright Protection for 3D Printing by 
Embedding Information inside Real Fabricated Objects”, 
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on 
Computer Vision Theory and Applications, vol. 3, pp. 180–
185, 2015 
[2] P. Silapasuphakornwong, M. Suzuki, H. Unno, H, Torii, K. 
Uehira, and Y. Takashima, “Nondestructive Readout of 
Copyright Information Embedded in Object Fabricated with 
3D Printers”, Digital-Forensics and Watermarking LNCS 
9569 Springer, pp. 232–238, 2015J 
[3] K. D. D. Willis and A. D. Wilson, “Infrastructs: Fabricating 
information inside physical objects for imaging in the 
terahertz region,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 32, no. 
4, pp. 138:1–138:10, 2013. 
Figure 3. Sample used in experiment  
Figure 4. Experimental system 
Sample 
Thermographic camera 
Halogen lamp 
40 mm 
40 mm 
10 mm 
1 mm 
Positions where no pattern exists 
Positions where pattern exists 
Pattern size (mm) 
Group A: 2.5 x 2.5 x 2.0 
Group B: 2.0 x 2.0 x 2.0 
Group C: 1.5 x 1.5 x 2.0 
Group D: 1.0 x 1.0 x 2.0 
2 mm 
(a) 
Top view 
(b) Cross-section 
Group D 
Group A 
Group B 
Group C 
TABLE I.  
ACCURACY IN READING OUT INOFRMATION  
Group (size) 
Accuracy (%) 
A (2.5 mm x 2.5 mm)  
100 
B (2.0 mm x 2.0 mm) 
100 
C (1.5 mm x 1.5 mm) 
72 
D (1.0 mm x 1.0 mm) 
76 
 
Figure 5. Image captured by thermography 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

