Analysing Human Migrations Patterns Using Digital
Social Network Analysis
Charles Perez
PSB Paris School of Business, Chair D3 Digital, Data, Design,
Paris, France
email:c.perez@psbedu.paris
Abstract—The success of smartphones and digital social networks
has permitted a constant increase in the mobile social networks
of users in the last decades. It is now possible for anyone to share
content with enriched metadata, providing user’s context and, in
particular, times and locations. Contextual information associated
with messages’ content allows for the large-scale analysis of users’
spatio-temporal behaviour, affording various possible applications
(e.g., geo-marketing, security, smart cities). A number of studies
have focused on spatio-temporal social data analyses for event
detection and the identiﬁcation of region of interests. This paper
proposes a methodology that relies on social network analyses to
identify the migrations of users between regions of interest. The
proposed methodology allows for the capture of similar events and
their characterization by participants’ behaviour (source location
and destination, etc.). The methodology is tested on 3 millions
tweets from the San Francisco Bay Area.
Keywords–Social media, Social network analysis, Region of
Interests, Migration,Spatio-temporal graphs, Twitter.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of smartphones, in conjunction with the
success of social platforms, has led to an increase in mo-
bile social applications. Smartphones capture spatio-temporal
traces of interactions with an internal clock and a GPS. This
allows for new services to be available to users and also
becomes an opportunity for research activities to understand
communication and relations between humans in space and
time at a large scale.
The Twitter microblogging platform is an example of a
mobile application that allows the public to share contextual
information. It is currently one of the top public sources
of spatio-temporal data with an estimated 20% of tweets
geolocated [1]. Microblogging is a type of blogging that allows
for brief text updates. Due to the short length of messages,
approximately half of Twitter users access the platform through
a mobile application installed on their smartphones, generating
large amounts of spatio-temporal data to be analysed.
It is common to represent a social network as a social
graph denoted G(N, E), where N represents the set of nodes
and E the set of edges. Proﬁles are represented by nodes
while edges represent relationships between proﬁles. These
relationships illustrate any type of interaction captured online
between a given pair of proﬁles. Social platforms compute
the social graph from connections between individuals based
on their inclusion in a contact list. However, other types of
interactions may be retrieved and analysed. For example, two
individuals communicating about the same subject may be
considered connected in examining communities of interests. A
diffusion graph is an another example, wherein two individuals
are connected when one retweets the other. Diffusion graphs
are often used for analysing virality in social networks.
This article proposes the study of two different types
of relationships related to spatio-temporal data. First, spatio-
temporal graphs of meetings between people capture the qual-
ity of spatio-temporal data and the number of users concerned
about such types of analyses. Second, using previous obser-
vations, the study proposes computing the migration graph
of regions of interest (ROI). Dynamic analyses of such a
graph highlight the relationships between ROI at multiple
scales. It is likely that this contribution will allow for a better
understanding of human mobility patterns and could allow
for the identiﬁcation and qualiﬁcation of ROI from a novel
perspective (variety of people concerned, temporality of event,
distance of people coming to the event, etc.).
The remainder of the article is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the related works. Section III describes
an approach to building and analyzing the spatio-temporal
patterns of users. Section IV reports the results on a dataset
of 3 millions tweets collected from Twitter. The article ends
with a brief discussion and a conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Many works have modelled and analysed human mobility
patterns. While in the past, collecting such data required
speciﬁc devices [2], [3], smartphones and social media have
helped in overcoming this limitation.
A common method to model spatio-temporal interactions
is to use temporal graphs. As deﬁned in [4], a temporal
graph is a graph observed at different times as a sequence of
time windows. A temporal graph is denoted Gw
t (tmin, tmax),
where w is the time between two snapshots, the starting
time of the experiment tmin and the ending time tmax.
The temporal graph is a sequence of the following graphs:
{Gtmin, Gtmin+w, . . . , Gtmax}. At each frame, one observes
the relationships between actors are observed and represented
as a graph.
Various, state-of-the-art approaches differ in the way that
graphs are built using spatio-temporal data. The authors of [5]
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

propose a time aggregated graph to model temporal graphs.
Each relationship (i.e., edges) is represented with a series
of time labels indicating the type of relationship observed
in each time frame. Such an approach reduces storage and
computational costs. In their work to detect malicious circles
of users, the authors of [6] employed a spatio-temporal co-
occurrence graph. This graph is generated from posts published
on Facebook whose spatio-temporal constraints are adapted to
match an original friend graph. They found that particular con-
straints allow for ﬁnding strong correlations between the two
graphs. In [7], authors analysed data generated by smartphones
using Bluetooth. They proposed a proximity network, com-
posed of people and connections between them. Connections
are established when people spend more than a certain number
of minutes together. The authors of [8] propose the concept
of encounter networks. Such a network is deduced from the
number and duration of meetings between two individuals.
Each edge is weighted using a friendship probability measure
that depends on the number and duration of meetings.
In [9], the authors analysed ﬂuctuations in the activity
of mobile phone users based on the number of calls per
hour and per geographical location. The approach permits
the detecting of abnormal spatio-temporal patterns, such as
events. The authors of [10] also present a statistical approach to
detect events from mobile devices. The approach discovers the
busiest locations at a city-wide scale and detects unexpectedly
busy locations. In [11], the authors estimate the centres of
earthquakes and the trajectories of typhoons from Twitter
activity. A method for detecting ROI from Twitter network
is proposed by [12]. Such geo-social event detection relies
on the geographical regularities observed in user behaviour
with regard to the normal level of interest from a geographical
region.
Spatio-temporal considerations have also been integrated
into collaborative ﬁltering [13]. The approach relies on the cal-
culation of user similarity, such as spatio-temporal proximity.
Spatio-temporal proximity is calculated as the ratio of items
that each pair of users has consumed in the same time and at
the same place. The authors of [14] studied the geography
of the Twitter network, ﬁnding that geographical distance,
language, and country have a role in determining the creation
of a connection on Twitter. In [15], the authors show that it
is possible to detect the location of users depending solely on
the content of their tweets and are able to estimate a Twitter
user’s location in a city with the technique.
The authors of [16] proposed a method to evaluate the
relationship between social ties and spatio-temporal patterns.
The approach divides the world into discrete cells and counts
co-occurrences based on the observation of individuals in
the same cell at the same time. The approach proposes a
probabilistic model to infer friendship on the Flickr networks.
Co-occurrences are based on the fact that two users took
pictures in the same spatio-temporal frame.
In [17], authors analysed spatio-temporal data generated
by smartphone users. Their analysis focuses on the contact
duration and frequency between two individuals. They propose
applying a community detection based on a graph weighted
by contact duration. The authors of [18] propose integrating
spatio-temporal considerations in multi-layer friendship mod-
elling. This friend recommendation system takes into account
the social graph layer, interests graph layer, and co-occurrence
graph layer. The location metric between two users is deﬁned
as the minimum value of the update distance divided by the
sum of updates times in the two locations. They show a clear
correlation between such indicators and the fact to be friend
or not on the mobile social network.
The mobility patterns of Foursquare users were analysed
in [19]. The authors expose geo-temporal rhythms, check-
in dynamics, and activity transitions to highlight possibilities
of integrating spatio-temporal patterns into recommendation
systems. The authors of [20] analysed the event-based social
network (EBSN). The paper highlights the speciﬁcities of such
networks, such as the correlations between online and ofﬂine
relationships. The authors apply this cyber-physical analysis to
study community detection and information diffusion. A study
of 100,000 anonymous mobile phone users over a period of
6 months was conducted by the authors of [21]. The authors
highlight that human trajectories have a high degree of spatio-
temporal regularity. Moreover, humans tended to only move
within a set of limited locations during the experiment. This
observation is important as it indicates that human mobility
observations follow simple, reproducible patterns.
To the best of the current study’s knowledge, this article is
one of the ﬁrst to focus on how social users migrate between
events.
III.
METHODOLOGY
This section presents the general methodology for building
migration networks from contextual social data. Such networks
allow for connections between locations of interest (medium
to large-scale events) based on the migration of Twitter users.
The ﬁrst subsection presents the process to identify ROI based
on Twitter users meetings. The second subsection presents an
algorithm for creating the migration graph. Applications of this
methodology are discussed later in the paper.
A. Overview
Figure 1 displays the main steps of the methodology pro-
posed in this paper. First, Twitter data in the San Francisco Bay
Area was crawled for a period of 3 months. The crawler relies
on the Twitter streaming application programming interface
(API) and provides tweets belonging to the deﬁned area (step
I). More than 3 million tweets were collected during this
step. From the collected tweets, spatio-temporal proximity was
computed between the most active users to identify meetings
between people (step II). In step III, a spatio-temporal graph
of meetings is analysed. Such analysis allows for a better
understanding of the physical interactions between users and
provides an overview of the most active users (step IV). In step
V, a migration graph is built to identify dynamic changes in
ROI. Social network analysis (SNA) metrics applied in step VI
aid in further understanding of the size and the characteristics
of the ROI.
B. User selection and spatio-temporal meetings
Some proﬁles, despite geolocated tweets, are not suitable
for the current spatio-temporal analysis. Two different ty-
pologies of geolocated users were observed: (1) individuals
whose proﬁles are located and whose tweets are associated
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Figure 1.
Methodology for analysis of migrations of Twitter users between
regions of interest.
with the location of their proﬁle; (2) proﬁles that share their
location at the moment tweets are sent. The current study only
included tweets belonging to the 2 types of proﬁles in this
analysis. To ensure that only relevant proﬁles were included
in the analyses, a set of locations related to users’ tweets was
computed and it was veriﬁed that multiple locations exist in
the list. Proﬁles whose location remain constant were removed
from the analysis. Proﬁles that shared less than two updates a
day were also removed.
Meetings between proﬁles were computed as follows. If
two proﬁles belong to the same geographic area (the raw ρ of a
circle around the location of a user) at the same time (denoted
δt), they are concidered met. The global time frame for the
observation of proﬁles is identiﬁed by the interval I = [0, T].
For each observation time tk, the function of sharing local
spatio-temporal windows of dimension ρ ∗ δt is proposed.
Given that d(u, v) is a geographical distance between two
proﬁles (u, v) ϵ P 2, a spatio-temporal meeting at a given time
step tk can be identiﬁed as follows.
Meetk(u, v) =



1
if v ∈ {n ∈ P|
min[tk−δt, tk+δt] d(u, v) ≤ ρ
	
0
otherwise
(1)
Using the list of meetings, a spatio-temporal user proximity
graph is computed-denoted Guser(N, E)- where N denotes
proﬁles and E denotes meetings between them. For this
purpose, a weight is attached to each edge that corresponds
to the number of spatio-temporal meetings observed between
these two individuals as in (2).
w(u, v) =
n
X
k=1
Meetk(u, v)
(2)
When w(u, v) = 0, no meeting is recorded during the full
time of the experiment and no connection is created between
the two proﬁles. If Meetk(u, v) = 1, at least one meeting was
recorded during the time frame of the experiment. The choice
of the parameters (spatio-temporal frame ρ ∗ δt) depends on
the desired level of precision. For example, analysing global
spatio-temporal patterns over one year does not require strong
spatio-temporal constraints. However, detecting an event at a
city-scale requires strong spatio-temporal constraints. The next
section presents the capture of user migration between ROI.
C. Migration graph construction
As shown in Figure 2, the given area is divided into a
set of squared cells of length δz. The choice of the size
depends on the level of precision required for the performance
of the detection of spatial patterns and can be adapted as
necessary. The aim of the current approach is to assign each
cell to a geographical node and to evaluate the relationship
between these nodes based on the recorded meetings of users.
In the current study, two locations are connected whenever a
user meeting has been detected in both distinct locations. The
meetings need not to involves the same pair of individuals, but
instead at least one of the two individuals is required in both
locations. The edge is weighted by the number of moves made
between locations to capture ROI and migrations in a unique
algorithm. Note that ROI is this article are deﬁned as relatively
small geographical areas that receive a large number of users
over a short period of time. This is made possible without
any additional analysis due to the spatio-temporal constraints
applied to meetings. Indeed, Twitter users who tweet in the
same area at the same time are detected as met and this is more
likely to occur during events attracting a particular density of
individuals at a normal time. An individual sending a tweet
without other active users in the area is not included in the
analysis as they do not belong to a ROI. If a location is not
associated with an edge, it is considered irrelevant and removed
from the set of nodes (ROI).
Figure 3 presents the algorithm for computing the geo-
spatio-temporal graph. For each time step and each couple of
proﬁles (lines 1-2), the meet function (line 3) tests whether
or not a meeting is recorded. Each meeting is tracked and
associated with a timestamp and geolocation (line 4).
When all meetings are recorded, the relationships between
cells of the geographical space, delimited by the A and B
points, are extracted. Each cell is identiﬁed as a node with a
unique identiﬁer. The algorithm creates an edge between two
cells (i.e., two locations) when an individual has met (as stated
in equation 1) persons at least once in each location (line 10).
A matching function is used to identify the cells concerning
each meeting.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Figure 2.
Construction of spatial cells and identiﬁcation of meetings for
building edges of Ggeo(N
′, E
′).
Inputs:
Set of proﬁles P
Cell size δz
Spatio-temporal frame ρ ∗ δt
Spacial
borders
A(Latmin, Lngmin)
and
B(Latmax, Lngmax)
Time frame of observation I = [0, T]
Output:
Ggeo(N
′, E
′) the spatio-temporal geo graph
1 foreach time step k
2
foreach (u, v)ϵP 2
3
if Meetk(u, v) = 1 (see equation 1)
4
Meetings ←Record a meeting between u and
v at period k at location l
5
endif
6
endforeach
7 endforeach
8 N ′ ←set of squared cells of size δz delimited by A and B
(see Figure 2)
9 foreach couple of cells (c1, c2)ϵN
′2
10
ek(c1, c2) ←Number of Meetings that both belong
to c1 and c2
11
E′ ← e(c1, c2)
12 endforeach
13 return Ggeo(N
′, E
′)
Figure 3.
Pseudo-code for computing the spatio-temporal geo graph
The resulting graph Ggeo(N
′, E
′) of spatial locations re-
veals the frequency at which users meet at a particular place.
Since meeting is directly dependent on the online activity of
users online (e.g., sending messages), the graph permits to
illustrating the importance of each location for user activity.
In performing the algorithm, locations where individuals tend
to meet can be retreived, in addition to the migration of
individuals between locations.
The methodology allows for a vision of migration ROI, but
further analysis can be applied to the ﬁnal Ggeo(N
′, E
′) graph
to characterize the events. Table I presents the potential inter-
pretations of SNA metrics on the characteristics of an event
(nodes of the Ggeo(N
′, E
′) graph). The unweighted indegree
captures the number of locations people come from, providing
an idea of the variety of individuals than an event attracts (in
particular when applied worldwide). The unweighted outde-
TABLE I. SNA METRICS APPLIED TO NODES OF Ggeo(N
′, E
′) AND
THEIR POTENTIAL USE FOR BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF ROI.
SNA Metric
ROI Characteristics
Unweighted Indegree
Number of ROI people
comes before arriving to
the event.
Unweighted Outdegree
Number of ROI people go
after leaving the event.
PageRank
Importance of the ROI in
terms of ability to attract
people from other
important ROI.
HITS
Identify ROI that are hubs
and authorities.
gree captures the variety of locations people goes after leaving
an event. The PageRank captures the importance of an event
based on its ability to attract people coming from important
location [22]. For example, analysing information technology-
related tweets at a large spatio-temporal scale may allow for
the capture of the fact that a Consumer Electronics Show
(CES) event attracts many people coming from WebSummit,
contributing to the importance of both events. Finally, the
Hyperlink-Induced Topic Search (HITs) algorithm can provide
interesting interpretations when applied to Ggeo(N
′, E
′). The
algorithm assumes that nodes can be ranked in terms of their
ability to be good hubs and authorities [23]. In the present
case, a good hub could be concidered a ROI that points to
many other ROI, and a good authority would be an ROI that
is linked by many different hubs. A good hubs would typically
be an airport or a train station, while a good authority is an
event that succeeds in attracting people from many hubs. This
would be a way to capture popular events within a country,
region, or city.
IV.
EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
The analysis was performed on a sample of 3 millions
tweets sent by 50,000 active, geolocated Twitter users in and
around San Francisco. Figure 4 represents the spatio-temporal
graph extracted from the footprints of users in the area over
a period of 3 months. This sample is composed of 3,781
users twith dynamic, geographical data associated with their
messages. The spatio-temporal constraints in the analysis are
ρ = 0.6 miles and δt = 1 min. The graph is composed of
4,720 edges which indicates the number of recorded meetings.
Table II indicates the graph metrics, revealing the general
activity of San Francisco users. On average, people have
between 2 and 3 meetings during the observation time. The
maximum observed degree is 135, which is high. Nodes with
many meetings appear larger in ﬁgure 4. The modularity of the
graph is high, meaning that the network tends to organize into
clusters (spatio-temporal constraints tend to organize people in
communities).
The degree distribution highlights that a few nodes have
a high degree (10 nodes have a degree up to 50), while
most nodes have a low degree. This observation suggests that
some proﬁles have a central role in spatio-temporal meetings,
meaning that they are able to be very active and are regularly
observed in ROI.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE II. GRAPH METRICS OF THE SPATIO-TEMPORAL USER GRAPH
Graph Metric
Value
Nodes
3781
Edges
4720
Average Path Length
5.347
Modularity
0.769
Number of Communities
241
Density
0.001
Average Degree
2.497
Figure 4.
Aggregated spatio-temporal user graph from the full duration of
the experiment.
Figure 5 illustrates the results of the algorithm for two
distinct choices of δz and ρ spatial parameters. The back-
ground image illustrates the relationship between ROI regard-
ing the meeting of users in the San Francisco Bay Area. A
meeting is identiﬁed if two users have been observed in the
same neighbourhood (ρ = 0.8 miles) and at the same time
(δt = 30 s). Airports appear to be important ROI. Many events
also occur in the city center. The foreground image illustrates
the same algorithm when performed in the shortest space area
and with shorter geographical cells (i.e., ρ = 0.08 miles). This
more precisely highlights more precise possible ROI, such as
AT&T Park, Westﬁeld San Francisco Centre, Yerba Buena
Center for the Arts (YBCA), etc. The two ﬁgures illustrate
the performance of the algorithm at different scales. Note that
these graphs are based on all observations captured during the
experiment.
Moreover, analysis of the evolution Gk
geo graphs allows for
the discovery of particular temporal locations of interest for
users. Figure 6 highlights two graphs for different intervals
of time. One can observe the changes between the central
locations in the graph. Centrality indicates that an event has
occurred within the time interval. In other words, the location
has attracted many individuals who were previously meeting
in different locations.
Events can be detected by comparing the time frame degree
of nodes regarding their average degree. A high variation
indicates that an event likely occurs in the particular spatio-
temporal context. Due to constraints, more details concerning
Figure 5.
Example of ROIs relationships at two different spatial scales:
ρ = 0.8 miles for the San Francisco Bay Area map and ρ = 0.08 miles for
the San Francisco city map.
Figure 6.
Samples of the spatio-temporal graphs at three different time steps,
revealing multiple ROI and their relationships.
SNA metrics applied to the graph are not provided.
V.
DISCUSSION
This current study has several applications and potential
extensions to be discussed. For example, the study does not
include content-based analysis of tweets. A potential im-
provement would be the automatic identiﬁcation of the main
discussion topic of events using content-based analysis. The
current study can also be a ﬁrst step in the prediction of
the next location of users based on common patterns found.
It is likely that the graph parameters (nodes, edges, density,
degree distribution) can allow for the automatic identiﬁcation
of ROI. The best parameters may be found by optimizing some
of the graph features, such as modularity, or by analysing
the obtained degree distribution (e.g. parameters of the power
law). That study relies on tweets for measuring spatio-temporal
meetings provides some advantages and disadvantage. A dis-
advantage is the lack of a regular vision of the location of
users, which complicates the detection of small-scale events.
However, it is observe that people tend to tweet more when
participating in events, which, by construction, allows for most
of the captured meetings to be related to ROI.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The success of digital, social media, combined with smart-
phones, contributes to an increasing amount of spatio-temporal
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

data. Its availability for analysis can contributes to improving
of multiple ﬁelds. The current paper proposes a novel approach
to detecting spatio-temporal changes in crowds of Twitter
users. The study shows that the relationship between locations
based on the meetings of users can contribute to the detection
of large-scale events. This contribution allows not only for
the identiﬁcation of ROI for users, but also their evolution
and characterization at multiple scales. The efﬁciency of the
methodology is shown with a sample of 3 millions tweets in
the San Francisco Bay Area, analysed at different scales.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. D. Weidemann, “Geosocialfootprint (2013): Social media location
privacy web map,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Southern California,
2013.
[2]
E. Paulos and E. Goodman, “The familiar stranger: Anxiety, comfort,
and play in public places,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’04.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 223–230.
[3]
R. Want and O. R. Limited, “The Active badge location system,” 1992.
[4]
V. Kostakos, “Temporal graphs,” Physica A, vol. 388, no. 6, Mar. 2009,
pp. 1007–1023.
[5]
B. George and S. Shekhar, “Journal on data semantics xi,” S. Spaccapi-
etra, J. Z. Pan, P. Thiran, T. Halpin, S. Staab, V. Svatek, P. Shvaiko,
and J. Roddick, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2008, ch.
Time-Aggregated Graphs for Modeling Spatio-temporal Networks, pp.
191–212.
[6]
Z. Halim, M. M. Gul, N. ul Hassan, R. Baig, S. Ur Rehman, and
F. Naz, “Malicious users’ circle detection in social network based on
spatio-temporal co-occurrence.”
[7]
N. Eagle and A. (Sandy) Pentland, “Reality mining: Sensing complex
social systems,” Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 10, no. 4, Mar. 2006,
pp. 255–268.
[8]
D. Quercia, J. Ellis, and L. Capra, “Using Mobile Phones to Nurture
Social Networks,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 9, no. 3, 2010, pp.
12–20.
[9]
J. Candia, M. C. Gonz´alez, P. Wang, T. Schoenharl, G. Madey, and
A.-L. Barab´asi, “Uncovering individual and collective human dynamics
from mobile phone records,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical, vol. 41, no. 22, May 2008, p. 224015.
[10]
M. Loecher, M. Loecher, and T. Jebara, “CitySense TM: multiscale
space time clustering of GPS points and trajectories.” Joint Statististical
Meeting, 2009.
[11]
T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo, “Tweet analysis for real-time
event detection and earthquake reporting system development,” IEEE
Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng., vol. 25, no. 4, Apr. 2013, pp. 919–
931.
[12]
R. Lee and K. Sumiya, “Measuring geographical regularities of crowd
behaviors for Twitter-based geo-social event detection,” in Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Location
Based Social Networks.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 1–10.
[13]
A. de Spindler, R. De Spindler, M. C. Norrie, M. Grossniklaus, and
B. Signer, “Spatio-Temporal Proximity as a Basis for Collaborative
Filtering in Mobile Environments.”
Ubiquitous Mobile Information
and Collaboration Systems UMICS.
[14]
Y. Takhteyev, A. Gruzd, and B. Wellman, “Geography of Twitter
networks,” Social Networks, vol. 34, no. 1, Dec. 2011, pp. 73–81.
[15]
Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, and K. Lee, “You are where you tweet: A content
based approach to geo-locating twitter users,” in In Proc. of the 19th
ACM Int’l Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM), 2010.
[16]
D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Cosley, S. Suri, D. Huttenlocher,
and J. Kleinberg, “Inferring social ties from geographic coincidences,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 107, no. 52,
2010, pp. 22 436–22 441.
[17]
P. Hui and J. Crowcroft, “Human mobility models and opportunistic
communications system design,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
vol. 366, no. 1872, 2008, pp. 2005–2016.
[18]
N. Li and G. Chen, “Multi-layered friendship modeling for location-
based mobile social networks,” in 2009 6th Annual International Mobile
and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking Services, MobiQuitous, 2009, pp.
1–10.
[19]
A. Noulas, S. Scellato, C. Mascolo, and M. Pontil, “An empirical
study of geographical user activity patterns in foursquare,” in The
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, pp. 570–
573.
[20]
X. Liu, Q. He, Y. Tian, W.-C. Lee, J. McPherson, and J. Han, “Event-
based social networks: Linking the online and ofﬂine social worlds,”
in Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’12.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 1032–1040.
[21]
M. C. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi, “Understanding
individual human mobility patterns,” Nature, vol. 453, no. 7196, June
2008, pp. 779–782.
[22]
L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The pagerank
citation ranking: Bringing order to the web,” in Proceedings of the 7th
International World Wide Web Conference, Brisbane, Australia, 1998,
pp. 161–172.
[23]
J. M. Kleinberg, “Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment,”
J. ACM, vol. 46, no. 5, Sep. 1999, pp. 604–632.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

