Information Demand Patterns 
Capturing Organizational Knowledge about Information Flow 
 
Kurt Sandkuhl 
Institute of Computer Science, The University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany  
and 
School of Engineering, Jönköping University, Sweden 
Kurt.Sandkuhl@uni-rostock.de 
 
 
Abstract—The work presented in this paper aims at 
contributing to reduced information overload in organizations. 
We propose to capture organizational knowledge about the 
typical information demand of an organizational role in an 
information demand pattern, which can serve as basis for 
analyzing 
information 
flow 
problems 
and 
developing 
organizational and technical improvements. The contributions 
of this paper are (1) the concept of an information demand 
pattern, (2) the structure for textual descriptions of such 
patterns, and (3) experiences from the development and 
validation process. The approach is based on an industrial case 
and illustrated by an example pattern. The main achievements 
are validated research results, i.e. the concept of information 
demand patterns and actual patterns. 
Keywords: Information demand; organizational knowledge 
pattern; information logistics; information demand pattern 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The work presented in this paper aims at contributing to 
reduced information overload in organizations by capturing 
reusable organizational knowledge about information 
demand in so called information demand patterns. 
Information overload has been a phenomenon observed and 
discussed in the literature since many decades. One of the 
pioneers 
of 
computer-supported 
collaborative 
work, 
Vannevar Bush, foresaw already in 1945 that it would not be 
possible to manage all information we collect in our 
“bewildering store of knowledge” [13]. Simpson and Prusak 
discussed in 1995 [14] a conceptual model for reducing 
overload by using quality attributes to information. 
Nowadays, information overload is also perceived as a 
problem in enterprises. Today’s enterprise information 
systems usually support well-defined work flows and routine 
activities by sophisticated solutions. But for exceptions from 
daily routine, ad-hoc tasks or seemingly unstructured 
activities, quickly finding the information needed is a 
challenge. Some studies show that users spend a lot of time 
in searching for the right information causing unnecessary 
delays and costs. An example is [17] showing that 2 out of 3 
top or mid-level managers participating in a study among 
Swedish enterprises perceive an information overload due to 
“far too much information” (37%) or “too much 
information” (29%). Since accurate and readily available 
information is essential in decision making situations, 
problem solving and knowledge-intensive work, an 
improved information supply would contribute significantly 
to saving time and most likely to improving productivity. 
The paper aims at contributing to the reduction of 
information overload by bringing together experiences from 
organizational knowledge management and pattern-based 
reuse in information system development. We propose to 
capture 
organizational 
knowledge 
about 
the 
typical 
information demand of an organizational role in an 
information demand pattern, which can serve as basis for 
analyzing information flow problems and developing 
organizational 
and 
technical 
improvements. 
The 
contributions of this paper are (1) the concept of an 
information demand pattern, (2) the structure for textual 
descriptions of such patterns including an example, and (3) 
the development and validation process in an industrial case.  
The remaining part of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes the background for this paper and 
introduces related work. Section III presents an industrial 
case motivating the work. Section IV introduces the concept 
of information demand pattern, including a definition of the 
term, the structure of pattern descriptions and an example. 
Section V describes the development process and validation 
of this pattern. Section VI summarizes the work and 
discusses future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
A. Organizational Knowledge Patterns 
Background for the work presented in this paper is 
research in enterprise knowledge modeling with the 
objective to make organizational knowledge reusable by 
applying techniques from enterprise modeling. 
In general terms, enterprise modeling is addressing the 
systematic analysis and modeling of processes, organization 
structures, products structures, IT-systems or any other 
perspective relevant for the modeling purpose [18]. 
Enterprise knowledge modeling combines and extends 
approaches and techniques from enterprise modeling. The 
knowledge needed for performing a certain task in an 
enterprise or for acting in a certain role has to include the 
context of the individual, which requires including all 
relevant perspectives in the same model. Thus, an essential 
characteristic of knowledge models are “mutually reflective 
views of the different perspectives included in the model” 
1
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

[8]. Enterprise knowledge modeling aims at capturing 
reusable knowledge of processes and products in knowledge 
architectures supporting work execution [19]. 
In this context, we define the term organizational 
knowledge pattern as follows: 
An organizational knowledge pattern is a formalization 
of knowledge for a recurring organizational task abstracting 
from organization-specific aspects, which is of value for an 
organizational actor and an asset for an organization. 
In the context of this definition, the following 
characteristics of organizational knowledge patterns (OKP) 
have to be emphasized: 
 
OKP need to represent organizational knowledge, not 
individual knowledge, i.e. support the organizational 
knowledge creation process, the organizational context 
for use of knowledge by individuals as opposed to 
supporting knowledge creation of an individual. 
 
OKP address recurring organizational tasks and at the 
same time abstracting from a specific organization, i.e. 
like most other kinds of patterns in computer science is 
the description of the core elements independent from 
the actual solution for an organization.  
 
OKP are expressed in a formalized way, which requires 
a formal language or at least a structured representation. 
Thus, OKP are explicit knowledge. 
 
OKP are an asset of the organization, i.e. are not only a 
resource as such but capture knowledge about the 
resource’s use. This means they do not only capture how 
to use the pattern (as for many computer science 
patterns) but how to use the resource.  
 
An OKP is of value for an organizational actor in its 
original form and / or its adaptation for a specific 
organization. 
B. Related Work 
For more than a decade, patterns have been popular in 
computer science and were introduced for numerous areas, 
like software design, information modeling or business 
processes. Although there is no generally accepted definition 
of the term pattern, most publications in the field get some 
inspiration from Christopher Alexander’s definition: “Each 
pattern describes a problem which occurs over and over 
again in our environment, and then describes the core of the 
solution to that problem, in such a way that you can use this 
solution a million times over, without ever doing it the same 
way twice” [3]. Whilst Alexander’s focus is on the solution, 
many pattern approaches in computer science focus more on 
capturing proven practices or an advice on, how to approach 
certain problems.  
The seminal book on patterns was published by the 
“Gang of Four” [7] and focuses on software design patterns. 
Many other books followed, basically offering patterns for 
all phases of the software development process, including 
analysis patterns [5], data model patterns [8] or software 
architecture patterns [9]. The pattern idea was adapted in 
other areas of computer science, like ontology patterns [12] 
or groupware patterns [10]. 
Concepts, methods and technologies for identifying, 
capturing and reusing organizational knowledge have been 
subject of research in organizational sciences and industrial 
engineering since more than two decades. Patterns of 
organizational knowledge, such as task patterns [15] or 
workflow patterns [11] are a recognized contribution to this 
area. The term knowledge pattern has been explicitly defined 
by Clark, Thomson and Porter in the context of knowledge 
representation [2]. They define “a pattern as a first-order 
theory whose axioms are not part of the target knowledge-
base, but can be incorporated via a renaming of the non-
logical symbols” [2, p.6]. The intention is to help construct 
formal ontologies by explicitly representing recurring 
patterns of knowledge, so called theory schemata, and by 
mapping these patterns on domain-specific concepts. Staab 
et al. [4] investigated the use of so called “semantic patterns” 
for enabling reuse across languages when engineering 
machine-processable knowledge. Semantic patterns consist 
in this approach of one description of the core elements 
independent from the actual implementation and for each 
target language a description that allows for translating the 
core elements into the target language. 
III. 
INDUSTRIAL CASE 
The industrial case defining the context for work 
presented in this paper is taken from automotive industries 
and focuses on engineering change management in a 
networked organization with different suppliers. One partner 
is the business area “seat comfort components” of a first tier 
automotive supplier with the main product development sites 
in Scandinavia. The seat comfort products mainly include 
seat heater, seat ventilation, climate control, lumber support 
and head restraint. One of the sub-suppliers of this first tier 
supplier is performing different surface treatment services of 
the metal components. Surface treatment in this context 
includes corrosion protection, different technical coatings to 
achieve certain functionality or decorative coatings in order 
to reach matt, lustrous or colored surfaces. 
As part of the project “infoFLOW”, which runs from 
2006 - 2011 and includes 7 industrial and academic partners, 
the engineering change management process between the 
supplier and sub-supplier was analyzed including the 
different work steps involved, the roles included on both 
sides, the information and documents exchanged between 
both partners, common causes for problems in operations 
and the needs and goals of improvements. The process is 
geographically 
distributed 
involving 
engineers 
and 
specialists at several locations of the automotive supplier and 
sub-supplier. 
A 
large 
percentage 
of 
the 
produced 
components are parts of product families, i.e. various 
versions of the components exist and have to be maintained 
and further developed for different customers. In this 
context, managing different versions of specifications, 
change requests and production orders including their 
validity and date of effectiveness is of crucial importance. 
The results of the process analysis were captured in 
enterprise models and later used in the development of a 
method specialized on information demand analysis. 
Selected results of analyzing the engineering change 
process are: 
2
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

 
In both enterprises, many different persons involved in 
the change management are having similar roles, like on 
sub-supplier side different key account managers for 
different projects from the supplier or on supplier side 
product managers for different customer projects 
ordering surface specific treatments at the sub-supplier. 
 
The change management process as such is well-defined 
and agreed on. However, in daily practice the number of 
“exceptional” and “emergency” actions is significant 
and causing many situations where the defined process 
is not followed. 
 
Conventional business process improvement approaches 
were tried, but did not lead to significant improvements, 
which most likely is based on the large number of 
exceptions. 
 
Many 
change 
requests 
are 
time 
critical; 
not 
implementing them accurately or timely will cause high 
costs for supplier and sub-supplier, e.g. by coating 
thousands of metal components wrongly, which will not 
be accepted by the customer and have to be disposed. 
 
The roles perceive information overload, and at the 
same time an information “underload”: a lot of task-
related information is available and continuously 
reaching them, but the really relevant information often 
is “lost in the information flood” or not reaching them. 
Based on these results it was decided to use an approach 
for improving the process based on the information demand 
of the roles. To find reusable solutions applicable in several 
enterprises was considered an important goal and given 
priority in the project. 
IV. 
INFORMATION DEMAND PATTERNS 
Starting from a definition of the term information 
demand (Section IV.A), this section introduces the definition 
and structure of information demand patterns (Section IV.B) 
and presents an illustrative example (Section IV.C). 
A. Information Demand 
The notion of information demand is closely related to 
work in two areas: information logistics and information 
retrieval.  The main objective of the research field 
information logistics is improved information provision and 
information flow [6]. This is based on information demands 
with respect to the content, the time of delivery, the location, 
the presentation and the quality of information. The research 
field 
information 
logistics 
explores, 
develops, 
and 
implements concepts, methods, technologies, and solutions 
for the above mentioned purpose. 
As part of the information logistics research, Lundqvist 
[1] investigated the nature and characteristics of information 
demand (ID) in an enterprise context in an empirical study 
involving 3 organizations and 25 informants. The conclusion 
from the study is information demand of employees in an 
organization is to a large extent based on the organizational 
role, i.e. the information demand of a person is based on the 
roles and tasks this person has: “Information demand 
depends on the role and tasks an entity has within a larger 
organization. If the role and/or the tasks change, so too will 
the demand" [1, p. 60]. This role-centric perspective with 
task and responsibilities as primary characteristics has been 
the starting point for developing the approach of information 
demand patterns. 
Information 
retrieval aims at retrieving relevant 
information meeting the needs of a user, which are expressed 
by a query. In this context the aspect of relevance of 
information is of high importance. Saracevic [16] considers 
several types of relevance, e.g. algorithmic, topical and 
cognitive relevance. The underlying concept for algorithmic 
relevance is the relation between the query features and the 
search result. Topical relevance is the relation between 
aboutness of content objects and query. These two relevance 
concepts are important for retrieving information meeting the 
demand of a user, but do not contribute to explaining 
information demand as a concept. Here, we consider 
cognitive relevance of higher importance, which is the 
association between perceived information need of the user 
and information presented to the user based on retrieval 
results.  
B. Definition and Structure of ID-Patterns 
The general idea of information demand patterns is 
similar to most pattern developments in computer science: to 
capture knowledge about proven solutions in order to 
facilitate reuse of this knowledge. In this paper, the term 
information demand pattern will be defined as follows: 
An information demand pattern addresses a recurring 
information demand problem that arises for specific roles 
and work situations in an enterprise, and presents a 
conceptual solution to it. 
An information demand pattern consists of a number of 
essential parts used for describing the pattern: 
A statement about the organizational context where the 
pattern is useful. This statement usually identifies the 
application domain or the specific departments or functions 
in an organization forming the context for pattern definition. 
Problems  of a role that the pattern addresses. The tasks 
and responsibilities a certain role has are described in order 
to identify and discuss the challenges and problems, which 
this role usually faces in the defined organizational context. 
The conceptual solution that resolves the problem, which 
for information demand patterns includes three parts: 
 
Information demand of the role, which is related to the 
tasks and responsibilities, is described as part of the 
pattern, i.e. the different parts of the information 
demand are identified 
 
Quality criteria for the different parts of the information 
demand include the general importance of the 
information demand part, the importance of receiving 
the part completely and with high accuracy, and the 
importance of timely or real-time information supply  
 
a timeline indicating the points in time when the 
different information parts should be available at the 
latest 
The effects that play in forming a solution. If the needed 
information part should not be available or arrive too late this 
might affect the possibility of the role to complete its task 
3
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

and responsibilities. The effects described in the pattern 
include 
 
Potential economic consequences 
 
Time/efficiency effects, i.e. whether the role will need 
more time for completing the task or will be less 
efficient 
 
Effects on improving or reducing the quality of the work 
results 
 
Effects with respect to the motivation of the role 
responsible 
 
Learning and experience effects 
 
Effects from a customer perspective 
The above parts of a pattern are described in much detail 
in the textual description of the pattern, which is the main 
way of representing an information demand pattern (see 
Section IV.C for an example). Additionally, a pattern can 
also be represented as a visual model, e.g. a kind of 
enterprise model. This model representation is supposed to 
support communication with potential users of the pattern, as 
it illustrates the information demand context, including 
 
the relation of the role to co-workers and other roles in 
the organization 
 
the relation between the different parts of the 
information demand and IT system in the enterprise, 
which are potential source of this information 
 
the relation of tasks and responsibilities to processes in 
the organization 
C. Information Demand Pattern Example 
In order to illustrate the pattern approach, the information 
demand pattern “material specification responsible” was 
selected. Due to space limitations, only the textual 
description is presented, i.e. the visual representation is not 
included. The textual description follows the structure 
introduced in Section IV.B. The first element is the context 
where the pattern is useful: 
 
Context: 
The context for this pattern is manufacturing industries, in 
particular automotive industries and automotive suppliers. When 
developing new products or variants of the existing product 
families, usually a team of many different engineering disciplines is 
involved. One role in this team is the material responsible who is 
supposed to make sure that the applied materials meet the quality 
requirements of both, the customer of the supplier and the supplier 
as such. This role requires experience and accurate information 
about the material characteristics, test results, customer 
requirements, supplier information etc., which usually originate 
from different information sources and actors. The pattern 
describes the information demand typically experienced by the role 
responsible for contributing to product design processes. 
The pattern is supposed to be useful for manufacturing 
enterprises producing products with high demands to material 
characteristics developed in distributed teams of engineers. 
 
The next part is the problem addressed by the pattern: 
 
Problem: 
The pattern addresses the general problem of unnecessary 
shortcomings, product design or production problems caused by the 
materials used. This includes the following problems, which were 
observed by practitioners in product design projects: 
 
Changes in customer requirements affect the required features 
of the material, but this is difficult to detect in the change 
description. Thus, the material responsible does not receive 
this information, although changes in the material or 
adjustments would be necessary. Long-term effects could be 
production problems, acceptance failure by the customer or 
quality problems due to shortcomings in the material. 
 
Test results or policy changes, possibly from other business 
areas of the company using the same material, indicate that 
the use of the material should be changed. This information is 
not reaching the material responsible, as this role is not part 
of the respective work process or organization unit where the 
relevant information is produced. 
 
It follows the information demand, which is based on the 
task and responsibilities of the role under consideration: 
 
Information Demand 
The information demand is based on the tasks and 
responsibilities of the role. The tasks of the material responsible 
include 
 
Responsibility: the material selected for a certain product 
version fulfills all desired quality attributes, including 
customer requirements, internal policy, laws and regulations, 
sustainability, manufacturability 
 
Establish suitable test methods for the material (for example 
by selecting the appropriate ones or initiating new 
developments) and initiate tests continuously validating the 
desired quality of the material 
 
Specify material characteristics to be used in procurement 
 
The information demand of the role material responsible 
consists of: 
 
To receive information about all change requests from the 
customer side that possibly could affect the material of the 
product under design or manufacturing 
 
To get all information about changes in company-internal 
policies or in public laws and regulations regarding the use of 
the material in the company’s products 
 
To receive all information about customer complaints or 
complaints from the production site regarding the material 
 
To get all relevant information from material testing w.r.t. test 
results of the material in question and regarding modification 
or new developments regarding the test methods and test 
processes 
 
To get all information from the supplier side regarding 
changes in the characteristics of the material 
 
To receive reports and complementary information from 
certification organization, domain organizations or clusters 
regarding the material used. 
 
The quality criteria for the above information demand 
information uses three levels: 
 
Decisive: you can’t manage without this information 
 
High: it is very important to have, but in worst case you 
could complete the task without 
 
Nice to have: you will manage without this information, 
but the result will be not as good as with this 
information 
For each pattern, the quality criteria are summarized in a 
table, which includes the information demand (left column), 
4
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

the general importance of this information, and the 
importance to get the information accurately, as soon as 
possible (here: in close to real-time) and completely. Below 
is the table for the example pattern: 
 
Information 
Demand 
General 
importance 
Accurate 
In real-
time 
Complete 
Customer 
Change 
Requests 
decisive 
Decisive 
high 
Decisive 
Policy, law, 
regulation 
changes 
high 
High 
high 
Decisive 
Complaints from 
own production 
decisive 
High 
decisive 
High 
Customer 
complaints  
decisive 
Decisive 
high 
Decisive 
Test results 
high 
High 
high 
High 
Changes on 
supplier side 
high 
High 
high 
High 
Complementary 
information 
Nice to 
have 
Nice to 
have 
Nice to 
have 
Nice to 
have 
Table 1: Quality criteria for the information demand of the role 
“material specification responsible”  
The effects of not receiving the needed information or of 
receiving it to late is described in a short text and in a table. 
We will only include an excerpt of the text due to space 
limitations: 
 
Effects 
If the needed information should not be available or arrive too 
late this will have effects on the work of the material specification 
responsible: 
 
Economic effects: the economic consequences could be: in 
worst case costs for recall of non-functional parts;  increased 
cost for the component or product, reducing the profit margin 
for the supplier; increased level of investment in production 
equipment 
 
Time/efficiency of the task: production or product design will 
need much more time and will be less efficient. An example is 
when replacing one failing material, one extra test loop is 
required for the validation of the complete product  
 
Quality improvement or reduction: the quality of the products 
is positively or negatively affected by this information. 
Examples are: late reinforcements of the product, due to 
failing materials, might result in reduced performance, for 
instance in mechanical comfort level  
 
[…]  
V. 
PATTERN DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION 
The elaboration and validation of the concept of 
information demand pattern in general and of actual 
information demand patterns for specific organizational roles 
was performed in an iterative way consisting of various 
cycles, including both structure and content. Figure 1 
illustrates the overall approach. 
As indicated in Section II, the concept of information 
demand patterns is inspired by other work in computer 
science. Thus, the initial work on elaboration of the concept 
“information demand pattern” (marked as “1” in figure 1) 
focused primarily on the structure of such patterns based on 
the literature in the field. The validation of the initial 
structure (“2” in figure 1) consisted of checking this structure 
for internal consistency and soundness, and using it for 
capturing a very simple pattern example. The elaboration of 
the first actual pattern using the initial pattern structure 
consisted of selecting a simple but sufficiently complex 
organizational role and developing the content of the pattern 
for the selected role (step “3”). Afterwards, the initial content 
of the pattern again was validated by checking internal 
consistency and completeness, and by using own experiences 
(step “4”). Steps 1 to 4 form the first iteration, which was 
performed in a lab environment without involvement from 
actors outside the research team.  
The second iteration started with the next elaboration 
phase for the pattern structure (step “5”), which was based 
on experiences from elaborating and validating the first 
actual pattern (steps 3 and 4). Improvement of the pattern 
structure and the following step of validation for the 
improved version (step “6”) now also involved additional 
actors, namely the industrial partners of the infoFLOW 
project. Later iterations (i.e. steps beyond “8”) included 
elaboration and validation activities involving actors outside 
the project team and outside academia. The different iterative 
development steps did not change the structure of patterns 
significantly, but mainly contributed to a refinement of the 
level used for describing the quality criteria, the effects and 
the timeline. 
 
Fig. 1. Iterative process of elaboration and validation of 
information demand patterns.  
The pattern presented in Section IV was developed in the 
context of the industrial case introduced in Section III by 
analyzing a number of enterprise knowledge models with 
focus on reoccurring roles and their relations to processes 
and infrastructure resources. All enterprise models addressed 
different parts of collaborative product development in 
5
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

networked enterprises. The focus of the analysis was to 
identify roles reoccurring in the different models and 
indicating a specific information demand. The selected role 
“material specification responsible” appeared in several 
models developed. The information demand of these roles 
was derived from the textual descriptions accompanying the 
enterprise models and the scenario descriptions developed in 
the modeling process.  
The pattern was validated in two steps: The first version 
was presented, discussed and refined during an infoFLOW 
project meeting. This included a walkthrough the visual 
model and a in-detail discussion of the textual description. 
The revised version was presented to an industrial expert in 
the field who proposed changes and improvements, primarily 
regarding the effects to be expected and the required 
information quality. This refined version was again 
discussed in a project meeting. 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented an approach for capturing 
organizational knowledge about the information demand for 
an organizational role in information demand patterns. 
Starting from task and responsibilities of a role, these 
patterns identify the information needed for the role under 
consideration, the required level of accuracy, completeness 
and timeliness, a typical timeline, and the economic, quality, 
efficiency and customer effects of receiving the information 
too late of in insufficient quality. 
In their current development state, information demand 
patterns are supposed to contribute to explaining and 
investigating operational problems in an organization caused 
by information lack of a role: 
 
Patterns help to analyze and identify information 
demand problems. If an organization detects information 
problems in a certain part of the organization or intends 
to identify improvement potentials, a pattern can be used 
to compare the typical or desirable solution described in 
the pattern with the current situation in the organization  
 
Patterns identify and specify abstractions that are above 
the level of single solutions in specific enterprises and 
provide a common vocabulary and understanding for 
information demand problems. 
 
Patterns are a means of documenting solutions to 
information flow problems. 
 
Patterns help to manage information supply complexity 
by dividing larger information flow problems in smaller 
“modules”, which can be expressed in patterns. 
Future work will focus on four main aspects 
 
Increasing the number of patterns, applying them in 
organizations and evaluating the benefits of the 
information demand pattern approach 
 
Extending the patterns toward solutions for information 
supply, i.e. how can the information demand described 
in a pattern be supported by IT-solutions or 
organizational measures 
 
Investigate and define the process of adaptation of an 
information demand pattern to another context of use 
 
Development of a method for pattern development and 
refinement, including technical support for pattern 
management, like a pattern repository. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research presented was financed by the Swedish 
Knowledge Foundation (KK-Stiftelsen), grant 2009/0257, project 
“Demand Patterns for Information Logistics (infoFLOW-2)”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Lundqvist, M. (2007) Information Demand and Use: Improving 
Information Flow within Small-scale Business Contexts. Licentiate 
Thesis, Dept of Computer and Information Science, Linköping 
University, Linköping, Sweden, ISSN 0280-7971. 
[2] 
Clark, P.; Thompson, J., and B. Porter (2000). Knowledge Patterns. In 
A. G. Cohn, F. Giunchiglia, and B. Selman, editors, KR2000: 
Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, San 
Francisco, 2000. Morgan Kaufman. 
[3] 
Alexander, C. et al. (1977) A Pattern Language. Oxford, 1977. 
[4] 
Staab, S., Erdmann, M., and Maedche, A. (2001) Engineering 
Ontologies using Semantic Patterns. In D. O'Leary and A. Preece 
(eds.) Proceedings of the IJCAI-01 Workshop on E-business & The 
Intelligent Web, Seattle, 2001. 
[5] 
Fowler, M. (1997) Analysis Patterns. Addison Wesley, 1997. 
[6] 
Sandkuhl, 
K. 
(2008) 
Information 
Logistics 
in 
Networked 
Organizations: Selected Concepts and Applications. Enterprise 
Information Systems, 9th ICEIS 2008. LNBIP, Springer. 
[7] 
Gamma, Helm, Johnson, and Vlissides (1995) Design Patterns. 
Addison-Wesley, 1995. 
[8] 
Hay (1995) Data Model Patterns. Dorset House, 1995. 
[9] 
Buschmann et al. (2000) Pattern-oriented Software Architecture. 
Wiley. 
[10] Schümmer, T. and S. Lukosch (2007) Patterns for Computer-
Mediated Interaction, Wiley & Sons, ISBN: 978-0-470-02561-1, 
2007. 
[11] Van der Aalst, W.M.P., ter Hofstede, A.H.M., Kiepuszewski, B., and 
A.P. Barros (2003) Workflow Patterns. Distributed and Parallel 
Databases, 14, 5–51, Kluwer. 
[12] Blomqvist E. and K. Sandkuhl (2005) Patterns in Ontology 
Engineering – Classification of Ontology Patterns. Proc. 7th 
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, Miami, 
USA, May 2005. 
[13] Bush, V. (1945) “As we may think” The Atlantic Monthly, July. 
[14] Simpson, C.W. and L. Prusak (1995) “Troubles with Information 
Overload – Moving from Quantity to Quality in Information 
Provision”, International Journal of Information Management, Vol. 
15 No. 6, pp. 413-425. 
[15] Sandkuhl, K. (2008) Capturing Product Development Knowledge 
with Task Patterns: Approach and Economic Effects. Proceedings 
IMS 2008, Szczecin, Poland, IFAC paper online. 
[16] Saracevic, T. (1996) Relevance Reconsidered ´96. In Ingwersen, P.; 
Pors, N. O. (eds.): Information Science: Integration in Perspective. 
Royal School of Library and Information Science, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, pp. 201-218, 1996. 
[17] Öhgren, A. and K. Sandkuhl (2008) Information Overload in 
Industrial Enterprises - Results of an Empirical Investigation. 
Proceedings ECIME 2008, London, UK. 
[18] Vernadat, F.B. (1996) Enterprise Modelling and Integration. 
Chapman & Hall, 1996. 
[19] Lillehagen F. and D. Karlsen (1999). Visual Extended Enterprise 
Engineering 
embedding 
Knowledge 
Management, 
Systems 
Engineering and Work Execution. IFIP International Enterprise 
Modelling Conf., Norway. 
 
6
PATTERNS 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-158-8

