Developing Patterns Step-by-Step 
A Pattern Generation Guidance for HCI Researchers 
 
Alina Krischkowsky, Daniela Wurhofer, Nicole Perterer, Manfred Tscheligi 
Christian Doppler Laboratory for “Contextual Interfaces” 
HCI & Usability Unit, ICT&S Center, University of Salzburg 
Salzburg, Austria 
{firstname.lastname}@sbg.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—Despite the broad application and usefulness of 
patterns in many application areas, there is still a lack of 
information on how patterns are generated. In this paper, we 
introduce a step-by-step guidance for generating patterns in 
the domain of human-computer interaction (HCI). With our 
guidance, we support researchers in structuring and 
presenting gathered empirical knowledge for special contexts 
(automotive, home, mobile). By means of the pattern 
generation guidance, we support researchers without previous 
expertise in pattern generation to make their insights available 
for other HCI researchers. Furthermore, our approach 
enhances the pattern generation process towards more 
traceable and comparable patterns. 
Keywords-Pattern Development; Guidance; CUX Patterns 
I. 
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
Patterns have turned out to be a valuable tool for 
structuring and capturing knowledge in many application 
areas. For example, patterns are used in architecture, 
software engineering, interface design, pedagogics or 
ubiquitous computing (e.g., [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]). In 
these contexts, patterns have been applied to document 
proven solutions for reoccurring problems in a specific 
domain. In the field of human-computer interaction (HCI), 
patterns have been used for documenting results from 
empirical studies (see e.g., [7][8]). As patterns allow to 
structure and collect study results in a systematic manner, the 
gained knowledge can be easily and quickly provided to 
other researchers and stakeholders.  
 
Despite the broad application and apparent usefulness of 
patterns in general, there is still a lack of information on how 
patterns are generated. In fact, pattern generation seems to be 
more a matter of experience than of a structured process. In 
the pattern community, there is little literature available that 
tells more about the genesis of patterns. It still remains 
unclear how patterns actually come into existence and how 
patterns should be generated [7]. This makes it especially 
difficult for novices, who have no previous experience in 
developing patterns. In the area of HCI particularly, it turned 
out that patterns are a valuable tool to systematically 
structure and collect knowledge from empirical studies. 
There is a need for supporting researchers in developing 
patterns. Research in this area - i.e., how to come from 
empirical findings to patterns - is rare. There are some first 
attempts dealing with the generation of patterns; however, 
we did not find systematic descriptions of the generation 
process. Thus, the process of pattern generation can be 
considered as implicit knowledge – knowledge that is based 
on one’s expertise or experience and often hard to articulate. 
This is not only difficult for researchers who are unfamiliar 
with pattern generation but also poses the problem of 
traceability and comparability. To the best of our knowledge, 
a systematic guidance for developing patterns based on 
empirical study results does not exist to date.  
 
This prevalent deficiency encouraged us to develop a 
step-by-step online guidance for pattern generation in the 
area of HCI. In particular, we intended to support User 
Experience (UX) researchers in converting their gathered 
knowledge from empirical studies into patterns. The 
structural foundation for the intended patterns is the so-called 
Contextual User Experience (CUX) patterns format [9]. 
CUX patterns provide solutions on how to improve a user’s 
experience when interacting with an interface in a specific 
application area. They are characterized by explicitly 
combining contextual aspects and UX. 
 
The objective of this paper is to introduce a step-by-step 
UX pattern generation guidance. After motivating the need 
for systematic pattern generation guidance in Section I, we 
give an overview on patterns in HCI as well as on existing 
pattern development approaches in Section II. Based on a 
critical examination of existing pattern development 
approaches, we then present in Section III, our attempt to 
guide researchers in the pattern generation process. In 
Section IV, we provide insights on how we employed the 
suggested pattern guidance in a first pre-test in order to 
gather suggestions for further improvements and iterations. 
Based on related work done in this area, our proposed step-
by-step guidance as well as the insights gathered within our 
first employment, we then, in Section V reflect and discuss 
our actions taken and provide an outlook for future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. The Role of Patterns in HCI 
In HCI, patterns have gained a lot of attention over the 
last years. Especially in interface or interaction design, there 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

are numerous pattern collections (e.g., [10], [11], [4]). The 
concept of patterns in this area is known under different 
names; e.g., ‘interaction (design) patterns’, ‘user interface 
(UI) patterns’, ‘usability patterns’, ‘web design patterns’, 
‘workflow patterns’ or, more general, ‘HCI patterns’. 
Basically, these patterns provide solutions to commonly 
occurring usability problems in interaction and interface 
design. As the comprehensive use of patterns shows, patterns 
have been proven as a valuable tool for designing usable 
systems.  
 
Apart from dealing with common user interface or 
interaction problems, patterns have been also used to 
document knowledge based on empirical studies. Martin et 
al. [7] developed patterns for cooperative interaction in order 
to 
organize, 
present, 
and 
represent 
material 
from 
ethnographic studies. In their work, patterns primarily served 
as a vehicle for presenting the major findings of previous 
studies and as communicative devices. In contrast to 
interface or interaction design patterns, this approach does 
not deal with solution-orientated patterns but rather with 
descriptive patterns in the tradition of Erickson [12]. UX 
research represents another specific domain of HCI, where 
patterns have been deployed to collect and structure 
knowledge based on empirical findings [8]. In the following 
section, we will introduce the idea of UX patterns in more 
detail as this represents the basis for the patterns generated 
with our pattern generation tool.  
B. UX and Patterns 
One major aim of HCI research is to create a positive 
experience while interacting with an interface [13], [14]. 
Research in this area is often referred to as “UX research”. 
According to Alben [15], UX comprises all aspects of how 
people use an interactive product. This means, all the aspects 
of how people use an interactive product: the way it feels in 
their hands, how well they understand how it works, how 
they feel about it while they are using it, how well it serves 
their purposes, and how well it fits into the entire context in 
which they are using it [15]. Patterns have already been 
applied in the area of UX in order to structure and preserve 
knowledge. Blackwell & Fincher [16] suggest to adopt the 
idea of patterns and UX in the form of Patterns of User 
Experience (PUX). Such patterns should help HCI 
professionals to understand what kind of experiences people 
have with information structures.  
 
Obrist et al. [8] applied UX patterns to document 
knowledge on UX in the domain of audio-visual networked 
applications (e.g., Facebook or YouTube). By means of UX 
patterns, they intended to capture the essence of a successful 
solution to a recurring UX related problem or demand of 
audio-visual networked applications. They developed a set of 
30 UX patterns, summarizing the most important insights 
based on qualitative and quantitative studies. Thus, 
empirically grounded guidance on how to design for a better 
UX in audio-visual networked applications is provided. An 
extension of the UX patterns, are the so-called Contextual 
User Experience (CUX) patterns [9]. This approach relates 
contextual issues to UX and provides a pre-defined pattern 
structure to do so. Accordingly, patterns are “used to 
describe knowledge on how to influence the user’s 
experience in a positive way by taking context parameters 
during the interaction with a system into account.”   
C. Approaches on Pattern Generation 
As already stated before, there is not much literature on 
how to generate patterns. The process of looking for patterns 
is often considered as pattern mining [10]. However, pattern 
collections or languages are often introduced without 
explicitly stating how the patterns emerged. One of the few 
outlining their experiences and difficulties in developing 
patterns were Martin et al. [7], who deployed patterns for 
describing insights from ethnographic studies. They started 
pattern creation by looking, for instance, of repeated 
phenomena in ethnographic studies (re-examination of 
previous studies). Thereby, they included a reference to their 
context of production and seeking in their pattern 
descriptions. For them, the main purpose of patterns was to 
present major findings of previous studies and as 
communicative devices. For their creation of patterns, they 
began with looking for specific examples in a particular 
domain and then tried to expand the observed phenomena to 
other domains (similar but different examples).  
 
In his work, Vlissides [17] describes seven habits for 
successful pattern writers. According to the author, reflection 
is the most important activity in pattern writing; this should 
be done by thinking about the developed applications and the 
problems and (if existing) successful solutions. This will 
provide the raw material of patterns. Additionally, similar 
applications or domains with similar problems can also give 
support for problems and solutions and, therefore, for the 
development of a pattern.  
 
According to the author [17], the next step will be to 
choose a suitable and consistent structure for the patterns to 
be developed. Another important point in the development 
process of pattern is concreteness (compared to abstractness), 
meaning that concreteness improves the comprehensibility 
for people. It is also crucial to always keep the intents of 
patterns in mind, as well as the relationships between the 
patterns, so that the details of the patterns do not prevail. 
Moreover, effective presentation of patterns, including 
typesetting and writing style, is substantial for the quality of 
patterns. It is also important to mention that continuous 
iteration is essential, as patterns are never completed and 
always can be improved. Re-writing patterns, is therefore, a 
“normal” and necessary process. Finally, the collection and 
incorporation of feedback is another important step in the 
development of patterns. This includes the fact that patterns 
should be understandable to people, who had never been 
concerned with the problem before.  
 
In order to develop patterns, Christopher Alexander 
defined the following questions to be answered within the 
process of mining [1].  
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

1)  “What, exactly, is this something? We must define 
some physical feature of the place, which seems worth 
abstracting.  
2) What, exactly, is this something helping to make the 
place alive? Next, we must define the problem, or the 
field of forces, which this pattern brings into balance.  
3) And when, or where, exactly, will this pattern work? 
Finally, we must define the range of contexts where 
this system of forces exists and where this pattern of 
physical relationship will indeed actually bring it into 
balance.”  
Alexander already pointed out the difficulty of generating 
patterns: “One very important question in writing patterns is, 
of how someone can recognize a pattern when coming across 
one? A simple but precise answer to this question is, that 
someone cannot always know.”  
 
According to Appleton [18], the best way to learn how to 
recognize and document useful patterns is by learning from 
others how they have done it well. It might be a good idea to 
read several books and articles that describe patterns and 
then try to see the necessary pattern elements and desirable 
qualities of a pattern. It has to be highlighted, that it is 
important to be introspective about everything to read. 
However, this is again about implicit knowledge and does 
not make the process of generating patterns explicit. There 
exist different criteria, which should be met by patterns in 
order to be considered as “good” patterns [18]. Further, there 
are defined processes a pattern should undergo [19]: (1) 
pattern mining, (2) pattern writing, (3) shepherding, (4) 
writers workshop, (5) author review, (6) pattern repository, 
(7) anonymous peer review, and (8) pattern book 
publication. However, there are no specific descriptions of 
each process in detail, and it is still not explicitly described 
how a first version of a pattern is developed.   
D.  Pattern Generation as Implicit Knowledge 
According to May and Taylor [20], knowledge cannot 
always be handled directly. Knowledge emerges from a 
combination of expertise, perception, personal skill, and 
history, as well as constructive memory [21]. Indeed, some 
gathered information might be rather implicit and needs to be 
transferred into explicit knowledge. Thus, alternatives to 
capture and manage information in a way that supports 
making knowledge explicit and transferable are necessary. In 
order to capture and manage information to make knowledge 
more explicit, they suggest the use of patterns. Based on this, 
we see that the process of pattern generation can be 
considered as tacit or implicit knowledge – knowledge that is 
largely based on one’s experience and hold by experts in 
patterns and pattern development [20].  
 
It is quite common, that experts are unable to explain 
their methods or rationalize their actions. So far, the process 
of pattern generation is hardly explained in detail or 
described explicitly. In order to allow also non-experts to 
generate patterns, we aim to convert the implicit knowledge 
on pattern generation into an explicit one by applying our 
step-by-step pattern generation guidance. In this paper, we 
present a step-by-step pattern generation guidance whereby 
more details on our guidance are outlined below. 
III. 
A STEP-BY-STEP PATTERN GENERATION GUIDANCE 
Within our research activities, the need for pattern 
guidance occurred within two national projects. These two 
projects focus on interface research. One project especially 
takes into account UX in the automotive context, whereas 
the other project deals with advanced interfaces in the home 
and mobile context. In both projects we aim to preserve 
knowledge gained on UX and contextual aspects based on 
empirical studies. Therefore, we used the CUX patterns 
approach [9], which has already proved its value for 
collecting and structuring knowledge on UX [8]. In 
comparison to other pattern structures, the CUX patterns 
approach seemed as most appropriate as it explicitly 
considers the relation of UX and contextual aspects. As this 
is an objective of our research, we chose the CUX pattern 
structure as a tool for preserving our knowledge.  
 
Confronted with the fact that researchers involved in 
these projects were domain experts but mainly novices with 
regard to pattern generation, we systematically scanned 
literature in order to find advice for non-pattern experts on 
how to develop patterns. As already pointed out in our 
related work part, the main problem we identified was that 
the process of pattern generation represents implicit/tacit 
knowledge (i.e. expert knowledge). In order to make this 
knowledge also usable for non-experts, it has to be made 
explicit. According to our knowledge, this has not been done 
so far in a systematic manner. Thus, our step-by-step 
guidance on pattern generation represents a first step towards 
making the process of pattern generation explicit, allowing 
non-experts also to generate patterns and making the pattern 
generation process itself more traceable.    
 
In the following section, we outline our developed 
pattern generation guidance in detail, reflecting on each step 
individually. Our major goal was to develop a systematic 
process that supports researchers to create patterns out of 
empirical study results. In order to ensure that the researchers 
have the possibility to iteratively as well as remotely, 
succeed with the pattern generation guidance, we set up an 
online survey (see for tool specific details [25]). Further, the 
use of this online survey tool supports storing data in a 
database, resulting in a pattern at the end.  
 
After conducting intense desktop research, we developed 
an initial suggestion of a structured pattern generation 
guidance to support HCI researchers to create their own 
CUX pattern out of empirical study results. Our guidance is 
divided into five steps, all described in detail below. 
A. Step I: Introduction on Patterns 
Within this first step, the concept of CUX patterns [9] is 
introduced to the targeted HCI researchers (novices as well 
as experts). We split this first step into the following four 
sub-topics.  
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Outline of Major Goal (1): The major goal of our guidance 
tool was to support a structured pattern generation process in 
order to preserve and pass on knowledge from empirical 
study findings in the form of a pattern. This goal was first 
outlined in the guidance. Literally, it was defined as 
“Collecting and sharing UX and context related knowledge 
(based on empirical results either gathered within your own 
study or from literature) in a structured way by using a 
pattern form!” After outlining our major goal, we have 
included a visualization of an exemplary pattern in the 
guidance based on [8] with an UX focus on involvement and 
motivation (see in detail [26]). This should help the 
researchers to get a better impression about what CUX 
patterns are and how they are structured.  
 
Characteristics of Patterns (2): After explaining our major 
goal and presenting an exemplary CUX pattern, the guidance 
provides an overview on the most important characteristics 
of patterns. Based on Vlissides [17], we defined the 
following eight aspects to be essential when creating a 
pattern especially for HCI researchers that are not 
experienced in developing patterns: 
 
Patterns within the Specific Project (3): Next, our guidance 
describes the purpose of CUX patterns and intended 
stakeholders within the targeted project. Furthermore, the 
definition of CUX patterns is provided to the researchers 
(see Section II.B).  
 
Additional Information on Patterns (4): To provide further 
and more detailed information about patterns, we added 
some links that deal with software patterns, pattern 
languages (see [23]) as well as general information on 
patterns such as selected collections and publications (see 
[24]). 
B. Step II: Reflect and Select Your Key Finding(s) 
After giving the researchers a brief overview and input 
regarding patterns, the next step of the guidance focuses on 
the reflection and selection of relevant UX related results 
from empirical studies conducted by the researchers. This is 
one of the key steps within our process, since the process of 
reflection is the most important activity in pattern creation 
according to Vlissides [17]. We provide three text boxes 
within the survey, asking the researchers to select and 
summarize three findings. We have decided to provide three 
text boxes for the key findings in order to ensure that at least 
one of the key findings is appropriate for a pattern. These 
findings should be gathered within their studies and should 
represent insights on UX. Each key finding should be 
entered in one box.  
In order to support the researchers in recognizing 
appropriate results to create a pattern with, we remind them 
within that part of the guidance that the main goal of 
generating the patterns is, to collect and share UX related 
results that have been gathered within their study in a 
structured way. After the researchers have entered three UX 
related key findings, we ask them in a next step to reflect on 
their chosen findings. Therefore, we ask the researchers to 
analyze their key findings according to the following aspects. 
These aspects ensure that they will be able to create a pattern 
and meet the predefined structure of our suggested CUX 
pattern based on their key findings: 
 
After this checklist, the previously entered key findings 
are visualized again to ensure that the researchers can 
directly check their entered results and reflect on them 
according to the pointed out aspects outlined above. If the 
researchers were not able to identify any UX related key 
findings that satisfy those needs, we ask them to have a 
closer look at their results again in order to identify a 
potential UX related result there. By including this reflection 
cycle in the guidance, we want to ensure that the researchers 
proceed with an appropriate result to be able to create a 
pattern.  
What you need to know about patterns! 
 
①
They capture expertise and knowledge to make it 
accessible to experts as well as non-experts. 
②
Their names collectively form a vocabulary that 
helps developers to communicate better. 
③
They help people understand a system more 
quickly when it is documented with the patterns it 
uses. 
④
Patterns represent a structured way to represent and 
communicate knowledge. 
⑤
Using the same vocabulary avoids 
misunderstandings and ambiguities. 
⑥
Patterns are abstract enough to make 
generalizations but as well detailed enough to 
provide practical solutions or suggestions. 
⑦
Patterns are easy to understand (in a unified and 
human-readable format). 
⑧
Patterns are short enough so that the  
knowledge can be accessed quickly. 
 
Analyze according to the following checklist! 
 
①
My key finding addresses a/some specific UX 
factor(s). 
②
I can give a detailed and further description of my 
result(s). 
③
I can describe the context from which my chosen 
key finding is extracted/gathered from 
④
I can create design suggestions from these results. 
⑤
I can underpin or visualize my design  
suggestions with examples. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

C. Step III: Develop Your Pattern 
TABLE I.  
STRUCTURAL OVERVIEW OF OUR PATTERN 
Instructions on Each Pattern Section 
# 
Section 
Name 
 
Instruction on Each Section 
1 
Name 
The name of the pattern should shortly describe the 
suggestions for design by the pattern (2-3 words 
would be best). 
2 
UX  
Factor 
List the UX factor(s) addressed within your chosen 
key finding (potential UX factors listed in this 
section can be e.g. workload, trust, fun/enjoyment, 
stress...). Please underpin your chosen UX factor(s) 
with a definition. 
3 
Key 
Finding 
As short as possible - the best would be to describe 
your key finding (either from an empirical study or 
findings that are reported in literature) in one 
sentence. 
4 
Forces 
Should be a detailed description and further 
explanation of the result. 
5 
Context 
Describe the detailed context in which your chosen 
key finding is extracted/gathered from. 
6 
Suggestions 
for Design 
1) 
Can range from rather general suggestions to 
very concrete suggestions for a specific 
application area. 
2) 
The design suggestions should be based on 
existing knowledge (e.g., state of the art 
solutions, empirical studies, guidelines, ...).  
3) 
More than one suggestion are no problem but 
even better than only one. 
4) 
There can also be a very general suggestions 
and more specific “sub-suggestions”.	  
7 
Example 
Concrete examples underpinned by pictures, 
standard values etc. Examples should not provide 
suggestions (this is done in the suggestion part) but 
rather underpin and visualize the suggestion 
presented above. 
8 
Keywords 
Describe main topics addressed by the pattern in 
order to enable structured search. 
9 
Sources 
Origin of the pattern (e.g. literature, other pattern, 
studies or results) 
 
After the reflection cycle in Step 2, the researchers 
should be ready to actually create their own CUX pattern. 
Therefore, the pattern guidance again reminds them that their 
generated patterns should 1) capture expertise and 
knowledge, 2) be abstract enough to make generalizations, 3) 
but as well detailed enough to provide practical suggestions 
and 4) be easy to understand in a short and concrete manner. 
In order to support the researchers to meet these goals, we 
show them a predefined pattern structure visualized as a 
table. This provides an overview on the sections to be filled 
in. Further, this should encourage the researchers to keep our 
suggested structure. Our patterns are structured according to 
the nine sections (see section name) shown in TABLE I. The 
researchers are then asked to fill in the sections sequentially 
according to the given instructions below each section. In 
TABLE I. the instructions according to each section are 
outlined in more detail. After proceeding through each of 
these sections, the researchers have developed a first version 
of their CUX pattern based on their empirical results. 
D. Step IV: Final Check 
In order to ensure that the researchers have successfully 
conducted the process of pattern writing and met our 
predefined format of CUX patterns, we ask the researchers in 
a fourth step to have a final look at their pattern according to 
the following points:  
 
 
 
To support the researchers in checking their generated 
pattern, we visualize the generated pattern below this 
checklist to make it easier for the researchers to assess if the 
generated pattern fulfills all the criteria listed above. 
E. Step V: Feedback 
In a last step, the guidance asks the domain specific 
researchers to provide feedback on the pattern generation 
process. Thus, we get insights on how to improve the 
guidance as a basis for further iteration. Therefore, we 
developed a short questionnaire (9 items) focusing on 
helpfulness, effort, difficulties, and concrete problems when 
using the pattern generation guidance. 
IV. 
EMPLOYMENT OF THE PATTERN GENERATION 
GUIDANCE  
In order to evaluate the guidance in terms of helpfulness, 
effort, task difficulty, and other issues occurring when 
applying our guidance, we have conducted a first pre-test 
with one HCI researcher who has had no previous experience 
in generating patterns. This initial evaluation cycle allowed 
us to get insights on the applicability and weaknesses of the 
guidance in practice. Based on these insights, we iterated our 
guidance especially for researchers with no previous 
experience in generating patterns. The pre-test was 
conducted in December 2012 and the researcher needed two 
hours to create his/her pattern out of gathered empirical 
results; we had expected that the generation process would 
generally take much longer.  
TABLE II. represents the major issues evaluated during 
the pre-test, which have been clustered in four different 
problem categories. Apart from these more significant issues, 
the HCI researcher has also reported about minor issues, 
such as spelling mistakes and design issues of the survey. 
These minor issues are excluded from the reported problem 
categories below, since these issues are not relevant to the 
Have a final check! 
 
①
Do a spell check by reading the pattern from the 
beginning to the end. 
②
Check if all sections are filled in appropriately. 
③
Check if you have written everything in an easy 
and understandable way. 
④
If you want to insert e.g. pictures, links in the 
“examples” or “sources” section, check if you have 
attached them. 
⑤
Check if you are as concrete and short as  
possible. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

aim of the guidance and are easy to correct and do not need 
to be outlined in much more detail.  
TABLE II.  
REPRESENTATION OF IDENTIFIED PROBLEMS 
Overview of Identified Problems  
Problem 
Category 
Identified Problems 
Reference to  
Guidance 
Sequence 
(1) Sequence of sub-steps could be 
structured more clearly and intuitive 
(1) Step 2 
(2) The chosen key-finding from 
Step 2 should appear in Step 3 again  
 
(2) Step 3 
(3) Sequence of the sections (in the 
pattern structure) is not intuitive 
enough, since this is not the way 
how people create a pattern in their 
mind 
(3) Step 3 
Wording 
(4) For Step 2 and 3 the wording 
“pattern” within the guidance is 
misleading since this would imply 
that the HCI Researcher already has 
to have the outcome in his/her mind  
(4) Step 2 
and 3 
Repetitions/ 
unneeded 
information 
(5) Detailed definition of Patterns is 
unnecessary, since the guidance 
should guide you how to create a 
pattern, therefore it´s not necessary 
to know a definition of what patterns 
are in our case 
(5) Step 1/C 
(6) Graphical visualization of 
general pattern structure is shown 
again, which is unneeded 
information at that point 
(6) Step 3 
Text 
complexity 
(7) The provided information in Step 
3 (especially the reminder) is 
formulated too long and complex 
(7) Step 3 
(8) The provided input in the 
introduction section is too long and 
not to the point 
(8) Step 1 
 
Overall, three problems were evaluated that relate to the 
sequence of different steps and sub-steps within the 
guidance. The pre-study participant reported that the 
sequence for the different sub-steps within Step 2 and 3, 
need to be iterated, in terms of making the sequences more 
intuitive and clear for the researchers. This means that for 
example, the reported problem number (3) ‘the sequence of 
sections in the pattern structure’ should be switched since the 
current sequence is not supporting the researchers, how they 
intuitively would generate a pattern in their mind. Therefore, 
we would suggest to change the sequence, in an iterated 
version of the guidance, as followed: 1) Pre-step, where the 
chosen key finding (from step 2) by the researchers is 
visualized again, 2) Forces, 3) Context, 4) Suggestions for 
Design, 5) Example, 6) Key Finding, 7) UX Factor, 8) 
Keywords,  9) Sources, 10) Examples. In order to check, if 
the sequence change of the sections makes it easier and more 
intuitive for the researchers to generate their pattern, we aim 
to test this changed order of sequences in another pre-test. 
Besides this suggestion how to improve the guidance in 
terms of sequence changes in the pattern structure when 
generating the pattern, other areas for improvement could 
have been identified. Within Step 1 (introduction on 
patterns) especially, some parts of the guidance contain of 
unneeded/unnecessary information that is formulated rather 
complex at some parts. Our pre-study participant reported 
that some sections/parts (e.g. detailed definition of what 
CUX patterns are) do not have to be part of the guidance, 
since the guidance itself should direct the researchers in a 
way, that the generated pattern complies with our view on 
what CUX patterns for a structural representation of 
empirical study results are. Therefore, we aim to reduce such 
unneeded information in terms of deleting these sections and, 
therefore, reduce the information flow and complexity of the 
guidance. As another step to reduce the information 
overflow, 
we 
aim 
to 
formulate 
the 
different 
instructions/information shorter and especially formulating 
these parts more active in terms of  “Researcher, do this… do 
that…” in order to provide short and concrete instructions for 
the researchers. This might reduce the potential of 
misunderstanding some parts.  
Summarizing our first use of the guidance, we can state 
that when generating a pattern out of empirical study results, 
it is important to address an intuitive sequence of the 
different sections and steps, as well as to be concrete, short 
and to the point with the instructions provided in the 
guidance for the researchers. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we introduced a step-by-step pattern 
generation guidance to support non-pattern experts in the 
generation of patterns and to support a traceable pattern 
generation 
process. 
Thus, 
knowledge 
gained 
within 
empirical studies is captured in the form of CUX patterns. 
We claim that our pattern generation process supports 
explicit knowledge regarding pattern development, and thus 
makes it easier to share and access knowledge with other 
HCI researchers. By applying our approach, we preserve and 
structure UX and context related knowledge gained within 
research projects and thus make knowledge accessible for 
researchers. Further, the researchers have to reflect on the 
quality of their empirical results which effects also the 
quality of the generated pattern. However, the presented 
approach also has some shortcomings. For example, the 
initially suggested sequence of the pattern generation was not 
intuitive, as turned out in the employment of the guidance. 
This issue will be addressed in an iterated version of the 
guidance. Another weakness of the presented approach is 
that patterns sometimes might not be the right format to 
represent empirical results. However, we believe that in most 
cases, patterns are able to summarize insights on contextual 
user experience.  
We are aware that there is still space for improvement of 
our approach. For example, we would suggest that 
researchers could take different sources for their pattern. For 
instance, a researcher could take one key finding from 
his/her study, and the rest from reported literature. Using 
various resources (e.g., a published paper from the field, 
other domain-specific patterns, norms or guidelines) helps 
researchers to reflect about their relevant key finding, to 
combine it with relevant aspects and thereby, increases the 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

quality of the generated pattern. According to Appleton [18], 
patterns should tell us a story, which captures the 
experiences they are trying to convey. In this context, we 
found that the right sequence of our pattern guidance is 
important. Especially Step 5, which asked to describe the 
context, should be represented earlier within the generation 
process. Further, we will support the researcher by listing six 
contextual categories to be selected: user context, system 
context, social context, temporal context, physical context, 
and the category “others”. By presenting concrete contextual 
categories, we assist the researchers to assign the key finding 
to the specific context. With such detailed information about 
the context, we get a deeper understanding of the relevant 
context.  
In general, we consider the development of the pattern 
generation guidance as an iterative process, which demands 
continuous evaluation. In a first step, we plan to iterate the 
pattern sequence according to the drawbacks reported in the 
first employment of the guidance. In particular, we will 
change the different sections and check if this order is more 
intuitive for the researchers. Another issue for future work is 
the extension of the guidance towards a validation of the 
created patterns [22]. This will be easy to realize as the 
patterns are already digitalized and can be provided to others 
for validation. Further, we will conduct an expert workshop 
on the suggested process in order to identify further 
improvement potentials. After iterating the guidance, we will 
employ the pattern generation guidance in the field by 
providing the guidance to HCI researchers, with differing 
experience in generating patterns, in order to collect patterns 
for the automotive, home, and mobile context. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The financial support by the Federal Ministry of 
Economy, Family and Youth and the National Foundation 
for Research, Technology and Development is gratefully 
acknowledged (Christian Doppler Laboratory for Contextual 
Interfaces). This research was also supported by the Austrian 
project AIR Advanced Interface Research funded by the 
Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG), the ZIT Center 
for Innovation and Technology and the province of Salzburg 
under contract number 825345. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Alexander, “The Timeless Way of Building,” New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979. 
[2] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, “Design 
patterns: elements of reusable object-oriented software,” 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 1995. 
[3] C. Crumlish, and E. Malone, “Designing Social Interfaces,” 
O’Reilly, 2009. 
[4] J. Tidwell, “Designing Interfaces : Patterns for Effective 
Interaction Design,” O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2005. 
[5] P. Kotzé, K. Renaud, and J. V. Biljon, “Don’t do this – 
pitfalls in using anti-patterns in teaching human-computer 
interaction principles,” Comput. Educ., Volume 50, Issue 3, 
2008, pp. 979–1008. 
[6] R. Reiners, I. Astrova, and A. Zimmermann, “Introducing 
new Pattern Language Concepts and an Extended Pattern 
Structure for Ubiquitous Computing Application Design 
Support,” Third International Conferences on Pervasive 
Patterns and Applications, 2011, pp. 61-66. 
[7] D. Martin, T. Rodden, M. Rouncefield, I.Sommerville, and S. 
Viller, “Finding Patterns in the Fieldwork,” Proceedings of 
the Seventh European Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work, Bonn, Germany, 2001, pp. 39-58. 
[8] M. Obrist, D. Wurhofer, E.Beck, A. Karahasanovic, and M. 
Tscheligi, “User Experience (UX) Patterns for Audio-Visual 
Networked 
Applications: 
Inspirations 
for 
Design,” 
Proceedings of the NordiCHI, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2010, pp. 
343-352. 
[9] M. Obrist, D. Wurhofer, E.Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “CUX 
Patterns Approach: Towards Contextual User Experience 
Patterns,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Second 
International 
Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 2010, pp. 60-65. 
[10] A. Dearden and J. Finlay, “Pattern Languages in HCI: A 
Critical Review,” HCI, Volume 21, 2006, pp. 49-102. 
[11] J. Borchers, “A pattern approach to interaction design,” 
Chichester et al.: John Wiley & Sons, 2001. 
[12] T. Erickson, “Lingua Francas for design: sacred places and 
pattern languages,“ Proceedings of the 3rd conference on 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, 
and techniques, Brooklyn, New York, 2000, pp. 357-368.  
[13] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky “User experience - a 
research agenda,” Behaviour & Information Technology, 
Volume 25, Issue 2, 2006, pp. 91-97. 
[14] M. A. Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A. F. Monk and P.C. Wright,  
“Funology: From Usability to Enjoyment,” Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 2004. 
[15] L. Alben, „Quality of experience: defining the criteria for 
effective interaction design,“ Interactions, Volume 3, Issue 3, 
1996, pp. 11-15. 
[16] A. F. Blackwell and S. Fincher, “Pux: patterns of user 
experience,” Interactions, Volume 17, Issue 2, 2010, pp. 27–
31. 
[17]  J. Vlissides “Pattern Hatching: Design Patterns Applied,” 
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 1998. 
[18] B. Appleton, “Patterns and Software: Essential Concepts and 
Terminology,” Object Magazine Online, Volume 3, Issue 2, 
1997, pp. 20-25.  
[19] S. Köhne, “Didaktischer Ansatz für das Blended Learning: 
Konzeption und Anwendung von Educational Patterns,” 
Dissertation, Universität Hohenheim, 2005.  
[20] D. May and P. Taylor, “Knowledge Management with 
Patterns. Developing techniques to improve the process of 
converting information to knowledge,” Communications of 
the ACM - A game experience in every application, Volume 
46, Issue 7, 2003, pp. 94-99. 
[21] I. Nonaka, H. and Takeuchi “The Knowledge-Creating 
Company. How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of 
Innovation,“ Oxford University Press, 1995, pp. 3-19. 
[22] D. Wurhofer, M. Obrist, E. Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “A 
Quality 
Criteria 
Framework 
for 
Pattern 
Validation,” 
International Journal On Advances in Software, Volume 3, 
Issue 1-2, 2010, pp. 252-264. 
[23] The Hillside Group. Accessed March 2013. Retrieved from: 
http://hillside.net/index.php/patterns 
[24] HCI Patterns. Accessed March 2013. Retrieved from: 
http://www.hcipatterns.org/ 
[25] LimeSurvey tool. Accessed March 2013. Retrieved from: 
http://www.limesurvey.org/ 
[26] Current Version of CUX Pattern Survey. Accessed March 
2013. http://survey.uni-
salzburg.at/index.php?sid=96811&newtest=Y&lang=en 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-276-9
PATTERNS 2013 : The FIfth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

