Mass Events Monitoring Through Crowdsourced Media Analysis
Marco Cavallo, Ermanno Guardo and Alessandro Ortis
Universit´a degli Studi di Catania
Viale A. Doria 6, 95125
Catania, Italy
Email: marco.cavallo@dieei.unict.it,
ermanno.guardo@unict.it,
ortis@dmi.unict.it
Marco Sapienza and Giuseppe La Torre
Telecom Italia
Viale A. Doria 6, 95125
Catania, Italy
Email: marco1.sapienza@telecomitalia.it,
giuseppe.latorre@telecomitalia.it
Abstract—In the context of Smart Cities, the crowdsourced
approach provides huge amount of information that can be
exploited for the detection and monitoring of critical events.
To this aim, a framework to collect and analyze a multitude
of crowdsourced data is described in this paper. The proposed
system exploits the existing Radio Access Network (RAN) to
collect proﬁled users’ contributes within a speciﬁc area of interest,
which are properly analyzed. The results of such processing are
made available to the service that required the monitoring. This
supports the decision making process devoted to the critical event
response.
Index Terms—Crowdsourcing; Data Monitoring; Mobile Edge
Computing; Multimedia Analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the pace of urbanization is exponentially increas-
ing, with a multitude of information sources such as wireless
sensor networks, cameras, smartphones, wearable devices and
social networks. Such a huge amount and variety of data
provide new technological assets to deal with unprecedented
challenges in the context of smart cities.
In this scenario, the occurrence of critical events, such as
ﬁres, heartquakes or explosions, needs to be quickly noticed
in order to safeguard the nearby citizens, who are often
unaware about accidents and risk their safety or hinder the
emergency operations. In this context, transports and ICT play
a crucial role in disaster response and management based on
information collected from smart heterogeneous entities such
as personal devices, cameras, connected vehicles, forming the
recent emerging Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm [1]. IoT
aims to have more pervasive connected objects which provide
heterogeneous information useful for future Smart Cities. The
Smart City aims to have a distributed, shared, horizontal
and social intelligence, which encourages the participation of
citizens and the organization of the city in a perspective of
optimizing resources and results [2].
The management of the aforementioned critical events, in a
Smart City context, requires two main actions: event detection
and monitoring. The ﬁrst aims to detect signal anomalies, such
as anomaly values on mass movements, pollution data, etc.
The detection phase is devoted to a continuous observation of a
number of predeﬁned data and the design of statistical models
of these observations in a normal context. When a critical
event occurs, the system detects an anomalous data pattern
with respect to ordinary conditions. This kind of analysis aims
to promptly understand what it is happening and how the
event is evolving, in order to support the decision making
process. Although the detection can be easily obtained by the
continuous observation of signals over a speciﬁc geographical
region, the monitoring of an event could require the collection
of live customized data in not observable areas. As an example,
an anomaly detection system could spot unusual behavior, such
as the presence of mass of people who are moving towards an
area due an accident. To quickly understand what is happening
in that speciﬁc area, a monitoring system needs to collect more
speciﬁc data related to the involved region. In this context, it
could be optimal to have a video stream from cameras which
observe that region. However, there is no guarantee of the
presence of such devices. One solution could be to ask nearby
people to contribute on collecting speciﬁc data through their
personal devices, exploiting a crowdsourced approach.
In this work, we propose a framework able to correlate user
data such as video, images and text, exploiting this information
in order to detect and monitor critical events and rapidly
notify the citizens. To this aim, the proposed framework
exploits the existing Radio Access Network (RAN), which
also provides computational capabilities deﬁned by the Mobile
Edge Computing (MEC) paradigm [3]. Such a computing
paradigm allows the allocation of MEC IT application servers
that can be directly integrated on the LTE access nodes in
order to provide low latency and location awareness for real
time services, allowing the pre-processing of the data provided
by the users located within the range of the speciﬁc Base
Transceiver Station (BTS) [4].
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
describes some background information on detection of critical
events and how the crowdsourced approach can facilitate a
disaster management. Section III presents an overview of the
reference scenario. Section IV describes the architecture and
a typical execution ﬂow of the proposed framework. Finally
in the last Section, some consideration and future work have
been presented.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

II. RELATED WORK
Many approaches have been proposed to automatically
detect patterns such as accidents (e.g., stampedes, ﬁre) but
also busy roads and trafﬁc jam. In [5], authors proposed
an automatic event detection technique for camera anomaly
based on image analysis. Starting from a procedure that ex-
tracts reduced-reference features from multiple regions in the
surveillance images, this technique detects anomaly events by
analyzing variation of features when image quality decreases
and ﬁeld of view changes. In [6], it is presented a solution to
detect anomaly speciﬁcally designed for trafﬁc cameras. This
work introduced a new state transition system that involves the
outcomes of image quality assessment and mixture of optical
ﬂow histogram analyzing. A two-stage scheme was proposed
to reduce the computational complexity in order to meet the
real-time requirements of large-scale monitoring system. This
method can be used for trafﬁc camera only. The work proposed
in [7] demonstrates how crowdsourcing can be facilitated in
the contexts of smart buildings and cities in order to support
a more effective and efﬁcient integrated disaster management
approach. In this scenario, is explained how various participant
users including critical infrastructures, cars, buildings, and
humans could be connected via sensors and mobile APIs in
order to acquire data from surrounding environment.
In order to monitor abnormal events, the proposed approach
acquires data related to the environment by exploiting personal
devices, video surveillance systems deployed in the city and
wireless air quality sensor systems. These information can be
analyzed with proper techniques of pattern recognition and
data analysis, enabling the distribution of computation on
the smart cities with Mobile Edge Computing, exploiting a
crowdsourced approach.
III. SCENARIO
Over the last few years, with considerable complicity of
social networks, we have discovered the enormous value that
people can bring to different areas by means the informa-
tion they produce. Common users have become prosumer
(producer-consumer) of original contents.
The scenario considered in this paper regards the detection
and the monitoring of abnormal events in a city with the help
of its citizens. The main strength of a crowdsourced approach
is the pervasiveness of the people, who can be considered as
“mobile sensors”. A similar pervasiveness is hard to achieve
using an infrastructure of real sensors (eg. cameras) mainly to
their costs in terms of hardware, installation and management.
People are instead inclined to share information and multime-
dia contents about their activities and the environment around
them. Each user can be considered as a source of information
and can contribute to improve the knowledge on the area
where it is located and about a possible occurring event. The
contributions from many different users can be combined to
obtain an overall view of the area of interest. The proposed
scenario exploits a crowdsourced approach to determine the
type of event that occurs in a speciﬁc area and monitor how
the situation evolves.
Fig. 1. Proposed Framework
After an event detection notiﬁcation, due to the observation
of abnormal signals, the proposed framework receives the
geographic information of the involved area. This information
is exploited to make a request to a proper MEC application,
which handles the communication between the involved users
and the framework. The system empowers the BTS to broad-
cast a “fast query” to the users within the interested area.
IV. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
This section describes the proposed framework in order to
achieve a quick and efﬁcient monitoring and being also able
to identify the speciﬁc critical event, warn citizens and call
the rescue services.
Initially, the event detection is carried out evaluating the
sudden movement of a large mass of people, through the
sensors on the personal devices, such as: accelerometer, gyro-
scope, proximity sensor and GPS position, enabling an implicit
crowdsourcing.
The main components of the framework, shown in Figure 1,
are the following:
• Service Interface: this component provides the access API
to the framework’s capabilities, which can be properly
exploited by an external service;
• Query Engine: this module is devoted to the deﬁnition
of fast queries used to interact with users, in a simple
and immediate way, with the aim of acquiring general
information about the status of a speciﬁc area affected
by an event. Moreover this module is also responsible
for generating multimedia contribution request to improve
the awareness about the area of interest.
• Crowdsourced Monitor: this module includes a set of
algorithms devoted to perform analysis and the inference
on the user gathered contents. The obtained results are
provided to the services on TOP and affect the user
proﬁling.
• User Proﬁling: this component collects historical data
about users interactions and performs a proﬁling based
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Fig. 2. A ﬂow diagram that describes the step-by-step interactions among the different modules of the proposed framework
on the quality of the obtained information and the used
devices.
• RAN Interface: this module allows the interaction be-
tween the proposed framework and the RAN by means a
proper API.
In Figure 2, the details of the monitoring process are shown.
The monitoring process may be triggered by an automatic
system of event detection or by an operator to gain awareness
of what is happening in the affected area and acquire additional
details about the event in progress. The numbered arrows
describe a typical execution ﬂow. Here follows a step-by-step
description of the actions taken by the system to serve the
request:
1) The framework receives through the Service On Top
Interface a monitoring request for a speciﬁc area.
2) The Query Engine processes the received request and
prepare a set of fast queries to send to the users located
in the area of interest.
3) The RAN Interface forwards the query messages to the
speciﬁc BTS, which covers the area and sends broadcast
text messages, containing the short questions.
4) The MEC Application deployed on the MEC Server
analyzes the users’ answers and ﬁlters them according
to the information accuracy (e.g., event awareness).
5) The Query Engine combines the acquired information
with the historical users’ proﬁle data (e.g., trusted users,
device model).
6) The Query Engine exploits this information to deﬁne the
suitable contribution request.
7) The RAN Interface sends the contribution request to the
speciﬁc BTS which forwards it to the users demanding
multimedia contribution (e.g., video stream, pictures).
8) In this step, the MEC Application performs some pre-
processing on the multimedia contributes. For instance,
if the number of provided video streams is high, they
can be ﬁltered considering several quality factors (e.g.,
video resolution, frame rate, stability). This prevents the
system to elaborate noisy information, and the reduction
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

of the amount of the data to process.
9) The Crowdsourcing Monitor performs the analysis of the
acquired data. These analysis depend on the kind of the
required data and the aim of the analysis. For instance, if
the system requires to perform the visual monitoring of
the area of interest, the video streams provided by the
users can be clustered according to the visual content
with the aim to understand what is the most viewed
scene [8].
The whole above described process is made transparent to the
user by means of both the mentioned interfaces. The system
only requires the area of interest to be monitored.
V. CONCLUSION
This work presents a framework able to provide a quickly
monitoring of critical events, obtained by exploiting a crowd-
sourcing approach and Mobile Edge Computing paradigm.
Upon receiving a monitoring request, the system deﬁnes
a process that allows to collect, analyze and make proper
inferences on crowdsourced data, with the aim to provide
useful results to the service. The contributes of the users are
selected considering several factors including user proximity,
quality of the provided information, user proﬁling, as well as
the user answer to a fast query. The collected data are then
aggregated and analyzed. Examples of contributes aggregation
analysis are visual clustering and saliency of video streams.
The analysis results are then provided to the Service On Top
and exploited to update the users’ proﬁles.
In the next steps of this work in progress project, we are
building up an actual prototype of the proposed framework
with the aim to achieve experimental results and assess the
effectiveness of the method described in this paper.
In the last few years, emerging technologies have been
leading toward the realization of efﬁcient cities, where tech-
nology will be applied to improve and support citizens’ daily
living in a realistic Smart City scenario in which the proposed
framework is fully integrated.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Alazawi, O. Alani, M. B. Abdljabar, S. Altowaijri, and R. Mehmood,
“A smart disaster management system for future cities,” in Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM international workshop on Wireless and mobile
technologies for smart cities.
ACM, 2014, pp. 1–10.
[2] H. Schaffers et al., “Smart cities and the future internet: Towards
cooperation frameworks for open innovation,” in The Future Internet
Assembly.
Springer, 2011, pp. 431–446.
[3] M. Patel et al., “Mobile-edge computing introductory technical white
paper,” White Paper, Mobile-edge Computing (MEC) industry initiative,
2014.
[4] M. Sapienza et al., “Solving critical events through mobile edge comput-
ing: an approach for smart cities,” in Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP),
2016 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[5] E. Asimakopoulou and N. Bessis, “Buildings and crowds: Forming smart
cities for more effective disaster management,” in Innovative Mobile
and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), 2011 Fifth
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 229–234.
[6] Y.-K. Wang, C.-T. Fan, K.-Y. Cheng, and P. S. Deng, “Real-time camera
anomaly detection for real-world video surveillance,” in Machine Learn-
ing and Cybernetics (ICMLC), 2011 International Conference on, vol. 4.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1520–1525.
[7] Y.-K. Wang, C.-T. Fan, and J.-F. Chen, “Trafﬁc camera anomaly detec-
tion.” in ICPR, 2014, pp. 4642–4647.
[8] A. Ortis et al., “Recfusion: Automatic video curation driven by visual
content popularity,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international con-
ference on Multimedia.
ACM, 2015, pp. 1179–1182.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

