On the Modular Structure and Evolvability
of Architectural Patterns for Housing Utilities
Peter De Bruyn
Normalized Systems Institute
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email:peter.debruyn@uantwerp.be
Jeroen Faes, Tom Vermeire and Jasper Bosmans
Department of Management Information Systems
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email:{jeroen.faes,tom.vermeire,jasper.bosmans}
@student.uantwerp.be
Abstract—Modularity is considered a powerful concept within
many domains. While modular artifacts are believed to have
the potential to exhibit several beneﬁcial characteristics such as
evolvability, the actual realization of this evolvability or ﬂexibility
remains challenging. This paper considers houses as modular
structures and employs the combinatorics underlying Normalized
Systems Theory, as well as the integration patterns it proposes,
to analyze design alternatives for the incorporation of electricity
and heating utilities within houses. The paper demonstrates
that the integration patterns can be applied at several modular
granularity levels. An analysis is presented regarding which
integration patterns are currently most frequently used at which
levels, and which patterns should deserve additional exploration.
The adopted approach to analyze the modular design alternatives
for housing utilities is believed to be applicable within other
domains as well.
Keywords–Modularity; Housing; Evolvability; Normalized Sys-
tems; Architectural Patterns.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modularity has proven to be a powerful concept in many
domains such as computer science, product engineering, orga-
nizational sciences, and so on. The concept generally refers to
the fact that a system is subdivided into a set of interacting
subsystems. Modular artifacts are deemed interesting due to
several potential beneﬁts which are attributed to it. For in-
stance, designing a product in a modular way is expected to
lower the complexity as the design can be decomposed into
a set of smaller (less complex) problems [1]. Another major
beneﬁt expected from modularity is increased ﬂexibility or
evolvability. In a modular artifact, one particular part (module)
of the system can be substituted for another version of it,
without having to build up the artifact again from scratch. This
kind of plug-and-play behavior allows for variation (using the
same set of available module versions, different aggregations
or variants can be made available) and evolvability (over time,
an artifact can evolve from one variant to another).
Nevertheless, achieving these modular beneﬁts is very dif-
ﬁcult. It is generally accepted that the coupling (dependencies
and interactions) between the modules in a system should be
studied and minimized [1][2][3]. How this should be realized
in speciﬁc situations is often unclear. In particular, several
features in modular structures are cross-cutting (e.g., security
in a software application) in the sense that they are required
across the whole modular structure (e.g., every data entity
should be securely stored) and adaptations in such cross-
cutting concerns can create large ripple-effects in the system
(i.e., a change in one module implies a change in another
module and so on), hampering the evolvability aimed for.
This paper focuses on the design of modular structures
of houses and their evolvability. It is clear that houses are
modular structures at several abstraction levels (e.g., houses
consisting of rooms and built by bricks) and could beneﬁt from
evolvability (e.g., connecting an additional room to an existing
house). Moreover, houses often lack this evolvability (e.g., the
need to drill into existing walls or even tear down walls to
be able to provide an additional room with water because the
connecting old walls did not provide any connection). More
speciﬁcally, we study the implications of different design al-
ternatives for utilities (and in particular electricity and heating)
within a housing context. We argue that such utilities can be
considered as cross-cutting concerns. Our design alternatives
will be based on the modular integration patterns for cross-
cutting concerns as suggested by the combinatorics underlying
Normalized Systems Theory (NST) [4]. The theory is suitable
for this purpose as it aims to provide prescriptive guidance on
how to design evolvable modular systems.
It is important to mention upfront that none of the authors
of this paper are experts within the domain of housing architec-
ture. Therefore, the intention of the paper is not the prescribe
in detail how housing architectures should be improved in
the future. Rather, we intend to show that it makes sense to
apply the modularity reasoning presented within NST (which
originated at the software level) to other domains in which
modularity plays a prominent role. In Section II, we provide a
brief overview of the integration patterns for modular structu-
res as presented within NST. We then apply these patterns for
the concerns electricity (Section III) and heating (Section IV).
Finally, we offer our reﬂections and conclusions in Sections V
and VI, respectively.
II.
NST INTEGRATION PATTERNS
A. NST and combinatorics
The origins of NST are situated in the formulation of a
set of design theorems for the creation of evolvable software
systems. Here, evolvability is operationalized by demanding
Bounded Input Bound Output (BIBO) stability on ever growing
systems. The theory proves that the isolation of all change
drivers in separate constructs (Separation of Concerns), the
stateful calling of processing functions (Separation of States)
and the ability to update data structures or processing functions
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

without impacting other data structures or processing functions
(Version Transparency) are necessary conditions in order to
obtain stability [5]. It has been shown that these theorems
can actually be formulated in more general terms for modular
systems [6] and seem to appeal to the basic combinatorics
regarding modularity [4]. More speciﬁcally, the promise of
modularity is that maintaining a particular amount of versions
of modular building blocks will result in an exponential
amount of available system variants. However, in case a
modular system is not well designed (e.g., by not adhering
to the theorems), a change in one particular version of one
particular module may have an impact (ripple effects) on other
(versions of) modules. This number of impacts will typically
grow (in an exponential way) with the size of the system and
its dependencies.
B. Patterns for cross-cutting concern integration
Adhering to the NST design theorems is difﬁcult as they
demand a very strict and ﬁne-grained design of a system, and
every violation will result in a limitation of the evolvability of
the system. Research on the realization of such systems has
shown that their design becomes much more realistic in case
a set of design patterns (so-called “elements”) are employed
[4]. Each individual element is a generic modular structure
for a basic functionality for the type of system at hand and
can be parametrized (and if necessary, customized) over and
over again when an actual system is built. For instance, in the
case of software systems, a general structure for data, task,
ﬂow, connector and trigger elements was provided [4]. Stated
otherwise, the set of modules constituting an element becomes
a reusable module at a higher abstraction (or granularity) level.
In essence, each element provides a core functionality (e.g.,
representing data) as well as an incorporated integration with
the relevant cross-cutting concerns in the domain (e.g., security
and persistency for data). In order to maximize the envisioned
evolvability, it is important that these cross-cutting concerns
are integrated at the most ﬁne-grained level possible (such as
these elements) and that the parts in the elements connecting or
dealing with the cross-cutting concerns are properly separated
in distinct modules which are version transparent.
More generally, we differentiate between the following
integration patterns of cross-cutting concerns. As a ﬁrst cate-
gory of integration patterns, we consider cross-cutting concern
modules added to the main modules wherein each cross-cutting
concern modules handles the full functionality of that cross-
cutting concern itself. We call this the embedded integration
pattern and refer to it as conﬁguration 1. This embedded
module can be dedicated (in case the module was speciﬁcally
designed for the system at hand) or standardized (in case a
standardized module is employed to handle the concern). We
refer to the ﬁrst variant as conﬁguration 1A and the second
as conﬁguration 1B. For modules in the context of a software
system, think of a separate module added to a data entity taking
care of the persistency of that data entity in a custom designed
way (1A) or by using a standard module (1B) for this purpose.
As a second category of integration patterns, we consider
cross-cutting concern modules added to the main modules
wherein the cross-cutting concern modules are merely con-
nections (“relay modules”) to a more elaborate (external)
implementation framework of the cross-cutting concern and
which actually perform the needed functionality. We call this
the relay integration pattern and refer to it as conﬁguration 2.
Such relay modules can connect to a dedicated framework (in
case the framework was speciﬁcally designed for the system
at hand) or standardized framework (in case the framework is
standardized and, for instance, publicly available). We refer to
the ﬁrst variant as conﬁguration 2A and the second as conﬁgu-
ration 2B. For modules in the context of software system, think
of a separate module added to a data entity serving as a proxy
to a persistency framework which was speciﬁcally designed
for its own system (2A) or to an available standard solution
such as JPA (2B). Finally, we mention the option to let the
relay modules connect to another module (i.e., a framework
gateway) and in which only this framework gateway directly
connects to the external implementation framework. We refer
to this third variant as conﬁguration 2C. For modules in the
context of a software system, think of a dedicated gateway
module which connects to the JPA framework but allows
all relay modules to be technologically independent of this
framework by calling the gateway in a JPA agnostic way.
III.
ELECTRICITY PATTERNS
In this section, we consider the electricity utility within
houses as a cross-cutting concern. We consider the integration
architectures as proposed in Section II at the modular granu-
larity level of a city or community, house, room and device.
Afterwards, we consider some advanced issues and reﬂections.
A. City or community level
Most cities and communities of developed countries need
electricity, so it can be considered as a cross-cutting concern.
Here, we consider how a city or community can power its
electrical grid as a whole (the distribution of electricity to
individual buildings is discussed later on).
A ﬁrst option could be to have all cities/communities have
there own electricity generation (conﬁguration 1). In primitive
communities, custom built solutions might be considered (1A),
but typically the use of standard solutions (1B) would be
more realistic (e.g., the reproduction of a typical power plant
by means of nuclear reactions, coal, etc.). However, this
often lacks economies of scale (it is more efﬁcient to have
large power plants producing energy for more than 1 city or
community) so typically a city’s electricity grid is connected
to a national electricity grid with one or more electricity
plants dividing the electricity over a large set of cities and
communities (conﬁguration 2). Each country might create its
own speciﬁcally designed grid connecting with the multiple
cities and communities (2A) or make use of a standardized
electrical power distribution network between cities (2B).
While this latter solution is most frequently opted for,
it also has some drawbacks in terms of dependencies. For
instance, if the central grid goes down, all connected cities and
communities are lacking electricity. Therefore, in reality, most
electrical grids are divided into several isolated areas avoiding
a problem in a particular part of the grid to get escalated into
the complete (national) electricity grid. Moreover, changes in
the standardized network still have their impact on the relay
modules (which should nevertheless be encapsulated within
the cross-cutting concern handling relay module and not in the
core module itself). For instance, a change in the voltage of
the network or from alternating current (AC) to direct current
(DC). In fact, the limitations (at that time) for distributing DC
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

over long distances (in order to be able to adopt integration
pattern 2B), was one of the main reasons for the general
prevalence of AC in the so-called “War of the Currents”. One
could even imagine the situation in which all cities plug their
individual grids into a centralized relay module (power supply)
which is tapping into the global electricity grid (2C), shielding
the individual cities and communities from changes in the
standardized framework used.
B. House level
Within every city, community or electricity grid area,
electricity typically has to be available within every house.
Therefore, it constitutes a cross-cutting concern at this level
as well. Sometimes, individual houses have the possibility to
generate their own electricity by using, for instance, a fuel
based electricity generator, based on solar panels, heat pumps,
etc. Furthermore, new technological developments have allo-
wed the creation of home based batteries with large storage
capacities, even allowing to store electrical power for a whole
house for a considerable amount of time. As this provides
a signiﬁcant amount of independence and sometimes budget
friendly solutions, this integration pattern can be interesting in
certain situations. Moreover, a certain amount of ﬂexibility is
enabled as each individual house can choose for that particular
type of energy which is most suitable in their case (e.g., those
areas with a high exposure to sun light might opt for solar
panels instead of a wind mill). In that case (except when
they want to transmit the overcapacity to the central electricity
distribution network), no distribution framework (see previous
subsection) is required and the generators and batteries support
the modules for the adoption of integration pattern 1 (typically
1B).
Most people, however, do not opt for the duplication of po-
wer generators and batteries in each and every individual house
and choose for the option of a connection module plugging
into the publicly available electrical power distribution network
(typically standardized, so 2B). Similar as stated above, depen-
dencies regarding the availability of the distribution network as
well as changes in the power distribution network affecting all
connection modules of houses, remain possible disadvantages
of this integration pattern.
C. Room level
Within every house or building, most if not all rooms
require electricity in terms of a set of available sockets where
individual devices (cfr. infra) can plug into. Therefore, it
constitutes a cross-cutting concern at this level as well. Based
on the integration patterns we summarized in Section II-B
and similar to our reasoning expressed above, it would be
theoretically possible for each room in a house to generate the
electricity required (conﬁguration 1A if custom designed, 1B
if a standard solution is opted for). Nevertheless, individual
heat pumps, electricity generators, etc. for individual rooms
are —to the best of our knowledge— typically not applied.
Therefore, conﬁguration 2 (typically 2B) is applied by having
sockets plugging, into the grid network of the house. In certain
situations, conﬁguration 2C might be relevant as well. For
instance, houses which employ a combination of electrical
sources (tapping from the publicly available grid, as well as
producing a portion of energy themselves by solar panels)
could beneﬁt from having the possibility of shifting between
them (e.g., using the solar energy when electricity is being
generated or available on the local battery and the public grid
in all other cases). By having the relay modules (sockets)
connecting to a gateway switching module (connecting to the
solar panels and public grid), only one electricity grid for such
house should be created.
D. Device level
Ultimately, electrical power should be made available to
individual devices for which it is required in order to work
properly. One possibility to obtain this power is by having a
built-in generator or battery in a device. While the generator
variant hardly exists in practice, batteries within devices are
common practice. Such batteries exist in both custom built
variants (integration pattern 1A) or by the use of general
purpose variants (integration pattern 1B). A conﬁguration like
this obviously provides the device a certain degree of auto-
nomy (i.e., the device can operate on its own) and absence of
speciﬁc dependencies in this respect. However, incorporating
batteries in every device might be a signiﬁcant engineering
challenge (sometimes even simply impossible) and requires
the duplication of a battery in each device. Therefore, in many
cases a centralized conﬁguration will be adopted in which the
device is connected to a custom developed (conﬁguration 2A)
or, typically, a standardized electrical grid (conﬁguration 2B).
Recall that we noted in Section III-A that historically, AC
was chosen above DC at the level of cities and communi-
ties due to (among other things) its possibility to transport
electrical current along larger distances. The consequences of
this choice ripple down to the lower modularity granularity
levels, such as the level of the devices, which then have to
deal with electricity delivered at AC. However, most electrical
devices need DC to function properly. As stated above, it
is the relay module which should encapsulate these kind of
dependencies regarding the external framework and ensure
conversions for mutual compatibility if required. Therefore, an
adapter (typically with a device speciﬁc connection) is often
included at the level of the cross-cutting connecting module
(i.e., between the device and the electrical grid) in order to
convert AC (coming in from the plug) to DC at the right
voltage (depending on the efﬁciency of the adapter typically
also resulting in a certain degree of loss of electrical power
converted into heat). This clearly shows the duplication of the
AC to DC conversion functionality present within all relay
modules (here: adapters). Moreover, in terms of ﬂexibility and
adaptability, the situation nicely illustrates that changes in the
external framework (e.g., a conversion of AC to DC within
the public electrical grid) would impact all relay modules.
In case the AC/DC conversion would not be separated in a
distinct module (e.g., the conversion would be performed in the
devices themselves instead of via a separately in/unpluggable
adapter), the impact would even be more profound as the
devices themselves should be adapted. Based on our analysis
of the different modular granularity levels, one could argue
for the investigation of the option to have the conversion
of AC to DC to happen at the house level instead of the
device level. This way, the duplication of adapters for each
separate device could be eliminated and the dependence on
DC would be avoided. More speciﬁcally, such situation would
correspond to the cross-cutting concern integration pattern
2C where the main modules are the devices, the sockets
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

are the relay modules (no need for adapters anymore) and
the centralized AC to DC converter would fulﬁll the role of
the gateway module. In fact, recent initiatives regarding new
possible electricity (micro)grid conﬁgurations seem to suggest
these type of integration patterns [7].
E. Overview and advanced issues
Table I provides an overview of the granularity-integration
pattern combinations for the electricity provisioning of houses.
We can observe that, at most modularity levels, a standardized
integration pattern (i.e., 1B and 2B) is opted for. This tends to
indicate a certain maturity within the respective domain, which
is in accordance with our expectations. While dependence on
the external framework is an important limitation regarding
integration pattern 2B, we identify that an interesting research
avenue regarding integration pattern 2C at the device level.
Further, the table illustrates that, when aiming for maximum
ﬂexibility, the integration of concerns tends to be solved at
more ﬁne-grained levels (going downwards in Table I) and in
a more standardized externally enabled way (going to the right
in Table I) in the long run.
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING ELECTRICITY.
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
city/community
•
house
•
•
room
•
•
device
•
•
•
◦
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
Further, the electricity cross-cutting concern might be
enriched with additional features for which our proposed
granularity levels and integration patterns might prove useful
during the analysis of their realization options. Consider for
instance on/off switching. Many devices (such as light bulbs)
using electricity to function need to be able to switched on
(i.e., emit light) and off (i.e., dim the light). Typical approaches
consist out of a switch attached to the lamp itself (required in
case of conﬁguration 1) or a separate switch integrated into
the electrical grid of the house itself (the integration structure
of the external framework in case of conﬁguration 2). While
this approach has worked well for many years it still requires
manual intervention at the location of the switch and, in the
latter case, requires the reconﬁguration and integration of the
switches when a lamp would be relocated within the house.
During the last decade, attention has grown for more advan-
ced home domotics in which switches can be managed by
software (e.g., allowing to automatically switch devices on at
a predeﬁned time slot) and in a remote way. Again, this could
be done by placing individual sensors/programmable control-
lers with individual remote controllers (conﬁguration 1B, if
standardized equipment is used). Alternatively, a network of
sensors/programmable controllers could be used having one
central management and remote control (conﬁguration 2B, if
standardized equipment is used), which manages all connected
switches. This would also allow the use of aggregated actions,
such as switching on or off all light bulbs at once at a
predeﬁned time slot, and enable parameter reconﬁguration in
a centralized way. Integration conﬁguration 2C could even be
opted for when, for instance, all sensors/programmable con-
trollers connect to one central connection module which allows
to be manipulated by means of multiple remote controllers and
protocols (e.g., a traditional remote, smartphone, etc.).
IV.
HEATING PATTERNS
In this section, we consider the heating utility within houses
as a cross-cutting concern. We consider the integration archi-
tectures as proposed in Section II at the modular granularity
level of a house, room and brick. Afterwards, we consider
some advanced issues and reﬂections.
A. House level
As all households need heating, a source of heat should be
transported to or being generated within every house. There-
fore, it represents a genuine cross-cutting concern. Today, most
houses provide for their own heat generation: a house typically
has a central heating system meaning that a central heating
boiler uses electricity (cfr. supra) or petroleum to generate heat
and convert cold into warm water. Another option could be to
use heat pumps. This water will then be distributed along the
different rooms in the house later on (cfr. infra). Considering
the granularity level of a house, this therefore means that typi-
cally integration pattern 1 is opted for (and more speciﬁcally
1B, as most households use a standardized heat generator for
this purpose). This way of working clearly implies certain
beneﬁts such as independence from external heat generation
providers. However, one might might wonder whether this
is always the most efﬁcient or environment friendly way of
working. It is interesting to see that certain initiatives are being
taken into the exploration of other integration patterns, such
as the so-called heat distribution networks. Here, heated water
is produced in a central location for multiple houses and then
distributed among them. This allows for optimizations in terms
of efﬁciency or simply the recovery of “lost heat” produced
by for instance nearby factories or (nuclear) plants. While this
warmed water is generally too cold to be useful for industrial
purposes, it might still sufﬁce to provide the heating for (a large
amount of) houses. Therefore, integration architecture 2A (as
the solution is typically not yet highly standardized) is opted
for in this case.
B. Room level
While a garage or cellar might not be in need of explicit
heating, most other rooms within a house (such as the living
room or bathroom) are. As a consequence, it can be considered
as a relevant cross-cutting concern at this level as well. As
mentioned before, most houses today employ a central heating
system in which heated water is produced at one centralized
place in the house and then transported via water pipes to the
required rooms in which a heating element/radiator is present.
The warm water causes the element to warm up and release
its heat into the room, after which the water (which partly
cooled down) returns to the central heating system. As these
systems and their pipe networks are highly standardized and
commonplace, integration architecture 2B is typically applied.
This allows an efﬁcient generation of heat but also clearly
entails a dependency of all rooms on this central heating
system: in case it would fail or be replaced in such way that
the old pipe network no long sufﬁces, all rooms would be
heavily affected. Using a framework gateway which decouples
the pipe network from the boiler might prevent this and would
even allow to switch between different sources of heat (elec-
trically generated, via a heat pump or via the heat distribution
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

network), which would correspond to integration architecture
2C. In case of absence of a central heating system, integration
architecture 1 might still be used. For instance, some houses
(although a minority) still use systems in which radiators are
placed within rooms which use the plug to tap electricity and
generate heat at their own spot (representing conﬁguration 1B).
The use of a ﬁreplace corresponds to the same architecture as
well (or conﬁguration 1A in case it concerns a custom designed
ﬁreplace). And theoretically speaking, one might also think of
situations in which each room is equipped with things such as
its own heat pump, although such solutions —at this point in
time— are very expensive and inefﬁcient.
C. Brick level
Finally, in order to have more homogeneous heat dis-
persion in rooms, heating elements incorporated in the ﬂoor
are sometimes adopted. In such design, the heating pipes
are traditionally also connected with a central heating boi-
ler, representing integration architecture 2. Nevertheless, such
design is typically not really scalable or ﬂexible as changes
(for example, extensions of the heating system to other or
larger rooms) might require to break up the ﬂoor as a whole.
In addition, designing standardized solutions might be more
difﬁcult as many rooms take on different shapes and sizes.
As a purely speculative and thought provoking alternative, we
therefore envision the integration of the heating cross-cutting
concern at the level of an individual brick as represented in
Figure 1 [4]. In every such element, standardized transport
pipes would be embedded for the transportation of hot water,
nicely ﬁtting onto the pipes of every similar adjoining brick.
This would provide a remarkable degree of scalability when
compared to traditional ﬂoor heating: as different rooms are
built or expanded throughout time, additional bricks (with
integrated pipes) could be used, enlarging the area which can
be heated. Clearly, just as it was the case for the device level
for the electricity concern, the brick level seems to represent
the most ﬁne-grained modularity level at which the heating
cross-cutting concern can be meaningfully integrated.
D. Overview and advanced issues
Table II provides an overview of the granularity-integration
pattern combinations for the heating of houses. We can observe
that, at most modularity levels, a standardized integration
pattern (i.e., 1B and 2B) is opted for. Again, this tends to
indicate a certain maturity within the respective domain, which
is in accordance with our expectations. While dependence on
the external framework is an important limitation regarding
integration pattern 2B, we identify that an interesting research
avenue regarding integration pattern 2C at the room level. Ad-
ditionally, we propose to consider the integration of the cross-
cutting concern at an even more ﬁne-grained level (i.e., a brick)
in the future. Further, the table illustrates that, when aiming
for maximum ﬂexibility, the integration of concerns tends to
be solved at more ﬁne-grained levels in a more standardized
externally enabled way (stated otherwise: evolving towards the
right lower corner in Table II).
Further, it should be clear that the heating cross-cutting
concern is highly related to the preservation of heat by, for
example, isolation. Also here, the different modular aggrega-
tion levels of the house (e.g., an isolating roof), the room (e.g.,
a well-closing door or isolation which is put behind a wall)
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING HEATING.
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
house
•
◦
room
•
•
◦
brick
◦
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
and the brick (e.g., isolation incorporated in every individual
brick) might be relevant. And similar to the on/off switching
of electricity consuming devices, heat distribution throughout
a house might beneﬁt from more speciﬁc, remote and/or
automated management (of its subparts). For instance, in order
to allow certain rooms in the house (e.g., the living rooms) to
be heated and others (e.g., the garage) not for a certain period
of time, an operating panel may be provided for every radiator
turning it on and off or even measuring the current temperature
and matching it with a predeﬁned temperature goal. In more
advanced settings, a central management unit at the level of
the house could be provided in which a goal temperature for
multiple zones could be speciﬁed after which heat is released
by those radiators which are standing in zones in which the
temperature is lower than speciﬁed.
V.
REFLECTIONS
Sections III and IV showed that the integration of the cross-
cutting concerns heating and electricity can and have to be
dealt with at several modular granularity levels and can be
solved in multiple ways. During the drawing of a building
plan, an experienced architect will take into account these
cross-cutting concerns in advance: the wires for the electricity
and water pipes for the water distribution will be provided,
space for central heating boiler will be assured, and so on.
And although some heuristics and best practices exist, this still
means that the integration problem of these concerns has to
be dealt with by every architect again, every time a house is
constructed. As mentioned in Section II, NST was inspired
by the need for adaptability and ﬂexibility. In the context
of a house, this would for instance mean the addition of an
additional room, or another provider for a particular cross-
cutting concern (e.g., switching from tapping electricity from
the public distribution network to self-generated solar energy).
However, it is generally known that the distribution of housing
cross-cutting concerns —such as the ones we considered in
this paper— may cause signiﬁcant problems during such house
extensions or adaptations. Many times, this leads to unforeseen
ripple effects, including the drilling into walls and ﬂoors,
and even tearing down (parts of) walls. As we explained in
Section II, NST therefore proposes to use a set of predeﬁned
design patterns (called “elements”) which already solve this
integration problem for a particular functionality of a modular
system and can then be used over and over again.
In the context of housing and their cross-cutting concerns,
we would envision an elementary construction element as
such ﬁne-grained element [4] and represented in Figure 1. We
already suggested such a brick for heating, but it is clear that
a construction element might provide the integration of more
than one cross-cutting concern (e.g., water supply, electricity,
support, etc.). Different types of such building blocks might
exist, such as for inner or outer walls, for ﬂoors and ceilings,
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

with and without certain utilities, etc. The adaptation problems
and their associated ripple-effects would be less frequent by
the use of such building blocks as it is often the set of
cross-cutting concerns which causes these invasive drilling
and tearing down activities and these would then already be
integrated in the most elementary building block of a house.
As they are used, the construction elements would provide
the cross-cutting concerns and integrate ﬂuently with the other
previously installed building blocks. Moreover, an architect
designing a new house would have to spend less effort into
the integration issues regarding the cross-cutting concern as the
elements already deal with it. As we are no domain experts,
we are not in a position to elaborate in detail how these
building blocks should actually look like. However, we do
think that it would be worthwhile for such building blocks
to be subject to intensive research and development, which
might for instance result in connections and isolations of
ﬂuid conduits and electrical conductors that are superior with
respect to handcrafted plumbing. As these building blocks
would be rather general and used over and over again, the
resources invested would have a signiﬁcant pay off due to the
high-quality re-used solution.
Figure 1. A construction element integration cross-cutting concerns [4].
So while in most cases, architects take the house as the
main level of modular granularity, it is interesting to see that
some initiatives have been taken to adopt the individual rooms
of a house as a modular unit and which have even proposed
some kind of elements for it (e.g., the Hivehaus “modular
living space” initiative [8]. Here, houses are assembled as
aggregations of prefabricated (e.g., hexagonal) modular parts,
wherein the distribution of auxiliary facilities has been inte-
grated upfront. Clearly, the design freedom concerning the
house is then limited to an aggregation of these modular
building blocks. This is due to the phenomenon we mentioned
in Section II: the cross-cutting concerns should be integrated
at the most ﬁne-grained modular level as possible, as this
determines the ﬂexibility of the resulting artifacts. It is for
this reason that we encourage the exploration of a construction
element which would integrate several cross-cutting concerns
as discussed above.
Note that very similar conclusions or analyses can be
made for other utility concerns within houses such as water
distribution or air conditioning. We anticipate that the bottom
line of such analysis will be highly similar: ﬁrst, the distri-
bution of the cross-cutting concern should be considered at
different modular aggregation levels. At each level, centralized
(integration pattern 1) or non-centralized (integration pattern 2)
integration patterns can be chosen, each in a non-standarized
(A) or standardized (B) way. Whereas the decentralized version
offers beneﬁts in terms of freedom of choice, the centralized
alternative might typically generate other beneﬁts such as
economies of scale. A centralized version then has to deal
with the fact that all modules plugging in into the external
framework are dependent on that framework unless a gateway
module assuring version transparency (2C) is used.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented an overview of the different possible
integration patterns (with their associated beneﬁts and draw-
backs) for the cross-cutting concerns of electricity and heat
distribution utilities in a housing context. It is important to
stress that none of the authors claim to be housing electricity
or heating experts. Instead, the analysis was based on general
knowledge within this domain. Our actual contribution is
situated elsewhere and is twofold. First, our goal was to
show that the cross-cutting integration patterns for modular
structures as proposed in [4] (and illustrated within the domain
of software systems) are, at ﬁrst sight, indeed relevant and
applicable in a domain outside software as well. Given our
non-expert status in the housing industry, we encourage actual
domain experts to scrutinize and validate or reﬁne our initial
analyses. Second, we proposed and illustrated an approach
to analyze and report on the different modular integration
patterns within a domain. That is, is seems valuable to start
with describing certain speciﬁcs and challenges in the domain
at hand. Next, the different (hierarchical) granularity levels
in the domain as well as the relevant cross-cutting concerns
could be listed. For each cross-cutting concern, all possible
combinations between the granularity levels and the ﬁve cross-
cutting concern integration patterns can be considered and
analyzed in terms of beneﬁts and drawbacks. Some of these
conﬁgurations might already exist, others might prove to be
interesting avenues for future developments and still others
might be purely theoretical considerations. Therefore, we hope
that this paper might incite researchers and experts within other
domains (e.g., logistics, manufacturing) to perform similar
analyses within their respective areas of expertise.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial.
MIT Press, 1996.
[2]
D. Parnas, “On the criteria to be used in decomposing systems into
modules,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 15, no. 12, 1972, pp. 1053–
1058.
[3]
C. Y. Baldwin and K. B. Clark, Design Rules: The Power of Modularity.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2000.
[4]
H. Mannaert, J. Verelst, and P. De Bruyn, Normalized Systems Theory:
From Foundations for Evolvable Software Toward a General Theory for
Evolvable Design.
Koppa, 2016.
[5]
H. Mannaert, J. Verelst, and K. Ven, “The transformation of requirements
into software primitives: Studying evolvability based on systems theoretic
stability,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 76, no. 12, 2011,
pp. 1210–1222, special Issue on Software Evolution, Adaptability and
Variability.
[6]
P. De Bruyn, “Generalizing normalized systems theory : towards a foun-
dational theory for enterprise engineering,” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Antwerp, 2014.
[7]
Emerge Alliance, http://www.emergealliance.org/, Last accessed on Fe-
bruary 4th, 2017.
[8]
Hivehaus, http://hivehaus.co.uk/, Last accessed on February 4th, 2017.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

