Requirements for the Application of Knowledge
Graphs in Automotive Manufacturing
Jan Michael Spoor
Team Digital Factory Sindelﬁngen
Mercedes-Benz Group AG
Sindelﬁngen, Germany
jan_michael.spoor@mercedes-benz.com
Christian Graewe
Automotive Connected Customer Journey
NTT DATA Deutschland AG
Erfurt, Germany
christian.graewe@nttdata.com
Jens Weber
Mechanical Engineering Department
DHBW Lörrach
Lörrach, Germany
weberj@dhbw-loerrach.de
Abstract—The application of knowledge graphs drives in
particular the development of Digital Twins. Thus, the creation of
knowledge graphs becomes an important objective in automotive
manufacturing. In the current literature, multiple requirements
are given. In this paper, we conduct a categorization of these
requirements. In addition, we evaluate expert interviews to enable
a comparison of the requirements mentioned by practitioners
with the requirements mentioned in the literature. While the
industry experts agree with most challenges and requirements
from the literature, some requirements differ. Most notably, real-
time monitoring is not seen as a high priority by the practitioners.
The application of predictive maintenance is seen as a subsequent
application and not as a fundamental feature. Lastly, the integra-
tion of external partners such as suppliers is seen as controversial
between the industry experts. This conducted evaluation provides
a foundation to further develop use cases and implementation
concepts in automotive manufacturing. In future work, we plan
to add technical implementation requirements and conduct ﬁrst
use cases of knowledge graphs.
Index Terms—Cyber-Physical Systems, Knowledge Based Sys-
tems, Production Engineering
I. INTRODUCTION
Within the highly automated Body-In-White (BIW) assem-
bly of the automotive industry, an improved representation,
documentation, and production connectivity as well as plan-
ning knowledge are required to further drive the automation
level. For this purpose, knowledge graphs are developed for
manufacturing applications. A knowledge graph is deﬁned
by Ehrlinger and Wöß [1] as a system which acquires and
integrates information into an ontology and applies a reasoning
to derive new knowledge. In their review, Buchgeher et al. [2]
list among others knowledge fusion, creation of Digital Twins
(DT), automated process integration, and program generation
as use cases for knowledge graphs. Thus, the development of
knowledge graphs is an essential part of the development of
DTs and as such highly relevant in the current development
and implementation of DTs within the automotive industry,
in particular the BIW assembly. In addition, Spoor et al. [3]
highlight the importance of knowledge representation within
the BIW assembly for inference procedures of fault detection.
In order to drive the development of DTs and to improve ex-
isting ontologies, Mercedes-Benz decided to run an evaluation
of the requirements for the applications of knowledge graphs.
Objective of the initiative is the discussion of applications,
requirements, and future use cases of knowledge graphs with
senior staff members and industry experts. Thus, the academic
view of knowledge graphs is complemented by the view of
industry experts. This enables a reﬁnement of the requirements
for an application in the BIW assembly line. The results of the
conducted interviews and the comparison of the results with
the academic point of view are presented in this paper.
In Section II, an overview of the current literature is pro-
vided and the requirements from the literature are grouped and
categorized. In Section III, the methodology of the interview
process is described. Subsequently, the results of the interviews
are presented and contrasted with the requirements from the
literature in Section IV. To summarize the paper and to provide
a future outlook, a conclusion is given in Section V.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
As structure for the requirements of knowledge graphs,
we use the ISO/IEC 25010 criteria [4]. In particular, we use
the quality model characteristics and add speciﬁc technical
requirements of knowledge graphs in the automotive industry
per category. The sub-characteristics of ISO/IEC 25010 still
apply as evaluation criteria of the requirements but are not ad-
ditionally discussed. The ISO/IEC 25010 criteria are discussed
in the literature and considered to be useful for the evaluation
of software architectures [5]. The derived requirements for
knowledge graphs from the literature review and the respective
ISO/IEC 25010 characteristics are summarized in Figure 1.
Functionality As ﬁrst step of the application of knowledge
graphs, a suitable data preprocessing is necessary. This in-
cludes a check for redundancy and preprocessing in order to
counteract this since duplication is a rather common problem
in knowledge graphs [6]. In addition, it is necessary to have
comprehensive data validity checks and conduct an extensive
Data Cleansing prior to the import and storage of data
since Machine Learning (ML) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
require solid databases for the training. Thus, Josko et al.
[7] propose a data defects ontology for knowledge graphs.
Weikum [8] states that it is crucial to think judiciously about
data source discovery and data quality assessment.
As second requirement, the overall Relation Modeling using
an ontological model as well as a query engine to access
this information is necessary. Ontologies are developed by,
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Fig. 1. Overview of the different requirement categories. Adapted from ISO/IEC 25010, we identiﬁed important requirements along the eight categories [4].
Business requirements are a cross-section to be taken into account in all vertical categories. All requirements rely on the technical feasibility of the concept.
e.g., Giustozzi et al. [9]. Most common in the automotive
industry are product, process, and resource (PPR) models, e.g.,
by Ferrer et al. [10]. Yahya et al. [11] list as a requirement for
ontologies that the scope should not be too application-speciﬁc
and applicable in all areas of the production. Currently avail-
able semantic model-based ontologies are limited regarding
this requirement.
Furthermore, the knowledge graph should provide an as-
is-model as well as a deﬁned to-be-model. Spoor et al. [3]
see the knowledge graph as method for inference procedures
and fault detection. Bellomarini et al. [12] differentiate a
knowledge base management system from a knowledge graph
management system since the latter includes Big Data and
analytics capabilities. Ehrlinger and Wöß [1] describe the
knowledge base and reasoning engine as components of a
knowledge graph. Thus, the capabilities of the Reasoning
Engine is a core functional requirement of knowledge graphs.
Since knowledge graphs most commonly use the Resource
Description Framework (RDF) consisting of subject, predi-
cate, and object, these relations have an uncertainty in case
of inconsistencies within the applied datasets [13] and the
data cleansing will not be able to resolve all inconsistent
information. Thus, a knowledge graph should Enable Fuzzy
Information and be applicable for fuzzy inferences. Noy et al.
[14] state that each entity may have multiple types and speciﬁc
types matter in different scenarios.
Performance Firstly, Real-time Monitoring and the speed of
integration of new or changed data is a performance-speciﬁc
requirement for knowledge graphs. In the literature, often a
real-time data availability and processing is demanded [11].
Secondly, the integration and Application of Big Data is
required [12]. Combined with real-time monitoring, this highly
affects the ISO/IEC 25010 performance sub-characteristics of
time behavior, resource utilization, and capacity.
Compatibility In this category, the main requirement is the
Integration of PPR Models including existing, currently devel-
oped, and future ontologies. A knowledge graph should enable
a problem-free integration of all systems related to the man-
agement of ontologies [11]. Different knowledge domains in
manufacturing often use different systems and thus, an efﬁcient
integration of heterogeneous data from knowledge domains
such as factory, building, system, resource, process, product,
strategy, performance, and management is required [15]. This
includes different applied systems within the production line,
all relevant data management software applications, and also
systems of external partners such as suppliers [16]. Thus, the
knowledge graph has to be able to manage the Integration
of Heterogenous Data Sources and extract knowledge from
multiple structured and unstructured sources [14]. This results
in interoperability requirements that are difﬁcult to implement.
Knowledge graphs should in addition be able to provide
data for the Training of AI Models. In particular, they improve
explainability by applying the knowledge graph’s reasoning
capabilities [17] and function as fundamental source for the
development of DTs by providing a direct DT Interface [2]. It
should be noted that the boundary between knowledge graphs
and DTs is rather blurred and implemented knowledge graphs
themselves are sometimes considered as DTs [18]. However,
knowledge graphs are most certainly important foundations for
any DT development. Thus, there is a high relevance in the
co-existence criteria between subsequent applications such as
the DT or AI models and the knowledge graph.
Usability Within the context of scientiﬁc knowledge graphs,
Auer et al. [19] name the development of methods for
exploration, retrieval, and visualization of knowledge graph
information as future challenges in the development of knowl-
edge graphs. Thus, an appropriate Visualization of Relations,
the Exploration Capabilities for ﬁnding new causal relations
among the industrial data, and the possibility for an Informa-
tion Retrieval of difﬁcultly accessible knowledge are speciﬁc
requirements. Although the original proposal is in the context
of scientiﬁc knowledge graphs, these requirements are also
relevant for the BIW assembly, the automotive industry, and
manufacturing in general.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Reliability Data in real-world scenarios often lack relia-
bility and thus, ontologies often contain errors, redundancies,
inaccuracies, or contradicting relations in particular if different
domain ontologies from different data sources are merged
[8]. This results in a reduction of reliability of the applied
knowledge graph. Thus, it is important to detect, identify,
and mark potential reliability issues and inform users about
these problems. Therefore, an applied knowledge graph must
provide information about its own reliability and errors for
users and industry experts to later correct these instances.
Hence, a Data Defect Management for users to handle errors,
redundancies, inaccuracies, or contradicting relations is a
relevant feature of applied knowledge graphs.
A further aspect of the reliability of knowledge graphs is
its Long-term Accuracy since the knowledge base continuously
changes over time. Noy et al. [14] state that it is critical to
manage changing schemas and type systems, without creating
inconsistencies. In practical applications, a system needs to
change organically based on changing input data due to,
e.g., company mergers or splits, scientiﬁc discoveries, and
organizational changes of divisions.
Security The ISO/IEC 25010 sub-characteristics are impor-
tant for knowledge graph management systems. However, the
application of a suitable Data Governance for the knowledge
graph is most relevant as part of the overall IT Governance of
the company [16]. This includes among others data security,
data consistency for an improved decision making by users,
proﬁtable use of the data, and most notably an organizational
concept for the accountability of the data quality [20]. Thus,
applied knowledge graphs should also contain concepts for
organizations and users to manage, improve, and correct data
quality. This is related to the data cleansing and data defect
management but differs since it focuses not on applications
and systems themselves but the overall organization and com-
pany guidelines. In addition, this includes the organizational
decision on the conﬁdentiality of data and ontologies within a
knowledge graph since malicious users could potentially use
the exploration and information retrieval aspects of knowledge
graphs to gain access to sensitive and business-relevant data.
Maintainability Regarding maintainability, the aspects of
re-usability and modiﬁability can be improved by follow-
ing the Linked Data Principle as stated by Yahya et al.
[11] as an important future development task for improved
knowledge graphs. These principles are as following: 1) the
use of Uniform Resource Identiﬁers (URI) as names for
entities, 2) the use of HTTP URIs, 3) the provision of
useful information when searching a URI, using standards
such as RDF or SPARQL, and 4) the inclusion of links to
further URIs. The application of linked data is often difﬁcult
since the data owners are different organizations (or sub-
organizations within a company), different URIs are used for
the same real-world entity, complementary information exists
across different datasets, the data is erroneous, out-of-date, or
conﬂicting, and different conceptualizations of the domain for
each dataset apply [21]. However, following the linked data
principle enables a high maintainability and scalability.
Portability Using the same rationale as in the category
of maintainability, the linked data principle also ensures an
adaptability and replaceability of knowledge graphs within
organizations. Thus, the linked data principle is a core re-
quirement for maintainability as well as portability.
In addition to the requirements based on the ISO/IEC 25010
characteristics, overarching business and economic require-
ments have to be met within an application in automotive
manufacturing. In general, the development, implementation,
and use of a knowledge graph should follow economic ade-
quacy. This includes development and running costs compared
to the usage beneﬁts such as among others reduced production
costs, reduction of complexity, or faster production planning
and development. This is realized by a prior development
of a business case to ensure an economic cost and beneﬁt
consideration. Further, not only the technical implementation
and integration into the IT systems but also the integration
into the business processes must be considered. In addition, a
company which wants to develop a knowledge graph should
carefully consider their current know-how and availability of
their IT workforce. If the development and maintenance of
a knowledge graph cannot be conducted by current internal
capacities, external capacities or an investment in internal
capacities should be considered. Furthermore, the knowledge
graph should be in adherence to the company’s strategic
direction, compliance guidelines, and IT governance. The
business and economic requirements should be evaluated as
a cross-section over the relevant vertical categories.
In conclusion, the technical feasibility of the proposed
knowledge graph should also be evaluated since some require-
ments currently lack extensive use cases so that a feasibility
assessment is not always completely possible. The technical
feasibility should also cover the analysis of the current hard-
ware and software of the IT landscape and the interoperability
of these systems. Server capacities or applications of cloud or
hybrid cloud solutions should be evaluated regarding available
storage capacities, performance, and interfaces.
III. METHODOLOGY
Building on the developed categorization from the literature,
guided and quantitative expert interviews were conducted. The
methodology of the interview process can be structured into
six consecutive phases. An overview of the six phases of the
interview process is given in Figure 2.
The ﬁrst phase of the used methodology is the development
of the interview guideline and of a quantitative questionnaire.
This includes questions regarding all identiﬁed special re-
quirements. Within the guided expert interview the focus was
the precise deﬁnition of the requirements from an industry
perspective. Guided interviews were selected since they enable
the interviewee to add necessary details and further ideas,
concepts, or requirements not covered by the conducted lit-
erature review. The quantitative questionnaire was in addition
designed to query the approval or rejection by the interviewee
of individual sub-aspects. For all questions, the approval was
measured using a ﬁve-level Likert scale.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Fig. 2. Sketch of the applied methodology along six phases for the conduction
of the interviews with industry experts from automotive manufacturing.
The ﬁrst phase includes the selection of relevant industry
experts. Only manufacturing industry experts with a high
seniority levels of >10 years of industry expertise and either
experience within data and knowledge modeling of the BIW
assembly or prior experience with the development, applica-
tion, or implementation of knowledge graphs were selected.
This was checked via a pre-screening of potential interviewees
and only interviews with relevant industry experts were con-
ducted. Disadvantageously, this resulted in a rather small set
of interviewed experts. In total, the whole described interview
process was conducted with twelve industry experts (N=12)
from German automotive BIW manufacturing departments.
After the ﬁrst interview sessions were conducted, each
expert completed a quantitative questionnaire. Subsequently,
the results of the guided interviews and the quantitative
questionnaire were aggregated to ﬂesh-out relevant questions
regarding the requirements and identify the most controversial
opinions or opposing statements. Using the updated set of
questions, a second round of guided interviews was conducted.
In particular, the interviewees were confronted with statements
from the literature or other interviewees contradicting their
former assertions and asked to clarify their statements. Thus,
the most relevant questions were discussed in greater detail
and the assessment of requirements was further ﬂeshed-out.
Concluding, the interview transcripts were evaluated using
as coding categories the ISO/IEC 25010 characteristics and
as sub-categories the derived requirements from the literature.
We separated within the coding of the transcripts factual
statements and opinion statements. After the ﬁrst coding of
the interviews, the requirement categories from the literature
were adjusted so that literature and interview structure aligned
along the new set-up requirements. These are the requirement
categories listed in Section II. Subsequently, a second coding
of the interview transcripts using the updated coding logic was
conducted. The resulting statements were then analyzed, eval-
uated, and compared with the statements from the literature.
IV. RESULTS
The results of the interviews are presented by descending
order starting with the most mentioned categories. While this
might not reﬂect the technical difﬁculties, it shows the focus
within the practical application in the automotive industry.
The most mentioned and discussed category during the
interviews was the Integration of Heterogenous Data Sources.
The main concerns of the practitioners are the compatibility of
different sources as well as the applications that access infor-
mation of the knowledge graph. Applications which access the
data from the knowledge graph are, e.g., Microsoft PowerBI
and other analytics tools. Often, multiple analytics applica-
tions are in use within the same organization. Thus, multiple
Application Programming Interfaces (API) are required for an
integration within the IT landscape of the automotive industry.
Important input data sources are the Internet of Things (IoT)
applications and sensor data. A major challenge in particular
is how to keep data within a knowledge graph up-to-date. The
concern is often that the data sources need to be adapted prior
to the implementation of the knowledge graph in association
with a high level of necessary manual effort. Furthermore,
data sources exist in different organizationally separated units
within an enterprise such as production, maintenance, research
& development, or sales, in particular aftersales. Thus, the
German automotive industry sees the development of industry
standards as a crucial part of a knowledge graph development.
The integration of heterogenous data sources is discussed in
the literature [16] and also a well-know current limitation and
future challenge in the development of knowledge graphs [14].
Thus, the perception from the literature and by the industry
experts match regarding this topic.
The next relevant topic is the applied Data Governance.
Most interviewed industry experts and practitioners have re-
ferred to directives already in force within their company.
Thus, the topic has already a high visibility within the German
automotive industry. However, the details of the application
are still part of a discussion. Multiple experts name data
democratization, the idea of providing all employees with the
necessary data, as a core principle for the management of the
information generated by the knowledge graph. Other experts
state that access control and access rights should strictly apply
since a knowledge graph contains critical information. In
addition, the access of suppliers, whose efﬁciency in providing
solutions to businesses would be greatly improved as a result
by the knowledge graph, is seen as a potential risk of losing
internal company knowledge. Thus, the role of knowledge
graphs needs further discussion within management science
regarding the level of data democratization and integration of
external partners and suppliers. While the literature states high
beneﬁts in the integration of external partners [16], this has
yet not been sufﬁciently discussed in application.
Within the topic of Relation Modeling, the integration of
contextual information and implicit knowledge by employees
are perceived as important topics. While the context and im-
plicit knowledge is perceived as highly relevant to understand
the application, possible faults, and presented data, there is a
lack of ideas on how to integrate the implicit knowledge and
how to manage or update implicit knowledge. Since not all
users share the same technical terms within large organizations
such as German automotive companies, it is crucial to enable
an identiﬁcation of entities by multiple, sometimes ambiguous,
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

terms. An exemplary case of ambiguous terms is the diversity
of variants which are sometimes referred to as the same car
model but in other instances strictly distinguished. Unfortu-
nately, the embedding of implicit knowledge is considered
necessary and knowledge graphs without this information
might be of no value to users. Implicit knowledge is a well-
know challenge in the literature [14].
Regarding Data Cleansing, there is a consensus among the
experts that manual data correction processes are doomed to
fail. The knowledge graph should provide functionality to
automatically check redundancies, validate the logic of the
RDF information of new or changed entities, check for cur-
rency of the data, and identify data defects. This is important
since industrial process data and decision-making processes
are highly susceptible to error and the current data sources are
often inadequately prepared. This matches with the recognized
challenges from the literature [8] and highlights the need to
develop concepts for data validation.
The implementation of knowledge graphs according to the
Linked Data Principle is very important to the experts and is
discussed in the practical application. The usage of URI, RDF,
and SPARQL is recognized by all experts as an important
factor for the maintenance and modiﬁability of the system by
software suppliers, as well as the connection with the supply
chain. All experts promote a collaboration within the German
manufacturing industry to align standards and ontologies.
Projects within initiatives such as AutomationML are currently
conducted and ﬁrst results evaluated.
Regarding usability, Information Retrieval was mentioned
the most. The idea to search multiple connected queries at once
is seen as a core advantage of knowledge graphs compared to
commonly used databases. Currently used databases are seen
as opaque with a lot of unused data and as a hurdle to extract
the necessary data. However, the experts are highly critical if
the knowledge graph should display the full complexity to all
users. The experts fear that users may not be able to ﬁnd their
way around and that too many functions and displayed data
might be a hurdle regarding usability. Thus, the capabilities
should be limited for certain users for an improved usability.
This should encourage academics to further research and
develop concepts in the ﬁeld of user experience of knowledge
graphs. The resulting transparency by a knowledge graph is
seen as an important feature. This feature is enabled by user
interfaces with reﬁned information retrieval capabilities.
Most noteworthy, an application of Real-time Monitoring
is seen as controversial among the industry experts. Although
real-time capabilities are considered to be potentially useful,
experts have doubts about the technical feasibility with the
given IT infrastructure since currently implemented systems
struggle regarding real-time data processing. Using a cost-
beneﬁt consideration, all interviewees list real-time monitoring
as a subsequent, secondary, or optional requirement. This is in
contrast to the literature such as Yahya et al. [11] and results
mostly from the technical feasibility.
Similar to the information retrieval, the Visualization of
Relations should only contain the most useful data and context
information. Links to other entities should be displayed and the
network visualized but the information should also be reduced
to only the most relevant data for the given user type. However,
the industry experts struggle to provide best practices and
examples. Thus, it is concluded that data visualization is still
a relevant future research topic.
The application of a Reasoning Engine is also not seen
as highly important since other tools are already in place.
The knowledge graph should be capable of adding more
context to currently identiﬁed problems but not necessarily act
as a separate reasoning engine. Thus, the knowledge graph
as proposed by the industry experts is more similar to a
knowledge base since Ehrlinger and Wöß [1] describe the
reasoning as core differentiation between a knowledge base
and a graph. Thus, practitioners see the knowledge graph as a
method to add further context to already identiﬁed errors. The
error detection is conducted in a separate application.
Regarding the Integration of PPR Models, the interviewees
note that a knowledge graph should use current PPR models
but PPR data are currently even within the same organiza-
tion heterogenous and not aligned. Thus, it is important to
merge, classify, and semantically enrich current models. One
interviewee proposed to ﬁrst build up a new narrow graph
and steadily further develop and enlarge its knowledge base
using additional PPR data. This is also acknowledged by the
literature as a challenge and as a necessary requirement for
the development of knowledge graphs [11].
The wide-scale application and Training of AI in production
engineering is currently not achieved and seen as too far from
a practical application in the automotive industry production.
However, the knowledge graph is seen as a foundation of
a useful database for future applications of AI and its ex-
plainability and thus, the necessary data quality and machine-
readability should be ensured. More important is currently the
DT Interface since the contextual information across multiple
systems is an important success factor of the DT development.
An unsolved aspect is the Long-term Accuracy of a knowl-
edge graph. An autonomous development and updating of
the knowledge graph are seen as necessary but currently no
solution for this topic exits. For example, if a part is changed,
repaired, or updated during maintenance work, this should
be noted and recorded accordingly within the knowledge
graph. These updates of input data are frequent and thus, this
processes must be automatically connected. Furthermore, with
long-term use changes of the domain ontologies will occur and
should trigger an automated update of the graph structure.
A second unsolved challenge is the Data Defect Manage-
ment. It is unclear for the interviewees how problems in
the database of the knowledge graphs should be managed.
Proposals range from technically capable users as product
owners, over rule-based consistency checks, to ML methods.
The interviewees see the necessity for an Application of
Big Data since, e.g., an interviewee states that an exemplary
manufacturing cell generates 37 GB data per day. Another
expert states that a processing of 1 TB production data per
day per factory location is currently feasible. As the amount
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

of cells per factory goes into the hundreds, either data and fea-
tures have to be selected prior or further Big Data capabilities
must be implemented to provide additional functionality for
large scale pattern detection and data mining. Solutions are in
particular hybrid clouds where high-risk data is stored locally.
The industry experts are uncertain on how to Enable Fuzzy
Information since some knowledge is not a priori known
but predicted and fuzzy categorized. However, the knowledge
graph should primarily display conﬁrmed factual information.
In addition, context might shift dynamically over time creating
fuzzy transitions. Overall, the knowledge graph should act as
a cross-section between predictions, assumptions, and facts.
The Exploration Capabilities were not a focus of the prac-
titioners but the analytic deep-dive capabilities are recognized.
The infrequent mentioning of this topic might be due to a focus
on operation and not analytics aspects of most interviewees.
In conclusion, the economic beneﬁts are named as cost
reduction due to process optimization, improved product
quality to ensure competitiveness, and an enabling of cross-
functional and organizational collaboration on production data.
Current IT governance and strategies are already in place to
enable a development of knowledge graphs. However, internal
competencies are still under development and communities
within an organization are necessary for the education and
training of employees in the application of knowledge graphs.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This contribution lists the most relevant requirements for a
knowledge graph implementation within the automotive indus-
try and proposes a useful categorization for these requirements.
In addition, the requirements from the body of literature and
from industry experts are listed and compared.
While most requirements match between literature and
practitioners, most notably, the real-time capabilities and rea-
soning engine are seen as a secondary priority since the
knowledge graph should primarily enable users and subsequent
applications to gain contextual information. In addition, the
aspect of data governance and access rights for users and
external partners such as suppliers are highly controversial.
Thus, management science should focus on data governance
concepts in the context of knowledge graphs in future research.
This manuscript is limited by the small amount of inter-
viewed experts and due to the focus on the German automo-
tive industry. In subsequent work, more international experts
should be interviewed and their opinion compared to the here
given results. In addition, we want to evaluate the technical
requirements and implementation of knowledge graphs in the
automotive industry in future research projects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A special thanks to all interviewees for their time and the
information provided. We also thank all colleagues and former
colleagues who provided data, concepts, and development
support of the research work within Mercedes-Benz Group
AG and the University of Applied Sciences Zwickau.
Funding by Mercedes-Benz Group AG and NTT DATA
Deutschland AG. All authors contributed equally.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Ehrlinger and W. Wöß, "Towards a Deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs,"
In: SEMANTiCS, vol. 48, pp. 1-4, 2016.
[2] G. Buchgeher, D. Gabauer, J. Martinez-Gil and L. Ehrlinger, "Knowl-
edge Graphs in Manufacturing and Production: A Systematic Literature
Review," In: IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 55537-55554, 2021.
[3] J.M. Spoor, J. Weber, S. Hagemann, F.S. Bäumer, "Concept of an
Inference Procedure for Fault Detection in Production Planning," The
Fourteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applica-
tions (PATTERNS’22), Barcelona, pp. 10-17, 2022.
[4] ISO/IEC 25010, "Systems and software engineering: Systems and
software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE)-System and
software quality models," International Organization for Standardization,
Geneva, 2011.
[5] M. Haoues, A. Sellami, H. Ben-Abdallah, L. Cheikhi, "A guideline
for software architecture selection based on ISO 25010 quality related
characteristics," In: Int. J. Syst. Assur. Eng. Manag., vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
886-909, 2017.
[6] M. Galkin, S. Auer, H. Kim and S. Scerri, "Integration Strategies
for Enterprise Knowledge Graphs," 2016 IEEE Tenth International
Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC’16), Laguna Hills, pp. 242-
245, 2016.
[7] J.M.B. Josko, L. Ehrlinger, and W. Wöß, "Towards a Knowledge Graph
to Describe and Process Data Defects," The Eleventh International Con-
ference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
(DBKDA’19), Athens, pp. 57-60, 2019.
[8] G. Weikum, "Knowledge graphs 2021: A data odyssey," In: Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment. vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 3233-3238, 2021.
[9] F. Giustozzi, J. Saunier, and C. Zanni-Merk, "Context Modeling for
Industry 4.0: an Ontology-Based Proposal," In: Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 126, pp. 675-684, 2018.
[10] R.B. Ferrer, B. Achmad, D. Vera, A. Lobov, R. Harrison, and J.L.
Martínez Lastra, "Product, process and resource model coupling for
knowledge-driven assembly automation," In: Automatisierungstechnik,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 231-243, 2016.
[11] M. Yahya, J. G. Breslin, and M.I. Ali, "Semantic Web and Knowledge
Graphs for Industry 4.0," In: Appl. Sci. 2021, vol.11, article 5110, 2021.
[12] L. Bellomarini, G. Gottlob, A. Pieris, E. Sallinger, "Swift Logic for
Big Data and Knowledge Graphs," In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI’17), pp.
2-10, 2017.
[13] G. Li, W. Li, H. Wang, "Querying Fuzzy RDF Knowledge Graphs Data,"
2020 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE),
Glasgow, pp. 1-8, 2020.
[14] N. Noy, Y. Gao, A. Jain, A. Narayanan, A. Patterson, J. Taylor,
"Industry-scale Knowledge Graphs: Lessons and Challenges: Five di-
verse technology companies show how it’s done," Queue, vol. 17, no.
2, pp. 48-75, 2019.
[15] K. Agyapong-Kodua, C. Haraszkó, and I. Németh, "Recipe-based In-
tegrated Semantic Product, Process, Resource (PPR) Digital Modelling
Methodology," In: Procedia CIRP, vol. 17, pp. 112-117, 2014.
[16] M. Galkin, A. Auer, M.-E. Vidal, S. Scerri, "Enterprise Knowledge
Graphs: A Semantic Approach for Knowledge Management in the
Next Generation of Enterprise Information Systems," In: Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
(ICEIS’17), vol. 2, pp. 88-98, 2017.
[17] G. Futia, A. Vetrò, "On the Integration of Knowledge Graphs into Deep
Learning Models for a More Comprehensible AI-Three Challenges for
Future Research," In: Information, vol 11, no. 2, article 122, 2020.
[18] A. Banerjee, R. Dalal, S. Mittal, K.P. Joshi, "Generating Digital Twin
Models using Knowledge Graphs for Industrial Production Lines," In:
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Web Science Conference (WebSci’17),
New York, pp. 425-430, 2017
[19] S. Auer, V. Kovtun, M. Prinz, A. Kasprzik, M. Stocker, M.E. Vidal,
"Towards a Knowledge Graph for Science," In: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics
(WIMS’18), Novi Sad, pp. 1-6, 2018.
[20] M. Al-Ruithe, E. Benkhelifa, K.A. Hameed, "Systematic literature
review of data governance and cloud data governance," In: Pers. Ubiquit.
Comput., vol. 23, pp. 839-859, 2019.
[21] M. Mountantonakis, Y. Tzitzikas, "Large-scale Semantic Integration of
Linked Data: A Survey," In: ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 5, article
103, 2019.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

