Analyzing User Generated Content on Instagram: the Case of Travel Agencies
Rony Germon∗, Karina Sokolova∗
∗PSB Paris School of Business
Chair D3 Digital, Data, Design,
Paris, France
email:{r.germon, k.sokolova}@psbedu.paris
Adil Bami†
†ISCAE Casablanca
Casablanca, Morocco
email:abami@groupeiscae.ma
Abstract—Social networks can become an essential part of a
brand’s communication strategy; they not only assist in reaching
potential customers, but also help develop an online community,
where users generate content about the service themselves: User
Generated Content (UGC). It is known that the actual user
experience, as well as feedback on social media, can have a higher
impact on customer acquisition than direct commercial offers.
Social media usage is on the increase in the travel industry.
Instagram - the photography-centred social network - has a
high number of users generating content, and this appears to
be advantageous for travel agencies. The goal of this article
is to understand the use and the strategy of Instagram UGC
concerning travel agencies, and to analyse the impact of UGC on
the community engagement. The results are based on Instagram
data collected for three online travel agencies: Very Chic, Voyage
Priv´e and Airbnb.
Keywords–User Generated Content; UGC; Social Media; Insta-
gram; Travel Agency; indicators of success.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Over recent decades, with the development of information
and communication technology, the travel industry has become
highly digitalised and now enjoys a high web proﬁle. Most
of the travel-related transactions now take place through the
Internet via ofﬁcial websites. Moreover, customers like to
share their travel experience online and often rely on previous
customer’s opinions to help make choices. User-generated
content currently has greater impact on customer acquisition
than traditional commercial offers, which are often seen as too
aggressive.
Instagram - a social network based on photo-sharing with
600 million monthly active users - is rapidly growing and has
already become the third most widely used social network
worldwide. Travellers usually take many photographs during
their multiple trips and share them online, together with
their opinions. In this study we examine the hypothesis that
Instagram user-generated content has an effect upon communi-
cation for travel agencies as well as upon customer acquisition
strategies. Even if the electronic word of mouth (eWOM) of
consumers is studied in depth, and is proven to have a positive
effect on the company image, as well as an even stronger
impact on user acquisition than marketing campaigns [1]–[6],
only a few studies have been focused on Instagram [7][8] and
on the Instagram UGC [9][10]. To our knowledge, no studies
have yet been conducted on eWOM regarding online travel
agencies and Instagram. The goal of this article is to offer a
preliminary analysis of Instagram’s communication strategies
concerning online travel agencies, to measure the impact of
each strategy on the community, and to identify the indicators
of success.
The article is organised as follows: Section 2 presents
related works. Section 3 presents the data collection process
and the indicators that we chose to study in this work. Section
4 presents the results of the study in the case of three speciﬁc
travel agencies. We end the article with a conclusion and
suggest future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
In [11], the authors reported that research on UGC, also
known as electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), works exactly
like traditional word-of-mouth [12]. Online social media such
as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and Instagram are examples
of places where users share UGC. As UGC is based on
consumers’ own experiences, it has proven to be trustworthy,
useful and unbiased [13][14]. Early research focused on pop-
ular forums, such as message boards or Internet-based chat
rooms [15]. It then extended to websites and blogs [16][17],
and later to social media platforms such as Facebook and
Twitter [18]. UGC reviews have been extensively studied, in
particular in relation to decision-making. Other researchers
have examined the effects and implications of UGC in the
tourism sector [19]. In this paper UGC is mainly used to
refer to reviews and interactions between users on travel
recommendation websites, such as Instragram webpages.
Instagram offers to organizations a network of more than
600 million global accounts, with 30 billion photographs
shared, and 4.2 billion daily likes (data extracted in 2017
from the ofﬁcial Instagram moderator blog). Instagram is the
chosen social media platform for this study due to the growing
popularity of the platform for marketing and branding initia-
tives. This social network focuses on advertising, promotion,
marketing, distribution of ideas/goods, and also for providing
information services fast, precisely and accurately, especially
in the tourism sector.
III.
METHODOLOGY
We conducted a semiotic study of photographs pub-
lished on Instagram by voyageprive.com, verychic.com and
airbnb.com. In this study, we chose to analyse 10 photographs
for each of the travel agencies, as follows. First we collected
the 50 most recent Instagram posts for each agency. Second,
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE I. MINIMUM, MAXIMUM AND AVERAGE VALUES OF INDICATORS OBTAINED FOR EACH TRAVEL AGENCY
VeryChic
VoyagePriv´e
AirBnb
Average #Likes
1,098
231
13,368
Maximum #Likes
2,288
375
40,545
Minimum #Likes
471
56
3,889
Average Engagement
2.2%
2.1%
1.11%
Maximum Engagement
3.9%
3.41%
3.38%
Minimum Engagement
0.8%
0.51%
0.32%
Average #Hashtags
6
27
23
Maximum #Hashtags
12
29
30
Minimum #Hashtags
4
25
1
Average #Comments
20
2
449
Maximum #Comments
98
7
1317
Minimum #Comments
2
0
29
we measured the average engagement level of the agency
based on the number of likes that each photograph obtained.
Finally, from the initial dataset and for qualitative analysis, we
chose four photographs having the highest amount of likes,
two having numbers of likes almost equal to the average
engagement level of the agency, and four photographs having
signiﬁcantly less likes than the average.
Figure 1.
Methodology representation
Based on the dataset obtained, we investigated the impact
of image and image description-based indicators on the in-
dicators of success. The methodology used in this study is
visually represented in Fig. 1. We established eight criteria
for our study based on the image, the image description and
community reactions. We obtained two image-related indica-
tors, four description-related indicators and four indicators of
success.
•
Image-related indicators
◦
Image family: landscape, person/selﬁe, activity
(hotel, cooking, sport, attractions, etc.).
◦
Image source: the image created by the agency;
the image created by another Instagram user;
the image found outside Instagram.
•
Description-related indicators
◦
Description type: commercial message; cita-
tion; image description; call for an action.
◦
Number of hashtags used in the description.
◦
Hashtags types: related to image description,
related to the call for an action.
◦
Geolocation type: place name or an exact lo-
cation.
•
Indicators of success
◦
Number of likes.
◦
Number of comments.
◦
Engagement
◦
Comment types: general interest expression,
information request, friendship request, answer
for a question, negative feedback.
Additionally, for simple numeric indicators, such as the
number of likes, the number of hashtags and the number of
comments, we deﬁned an indicator of engagement showing
how many interactions an image obtained, comparing this
to the current community of the agency Instagram account.
We deﬁned the engagement on Instagram as the number of
likes obtained by a photograph (denoted likes(p)), compared
to the number of followers of the Instagram channel of the
agency (denoted followers(a)). The engagement of a post p
published by an agency p is denoted Engagement(p, a) and
is calculated as stated in (1).
Engagement(p, a) =
#likes(p)
#followers(a)
(1)
The next section presents the results that were obtained.
IV.
RESULTS
Table I presents the minimum, maximum and the average
numbers of likes, hashtags, comments, and the engagement
scores for the photographs of each online agency. We observed
that AirBnB has a very large Instagram community, while the
VoyagePriv´e has the smallest community in terms of the maxi-
mum number of likes (40.545 and 231 respectively). However,
AirBnb has a lower average engagement score (1.11%) than
VoyagePriv´e (2.1%) meaning that Voyage Priv´e has fewer but
more engaged followers.
We observed that the indicators of success (the number
of likes, the number of comments and engagement level) are
correlated. We also observed that the number of comments
increases when the number of likes is high. This suggests
that most of the comments received by the travel agencies
are related to positive opinions from customers rather than
negative.
Considering the VeryChic photographs, the less popular
images mainly send out commercial messages using slightly
fewer hashtags than the more popular images. The most
popular messages are all borrowed from external sources.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Surprisingly, the most popular photographs include commer-
cial messages. We observed that 9 out of 10 images depict
landscapes, suggesting a common guideline within the strategy.
VoyagePriv´e was also observed to publish landscape pho-
tographs (9 out of 10). Again, the top four photographs come
from bloggers outside of Instagram; the description of those
photographs contains calls for an action. This suggests that a
good way to engage people is not only by sharing interesting
information or content, but also by engaging them in acting or
reacting. Once again, we observed that the less engaging pho-
tographs are agency-owned and contain commercial messages.
AirBnB publishes diverse types of photographs, of which
the most engaging depict landscapes and activities, and the
less engaging show people. Most of the AirBnB photographs
are not agency-owned and come from bloggers or Instagram
users. The most popular image descriptions contain calls for
action and the least popular posts contain simple description
of the photography. Most of the AirBnB photographs are
associated with precise locations, which indicate a desire to
contextualise/personalise their community management (9 out
of 10).
Considering the content of the comment published on
Instagram posts, we do not see any negative feedback on
VoyagePrive and VeryChic, and only the minority of AirBnB
comments are negative. Surprisingly, only VoyagePriv´e an-
swered the questions asked by community members in Insta-
gram comments.
We observed that the photographs published by AirBnB
seem to be more professional and of a higher quality than
the those published by VeryChic. The content of those of
AirBnB have generally the same style and a similar colour
palette, although other agencies do not deﬁne any particu-
lar publishing style. Among the most engaging photographs
published by AirBnB, we mainly observed the use of blue,
green and brown colours. We also observed that most of the
borrowed photographs emphasise highlight the photographer in
the description, and the community republish photographs that
are more engaging, probably because of the popularity of the
photographer. We did not observe any impact of geolocation
on the success indicators, probably due to the reduced dataset.
The number of hashtags used in the description do not
inﬂuence the engagement level: the most and the least engaging
photographs had about the same number of hashtags. New
indicators, such as types of hashtags, should be added in order
to better capture the engagement level based on the usage of
hashtags. We observed that AirBnB have their own agency
hashtags #airbnb and #LiveThere, and the agency ask users
to publish their experience through photographs using those
hashtags. We also observed that AirBnB regularly republishes
user-created content and obtains a high engagement level.
However, VeryChic do not have any branded hashtag and
VoyagePriv´e never publish photographs of other Instagram
users.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has described our ﬁrst exploratory study on
the indicators of Instagram communication success and on the
role of user-generated content on community engagement. We
analysed Instagram images with different engagement levels
produced by online travel agencies. We observed that UGC
has a higher success for the online travel agencies community
than for specially created images, and that is especially the
case with AirBnB. The most engaging photographs depicted
landscapes and contained calls for action in the description:
calls such as like, retweet or comment. The most successful
content came from Instagram users or, more often, from non-
Instagram bloggers sharing their experiences. Although our
current dataset is limited, it already shows the importance of
user-generated content in community management on Insta-
gram.
This current study is the basis of our larger study on the
indicators of Instagram communication success. We observed,
for example, that the most engaging photographs had similar
colours, and that high quality photographs generate more
comments. These observations provide us with new indicators
to be added to the research. We plan, in our research agenda, to
combine new indicators and to test them on a broader dataset.
We wish also to include ﬁner indicators of UGC in order to
better understand its use by the agencies.
Another potential research direction is a deeper investiga-
tion of post descriptions and hashtags via semantic analyses
and text mining. The same analysis could be applied to
understand what type of content provides what sort of reac-
tions. Finally, it would be interesting to analyse the Instagram
community of agencies, agency hashtags use and message
propagation.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Z. Bahtar and M. Muda, “The Impact of User – Generated Content
(UGC) on Product Reviews towards Online Purchasing – A Conceptual
Framework,” Procedia Economics and Finance, vol. 37, pp. 337–342,
2016.
[2]
H. J. Cheong and M. A. Morrison, “Consumers’ Reliance on Product
Information and Recommendations Found in UGC,” Journal of Inter-
active Advertising, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 38–49, 2008.
[3]
C. Cox, S. Burgess, C. Sellitto, and J. Buultjens, “The Role of User-
Generated Content in Tourists’ Travel Planning Behavior,” Journal of
Hospitality Marketing and Management, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 743–764,
2009.
[4]
Q. Ye, R. Law, B. Gu, and W. Chen, “The inﬂuence of user-generated
content on traveler behavior: An empirical investigation on the effects
of e-word-of-mouth to hotel online bookings,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 634–639, 2011.
[5]
P. O’Connor, User-Generated Content and Travel: A Case Study on
Tripadvisor.Com.
Vienna: Springer Vienna, 2008, pp. 47–58.
[6]
Z. Zhang, Q. Ye, R. Law, and Y. Li, “The impact of e-word-of-mouth on
the online popularity of restaurants: A comparison of consumer reviews
and editor reviews,” International Journal of Hospitality Management,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 694–700, 2010.
[7]
J. Park, G. L. Ciampaglia, and E. Ferrara, “Style in the age of instagram:
Predicting success within the fashion industry using social media,”
in Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ser. CSCW ’16.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 64–73.
[8]
E. Ferrara, R. Interdonato, and A. Tagarelli, “Online popularity and
topical interests through the lens of instagram,” in Proceedings of the
25th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media, ser. HT ’14.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 24–34.
[9]
L. Manikonda, Y. Hu, and S. Kambhampati, “Analyzing user activities,
demographics, social network structure and user-generated content on
instagram.” CoRR, vol. abs/1410.8099, 2014.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

[10]
Y. Hu, L. Manikonda, and S. Kambhampati, What we instagram: A ﬁrst
analysis of instagram photo content and user types.
The AAAI Press,
2014, pp. 595–598.
[11]
C. Burmann, “A call for ’User-Generated Branding’,” Journal of Brand
Management, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2010.
[12]
K. Manap, “The Role of User Generated Content (UGC) in Social
Media for Tourism Sector,” in The 2013 WEI International Academic
Conference Proceedings.
The West East Institute, 2013, pp. 52–58.
[13]
F. A. Buttle, “Word of mouth: understanding and managing referral
marketing,” Journal of Strategic Marketing, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 241–254,
1998.
[14]
Y. Verhellen, N. Dens, and P. De Pelsmacker, “Consumer responses to
brands placed in youtube movies: the effect of prominence and endorser
expertise,” JOURNAL OF ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESEARCH,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 287–303, 2013.
[15]
S. Mehdizadeh, “Self-presentation 2.0: Narcissism and self-esteem on
facebook,” Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 357–364, 2010.
[16]
E. Mazur and L. Kozarian, “Self-presentation and interaction in blogs
of adolescents and young emerging adults,” Journal of Adolescent
Research, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 124–144, 2010.
[17]
N. Ellison, R. Heino, and J. Gibbs, “Managing impressions online:
Self-presentation process in the online dating environment,” Journal
of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 11, no. 2, 2006.
[18]
N. J. Hum, P. E. Chamberlin, B. L. Hambright, A. C. Portwood,
A. C. Schat, and J. L. Bevan, “A picture is worth a thousand words:
A content analysis of Facebook proﬁle photographs,” Computers in
Human Behavior, 2011.
[19]
J. Kristian Steen Jacobsen and A. Munar, “Tourist Information Search
and Destination Choice in a Digital Age,” Tourism Management Per-
spectives, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 39–47, 2012.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

