Exploring Evolvable Modular Patterns
for Transportation Vehicles and Logistics Architectures
Peter De Bruyn and Herwig Mannaert
Normalized Systems Institute
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email:{peter.debruyn, herwig.mannaert}@uantwerp.be
Philip Huysmans
Antwerp Management School, Belgium
Email:philip.huysmans@ams.ac.be
Abstract—Many domains employ the concept of modularity as
a key aspect during their design. While the use of modularity
characteristics is believed to enable several beneﬁcial effects,
such as evolvability, the actual realization of this evolvability or
ﬂexibility remains difﬁcult. This paper analyzes a set of modular
structures which can be identiﬁed within transportation vehicles
and logistic systems. We employ Normalized Systems Theory
(NST), a theory on how to create evolvable modular structures, as
our theoretical basis to analyze these transportation and logistic
structures in terms of the ﬂexibility and adaptability they do
(not) enable. For these structures, multiple design alternatives
exist of which the theory can clearly highlight the respective
beneﬁts and drawbacks. The paper demonstrates that NST is
useful to analyze transport related modular structures at different
levels of granularity. Additionally, we reﬂect upon the modularity
characteristics of a recent logistics initiative called “The Physical
Internet”.
Keywords–Modularity; Transportation; Logistics; Evolvability;
Patterns; Physical Internet.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In many domains including computer science, product en-
gineering, and organizational sciences, modularity has proven
to be a powerful concept. A modular system is typically
considered as a system which is subdivided into a set of
interacting subsystems. Several potential beneﬁts are attributed
to modular artifacts. Amongst other things, designing a product
while using a set of modules is associated with a lower amount
of complexity as the design is broken up into a set of smaller
(less complex) problems [1]. Also, ﬂexibility or evolvability
are deemed to be improved in this way. Indeed, it allows one
module of the system to be swapped for another version of
it, without having to redesign the artifact from scratch. This
allows some kind of plug-and-play behavior enabling variation
(different aggregations based on the same set of modular
building blocks can be formed) and evolvability (an artifact can
evolve from one variant to another over time) and is deemed
very powerful.
Achieving these beneﬁts in reality is however quite challen-
ging. Often, coupling (dependencies and interactions) between
the modules in the system exist, which should be minimized
[1][2][3]. However, speciﬁc ways on how this should precisely
be done are often absent or ambiguous. For instance, some
concerns in a modular system are cross-cutting (e.g., security
in a software application) in the sense that their functionality
is required throughout the entire system (e.g., every data
entity should be securely stored). Adapting certain aspects of
such cross-cutting concerns is often problematic as it typically
creates profound ripple-effects throughout the system (i.e.,
a change in one module triggers a change in several other
modules), which is clearly contradictory which the purpose of
evolvability.
This paper focuses on the design of modular structures for
transportation vehicles and logistics systems. It is clear that
transportation vehicles (such as cars, trucks, boats, airplanes,
trains) are modular structures at several abstraction levels (a
car consisting out of a trunk, chassis, of which the latter
consists out of several cylinders etc.) and could beneﬁt from
evolvability (e.g., replacing or upgrading particular parts or
even extending the vehicle with additional seating places or
engines). Also, the concept of cross-cutting concerns seems
relevant within this context. That is, transportation artifacts
need multiple auxiliary facilities in their design such as elec-
tricity and communication, which are needed in most of their
components. More speciﬁcally, several of these auxiliary faci-
lities within the modular design of physical artifacts (such as
the different design options to distribute heating) were already
discussed from a NST perspective in another publication [4] in
a housing context. Analogous conclusions for these facilities
can be drawn in the context of transportation artifacts. What
differentiates transportation artifacts from other types of arti-
facts, is the presence of the additional and crucial concern of
propulsion. Every transportation mechanism should, somehow,
provide the ability for its cargo to be transported to another
location. This propulsion can be realized by means of different
driving mechanisms and different integration architectures,
which will be the main focus of our exploratory analysis in
this paper. However, most transportation vehicles are designed
in such way that they lack true evolvability at several aspects
(e.g., extending the seating capacity of a car or adding additio-
nal cylinders in the engine is typically impossible). This paper
studies the implications of different design alternatives for
transportation vehicles and logistics systems in terms of their
evolvability. The considered design alternatives are based on
the modular integration patterns as suggested by Normalized
Systems Theory (NST)[5]. The theory is relevant in this
context as it studies in-depth the necessary conditions in order
to design evolvable modular systems.
It is important to mention upfront that none of the authors
of this paper are experts within the domain of transportation or
logistics. Therefore, the intention of this paper is not the pres-
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

cribe in detail how architectures within this industry should be
improved in the future. Rather, we intend to show that it makes
sense to apply the modularity reasoning presented within NST
(which originated at the software level) to this other domain in
which we believe modularity is playing an important role. In
Section II, we provide a brief overview of NST and the ways
it describes to integrate the different modules within a system.
We then apply these patterns to the analysis of transportation
vehicles (e.g., cars, airplanes) in Section III. In Section IV,
we ponder on some new initiatives and trends present within
the logistics industry which seem to exhibit certain similarities
with NST’s (more general) modularity approach. Finally, we
offer our conclusions in Section V.
II.
MODULARITY AND NST INTEGRATION PATTERNS
A. NST and combinatorics
NST is a theory providing the formulation of design
theorems which are proven to be necessary for obtaining
an evolvable software system [5]. The authors operationa-
lize evolvability by demanding Bounded Input Bound Output
(BIBO) stability, even for systems which are growing in an
unlimited way. The theorems prescribe all change drivers to
be separated in distinct constructs (Separation of Concerns),
processing functions to be called statefully (Separation of
States) and data structures or processing functions to be up-
datable without impacting other data structures or processing
functions (Version Transparency) [6]. Further, these theorems
can actually be formulated for modular systems in general
[7] and related to basic combinatorics [5]. More speciﬁcally,
it is illustrated that modularity suggests that maintaining a
particular amount of versions of modular building blocks
should allow for an exponential amount of available system
variants. However, when modularity is applied arbitrarily (e.g.,
by not adhering to the theorems), changing one particular
version of one particular module may result into ripple effects
to other (versions of) modules. This number of impacts can
exponentially grow with the size of the system, which is clearly
harmful for the evolvability of a (software) system.
B. Patterns for cross-cutting concern integration
Adherence to the NST theorems results in a system which
is very ﬁne-grained. This ﬁne-grained design should be esta-
blished very meticulously as every violation of every design
theorem is proven to result eventually into ripple effects due to
change. This is very hard to achieve and therefore, “elements”
(i.e., modular design patterns) are proposed to enable the
construction of such systems in a realistic setting [5]. Each
of these elements provides a generically reusable modular
structure for a basic functionality of the type of system one
is creating. To ﬁt the speciﬁc situation at hand, they can
be parametrized and, if necessary, customized. A system is
then created as being a set of parametrized instantiations of
these generic modular elements. For software systems, data,
task, ﬂow, connector and trigger elements were deﬁned as
generic modular structures providing the basic functionalities
of most information systems [5]. One can therefore conclude
that the modules which form an element become (as a whole)
a reusable module at a higher level of abstraction. Internally,
every element takes care of a core functionality (e.g., the
representation of data), and provides integration with some
relevant cross-cutting concerns for that system (e.g., data
security and persistency). To maximally enable evolvability,
these cross-cutting concerns need to be integrated at the
lowest modular granularity level which is possible (forming
elements). The parts in the elements which connect or deal
with the cross-cutting concerns need to be properly isolated in
separate modules which are version transparent.
In general, different integration patterns for dealing with
cross-cutting concerns can be distinguished. One possibility
is to add cross-cutting concern modules directly to the main
modules. Each cross-cutting concern module will then, by it-
self, handle the full functionality of that cross-cutting concern.
We call integrations of this type the embedded integration
pattern and will refer to it as conﬁguration 1. More speciﬁcally,
such embedded module can either be dedicated (i.e., the
module was speciﬁcally designed for the considered system)
or standardized (i.e., a standardized module for handling the
cross-cutting concern is chosen). The ﬁrst option is referred to
as conﬁguration 1A, while the latter one will be referenced as
conﬁguration 1B. In the context of software systems, imagine
for instance a separate module added to a data entity to take
care of data persistency in a custom designed way (1A) or by
adopting a standard module (1B) for the same goal.
Another possibility is to add the cross-cutting concern
modules to the main modules in such way that the cross-cutting
concern modules only act as connections (or “relay modules”)
to an (external) framework, which implements the cross-cutting
concern more elaborately and will therefore actually perform
the needed functionality. We call integrations of this type the
relay integration pattern and will refer to it as conﬁguration
2. More speciﬁcally, a relay module can link to a framework
which is dedicated (i.e., the framework was speciﬁcally de-
signed for the considered system) or standardized (possibly
even publicly available). The ﬁrst option is referred to as
conﬁguration 2A while the latter one will be referenced as
conﬁguration 2B. In the context of a software system, imagine
for instance a separate module added to a data entity which acts
as a proxy to a speciﬁcally designed persistency framework
(2A) or to a standard solution which is widely used, such as
Java Persistence API (2B). Finally, it is also possible to have
a relay module connecting to a framework gateway module.
Here, it is only the framework gateway which connects directly
to the external framework. This third variant is referred to as
conﬁguration 2C. In the context of a software system, imagine
for instance a dedicated gateway module which connects to
the JPA framework allowing all cross-cutting concern relay
modules to call the gateway without being dependent on JPA
themselves.
III.
TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE PATTERNS
The identiﬁcation of modules within a system is often
a recursive issue [1]: at different levels of granularity, parts
and subparts can be discerned. Therefore, when studying
modularity within the domain of transportation, we propose
to focus on the modular structure and its integration patterns
at different levels: the vehicle, cargo and vehicle component
levels.
A. The vehicle level
Regarding transportation, it is clear that most types of vehi-
cles (such as cars, trucks, airplanes) provide their own propul-
sion mechanism, both in terms of power storage (e.g., fuel) and
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

energy generation (typically by means of an engine). Since in
most cases extensively tested and highly standardized modules
are used for this purpose, this clearly aligns with integration
pattern 1B as explained in Section II. This has beneﬁts in terms
of ﬂexibility: different types of vehicles might use different
types of power source (e.g., diesel, gas, electricity) or have
different power needs (e.g., related to the cargo capacity). It
also provides a high amount of independence and autonomy. A
downside of such an architecture is clearly that the propulsion
mechanism needs to be, by deﬁnition, embedded within every
individual transport vehicle and that for instance technological
advancements are not automatically dispersed over all available
vehicles unless each of their mechanisms (e.g., engines) are
individually updated or replaced. Another drawback is the fact
this does not allow to realize any possible economies of scale
which might arise from producing energy on a larger scale
(i.e., for many vehicles at once).
While the other integration architectures are used less
frequently, they are not completely inconceivable for trans-
portation vehicles. Consider for instance an electrical train.
While the propulsion forces are generated internally using
electrical engines, the electrical power which is used for this
purpose is generated externally. This electrical power is tapped
from an externally available framework or, in this case, the
electrical distribution network available along the train tracks.
Therefore, one could argue that —to a certain extent— this
aligns already to some extent with integration pattern 2B.
One could even go one step further. Consider for instance
the case of the Transrapid magnetic levitation train, or the
recently proposed Hyperloop. In these types of transportation,
the vehicles are propelled by the propulsion forces genera-
ted in or around the vehicle tracks. This would even more
narrowly ﬁt into the mentioned integration pattern 2B. While
such centralized architectures introduce a dependency on the
external framework which is employed (e.g., if the energy
distribution network is down, no vehicle will be able to
advance), they have clear beneﬁts as well. For instance, they
would be able to beneﬁt from economies of scale regarding
efﬁciency, or ﬂexibility with respect to the introduction of (for
instance) more environmentally friendly techniques for power
generation.
Returning to the design of cars, it is clear that such
mechanisms (i.e., as described in integration pattern 2) would
only be possible in case the roads contain propulsion mecha-
nisms or conduct power. As this is currently not the case, the
electrical power for electrical cars can only be stored internally
in batteries (but generated externally) and therefore stick to
integration pattern 1B. Speciﬁcally focusing our attention on
airplane vehicles, one can note that aircrafts require large
amounts of propulsion power, which would make the use of
an architecture in which the aircraft taps into an externally
available standardized framework via a relay module (i.e.,
integration pattern 2B) extremely tempting. Nevertheless, the
intertwining of propulsion and lift (which is speciﬁc for
aircrafts) would make this design very difﬁcult, and the notion
seems to be completely incompatible with the current degrees
of freedom airplanes enjoy to use the airspace. Indeed, such
an architecture would entail the need for some kind of tubes
encompassing the vehicles, which could in their turn remove
the need for lifting forces. In other words, such an architecture
would probably cease to be genuine air transport.
Nevertheless, as this conﬁguration has been realized for
certain transportation vehicles and offers potential for others
(e.g., cars) in the future, we believe that the exploration of (the
feasibility) of technologies enabling these kind of integration
architectures would be very worthwhile.
B. The cargo level
It is interesting to note that the transportation industry has
already, rather explicitly, adopted a high degree of modularity
standardization at the level of their cargo. This can be found
in the context of today’s logistics landscape, in which it is
important to be able to transport goods by means of cross-
mode transportation. That means that, in order to go from
point A to B, multiple vehicles of often different nature are
employed. A laptop which is for instance ordered in the USA
to be delivered in Antwerp, might travel by a combination of
airplane and/or boat, train, truck and car. In order to facilitate
such logistic routes, a large part of the way of how the
cargoes (i.e., the goods to be transported) are packaged, is
standardized by means of containerized freight. That is, while
for some type of goods customized transportation mechanisms
still exist (e.g., for the transportation of steel coils, roll-on roll-
off (RoRo) goods, bulk goods, etc.), the majority of non-bulk
goods is transported by means of containers. Such containers
can clearly be considered as standardized cargo modules in
terms of properties such as their dimensions (height, length,
depth), securing mechanisms, maximum load, etc.
From a modularity point of view, one can see that in such
case various sound design principles are applied, implying a
set of accompanying important beneﬁts. First, this existing
containerized modular freight architecture enables the decou-
pling or encapsulating the cargo from the transport vehicle
(cf. infra). This decoupling allows to freely combine both
decoupled parts (here: cargo and transport vehicle) without
having to adapt one or the other for this purpose. Stated
otherwise: substitution of the modular parts is made easy.
Indeed, the standardization of freight containers in terms of
dimensions and securing mechanisms allows the recombination
of goods on different transportation modes at the level of
the individual containers. As long as goods can be securely
stowed within these standardized containers, thousands of
them can be loaded by cranes on sea-going cargo ships,
be switched to barges in batches of tens or maybe hundred
containers, routed individually within a harbor, and further
shipped towards customers via trains (in a set up to 20) and/or
trucks (mostly individually). Similarly, as most transportation
vehicles are designed in correspondence with the standardized
dimensions of the freight containers, they can transport all
types of goods and do not need to undergo speciﬁc changes
when, for instance, a truck has to transport couches instead of
laptops. Second, the modular architecture of the cargo makes
it possible to upscale or downscale the total cargo on one
vehicle within certain limits. For instance, as long as a ship
is large enough, one can extend the overall cargo by simply
increasing the number of containers. Or, as long the traction
of a locomotive is powerful enough, additional containers can
be added to a transportation train. We therefore conclude that
already an important amount of ﬂexibility is achieved in terms
of the type of cargo as well as the transportation mode and
scale.
Interpreting the situation sketched above in terms of our
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

modular integration architectures as described in Section II,
this means that integration architecture 2C is applied. That
is, it is clear that no embedded architecture is present as the
container itself has no propulsion mechanisms incorporated
into it. Instead, the container has standardized connections to
connect into different types of vehicles (see Section III-A)
which, at their turn, have the capacity to provide the required
propulsion for one or several containers. As these connections
are version transparent in terms of a large set of different
vehicles (truck, train and even boat), no dependency regarding
a speciﬁc type of external network is present and therefore we
would be inclined to categorize it within architecture 2C.
Further, in terms of this containerized freight, it is im-
portant to mention that, conceptually speaking, the idea of
containerization should not necessarily limited to freight alone.
For instance, one can easily imagine that similar cargo modules
could be made for humans as well, although such containers
would clearly have to be made more human-friendly, and the
practicality and added value might —at this point in time—
be questionable.
Finally, it is interesting to note that certain players in the
industry are still looking for additional ways to modularize
freight in a more efﬁcient way. For instance, Airbus was only
recently —in late 2015— granted a patent for a modular
removable aircraft cabin, in which the whole cabin (i.e., the
space for all passengers) can be substituted by another cabin
[8]. The fact that major industry players are working on these
kinds of ideas, seems to support the fact that such ideas on
modularization in (air) transportation should deﬁnitely not be
considered ludicrous nor obvious.
C. The vehicle components level
In order to further explore the modular integration for trans-
portation vehicles, it is interesting to ponder on the decoupling
or encapsulation of the various concerns at the level of the
vehicle, such as a car. Here, relevant concerns could be the
passenger cabine (providing a comfortable place for passengers
to sit), the trunk (providing storage space for luggage), the
chassis (protecting the car from the outside world) or the
engine (generating the propulsion force). It is remarkable to
note that, in many cases, the compatibility of these modular
components of transportation vehicles seems restricted to vehi-
cles of one particular model or, in some cases, multiple models
of one manufacturer. This means that, again considering a car,
most passenger cabines, trunks, chassis parts, etc. can only
be replaced by their exact copies. Stated otherwise, a trunk
which was designed for car model A is typically not able to
be used for a car model B as it would simply not ﬁt due to size
limitations, aerodynamic constraints, weight, etc. This is due to
a high degree of coupling between the individual components
we consider and their model or manufacturer speciﬁcations.
It would certainly provide some added value to customers,
if the modules implementing these major concerns would be
decoupled, encapsulated, and standardized in accordance with
integration architecture 1B of Section II, allowing plug and
play behavior. For instance, in such case, consumers would
be able —for a certain car size category— to purchase the
chassis, the engine, the passenger cabine, the trunk, etc. all
independently from different vendors.
Moreover, each of these modules could then be replaced or
upgraded independently as well. For example, the engine could
be replaced when it breaks down, but could also be upgraded
in order to have a more powerful, modern, or environmentally
cleaner engine. One could even imagine to introduce an
electrical engine in a car which was originally equipped with
as gas or diesel engine. Of course, we mention once again that
we are no experts in car manufacturing and do not elaborate
on the speciﬁc manufacturing details of each aspect of the
design. Moreover, we are aware of the fact that it would not
be straightforward to keep the decoupling or encapsulation of
the various modules intact throughout the course of signiﬁcant
technological evolutions in time. Nevertheless, the advantages
of such design from a sustainability viewpoint would obviously
be signiﬁcant: cars could become more efﬁcient and cleaner
without ending up in a junkyard after a limited amount of
years.
Some indications exist which suggest that the amount of
coupling between vehicle components or between the vehicle
and its components is not equally large among different indus-
tries. For instance, the airplane industry seems to succeed in
having a better decoupling and encapsulation of certain parts of
an airplane. For example, manufacturers of jet engines and the
aircraft are typically different ﬁrms. In order to remain viable
as an industry, this implies (and necessitates) that the engine
and the rest of the vehicle should, at least to some extent,
be decoupled. However, though an engine can be replaced,
aircrafts are clearly designed for a certain type and amount of
engines.
Considering the components of transportation vehicles at a
still more ﬁne-grained modular level, one could imagine an
even more ﬁne-grained modular structure for, for instance,
car engines where cylinders could be replaced, upgraded, or
simply added in order to increase the engine power. Again,
in order to enable these possibilities, the modules at this
very ﬁne-grained level should be designed in such a way
that they are clearly decoupled, encapsulated and standardized,
corresponding to integration architecture 1B.
D. Overview and advanced issues
Table I provides an overview of the granularity-integration
pattern combinations for the case of transportation vehicles.
We can observe that an interesting and advanced modular
architecture seems already be in place at the cargo level. This
tends to indicate that the industry has reached a rather high
maturity level regarding this issue. As far as the vehicle and
vehicle component modularity levels are concerned, interested
avenues for a further exploration of the modular integration
architecture can be remarked. Certainly for the case of vehicle
components, where the design of fully decoupled and encap-
sulated modular parts seems still to be in-progress. The table
further illustrates that, when aiming for maximum ﬂexibility,
the integration of concerns tends to be solved at more ﬁne-
grained levels (going downwards in Table I) and in a more
standardized way enabled by an external framework (going to
the right in Table I) in the long run.
Furthermore, it is interesting to make the mental exercise
to apply NST reasoning in a more complete way and adopt the
notion of NST elements, which we introduced in Section II.
When employing such elements to build a system, a large set
of very integrated small and ﬁne-grained modules are used
to form the aggregated system (instead of one monolithic
and non-scalable building block). Translating this idea to the
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
vehicle
•
◦
cargo
•
vehicle components
◦
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
components of an engine, one could imagine an engine as an
aggregation of smaller integrated engines (with all required
subcomponents for a small engine) delivering propulsion for-
ces. This would theoretically mean that the propulsion power
could be increased by adding more engines, and that the
various small engines could be replaced and upgraded inde-
pendently, even combining combustion engines and electrical
engines. Once again, this could have signiﬁcant beneﬁts from a
sustainability point of view. Also, this would partly solve some
of the scalability issues we mentioned in Section III-A, for
instance in case carrying additional cargo within a particular
vehicle would be restrained due to limitations in the capacity
of the vehicle’s engine.
Going one step further, elements might be conceivable at a
higher granularity level as well. That is, elements might be
designed which also provide the integration of these small
engines with non-propulsion concerns. Suppose for instance
one-person transport modules or vehicles that can be aggre-
gated or combined at any time into more-person modules.
Assume further that these one-person modules have their
own propulsion mechanisms and storage spaces, which are
automatically combined when several modules are aggregated.
This would mean that the propulsion power and the storage
room would be proportional to the size of the vehicle, which
would be proportional to the number of passengers. And one
could further imagine that each one of those units could be
enabled to tap into external propulsion power if available,
while producing its own propulsion power otherwise.
One could even explore what this could possibly mean for
air transportation. When considering the design of airplane
artifacts, one can note that they differentiate themselves from
ground transportation artifacts by the fact that another concern
next to propulsion becomes apparent: the need to obtain lift.
Adding this concern to the design is obviously not trivial.
Indeed, both concerns —propulsion and lift— are even tightly
coupled in current airplanes: the lift force is based on the
velocity and therefore on the propulsion of the vehicle. This
actually represents an omnipresent risk in airplanes: without
propulsion, there is no lift anymore. Nevertheless, we do
think that a similar reasoning based on elements is valid
for air transportation. For instance, one could imagine small
integrated transport modules or vehicles for a few persons,
that can be aggregated or combined at any time into larger
airplane modules. From an energy or sustainability point of
view, it would clearly be very appealing to be able to adapt
the size and propulsion power of the airplanes to the number
of registered passengers.
As we are no domain experts, we are clearly not entitled
to discuss the outlook of modular structures for transport
propulsion in depth or judge on their practical feasibility. We
also do not have any intention to oversimplify the difﬁculties
and complexities one would be confronted with during the
design of such elements. For example, the design of such
modular architectures obviously does not liberate the designer
from the laws of physics which need to be obeyed at all
times: when considering the elements for air transportation,
the relationship between the weight of the vehicle and the
wing surface creating the lift, should result in the required
equilibrium at the cruising speed, both for the singular and
aggregated vehicles. However, instead of making such ar-
chitectures impossible, these physical constraints could serve
as boundary conditions to solve the design equations. So,
instead of elaborating in detail on the actual design of such
modular building blocks (such as the elements), our main
goal is to illustrate the relevance of our modularity approach
for the design of transportation vehicles and show what kind
of possibilities normalized evolvable transport architectures
could unleash. For instance, the scalability issue mentioned in
Section III-A, would probably be largely solved if the industry
would manage to realized such elements.
IV.
LOGISTICS ARCHITECTURES
Modularization is not necessarily limited to the analysis
of the vehicles and their load, but can also be applied at a
higher conceptual level such as the logistics supply chain.
For instance, triggered by the current inefﬁciencies of most
logistics networks (e.g., use of partly empty trucks, suboptimal
routes, trafﬁc jams, overusage of highly polluting transpor-
tation modes) the Physical Internet (PI) Initiative aims to
design “an open global logistics system founded on physical,
digital and operational interconnectivity through encapsulation,
interfaces and protocols” [9, p. 152]. In order to achieve this
goal, they propose to design a global logistics system based
on the basic architectural principles adopted by the Internet
for the distribution of digital information. This means that
cargo is transported as a set of (smaller) packages, will reach
its destination by traveling via a set of connecting nodes,
may follow different routes (possibly upfront undetermined)
and employs an open infrastructure (public stock facilities or
transportation providers) to this end. Related to our focus, it is
interesting to observe that the initiators of the project explicitly
coin the importance of well-designed modular structures in
logistics and the problems originated by the opposite situa-
tion: “Innovation is bottlenecked, notably by lack of generic
standards and protocols, transparency, modularity and systemic
open infrastructure” [10, p. 5].
Whereas space limitations do not allow us to analyze all
listed characteristics for this new logistics system, some of
them can easily be related to our integration pattern analysis
presented above. First, regarding the cargo level, it is remarka-
ble that the current freight containers are considered useful, but
too coarse-grained. Instead, they propose a set of unitary and
composite π-containers as world-standard, smart, green and
modular containers. They would differ from the currently used
containers by being smaller (causing less “empty space” in
containers), (de)composable (allowing to attach or disconnect
multiple containers to each other), having advanced securing
and sealing possibilities, being equipped with smart sensors
and controllers, have conditioning capabilities if required, etc.
Stated otherwise, the authors of the initiative argue that one
large cargo container is not sufﬁcient and should be considered
as a modular system on its own. Of course, the decoupling
between cargo and vehicle should be attained as it was the case
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

for current containers. Therefore, at the vehicle level, vehicles
should be manufactured adhering to this new π-container
standard. Further, a global PI could spur the development of
vehicles optimized (e.g., using the most adequate integration
patterns) for the trajectory which they are required to serve
(i.e., in some trajectories external propulsion mechanisms may
be present, in others not).
Moreover, the vision of the physical internet refers to the
logistics network as an additional aggregation level, which
supersedes transportation vehicles (i.e., the aggregation level
upon which this paper elaborates) and which needs to be
redesigned adhering to modularity guidelines. For example,
[10, p. 10] states that logistics networks need to “evolve from
point-to-point hub-and-spoke transport to distributed multi-
segment intermodal transport”. The current logistics networks
allow a certain level of intermodal transport, as discussed in
Section III-B. For example, a container can be use multiple
modes of transport such as trains, ships, and trucks, without
the freight itself being handled. However, the smaller granu-
larity of the cargo as proposed by the physical internet will
encourage smaller segments and more advanced optimization
of the different segments. Once routing decisions can be
optimized for a single package, as opposed to an aggregation
of packages in a container, advanced algorithms based on the
routing algorithms of the digital internet can be leveraged. This
vision is in line with our observations based on modularity
reasoning on other abstraction levels, but needs to confront
the same practical challenges discussed earlier. For example,
this vision requires the development of nodes which are highly
optimized for load breaking: disassembling aggregations of
cargo into individual constituents, calculating the optimal route
for each individual π-container, and reassembling new aggre-
gations. As such, these nodes will need to be technologically
more advanced than the current logistics hubs.
Many node-to-node segments will still be operated by
traditional transportation vehicles, because of the economies
of scale of these vehicles. However, because of the small
granularity of a single segment and the load breaking capa-
bilities of the nodes, the optimal transportation vehicle can be
re-evaluated for each individual segment. Consider the ﬁnal
segment an individual package has to travel to an individual
customer. In certain instances, individual air transport using
a drone could be the fastest way to fulﬁll such a segment.
Organizations such as Amazon are already experimenting with
this technology, albeit within very strict limitations: the ﬁnal
delivery needs to be very close to an Amazon depot (a
traditional hub), and strict weight limitations are enforced.
This last limitation relates to the lift concern of air transporta-
tion vehicles discussed earlier. Current research demonstrates
how this concern can be made scalable without introducing
couplings with other concerns, such as drone control [11].
This research shows how cargo can be attached to multiple
supporting drones, which, based on force sensing, follow
the movement of one primary controlled drone. The primary
drone can now be controlled as if it was the sole transport
vehicle, albeit with a scalable propulsion concern. This can be
considered as an illustration of how state-of-the-art research is
able to make advancement towards NST integration patterns
previously considered practically impossible. Indeed, NST
prescribes that the integration of concerns needs to be solved
at the most ﬁne-grained levels, for which several practical
obstacles have been identiﬁed in the past for air transportation
vehicles (cf. supra). The research of [11] demonstrates the
practical feasibility of adhering to this principle: a scalable
integration of the lift concern at the level of an individual π-
container. As such, we believe that further research elaborating
on the use of NST as a theoretical underpinning for R&D in
the logistics domain would be highly valuable.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presented an overview of different modular
structures which could be identiﬁed within transportation vehi-
cles, as well as the different integration patterns in this respect
(with their associated beneﬁts and drawbacks), using NST as
the theoretical basis. It is important to stress that none of the
authors claim to be transportation or logistics experts. Instead,
generally available knowledge within the domain was used as
the primary source for the analysis. The main contribution
is situated in the fact that we show the applicability and
relevance of NST in a context (i.e., transportation and logistics)
outside the original application domain of the theory (i.e.,
software systems). To this end, we identiﬁed modular struc-
tures at different granularity levels and discussed the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of the different modular integration patterns
proposed by NST. Next, we also interpreted upcoming trends
and initiatives in the ﬁeld, such as the Physical Internet, with
respect of their modularity characteristics. Given our non-
expert status in the transportation and logistics domain, we
encourage actual experts to scrutinize and validate or reﬁne our
initial analyses provided. Additionally, future research could
be directed towards the application of a similar analysis regar-
ding the integration of cross-cutting concerns into (physical)
artifacts within a particular domain outside the transportation
industry.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial.
MIT Press, 1996.
[2]
D. Parnas, “On the criteria to be used in decomposing systems into
modules,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 15, no. 12, 1972, pp.
1053–1058.
[3]
C. Y. Baldwin and K. B. Clark, Design Rules: The Power of Modularity.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2000.
[4]
P. De Bruyn, J. Faes, T. Vermeire, and J. Bosmans, “On the modular
structure and evolvability of architectural patterns for housing utilities,”
in Proceedings of The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive
Patterns and Applications, 2017.
[5]
H. Mannaert, J. Verelst, and P. De Bruyn, Normalized Systems Theory:
From Foundations for Evolvable Software Toward a General Theory for
Evolvable Design.
Koppa, 2016.
[6]
H. Mannaert, J. Verelst, and K. Ven, “The transformation of require-
ments into software primitives: Studying evolvability based on systems
theoretic stability,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 76, no. 12,
2011, pp. 1210–1222, special Issue on Software Evolution, Adaptability
and Variability.
[7]
P. De Bruyn, “Generalizing normalized systems theory : towards a
foundational theory for enterprise engineering,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Antwerp, 2014.
[8]
U.S. Patent US 9,193,460 B2, 2015.
[9]
B. Montreuil, R. D. Meller, and E. Ballot, Physical Internet Foundations.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 151–166.
[10]
B. Montreuil, “Toward a physical internet: meeting the global logistics
sustainability grand challenge,” Logistics Research, vol. 3, no. 2, 2011,
pp. 71–87.
[11]
A. Tagliabue, M. Kamel, S. Verling, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “Colla-
borative Object Transportation Using MAVs via Passive Force Control,”
ArXiv e-prints, Dec. 2016.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-534-0
PATTERNS 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

