Car User Experience Patterns: A Pattern Collection in Progress
Tim Kaiser, Alexander G. Mirnig, Nicole Perterer, Alexander Meschtscherjakov, Manfred Tscheligi
Christian Doppler Laboratory for ”Contextual Interfaces”
Center for Human-Computer Interaction, University of Salzburg
Salzburg, Austria
Email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@sbg.ac.at
Abstract— Car user experience patterns are a systematic way
to capture best practices and solutions to reoccurring problems
in automotive interaction design. Combining empirical data,
industry knowledge, and experts experience, they facilitate
communication between scientists and industry stakeholders.
In this paper, we present a newly generated set of eight car
user experience patterns that describe answers to problems in
automotive interaction design and engineering. These patterns
are part of an ongoing project with the aim of providing
a comprehensive, User Experience focused, pattern collection.
The patterns presented in this paper mainly contain information
on reducing potential distraction caused by the usage of in-
vehicle information systems and on designing efﬁcient in-car
warning systems. They are the result of a novel approach
combining scientiﬁc and industry know-how into very brief
and domain-speciﬁc design problem solutions.
Keywords— design patterns; pattern identiﬁcation and extrac-
tion; pattern reuse.
I. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK
The usage of patterns is well established in Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) and is advantageous for various
reasons. First, patterns are a method to capture proven design
solutions to reoccurring problems. Second, the use of patterns
improve the design process (regarding both time and effort
spent) to a considerable degree [1][2]. Moreover, scientiﬁc
research in HCI also strongly relies on communicating scien-
tiﬁc ﬁndings to the industry. By translating these ﬁndings so
that they convey relevant and useful information to designers
and developers, patterns can help facilitate the design process
by reducing time and effort that has to be put into it.
Designing for a good User Experience (UX) has become
an increasingly important topic in academia and industry
[3][4][5]. User Experience can be deﬁned as ”the users sen-
sory, emotional and reﬂective response to the interaction with
a system in a context” [6]. The car industry in particular has
become a fast-paced global market that can draw substantial
beneﬁts from a modular and ﬂexible documentation of best
practices.
Based on this consideration, we created a set of car
User Experience patterns, of which we present the eight
most recent car ones in this paper. In the following two
subsections, we will give an overview on the state of the art
on Contextual UX patterns in general, and our approach in
particular. In Section II, we show each pattern in its entirety,
and conclude with a brief summary in Section III.
A. Contextual User Experience Patterns
Recently, speciﬁc domains in HCI, such as UX research,
employed patterns to collect and structure their knowledge
based on empirical ﬁndings [2][7][8]. This is illustrated, e.g.,
by Martin et al. [9] and Crabtree [10] who use patterns for
organizing and presenting ethnographic material. The ﬁrst
who emphasized a focus on the human perspective in the
history of patterns was Alexander [11]. In 2010, Blackwell
and Fincher [5] suggest to adopt the idea of patterns and
UX in the form of Patterns of User Experience (PUX). Such
patterns should help HCI professionals to understand what
kind of experiences people have with information structures.
In the same year, Obrist et al. [2] developed 30 UX
patterns for audiovisual networked applications based on a
huge range of collected empirical data, which was further
categorized into main UX problem areas. An extension
of these UX patterns, are the so-called Contextual User
Experience (CUX) patterns. Accordingly, patterns are used
to describe the knowledge on how to inﬂuence the users
experience in a positive way by taking context parameters
during the interaction with a system into account. Within
their work, the authors provide a detailed description of
how to structure CUX patterns in the car context. Three
years later, Krischkowsky et al. [8] presented a step-by-
step guidance for HCI researchers for generating patterns
form HCI study insights. In particular, they intended to
support User Experience (UX) researchers in converting their
gathered knowledge from empirical studies into patterns. The
structural foundation for the intended patterns is the so-
called Contextual User Experience (CUX) patterns format,
as mentioned before.
Following in the footsteps of Obrist et al. [7], we decided
to pursue a triangular approach towards driver space design
and cover three major UX factors via appropriate design
patterns.These factors are:
• Mental Workload Caused by Distraction [12]: Safety is
paramount in an automotive environment, and distrac-
tion is one of the major contributing factors to accidents
on the road [13][14]. Especially in UX, where function-
alities and interface complexities are ever increasing,
this is one of, if not the, most important factors to
consider regarding driver safety.
• Perceived Safety [15]: The increased safety gained by
designing for decreased mental workload and less dis-
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

traction needs to be communicated to the driver. The
difference between objective and perceived safety can
be relatively large. For many situations, it has to be
evaluated if car interfaces should increase or decrease
perceived safety.
• Joy of Use [16][17]: This is strongly tied to the pre-
vious factor, but is not the same. Cars have more and
more become instruments that are not simply means of
transportation but are also used for entertainment. Thus,
it becomes important that car interfaces can be used not
only without frustration, but also in a way that makes
using them a joyful experience.
B. Pattern Generation Process
The pattern generation process for car user experience pat-
terns has been described in detail by Mirnig et al. [18]. First,
an initial knowledge transfer workshop was conducted in
order to provide HCI researchers with know-how regarding
patterns. The HCI researchers then generated an initial set of
16 patterns following the initial pattern structure. This lead
to several issues with the initial structure, so that an iteration
of the initial structure took place in a second workshop.
The resulting reﬁned pattern structure consists of 9 parts:
Name (a description of the solution of the pattern), Intent (a
short abstract to allow quick judgment whether the pattern
can be applied in a certain context), Topics (problem scope
and addressed automotive user experience factor), Problem
(a short but more detailed description of the problem which
should be solved by the pattern), Scenario (an example
application context of the pattern), Solution (the proposed
solution), Examples (concrete examples of best practices),
Keywords (other topics related to the pattern), and Sources
(origin of the pattern).
In the next step, patterns were presented to industry
stakeholders in a pattern evaluation workshop. Based on
their feedback, the name, intent and topics section were
standardized and kept brief, so it takes less time and effort to
process them. The context and forces sections were combined
into the new scenario category.
II. PATTERN COLLECTION
We developed a list of design problems together with
designers and engineers working in the automotive industry
and applied the aforementioned pattern generation approach,
involving the industry stakeholders at several stages in the
process. The following is one part of a resulting collection
of patterns, which combines scientiﬁc and industry know-
how into concrete problem solutions for UX-centered driver
space design problems in the automotive domain.
A. Pattern 1: Menu Depth and Number of Options
Intent: This pattern is about reducing distraction caused
by navigating visual menus as a secondary task.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, driver, haptic,
input
Problem: While driving, navigation of in-vehicle user
interface menus causes distraction. Given the safety implica-
tions of visual distraction, it is important to minimize visual
demand of these menus.
Scenario: Drivers interact with visual menus to access in-
formation, communication and entertainment systems. Nav-
igating menus with high visual demand severely distracts
the driver and can thus lead to road deviations and crashes.
Visual demand of menus is determined by a depth/breadth-
trade-off. The deeper a menu, the less menu options per page
there should be. A National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Agency
(NHTSA) guideline based on current research recommends
that a driver should be able to complete a task in a series
of 1.5 second glances with a cumulative time spent glancing
away from the roadway of not more than 12 seconds [19].
Solution: Designing menus with limited depth allow
drivers to complete secondary tasks in a relatively short
time period. With the help of an empirically derived formula
provided by Burnett et al. [20], it is possible to calculate
different menu structures that comply with design guidelines:
T = D(0.87 + 1.24 ∗ log(B)
where T = time to complete the task, D = depth of menu
where B = number of menu options. Table I shows acceptable
menu structures that comply with maximum task completion
time according to the NHTSA guideline, as calculated using
this formula.
TABLE I
MENU DEPTH AND NUMBER OF OPTIONS FOLLOWING NHTSA
GUIDELINES
Menu Depth
Menu Breadth
3
12
4
5
5
3
6
2
Examples: see Figures 1 and 2.
B. Pattern 2: Display Touch Field Size
Intent: This pattern is about determining the optimal touch
screen target size.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, driver, touch
screen, visual, haptic, input
Problem: Navigating in-vehicle displays while driving
causes distraction, leading to road deviations and possibly
to crashes. Thus, visual demand of touch screen menus has
to be minimized while preserving maximum usability.
Scenario: Because they are easy to use and to understand,
touch-screen interfaces are more and more used for operating
in-vehicle systems. Drivers use them to control entertainment
and navigation features provided by these systems as a
secondary task. The key factor for navigating these displays
easily is the size of the touch target like a menu button [21].
Subjective usability ratings, as well as objective measures
like task completion time and error rate heavily depend on
this factor.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Figure 1.
BMW iDrive - accessing vital information requires only three
navigation steps.
Figure 2.
BMW iDrive - changing the radio station requires only two
steps.
Solution: Touch targets need to be large enough in order
to minimize task completion time and error rate. Design
guidelines suggest a minimum contact surface area of 80
mm [19]. However, in a recent driving simulation study
that focused on touch target size for in-vehicle information
systems, the authors determined that a touch key size of at
least 17.5x17.5 mm minimizes navigation error rate, lane
deviations, driving speed variation and glance time while
maximizing subjective usability ratings [22]. While touch
screen size and overall visual complexity of the menu always
have to be taken in consideration, the recommended touch
key size may serve as a starting point for menu design.
Examples: See Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Apple Car Play menu.
C. Pattern 3: Auditory Informations and Warnings
Intent: this pattern is about designing auditory informa-
tions and warnings that are quick to capture and easy to
comprehend.
Topics: perceived safety, driver, acoustic, output
Problem: When using only visual warnings, driver distrac-
tion can occur. Still, drowsiness and inattentiveness increase
the risk of trafﬁc accidents. Thus, it is still necessary to direct
the drivers attention to potential dangers by different means.
Scenario: Well-designed auditory warning systems can
serve this purpose. Perceptibilty of auditory warnings de-
pends on loudness, background noise and complexity. Also,
the driver needs to know which actions have to be taken to
react appropriately.
Solution: Different warning techniques are appropriate
for different situations. According to Bliss and Acton [23],
verbal speech notiﬁcations and auditory icons (sounds with
real-world representations, e.g., the sound of a car engine)
are equally efﬁcient when it comes to response accuracy
and reaction time. Auditory warnings also have to convey
enough information to be accurately understood. Due to
driving comfort reasons, warnings of low urgency should
not be annoying and can even be quite pleasant, while high-
urgency warnings are bound to be annoying [24].
Examples: Table II shows auditory warnings for some
common situations of varying urgency. Empirical work on
the perceived urgency of speech based warnings has been
done [25].
D. Pattern 4: Choosing the Best Modality for Warning
Displays
Intent: this pattern is about choosing the right warning
display modality for different situations, combining different
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE II
RECOMMENDED WARNINGS FOR COMMON SITUATIONS OF VARYING URGENCY
Urgency
Speech Based Warnings
Auditory Icons
Appropriate Situation
Informational (low)
Signal words that convey
low urgency:
”Notice”, ”Information”
Pouring water,
steam, released air
Low petrol and oil levels, low tire pressure
Warning (moderate)
Signal words that convey
medium urgency:
Warning, Caution
Shutting car door,
Roaringmotor sound,
squeaking sound
Car door opened, speed limit exceeded, hand brake on
Critical (high)
Signal words that convey
high urgency:
Danger
Car horn, car crash,
alarm siren
Blind spot overtaking, car drifting off road, collision possible
modalities if adequate.
Topics: perceived safety, driver, multimodal, output
Scenario: In-vehicle information system (IVIS) informa-
tion needs to be delivered effectively while minimizing the
interference with driving. Display modality has a signiﬁcant
impact on the performance of in-vehicle information systems.
Visual, auditory and tactile displays all have their advantages
and disadvantages [26]: Visual warnings can be inspected
at the drivers own pace and can be viewed multiple times.
However, they cause visual distraction from the driving task
and can be overlooked. Auditory warnings can be picked up
without causing visual distraction, but they require the drivers
full attention when they are displayed. Tactile warnings are
highly noticeable, not inﬂuenced by noise and have no visual
demand, but they are limited to a few types of information,
such as simple alerts. In order to maximize IVIS efﬁciency,
designers have to choose carefully between the different
modalities.
Solution: When choosing between auditory and visual
presentation, table III offers decision guidelines based on
current empirical research for a variety of cases. Some of
these cases will probably beneﬁt if combined with another
display modality.
Examples: Figure 4 shows combined auditory and visual
warnings. See [27] for a live demonstration.
Figure 4.
Audi A8 Distance Warning through a combination of auditory
and visual warning displays.
E. Pattern 5: IVIS System Response Time
Intent: This Pattern addresses the role of system response
time while operating in-vehicle information systems by touch
interfaces or hardware keys and its inﬂuence on driver
distraction and comfort.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, joy of use, driver,
keys, visual, haptic, input
Problem: While getting more and more complex, many
modern in-vehicle information systems possess signiﬁcant
delays when using them because of the sheer amount of
information that they have to process. The inﬂuence of
system response time - the delay of a systems response after
user input until it is ready to take new commands - has
been discussed as a potential source of driver distraction and
annoyance [28].
Scenario: Drivers use in-vehicle information systems for
a wide variety of functions. While navigating their menus,
the IVIS processes large amounts of information, which may
lead to long and uncertain loading times.
Solution: Keep system response time below 250 ms.
According to current design guidelines [19], control feedback
should be given within 250ms after the input. A study
by Utesch and Vollrath [29] showed that longer feedback
delays (500 or 1000 ms) dont impair driving performance
but caused signiﬁcant annoyance in drivers. Keep system
response times constant. It has also been shown in this
study that delays that vary in their length distract the driver,
while constant delays cause less off-road glances. It can be
concluded that feedback delays should be kept constant so
that waiting times for system response are predictable. For
longer delays, use additional feedback modalities. According
to guidelines of the European Commission [30], if system
responses take longer than 250 ms, the system should inform
the driver that it has recognized the input. If longer delays
(500 ms and above) are inevitable, Utesch and Vollrath [29]
recommend using acoustic or tactile feedback to indicate
system readiness, as this will reduce off-road glances.
Examples:
1. Demonstration of a 2015 Audi MMI System, showing
constant and short system response times [31].
2. Demonstration of a BMW 5 Series iDrive, showing long
but constant delays [32].
3. Demonstration of an Apple CarPlay IVIS in the Ferrari
FF showing long and variable delays. This might cause
distraction and annoyance [33].
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

TABLE III
RECOMMENDED WARNINGS FOR COMMON SITUATIONS OF VARYING URGENCY
Case
Primary Modality
Reason
Combine with...
High priority messages
Auditory[34][35]
Visual warnings alone
are likely to be overlooked
Tactile [36] for
decreased reaction times
Complex secondary task
Auditory[37][38][39]
Further distraction due
to increased glance duration
Visual[40] for reduced
reaction times and less navigation errors
Driving task is highly demanding,
e.g., high driving speed
Auditory[37][38][39]
Divided visual attention
poses a security risk
Displaying instructions, commands,
warnings or alarms
Auditory [41]
Speech is more suitable
for this information type
Tactile [42]
Auditory message cannot be kept
short and precise
Visual [43]
Auditory messages that are
too long cause severe distraction
Driver performs auditory tasks
Visual [25]
Auditory perception is
partially or completely blocked
Tactile [44] for reduced lane
deviations and annoyance,
increased pleasantness
F. Pattern 6: In-Vehicle Display Icon Size
Intent: this pattern addresses recommended IVIS icon
sizes.
Topics: Joy of use, driver, icons, visual
Problem: IVIS displays transport various informations,
some of which require quick and accurate recognition. How-
ever, as in-vehicle displays have to convey more and more
information, available space on in-vehicle displays becomes
sparse.
Scenario: Icons are a way of presenting information in a
spatially condensed, yet clearly understandable way. When
relying on icons, the driver needs to be able to quickly grasp
and process information, which in turn requires that icons
can be easily recognized.
Solution: According to Zwaga [45], icons perform better
than text displays only if they are well designed. According
to FHWA guidelines [46], choosing the adequate size for an
icon can be determined with the following set of formulæ.
See Figure 5 for an illustration of visual angle, distance
and symbol height (where Symbol Height = the height of
the symbol; Distance = distance from viewers eyepoint to
the display; Visual Angle = angle in degrees. Height and
Distance use the same unit of measure).
Figure 5.
Relationship Between Viewing Distance, Symbol Height and
Visual Angle.
1. If viewer distance and Symbol Height are known,
the following formulæwill calculate the distance.
arctan(Symbolheight
Distance
)
(1)
or
3438 Height
Distance
60
(2)
2. If distance and visual angle are known.
Distance[tan(V isualAngle)]
(3)
3. If visual angle and symbol height are known, the
following formulæwill calculate the distance.
Symbolheight
tan(V isualAngle)
(4)
Examples: See Figure 6.
Figure 6.
Audi A4 2008 Dashboard Icons, taken from the users manual.
[47]
G. Pattern 7: Visual Display Colour Choices
Intent: this pattern is about choosing adequate colours for
visual displays.
Topics: Joy of use, driver, colors, visual
Problem: IVIS displays transport various informations,
some of which require quick and accurate recognition. How-
ever, as in-vehicle displays have to convey more and more
information, they still need to be processed quickly.
Scenario: IVIS displays have to display information in a
clear and efﬁcient way. One way to achieve this is picking
adequate colors for displays, so that reading and recognizing
symbols can be accomplished without delay.
Solution: According to NHTSA guidelines, visual display
colors should comply to a number of standards.
• Avoid using red/green and blue/yellow combinations so
that color blind drivers can process the display easily.
• According to a survey conducted by Lee and Park
[48], senior people prefer combinations with distinc-
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

tive brightness contrasts between foreground and back-
ground color because of their better legibility.
• Displays that are too colorful distract the driver in
various ways. Excluding black and white, a maximum
of ﬁve different colours should be used.
• Use different colours for different priorities, e.g., red
for critical alerts, amber for warnings, white for infor-
mation.
Visual displays are easier to process if high color contrasts
are used. A driving simulation study showed that inefﬁciently
designed car displays strongly increase reaction times in
driving tasks. They also increase reading errors [49]. Table
IV shows color contrasts that guarantee high legibility.
TABLE IV
RECOMMENDED COLOR CONTRASTS FOR IVIS DISPLAYS
Black/yellow
Black/yellow
Black/white
Black/white
Black/orange
Black/orange
Blue/white
Blue/white
Green/white
Green/white
Red/white
Black/yellow
Examples: See Figure 7. This dashboard relies on white-
on-black and orange-on-black contrasts which are highly
visible. Orange is the only color besides black and white.
Figure 7.
Dashboard with color contrasts that are highly visible.
H. Pattern 8: Physical Buttons Versus Touch Screen Inter-
faces
Intent: this pattern addresses the question whether touch
screens or physical buttons should be used.
Topics: workload caused by distraction, driver, touch
screen, visual, haptic, input
Problem: Current touch-screen devices provide no tactile
feedback concerning control orientation, location, separation
from one another. While driving, they can not be operated
with eyes on the road, which in turn leads to long off-
road glances. NHSTA guidelines [19] suggest that touch
interfaces should not be operated while driving. On the other
hand, touch screen devices provide much more ﬂexibility,
Figure 8.
BMW iDrive screen, showing blue-on-white contrasts with an
orange highlight.
which is needed to operate modern, feature-rich in-vehicle
information systems.
Scenario: Drivers use in-vehicle information systems for
a wide variety of functions. Ways to navigate through the
increasing number of functions are getting more and more
complex. Touch screen interfaces are getting more and
more popular, but navigating them while driving is highly
distracting.
Solution:
1) While driving, limit the amount of time spent to
interact with touch devices. NHTSA recommends a
maximum of six touches for every 12 seconds period
[50]. Physical buttons do not require such strict reg-
ulations as their functionality is limited and they are
not as visually distracting. Thus, functions that must be
available to the driver while the car is moving should
be represented by physical buttons or clearly identiﬁ-
able, big touch buttons. Recommended limitations are
as follows
• For touch devices without haptic feedback, limit
touch screen interactions to six touches for every
12 seconds.
• For touch devices with haptic feedback, limit
touch screen interactions only to certain functions.
• No restrictions apply to physical buttons while
driving.
• No restrictions apply while standing.
2) Equip touch devices with haptic feedback. According
to Harrison and Hudson [51], touch screens lead to a
high number of off-road searching glances and require
long periods of operation time. They also found that
this could be mitigated by provide touch screens with
haptic feedback, which is conﬁrmed by other studies
[52]. Studies suggest that this kind of feedback greatly
increases performance and reduces operation time. If
haptic feedback is used, touch devices still should to
be limited to the functionality provided by traditional
physical buttons.
3) Also, consider alternative input methods that dont
require visual attention (e.g., voice interaction).
Examples: See Figure 9.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Figure 9.
VW Passat dashboard which combines few physical buttons with
a well-readable touch display.
III. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a collection of patterns, which
deals with recurring questions of automotive design as re-
ported by designers working in that area. By relying on
design guidelines as well as empirical research, the collection
tries to bridge the gap between government regulations,
scientiﬁc ﬁndings and industry needs. These patterns were
intended to be of direct practical use for automotive design-
ers. The pattern structure and length, which we described
in earlier work [18], has been ﬁt to stakeholder demands,
resulting in patterns with an increased emphasis on brevity
and conciseness. The car User Experience patterns proposed
in this paper constitute a small part of a constantly growing
collection of design knowledge. The speed of innovations,
the complexity, and the range of functions of car interfaces
is increasing constantly. In addition, even if there are more
and more connections between single car interfaces, innova-
tions do not necessarily occur in parallel. Thus, an equally
dynamic approach to document best practices in design
is required. This pattern collection shows how a pattern
approach to car UX design can meet these demands. The
pattern collection will continue to grow into a substantial
body of car UX design knowledge, which covers at least
three of the most important UX factors for driver space
design [53].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ﬁnancial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry of
Science, Research and Economy and the National Founda-
tion for Research, Technology and Development and AU-
DIO MOBIL Elektronik GmbH is gratefully acknowledged
(Christian Doppler Laboratory for ”Contextual Interfaces”).
REFERENCES
[1] A. Dearden and J. Finlay, “Pattern languages in hci: A critical
review,” Human-Computer Interaction, 2006, pp. 49–102, Shefﬁeld
Hallam University. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: http://research.cs.vt.
edu/ns/cs5724papers/dearden-patterns-hci09.pdf.
[2] M.
Obrist,
D.
Wurhofer,
E.
Beck,
A.
Karahasanovic,
and
M.
Tscheligi,
“User
experience
(ux)
patterns
for
audio-visual
networked applications: Inspirations for design,” in Proceedings
of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction:
Extending
Boundaries,
ser.
NordiCHI
’10.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2010,
pp.
343–352.
[retrieved:
02,
2016]
URL:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1868914.1868955
[3] J. O. Borchers, J. C. Thomas, A. Sutcliffe, J. Coplien, and R. N.
Grifﬁths, “Patterns: What’s in it for hci?” in Extended Abstracts of
the CHI 2001 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2001.
[4] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, “User experience-a research
agenda,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 25, no. 2.
Taylor
& Francis, 2006, pp. 91–97.
[5] A. F. Blackwell and S. Fincher, “PUX: Patterns of User Experience,”
Interactions, vol. 17, no. 2.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp.
27–31.
[6] M. Tscheligi, “User experience design for vehicles,” in Christian
doppler laboratory: contextual interfaces. Tutorial for conference AUI.
ACM, 2012.
[7] M.
Obrist,
D.
Wurhofer,
E.
Beck,
and
M.
Tscheligi,
“Cux
patterns approach: Towards contextual user experience patterns,”
in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conferences on Pervasive
Patterns and Applications, PATTERNS, vol. 10.
IARIA, 2010.
[retrieved:
02,
2016]
URL:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?
view=article&articleid=patterns 2010 3 20 70079
[8] A. Krischkowsky, D. Wurhofer, N. Perterer, and M. Tscheligi,
“Developing patterns step-by-step: A pattern generation guidance
for hci researchers,” in PATTERNS 2013, The Fifth International
Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications.
IARIA, 2013,
pp. 66–72. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
index.php?view=article\&articleid=patterns 2013 3 30 70053
[9] D. Martin, T. Rodden, M. Rounceﬁeld, I. Sommerville, and S. Viller,
“Finding patterns in the ﬁeldwork,” in Proceedings of the Seventh
European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001, pp. 39–58.
[10] A. Crabtree, T. Hemmings, and T. Rodden, “Pattern-based support
for interactive design in domestic settings,” in Proceedings of
the 4th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes,
Practices, Methods, and Techniques, ser. DIS ’02.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 265–276. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/778712.778749
[11] C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein, A pattern language:
towns, buildings, construction. Oxford University Press, 1977, vol. 2.
[12] K. Young, M. Regan, and M. Hammer, “Driver distraction: A review
of the literature,” Distracted driving.
Australasian College of Road
Safety, 2007, pp. 379–405.
[13] M. A. Recarte and L. M. Nunes, “Mental workload while driving:
effects on visual search, discrimination, and decision making.” Journal
of experimental psychology: Applied, vol. 9, no. 2.
American
Psychological Association, 2003, p. 119.
[14] J. Engstr¨om, E. Johansson, and J. ¨Ostlund, “Effects of visual and
cognitive load in real and simulated motorway driving,” Transportation
Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 8, no. 2.
Elsevier, 2005, pp. 97–120.
[15] R. Buchner, D. Wurhofer, A. Weiss, and M. Tscheligi, “Robots in
time: How user experience in human-robot interaction changes over
time,” in Social Robotics.
Springer, 2013, pp. 138–147.
[16] R. Buchner, P. M. Kluckner, A. Weiss, and M. Tscheligi, “Assisting
maintainers in the semiconductor factory: Iterative co-design of a
mobile interface and a situated display,” in Proceedings of the 12th In-
ternational Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. ACM,
2013, p. 46.
[17] G. Stollnberger, A. Weiss, and M. Tscheligi, “”the harder it gets”
exploring the interdependency of input modalities and task complexity
in human-robot collaboration,” in RO-MAN, 2013 IEEE. IEEE, 2013,
pp. 264–269.
[18] A. G. Mirnig et al., “Generating patterns combining scientiﬁc and
industry knowledge: An inclusive pattern approach,” in PATTERNS
2015, The Seventh International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns
and Applications.
IARIA, 2014, pp. 38–45.
[19] A. Stevens, A. Quimby, A. Board, T. Kersloot, and P. Burns, NHTSA
Design Guidelines for Safety of In-Vehicle Information Systems.
National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, 2002.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

[20] G. E. Burnett, G. Lawson, R. Donkor, and Y. Kuriyagawa, “Menu
hierarchies for in-vehicle user-interfaces: Modelling the depth vs.
breadth trade-off,” Displays, vol. 34, no. 4.
Elsevier, 2013, pp. 241–
249.
[21] M. Pfauth and J. Priest, “Person-computer interface using touch screen
devices,” Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 25th Annual
Meeting, no. 1, 1981, pp. 500–504.
[22] H. Kim, S. Kwon, J. Heo, H. Lee, and M. K. Chung, “The effect of
touch-key size on the usability of in-vehicle information systems and
driving safety during simulated driving,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 45,
no. 3.
Elsevier, 2014, pp. 379–388.
[23] J. P. Bliss and S. A. Acton, “Alarm mistrust in automobiles: how col-
lision alarm reliability affects driving,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 34,
no. 6.
Elsevier, 2003, pp. 499–509.
[24] A. Guillaume, L. Pellieux, V. Chastres, and C. Drake, “Judging the
urgency of nonvocal auditory warning signals: perceptual and cognitive
processes.” Journal of experimental psychology: Applied, vol. 9, no. 3.
American Psychological Association, 2003, p. 196.
[25] J. Edworthy and E. Hellier, Complex Nonverbal Auditory Signals and
Speech Warnings.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 2006,
pp. 199–220.
[26] Y. Cao and M. Theune, “The use of modality in in-vehicle information
presentation: A brief overview,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International
Workshop on Multimodal Interfaces for Automotive Applications
(MIAA), in conjunction with IUI.
ACM, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[27] “Collision warning systems at the test track,” 2012, [retrieved: 02,
2016] URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYckJqp4XTc#t=45.
[28] P. Burns and T. Lansdown, “E-distraction: the challenges for safe and
usable internet services in vehicles,” in Internet Forum on the Safety
Impact of Driver Distraction When Using In-Vehicle Technologies,
2000.
[retrieved:
02,
2016]
URL:
http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/
departments/Human%20Factors/driver-distraction/PDF/29.PDF
[29] F. Utesch and M. Vollrath, “Do slow computersystems impair driving
safety?” in European Conference on Human Centred Design for
Intelligent Transport Systems, 2nd, 2010, Berlin, Germany, 2010.
[30] T. F. HMI, “European statement of principles on human machine
interface for in-vehicle information and communication systems,”
Tech. rep., Commission of the European Communities, Tech. Rep.,
1998.
[31] “2015 Audi MMI Infotainment Review in the 2015 Audi A3 Sedan,”
2014, [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
xadb1vSXw7Q.
[32] “BMW 5 Series Connected-Drive (iDrive) Full Demo - including
Head-Up Display,” 2013, [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=Ulcgm-GN M.
[33] “Apple CarPlay Demo,” 2014, [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=TQz64rhefqY.
[34] C. Kaufmann, R. Risser, A. Geven, and R. Sefelin, “Effects of
simultaneous multi-modal warnings and trafﬁc information on driver
behaviour,” in Proceedings of European Conference on Human Cen-
tred Design for Intelligent Transport Systems. Humanist Publications,
2008, pp. 33–42.
[35] B. Seppelt and C. Wickens, “In-vehicle tasks: Effects of modality,
driving relevance, and redundancy,” Tech. Rep., 2003. [retrieved: 02,
2016] URL: http://www.aviation.illinois.edu/avimain/papers/research/
pub pdfs/techreports/03-16.pdf
[36] C. Ho, H. Z. Tan, and C. Spence, “Using spatial vibrotactile cues to
direct visual attention in driving scenes,” Transportation Research Part
F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 8, no. 6.
Elsevier, 2005,
pp. 397–412.
[37] J. B. Hurwitz and D. J. Wheatley, “Using driver performance measures
to estimate workload,” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Er-
gonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 46, no. 22. Sage Publications,
2002, pp. 1804–1808.
[38] S. G. Klauer, T. A. Dingus, V. L. Neale, J. D. Sudweeks, and D. J.
Ramsey, “The impact of driver inattention on near-crash/crash risk:
An analysis using the 100-car naturalistic driving study data,” Tech.
Rep., 2006.
[39] R. Srinivasan and P. P. Jovanis, “Effect of selected in-vehicle route
guidance systems on driver reaction times,” Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 39, no. 2.
Sage Publications, 1997, pp. 200–215.
[40] Y.-C. Liu, “Comparative study of the effects of auditory, visual and
multimodality displays on drivers’ performance in advanced traveller
information systems,” Ergonomics, vol. 44, no. 4.
Taylor & Francis,
2001, pp. 425–442.
[41] K. Stanney, S. Samman, L. Reeves, K. Hale, W. Buff, C. Bowers,
B. Goldiez, D. Nicholson, and S. Lackey, “A paradigm shift in
interactive computing: Deriving multimodal design principles from
behavioral and neurological foundations,” International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 17, no. 2. Taylor & Francis, 2004,
pp. 229–257.
[42] J. B. Van Erp and H. A. Van Veen, “Vibrotactile in-vehicle navigation
system,” Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and
Behaviour, vol. 7, no. 4.
Elsevier, 2004, pp. 247–256.
[43] Y. Cao, S. Castronovo, A. Mahr, and C. M¨uller, “On timing and modal-
ity choice with local danger warnings for drivers,” in Proceedings of
the 1st International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications.
ACM, 2009, pp. 75–78.
[44] D. Kern, P. Marshall, E. Hornecker, Y. Rogers, and A. Schmidt,
“Enhancing navigation information with tactile output embedded into
the steering wheel,” in Pervasive Computing.
Springer, 2009, pp.
42–58.
[45] H. Zwaga and T. Boersema, “Evaluation of a set of graphic symbols,”
Applied Ergonomics, vol. 14, no. 1.
Elsevier, 1983, pp. 43–54.
[46] J. L. Campbell, J. Richman, C. Carney, and J. Lee, “In-vehicle display
icons and other information elements. volume i: Guidelines, technical
report,” Tech. Rep., 2004.
[47] Audi A4 2008 Owner’s Manual, http://www.alkivar.com/AUDI/Audi
A4 2008 Owner s Manual.pdf [retrieved: 02, 2016].
[48] M. Lee and J. Park, “Senior users color cognition and color sensitivity
features in visual information on web-interface,” in Universal Access
in Human-Computer Interaction. Aging and Assistive Environments.
Springer, 2014, pp. 129–137.
[49] E. S. Wilschut, G. Rinkenauer, K. A. Brookhuis, and M. Falkenstein,
“performance in a lane-change task is vulnerable to increased sec-
ondary task complexity.”
TNO Publications, p. 5.
[50] Authors unknown, “Visual-manual nhtsa driver distraction guidelines
for in-vehicle electronic devices,” Washington, DC: National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA), Department of Transportation
(DOT), 2012.
[51] C. Harrison and S. E. Hudson, “Providing dynamically changeable
physical buttons on a visual display,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2009,
pp. 299–308.
[52] H. Richter, R. Ecker, C. Deisler, and A. Butz, “Haptouch and the
2+ 1 state model: potentials of haptic feedback on touch based in-
vehicle information systems,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international
conference on automotive user interfaces and interactive vehicular
applications.
ACM, 2010, pp. 72–79.
[53] A. G. Mirnig et al., “User experience patterns from scientiﬁc and
industry knowledge: An inclusive pattern approach,” International
Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 7, no. 3 and 4.
IARIA,
2015, pp. 200–215. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.thinkmind.
org/index.php?view=article&articleid=patterns 2015 2 30 70011.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-465-7
PATTERNS 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

