CUX Patterns Approach: Towards Contextual User Experience Patterns
Marianna Obrist, Daniela Wurhofer, Elke Beck & Manfred Tscheligi
Christian Doppler Laboratory for ”Contextual Interfaces”
HCI & Usability Unit, ICT&S Center
University of Salzburg
Salzburg, Austria
Email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@sbg.ac.at
Abstract—User experience (UX) is highly inﬂuenced and
even changed by the context in which it occurs. So far, both
concepts “user experience” and “context” have been discussed
a lot to various extent and in different dimensions. Within
this paper, we aim to bring these two important areas closer
together by using patterns. We introduce the contextual user
experience patterns (CUX patterns) approach. Precisely, we
argue for using patterns to describe knowledge on how to
inﬂuence the users’ experience in a positive way by taking
context parameters during the interaction with a system into
account. To do so, we provide a detailed description of how to
structure CUX patterns, referring to the context ”car” as one
of the two main application areas, which is investigated in our
recently established laboratory on contextual interfaces.
Keywords-user experience; context; contextual user experi-
ence; patterns approach; patterns structure; contextual inter-
faces; car application area
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
In the ﬁeld of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and re-
lated ﬁelds, it is increasingly recognized that apart from stan-
dard usability and ergonomic principles, the much broader
concept of user experience (UX) needs to be considered
intensively to design next generation interaction innovations
[1]. This includes aspects such as fun, enjoyment, emotion,
sociability, and other factors.
Moreover, there is an observable trend in HCI towards
novel and alternative forms of interaction, moving away
from traditional desktop computing to computing in various
contexts with various interfaces. One general form of novel
interfaces are so-called “contextual interfaces” (see [2][3]),
which are designed according to the needs and behaviors
of people in speciﬁc contextual situations and have the
potential to be conceptually as well as technically adapted
to the characteristics of the speciﬁc context. Thus, an in-
depth understanding of the particular context is needed for
designing contextual interfaces.
In addition to knowledge on the context, there is a need
for insights into how a user perceives an interaction with a
system. Thereby, evoking a positive feeling within the user
through the usage of the system increases the potential for
re-usage of the system. We thus claim that enabling the user
a positive experience by considering the context parameters
during an interaction is one important ingredient for the
success of contextual interfaces. However, as far as we are
aware, there are no such insights and best practices available
yet for contextual interfaces.
So far, both concepts “UX” and “context” have been
discussed a lot to various extent and in different dimensions.
We aim to bring both concepts together to reach a more
comprehensive understanding of contextual UX [3], which
opens up different roads for research and challenges for
the HCI community in all design and development phases.
In particular, we bridge the two concepts by using the
patterns approach. Patterns exist in many areas, ranging
from architectural patterns (e.g., [4]) to patterns for human-
robot interaction (e.g., [5]). However, despite the growing
importance of contextual interfaces as well as UX, the
patterns approach has not been applied yet for contextual UX
design. Within this paper, we introduce “Contextual User
Experience Patterns” (in short, CUX patterns). We propose
a pattern structure and describe each part, but without giving
a detailed description of CUX patterns themselves.
Building on our previous work on UX patterns for audio-
visual networked applications [6], we again use the patterns
approach for describing knowledge on how to inﬂuence the
users’ experience in a positive way when interacting with
a contextual interface. CUX patterns represent a pattern
collection for documenting and collecting best practices
in the area of contextual user interfaces. Thus, developers
and designers can be supported in producing high-quality
user-centered applications. This research represents a main
element of a recently started Christian Doppler Labora-
tory (CDL) on “contextual interfaces” at the University of
Salzburg, Austria.
The present paper is organized as follows: Section II
explains the background of our research on contextual
interfaces and section III summarizes related work on (HCI)
patterns, as well as clariﬁes the potential of patterns for
contextual user experience. In section IV, the main idea
of CUX patterns, and their structure are described and
summarized in the ﬁnal section.
60
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

II. RESEARCH CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND
Within this section, we shortly explain the background of
our research on contextual interfaces (basic research within
our laboratory) and our understanding of UX factors and
context parameters.
A. Laboratory on Contextual Interfaces
The overall goal of the laboratory on “contextual in-
terfaces” is to further strengthen existing research and in
particular to gain new insights into the multidimensional
aspects of contextual interaction. Contextual interaction can
be considered as situated human-computer/machine inter-
action, which is dependent on a multitude of factors. We
investigate contextual interaction from a constructional and
methodological viewpoint to develop a deeper understanding
of optimal contextual user experiences and their inﬂuences.
Figure 1.
Basic Contextual Research Parts of our Christian Doppler
Laboratory (CDL): Bridging User Experience (UX) Factors and Context
Factors by doing Basic Research Activities on Methods and Tools.
The planned work is divided into two parts (see Figure
1). On the one hand, UX factors and context factors are
investigated, and on the other hand, methods and tools
to study contextual interfaces are addressed. Thus, these
basic research parts will deliver a foundation for the second
research part which addresses two speciﬁc application areas,
namely car and factory. Both parts are related to each
other and aim to increase the knowledge on contextual user
experience. One main outcome of this research project (for
the next seven years) are more generalizable UX patterns for
contextual interfaces, i.e. CUX patterns. First of all, deeper
insights on the main elements are needed and are shortly
introduced in the following section.
B. Understanding User Experience and Context
The concept of seeing technology in terms of experience
was originally introduced by McCarthy and Wright [7] and
further extended by several attempts, models, deﬁnitions etc.
(e.g. [8][9]). In our previous research we already investigated
UX in different application areas (i.e. human-robot interac-
tion and audiovisual networked applications) and identiﬁed
a set of relevant UX factors to understand the aspects that
make an experience more successful and valuable to users
and contribute to positive contextual user experiences.
A small selection of these UX factors, which we conceive
as relevant for the context car and factory, is provided below:
• Emotions (e.g., What emotions does the interaction
with a system provoke?)
• Fun/Enjoyment (e.g., Do people enjoy interacting with
a system?)
• Co-Experience (e.g., How do other people inﬂuence the
experience?)
• Trust (e.g., To what extent do people trust a system?)
• Feeling of Security (e.g., How save do people feel?)
• Comfort (e.g., What is perceived as comfortable?)
• etc. (e.g., motivation, added value, engagement, etc.)
Based on empirical insights, the factors listed above will
be further extended.
Moreover, in HCI, several deﬁnitions of context have been
proposed during the last years. One of the most complete
deﬁnitions of context, which we use as a starting point
in our research, is provided by Dey [10]: “Context is any
information that can be used to characterize the situation
of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object that is
considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an
application, including the user and applications themselves”.
Overall, a common understanding of context is not fully
developed up to now. Especially the inﬂuence and potential
of context parameters for designing interaction innovations
is poorly conceived and underpins the need for empirically
grounded research. However, some relevant context parame-
ters can already be extracted from [11] and are summarized
as follows:
• Physical context (e.g., spatial location)
• Task context (e.g., task types, interruptions)
• Social context (e.g., presence of other people, culture)
• Temporal context (e.g., duration, time of day, week, and
year)
• Technical and information context (e.g., other systems
and services)
Overall, the focus on contextual user experience is not
completely new in the history of patterns. The ﬁrst who
emphasized a focus on the human perspective was Alexander
[4]. He argues that it is important to investigate how people
experience architectural constructs, and to take the user’s
experience into account when constructing new buildings.
Other authors (e.g., [12], [13], [14], [15] and [16]) also argue
to consider human activity and experience and thus underpin
the relevance of this topic.
The advancement of our approach is the strong combina-
tion of the two concepts “UX” and “context”. Furthermore,
our approach bases on empirical evidence from the two
context application areas car and factory (see section IV-B).
61
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

III. RELATED WORK
Within this section, we will provide more insights on the
idea of patterns and their application in the area of HCI
as well as their potential for addressing contextual user
experience.
A. The Idea of Patterns
Patterns exist in many areas. The concept of patterns
was ﬁrst described by Alexander [4] who developed more
than 250 patterns showing best practices and thinking in
architecture. Later, computer scientists captured the idea of
patterns and successfully applied it to common problems
in software engineering [17]. Over the past years, the area
of HCI also adopted the idea of patterns for conveying
principles and best practices of good interface design (e.g.,
[18][19][20][21][22]).
The concept of interaction design patterns is known under
different names such as interaction (design) patterns, user in-
terface (UI) patterns, usability patterns, web design patterns,
workﬂow patterns or, less precisely, HCI patterns. In general,
these patterns share a lot of similarities and all provide
solutions to common usability problems in interaction and
interface design. For a detailed review on patterns in HCI
we refer to Dearden and Finlay [23].
As the wide usage of patterns shows, patterns have proven
to be an effective tool for designing usable systems. The idea
of “reusable” solutions for recurring problems is important
for both novice and experienced designers.
B. Characteristics of Patterns
Already in 1977, the main characteristics of patterns were
pointed out by Alexander [4], stating that “each pattern
describes a problem which occurs over and over again in
our environment, and then describes the core of the solution
to that problem, in such a way that you can use this solution
a million times over”. Newer deﬁnitions of patterns deﬁne
them as “structured textual and graphical descriptions of
a proven solution to a recurring problem” [24], as “tools
for capturing useful design solutions and generalizing them
to address similar problems” [12], as “devices for re-use,
generalisation and design” [25], or simply as “descriptions of
best practices within a given domain” [20]. These deﬁnitions
illustrate one of the main characteristics of patterns – the
characteristic of reusability.
Another characteristic of patterns is their context, i.e. the
physical and social environment the pattern is embedded
in. Furthermore, patterns represent a systematic approach
to design which can be beneﬁcial for a wide audience of
practitioners [26] and thus can be considered as an “effec-
tive knowledge management tool” [16]. Patterns provide a
collective vocabulary [27] or lingua franca [28] and thus
facilitate communication between different stakeholders.
C. Special Application Areas of Patterns in HCI
Patterns are adopted in a variety of application ﬁelds.
Recently, Zimmerman [29] used design patterns for de-
scribing how to apply the product attachment theory to the
interaction design of a product. Kahn et al. [5] used patterns
in the area of Human-Robot Interaction for explaining how
to achieve sociality in Human-Robot Interaction. Patterns
have been adopted for supporting innovative game design
[30], for describing best practices in ubiquitous computing
applications [31] and in the design of social interfaces [32],
as well as for teaching HCI principles [33].
According to Zimmerman [29], patterns can also be used
as a method for analyzing user research. This is illustrated,
for instance, by Martin et al. [34] and Crabtree et al. [35],
who use patterns for organizing and presenting ethnographic
material. A recently published book targets the design of
social interfaces [32]. Principles and patterns for social
software are introduced by giving practical design solutions
for improving the interfaces of social websites. In our
recent research, we also successfully explored the patterns
approach for audiovisual networked media (social media
applications) by introducing UX patterns (see [36][37]).
D. User Experience Patterns
Designing for a good UX is an increasingly important
topic in academia and industry (see [38][39]). In our previ-
ous research, we developed 30 UX patterns for audiovisual
networked applications [37] based on a huge range of
collected empirical data, which was further categorized into
main UX problem areas. These areas cover the main UX is-
sues in audiovisual networked applications. As advancement
of this research, we intend to extend the application areas
beyond audiovisual applications towards the application area
car and factory. Thereby, we additionally want to strengthen
the importance of context factors (the inﬂuence of contextual
parameters) on the UX.
The multifaceted adoption of patterns illustrates their ﬂex-
ibility as well as their potential for storing and representing
knowledge. We are convinced that the patterns approach can
be further strengthened by putting a strong emphasis on the
context and relevant context parameters for an application
area, linked with relevant UX factors.
IV. THE POTENTIAL OF PATTERNS FOR CONTEXTUAL
USER EXPERIENCE
Within this section, we provide a structured overview
on the details of our CUX patterns approach, including a
deﬁnition as well as our strategy for structuring the patterns
(see CUX Patterns Structure). Therefore, we selected the
application area “car” as a case example to clarify our
approach.
62
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

A. Details on the CUX Patterns Approach
Best practices for designers and developers are needed to
guide the development of contextual interfaces which, for
instance, support user’s trust and feeling of comfort. We
suggest to transform such best practices into CUX patterns
for contextual interfaces. In the following, we focus on “car”
as an application area. We suggest the following initial list
of UX demands (exemplary problem areas), which does not
strive for completeness, and needs to be extended based on
empirical insights:
• Trust: How to increase the user’s trust in the car when
interacting with in-car interfaces?
• Comfort: How to give the user a feeling of comfort
when using in-car interfaces?
• Personal and social beneﬁt: How to raise the personal
and social beneﬁt of using in-car interfaces?
• Feeling of Control: How to raise the users’ feeling of
control when using in-car interfaces?
For these UX problems, the CUX patterns for the applica-
tion area car should provide proven solutions. One problem
area can comprise more than one pattern, depending on
how many different best practices exist for the problem
addressed. The patterns subsumed under each problem area
should address a more speciﬁc problem (which can be sub-
sumed under the corresponding problem area) and provide
detailed solutions for this problem.
In general, CUX patterns provide solutions on how to im-
prove a user’s experience when interacting with a contextual
interface in a speciﬁc application area. More speciﬁcally,
CUX patterns are characterized by combining two aspects,
i.e. (a) the application area of the patterns including the
most relevant context parameters and (b) the speciﬁc (re-
curring) UX problem (demand) which the pattern intends
to solve. Thus, CUX patterns can provide useful support
during the design and development phase of an application.
They especially provide guidance in the initial steps of an
experience-centered design approach, where the designer
does not yet have a clear picture on the potential users and
their expectations, that inﬂuence their experience with a new
system. Thus, it is relevant to consider CUX patterns quite
from the beginning as an additional pool for inspiration.
B. CUX Patterns Structure
As a starting point for developing the CUX patterns we
build on the structure of Van Welie [16] and Borchers [38]
and extend it in particular regarding UX factors and context
parameters. Context is currently limited to the characteristics
of the usage context for which the pattern can be applied,
but does not link the context/context parameters back to
the UX factors relevant for the particular application area.
In the following, the suggested structure is described and
illustrated by the exemplary pattern ”Feeling of Security”
for the application area car.
• Name/UX Factors: The name of a pattern is essential.
It should describe the main idea of the pattern in
one or a few words; it should be both descriptive
and unique so that it helps in identifying and refer-
ring to the pattern. In other words, patterns should
be easy to remember and communicate. Moreover,
the naming strategy should be consistent across all
patterns collected, also supporting better memorization
and easier communication (about patterns). Finally, the
user experience factors that are addressed by the pattern
should be included along with the name in combination
with the relevant context parameters. An example for a
CUX pattern name in the application area car can be:
“Feeling of Security”.
• Problem: The problem states the major issue the pattern
addresses, formulated as a question based on the experi-
ences made by the users. Problems in CUX patterns are
formulated from the users’ perspective and are related
to the usage of the system. An example for a CUX
pattern problem in the application area car can be:
“How to raise the users’ feeling of security when using
the speed control?”.
• Forces: The forces further elaborate the problem state-
ment. They depend on the application area and can
describe various trade-offs, constraints, or concerns
related to the use of the pattern. Examples for CUX
pattern forces in the application area car can be: “The
user wants to see the status of the speed; the user wants
to change the speed, etc.”.
• Context Parameters: The context section of a pattern
should describe when it is appropriate to apply a partic-
ular pattern, giving information about the characteristics
of the context of use, including the context parameters
listed above for which the pattern can be applied. An
example for a CUX pattern context parameter in the
application area car can be: “Use this pattern when
you want to support the users’ feeling of security while
driving”. The context parameter, in this case the task
context (see II-B), is applied for speciﬁcally addressing
the UX factor “Feeling of Security”.
• Solution: A solution must be described precisely and
must not impose new problems. However, a solution
describes only the core of the solution and the de-
signer has the freedom to implement it in many ways.
Other patterns might be needed to solve sub-problems;
patterns relevant to the solution should be referenced,
too. An example for a CUX pattern solution in the
application area car can be: “Support users to better
estimate speed risks by using persuasive interfaces”.
• Examples: The example should show how the pattern
has been used successfully in a system, i.e. refer
to commonly known implementations of the pattern.
Whether an example is commonly known or not can be
difﬁcult to determine, but this must be seen in relation
63
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

to the intended target audience for the patterns as well.
Examples for real-life systems are preferably used, so
that the validity of the pattern is enforced. Examples
for an applied CUX pattern are not available yet.
Having the same structure for the whole pattern collection
makes it easy for people to use them. As patterns represent
possible solutions, which can be extended dynamically, they
are never complete; when new solutions appear, they can be
easily integrated into the given structure. This is in particular
relevant for contextual interfaces, as the inﬂuence of context
parameters on UX is a relatively new area of research.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Within the CHI community, several experts commented on
the pattern approach (see [38], most recently [39]). It was
pointed out that patterns can facilitate the communication
among all stakeholders and are more than just a sort of poetic
form of guidelines. Pattern languages are intended to be meta
languages used to generate project-speciﬁc languages that
are grounded in the social and cultural particularities of a
given design domain.
Moreover, it can be stated that patterns are important as
they provide a common vocabulary [28], they are structured
around the problems the designers face, and they provide
solution statements [40]. These pattern characteristics can re-
duce time and effort for designing new projects considerably
[16] and support a better communication among different
stakeholders. In sum, capturing useful design solutions and
generalizing them to address similar problems [12] is one
of the big advantages of patterns, in part because the
documentation and use of best practices improves the quality
of design.
Within this paper, we especially build on patterns to
introduce the “Contextual User Experience Patterns” (CUX
patterns) approach. Thereby, we bring together the two rele-
vant and increasingly important concepts of UX and context.
UX is highly inﬂuenced and even changed by the context in
which it occurs. So far, both concepts have been discussed
a lot to various extent and in different dimensions, however,
there is no guidance on how to design for a good UX for
relevant application areas addressed in our research (car and
factory). Thus, the introduced CUX patterns approach takes
the discussion a step further by highlighting the potential of
the patterns approach for describing knowledge on how to
inﬂuence the users’ experience in a positive way by taking
context parameters during the interaction with a system into
account.
Based on this theoretical argumentation, we describe
the structure for CUX patterns, referring mainly to the
application area car. This paper builds the starting point for
our research within the recently established laboratory on
contextual interfaces and will be further elaborated based on
insights gained by ongoing and future empirical research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ﬁnancial support by the Federal Ministry of Economy,
Family and Youth and the National Foundation for Research,
Technology and Development is gratefully acknowledged
(Christian Doppler Laboratory for “Contextual Interfaces”).
REFERENCES
[1] J. H. Westerink, M. Ouwerkerk, T. J. Overbeek, W. F. Pasveer,
and B. d. Ruyter, Probing Experience: From Assessment of
User Emotions and Behaviour to Development of Products
(Philips Research Book Series).
Springer Publishing Com-
pany, Incorporated, 2008.
[2] A. Weiss, W. Reitberger, F. P¨ohr, F. F¨orster, R. Buchner,
and M. Tscheligi, ““Contextual interfaces” – Bridging the
gap of fundamental research and industrial application,” in
USAB2010: 6th Symposium of the WG HCI&UE of the Aus-
trian Computer Society. Springer, 2010, currently Submitted.
[3] M. Obrist, M. Tscheligi, B. de Ruyter, and A. Schmidt,
“Contextual user experience: How to reﬂect it in interaction
designs?” in CHI EA’10: Proceedings of the SIGCHI confer-
ence on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2010,
accepted for Publication.
[4] C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein, A Pattern
Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction (Center for Envi-
ronmental Structure Series).
Oxford University Press, 1977.
[5] P. H. Kahn, N. G. Freier, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, J. H. Ruckert,
R. L. Severson, and S. K. Kane, “Design patterns for sociality
in human-robot interaction,” in HRI ’08: Proceedings of the
3rd ACM/IEEE international conference on Human robot
interaction.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 97–104.
[6] D. Wurhofer, M. Obrist, E. Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “Introduc-
ing a comprehensive quality criteria framework for validating
patterns,” in 2009 Computation World: Future Computing,
Service Computation, Cognitive, Adaptive, Content, Patterns.
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 242–247.
[7] J. McCarthy and P. Wright, “Technology as experience,”
Interactions, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 42–43, 2004.
[8] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, “User experience - a
research agenda,” Behavior and Information Technology,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 91–97, 2006.
[9] E. L.-C. Law, V. Roto, M. Hassenzahl, A. P. Vermeeren, and
J. Kort, “Understanding, scoping and deﬁning user experi-
ence: a survey approach,” in CHI ’09: Proceedings of the
27th international conference on Human factors in computing
systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 719–728.
[10] A. K. Dey, “Understanding and using context,” Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 5, pp. 4–7, 2001.
[11] S. Jumisko-Pyykk¨o and T. Vainio, “Framing the context of
use for mobile hci,” International Journal of Mobile-Human-
Computer-Interaction (IJMHCI), vol. 1, no. 2, 2010.
[12] A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin, About Face 3: The
Essentials of Interaction Design.
Indianapolis: Wiley, 2007.
64
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

[13] J. Coplien, “Organizational patterns: Beyond technology to
people,” in ICEIS (1), 2004, pp. IS–15.
[14] T. Coram and J. Lee, “Experiences - a pattern language
for user interface design,” Website, 1998, available online at
http://www.mapleﬁsh.com/todd/papers/experiences; retrieved
at August 21st 2009.
[15] K. Kohler, S. Niebuhr, and M. Hassenzahl, “Stay on the
ball! an interaction pattern approach to the engineering of
motivation,” in INTERACT (1), 2007, pp. 519–522.
[16] M. van Welie and G. van der Veer, “Pattern languages in
interaction design,” in Proceedings of IFIP INTERACT03:
Human-Computer Interaction.
IFIP Technical Committee
No 13 on Human-Computer Interaction, 2003, p. 527.
[17] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, De-
sign patterns: elements of reusable object-oriented software.
Addison-Wesley Professional, 1995.
[18] E. Bayle, R. Bellamy, G. Casaday, T. Erickson, S. Fincher,
B. Grinter, B. Gross, D. Lehder, H. Marmolin, B. Moore,
C. Potts, G. Skousen, and J. Thomas, “Putting it all together:
towards a pattern language for interaction design: A chi 97
workshop,” SIGCHI Bull., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 17–23, 1998.
[19] T. Erickson, “The Interaction Design Patterns Page,” Web-
site, 2005, available online at http://www.visi.com/ snow-
fall/InteractionPatterns.html; retrieved at July 30th 2009.
[20] J. Tidwell, Designing Interfaces : Patterns for Effective In-
teraction Design.
O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2005.
[21] M. Van Welie, “A Pattern Library for Interaction Design,”
Website, 2005, available online at http://www.welie.com; re-
trieved at July 30th 2009.
[22] D. K. V. Duyne, J. Landay, and J. I. Hong, The Design
of Sites: Patterns, Principles, and Processes for Crafting a
Customer-Centered Web Experience.
Boston, MA, USA:
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2002.
[23] A. Dearden and J. Finlay, “Pattern languages in hci: A critical
review,” Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 1, pp. 49–102,
2006.
[24] J. Borchers, A Pattern Approach to Interaction Design.
Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[25] D. Martin, M. Rounceﬁeld, and I. Sommerville, “Applying
patterns of cooperative interaction to work (re)design: e-
government and planning,” in CHI ’02: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 235–242.
[26] M. W. Steenson, “Feature problems before patterns: a dif-
ferent look at christopher alexander and pattern languages,”
interactions, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 20–23, 2009.
[27] J.
Vlissides,
“Patterns:
The
Top
Ten
Miscon-
ceptions,”
Website,
1997,
available
online
at
http://www.research.ibm.com/designpatterns/pubs/top10misc.html;
retrieved at July 30th 2009.
[28] T. Erickson, “Lingua francas for design: sacred places and
pattern languages,” in DIS ’00: Proceedings of the 3rd con-
ference on Designing interactive systems.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2000, pp. 357–368.
[29] J. Zimmerman, “Designing for the self: making products that
help people become the person they desire to be,” in CHI ’09:
Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human
factors in computing systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2009, pp. 395–404.
[30] K. McGee, “Patterns and computer game design innovation,”
in IE ’07: Proceedings of the 4th Australasian conference on
Interactive entertainment.
Melbourne, Australia, Australia:
RMIT University, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[31] E. S. Chung, J. I. Hong, J. Lin, M. K. Prabaker, J. A.
Landay, and A. L. Liu, “Development and evaluation of
emerging design patterns for ubiquitous computing,” in DIS
’04: Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interac-
tive systems. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 233–242.
[32] C. Crumlish and E. Malone, Designing Social Interfaces.
O’Reilly, 2009.
[33] P. Kotz´e, K. Renaud, and J. v. Biljon, “Don’t do this - pitfalls
in using anti-patterns in teaching human-computer interaction
principles,” Comput. Educ., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 979–1008,
2008.
[34] D. Martin, T. Rodden, M. Rounceﬁeld, I. Sommerville, and
S. Viller, “Finding patterns in the ﬁeldwork,” in ECSCW’01:
Proceedings of the seventh conference on European Confer-
ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
Norwell,
MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001, pp. 39–58.
[35] A. Crabtree, T. Hemmings, and T. Rodden, “Pattern-based
support for interactive design in domestic settings,” in DIS
’02: Proceedings of the 4th conference on Designing interac-
tive systems. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 265–276.
[36] D. Wurhofer, M. Obrist, E. Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “In-
troducing a comprehensive quality criteria framework for
validating patterns by means of a case study,” Invited article
for IARIA: International Journal on Advances in Software,
2010, to Appear.
[37] M. Obrist, D. Wurhofer, E. Beck, A. Karahasanovic, and
M. Tscheligi, “User Experience (UX) Patterns for Audio-
Visual Networked Applications: Inspirations for Design,” in
Proceedings of NordiCHI 2010.
ACM, 2010.
[38] J. O. Borchers and J. C. Thomas, “Patterns: what’s in it for
hci?” in CHI ’01: CHI ’01 extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2001, pp. 225–226.
[39] A. F. Blackwell and S. Fincher, “Pux: patterns of user
experience,” interactions, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 27–31, 2010.
[40] S. Fincher, J. Finlay, S. Greene, L. Jones, P. Matchen,
J. Thomas, and P. J. Molina, “Perspectives on hci patterns:
concepts and tools,” in CHI ’03: CHI ’03 extended abstracts
on Human factors in computing systems.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2003, pp. 1044–1045.
65
PATTERNS 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-111-3

