Best Practices (and Stumbling Blocks) for
Diversity-Sensitive Behavior Change in Persuasive
Application Design
Alexander G. Mirnig
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology
Center for Technology Experience
Vienna, Austria
alexander.mirnig@ait.ac.at
Stefan Eibl
University of Applied Sciences Wiener Neustadt
Campus Wieselburg
Wieselburg, Austria
stefan.eibl@fhwn.ac.at
Thomas Poscher
University of Applied Sciences Wiener Neustadt
Campus Wieselburg
Wieselburg, Austria
thomas.poscher@fhwn.ac.at
Lisa Diamond
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology
Center for Technology Experience
Vienna, Austria
lisa.diamond@ait.ac.at
Abstract—Design for Behavior Change can be used to enact
changes on an individual basis or beyond to gradually modify
users’ behaviors and constituting attitudes towards achieving a
desired goal. Today, achieving more sustainable behaviors is a
frequent goal of behavior change apps found on the market.
In order to be effective across a wide and diverse spectrum of
users and simultaneously avoid stigmatization or marginalization,
the design of such applications should be done in a diversity-
aware manner, which is often still lacking. In this paper, we
present a best practice analysis of existing applications in the
domains of food consumption, mobility, and energy consumption
that are available on the market in Austria, Europe. We present
the findings as a collection of three design patterns and discuss
their status as patterns versus anti-patterns in terms of how well
diversity factors are implemented in existing practice and where
improvements are necessary.
Index Terms—behavior change, sustainability, diversity, design
patterns.
I. INTRODUCTION
Behavior change support systems can be employed to mod-
ify users’ attitudes and behaviors in consideration of individual
motives, living contexts, and other individual or user-specific
factors. Today, such support systems are mainly available in
the form of apps that can be deployed across devices (typically
with smartphones and tablets the primaries, web and desktop
secondaries) to enable access to and continuous use of the
system.
The climate crisis constitutes one of the most relevant target
domains for behavior change [1]. A limiting factor of behavior
change effectiveness in this domain is an often insufficient
regard for gender and diversity aspects [2] in behavior change
support systems, which can cause disengagement from using
such systems and exclude groups of individuals from using
them [3].
In order to close this gap, the project biscuit4all [4] investi-
gates gender- and diversity appropriate design for behavior
change support systems in the climate-relevant application
domains mobility, nutrition, and energy consumption. In this
paper, we present the results from a best practice analysis
of behavior change in the Austrian (EU) market (Section III)
condensed into brief design patterns (Section IV) that show
best practices as well as areas for improvement (Section V)
to achieve better behavior change successes.
II. RELATED WORK
Theories of behavior change typically focus on behavioral
intention accompanied by other core variables concerning
conditions, habits, beliefs, responsibility perceptions and other
components. Commonly applied theories and models include
Triandis’ theory of interpersonal behavior [5] with attitude,
social factors, affect and frequency of past behavior impacting
intention and habits. Ajzen’s theory of planned behavior [6]
considers attitudes, norms and perceived behavioural control
as core components. Stern et. al’s value-belief-norm theory
[7] builds on values (biospheric, altruistic and egoistic), beliefs
and personal norms. Challenging factors that can pose issues in
the context of behavior change towards sustainability are cog-
nitive limitations, insufficiently perceived personal relevance
and missing tangibility, distrust and reactance [8].
Persuasive approaches such as the persuasive strategies
discussed by Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa [9] and Fogg [10]
offer the possibility to directly address important factors of be-
haviour change and overcome some of these barriers. Common
approaches include providing information that underlines the
responsibility and agency of the individual, accurate feedback
and social feedback to increase literacy and correct self-
serving and in-group biases, by offering timely and location-
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

specific prompts to battle bad habits and help with limited
cognitive resources.
Gender and other diversity dimensions including age and
class impact a number of factors important for sustainable
behaviour changes, such as attitudes and intentions or habits
in connection with societal roles. Women typically show, for
example, more positive attitudes towards sustainable behaviour
[11], different types of sustainable behaviour [12], [13], which
are also shaped through gender roles and access to free time
and resources that come with them [14], [15], and more
sustainable behaviour overall [16], [17]. We can also see
gender differences with regards to the type of values that
motivate behaviour [18].
Higher Income households typically have higher carbon
footprints [19], [20] but also more resources for high impact
changes. Both income and age-related differences can also be
seen in attitudes with younger people indicating to care more
about climate change [21] and being more likely to cycle [22],
and older people being more inclined to purchase food locally
[23]. The middle class is more likely to show sustainable
behaviour than the upper or lower class [24] but class associ-
ations with particular activities, such as cycling, also impact
willingness to adopt behaviours [25]. These observed differ-
ences change the persuasive effect of different approaches
to engagement strategy design and highlight the importance
of gender and diversity-sensitive design of behaviour change
support apps.
In their review paper from 2016, Thomson, Nash, and
Maeder [26] identified and collected a number of issues in im-
plementations of behaviour change techniques and persuasive
design principles in physical activity smartphone applications.
A lack of support for the diversity of user needs and pref-
erences was highlighted as one of the main issues identified,
alongside information flow and presentation, user engagement
and retention, and a generally fragmented use of persuasive
principles.
Design Patterns were originally conceived by Christopher
Alexander [27], [28] for capturing solutions in Architecture
and were later introduced for use in Software Engineering
by Gamma et al. [29]. Distinguishing features of patterns
are capturing of contextual information, problem focus, and
the potential to capture implicit knowledge [30], [31], [32].
They are also used in Human-Computer Interaction to capture
and communicating working solutions [33] and constitute an
effective way to capture a design state-of-the art in a way
that enables immediate reproduction to the pattern reader.
To address issues outlined by Thomson, Nash and Maeder,
the patterns presented in this paper draw from best practices
in diversity-sensitive design [2] for personalisation, feedback
design, and user engagement.
III. BEST PRACTICE ANALYSIS
The screening process and best practice analysis of behavior
change support apps followed procedures outlined in previous
content analyses of mobile apps [34], [35]. In January 2023,
the iOS App Store and the Android Play Store were screened
for relevant apps using smartphone devices. Only apps that
were free of cost were included in the analysis, as previous
studies suggest that users are reluctant to pay for apps and
prefer apps that are free of cost. We focused on analyzing
apps from three specific categories related to behavior change
support that are relevant for climate change: food consump-
tion, energy, and mobility.
To identify best practice examples in our study, we em-
ployed a two-step screening process. First, we searched for
apps that had been mentioned in reputable journal and mag-
azine rankings, indicating their recognition within the field.
Second, the thusly selected apps underwent a meta-analysis
that took factors such as the number of downloads, ratings,
and the level of star ratings into account. The operational-
ization of the best practice analysis was conducted using a
deductive categorization approach based on content analysis.
Predefined categories and characteristics of best practices
were established. Based on these criteria, the identified apps
were systematically analyzed and evaluated. The deductive
approach allowed for a structured and targeted analysis of the
apps to identify potential best practices. Apps lacking these
functionalities were automatically excluded from our analysis.
The screening process began by defining keywords relevant
to the selection of journals and magazines. Since the research
focused on German speaking locations, we conducted the
screening process on the basis of German keywords. For
the ”food consumption” category, we utilized keywords such
as ”Besser Essen Apps” (Better Eating Apps), ”Lebensmit-
tel retten” (Food Rescue), ”Ern¨ahrung” (food consumption /
nutrition), and ”Ern¨ahrung ver¨andern” (Changing food con-
sumption). For ”energy,” we used keywords such as ”Energie
Apps” (Energy Apps), ”Energiesparen Apps” (Energy Saving
Apps), ”Stromsparen Apps” (Electricity Saving Apps), ”En-
ergieeffizienz” (Energy Efficiency), ”Gas sparen Apps” (Gas
Saving Apps), and ”Heizkosten sparen” (Save Heating Costs).
For ”food consumption” we utilized keywords such as ”Besser
Essen Apps” (Better Eating Apps), ”Lebensmittel retten”
(Food Rescue), ”Ern¨ahrung” (food consumption / nutrition),
and ”Ern¨ahrung ver¨andern” (Changing food consumption).
Through this initial search, we identified 105 food consump-
tion apps, 119 mobility apps, and 54 energy apps. Via an
inclusion criterion of needing to be mentioned in reputable
journals or magazines at least 7 times, we narrowed down
the selection to 8, 15, and 8 apps, respectively. Subsequently,
we applied exclusion criteria that filtered out apps available
only in the paid version, with less than 1000 ratings, and
with less than 4-star ratings in the respective app store. We
also employed forward and backward snowballing techniques
based on in-app-store recommendations to potentially identify
additional relevant apps. The screening process led to the
identification of a total of 6 food consumption, 7 mobility,
and 7 energy apps for further analysis.
The content analysis of the identified apps was conducted
to gain insights into their features and functionalities. For
the systematic analysis, we derived the categories to be
examined from the work of Oinas-Kukkonen & Harjuuma
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

[9]. For each app, we extracted information on the each
of the following categories: reduction, tunneling, tailoring,
personalization, self-monitoring, simulation, rehearsal, praise,
rewards, reminders, suggestion, similarity, liking, social role,
trustworthiness, expertise, surface credibility, real-world feel,
authority, third-party endorsers, verifiability, social learning,
social comparison, normative influence, social facilitation,
cooperation, competition, recognition, gender&diversity.
IV. PATTERNS
The results from the best practice analysis served as the
basis for the design patterns, which were generated using the
general structure outlined by Mirnig et al. [36]. An addi-
tional mining step was performed to consolidate the identified
practices per each of the categories by Oinas-Kukkonen &
Harjuuma [9], and then formulate an application domain inde-
pendent description that summarizes the underlying solutions.
The categories represented in the patterns were chosen based
on the common issues of behavior change systems outlined by
Thomson, Nash, and Maeder [26], which also served as the
primary inspiration for the problem statements. This match-
ing eventually resulted in three patterns for personalization
techniques, feedback tangibility, and effective tunneling. We
should note at this point that diversity-sensitive design was
usually a by-product and rarely the focus in the identified
practices. As a result, the mining focused on directly diversity-
sensitive or diversity supporting design. In the following,
we present the initial version of all three patterns using the
reduced structure by Mirnig et al. [37] in order to suit the
publication format.
A. Pattern 1: Personalization Techniques for Diversity Inte-
gration
This pattern describes solutions to enable users to fit the
app output and or general UI to their personal needs under
specific consideration of gender- and diversity-related factors.
This cannot only improve the interaction quality but also make
app interaction and output more appropriate and better usable
within a user’s individual situation.
1) Problem: If a user’s needs, preferences and abilities
are not adequately considered when designing a behaviour
change app, then successful usage of the app and adherence
to interventions on the user side will be limited [26].
Generalized (i.e., non-personalized) cues, reminders, or en-
tire routines are unlikely to fit every user’s context. As a
result, system output might mismatch in terms of the user’s
goals or be inappropriate regarding the user’s living situation.
Furthermore, either through use of the app or a change in
circumstances unrelated to the app, the user can be expected
to change and modify their goals, needs, and preferences
accordingly. This, in turn, will result in previously effective
techniques to no longer be (as) effective and/or established
routines or programs to no longer be appropriate.
2) Solution: In order to appropriately reflect and support
within a user’s individual situational context, behaviour change
success can be enabled via:
1) custom goal setting,
2) diversity-sensitive personalization,
3) personalization effects.
Custom goal setting allows the user to define their goals
on two levels:
• qualitative, and
• quantitative.
The qualitative level specifies the general target that is to
be achieved. Sustainability-related and other typical targets
are “eat less meat”, “reduce food waste”, and ”lose weight”
in food consumption, “fastest connection”, “cheapest connec-
tion”, or “lowest carbon emission connection” in mobility,
and “reduce consumption” or “achieve target consumption”
in energy. Additional targets depend on app purpose and
intended user group. For food consumption, targets to include
or exclude based on dietary requirements or preferences (e.g.,
celiac, vegetarian, vegan – ideally with a default preset and
additional customization to specify included and excluded
food categories) are recommended. Mobility can similarly
allow to set a preference for (or exclude) certain types of
mobility means or routes to accommodate motion sickness or
sustainability concerns. In Energy, personalization can be tied
to actions and events tied to the overall energy consumption.
Example factors here are number of laundries done within
a period, laundry temperature, or number of hot beverages
consumed within a certain period.
The quantitative level allows the user to define a specific
quantitative target on the previously defined qualitative level.
Suitable units for quantities depend on the use case but “cost
in [currency]” is commonly sensible across all three target
domains. The carbon footprint is commonly used in Energy
and Mobility but can serve in food consumption as well
when a user wants to additionally tailor their consumption
with sustainability in mind. The quantitative level should be
addressed with both predefined goals or suggestions as well
as customizability of quantities. It is important that a user
can customize on both levels and in the order of quality →
quantity. Presets that stop at the qualitative level or that do
not allow full quantitative customization run the risk of not
addressing user contexts appropriately.
Diversity-sensitive personalization allows a user to per-
sonalize the app and its output in accordance with their
individual situation. This is commonly achieved via tying
personalization-specific settings to a user profile, so that this
step does not need to be repeated unless necessary (i.e., when
circumstances change and the user wishes to change their set-
tings). Best practices in diversity-sensitive personalization are
still limited, though common settings include age, language,
and gender.
Diversity is not limited to the common factors listed
above. Financial situation is an important diversity factor and
must be addressed in order to avoid exclusionary design.
While this factor is partially addressed via goal setting,
further integration is important to avoid unintended side ef-
fects. E.g., if an app categorizes consumption or prices into
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

cheap/medium/expensive, then these categories need to reflect
the general economic situation within the user’s economic
environment as well as what constitutes cheap vs. expensive
within the user’s individual situation. Financial situation can
be made an explicit value (e.g., enter monthly income and
expenses), though care should be taken to not make users
uncomfortable or stigmatize if social comparison techniques
are also employed. If possible, financial situation should be
implemented as a derived value and compare goal settings to
local averages; explicit definition should be optional.
The personalization can only be effective if it is tied to
actual personalization effects. Diversity-sensitive personaliza-
tion effects should go beyond cosmetics and either impact the
successful interaction with the app itself or the generated app
output. For the former, font size and colour contrasts need to be
customizable to accommodate preferences and disabilities. If
and wherever possible, cues, notifications, and general output
should be customizable regarding modes (visual, auditory,
haptic; inclusion of ‘silent’ modes) in order to accommodate
different daily situations and disabilities.
Customization choice can be reflected visually to commu-
nicate to the user that certain settings are currently active.
Nonfunctional and overbearing visuals should be avoided.
E.g., a user enters ‘woman’ as a gender in the profile and is
then presented with a bright pink theme serves no functional
purpose while potentially stigmatizing and repelling the user
from further interacting with the app. In addition, defaults
should be chosen carefully, e.g., when languages are tied to
location settings. In places with several active and/or official
languages, it is recommended to let the user immediately
specify their primary language after setting the location instead
of assuming the standard language and making the user change
it post-hoc via the settings page.
Personalization effects must be communicated to the user.
This can be done via tooltips when editing the profile, or
as part of other information messages during loading or idle
periods. Wizards, if employed, should lead the user through the
settings and explain the effect of each setting on the respective
page. It is important that the explanations are not limited to
the wizard alone and can still be accessed when a user decides
to update their settings afterwards outside the wizard.
3) Examples: The apps YAZIO [38] and MyFitnessPal allow
personalization regarding age, language, and sex (see Figures
1 and 2). Tooltips explain the effects of each setting. In YAZIO,
sex choice is reflected via different (gender-switched) images
throughout the rest of the interaction process to increase
relatability. This example limits the gender choice to only two,
which should be avoided in order to not exclude users beyond
the binary spectrum.
MyFitnessPal [39] uses a wizard to collect user preferences
in terms of their perceived level of activity to match and
customize recommended activities and levels of intensity (see
Figure 3.
Fig. 1. Example for sex choice explanation from YAZIO.
Fig. 2. Example for sex choice, age setting, and explanation of their effects
from MyFitnessPal.
Fig. 3. MyFitnessPal asks for user’s estimated level of activity after the user
specified their desired activity type.
B. Pattern 2: Tangible Feedback Design
This pattern describes solutions to frame the app output in
a user intelligible manner. This ensures that the previously
diversity-tailored persuasive content is appropriately received
and fully processed by the user, increasing its effectiveness.
1) Problem: Presentation and flow of the information the
user receives should be intelligible and simple to comprehend
[26]. If the presented information does not fit into the user’s
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

current frame of reference, then additional translational steps
are required in order to accurately process the information
presented. If this is not provided via the app or cognitively
done by the user, the app and its employed strategies can
be expected to be less effective. If the additional translation
for comprehension needs to be done by the user, then using
the app becomes more cumbersome, reducing usability and
likelihood of user retention over time.
2) Solution: The feedback by the system must be such so
that it is tangible to the user. ‘Tangible’ in this context is to be
understood that the user can associate an immediate meaning
to a given piece of information and situate it within their frame
of reference.
In order for a value to be tangible, unit and magnitude
need to be understood by and, if necessary, explained to the
user. E.g., an isolated carbon footprint value can be difficult
to comprehend without any additional information. Bringing
it into context with items the user is familiar with enables
framing and referencing. In the concrete example, a user could
be presented with the carbon footprint of brewing a cup of
coffee as an isolated value. The daily/weekly/etc. average
carbon footprint per person/household/etc. within the user’s
country or region can be used to serve as global reference
for the provided value. In addition, the footprint of, e.g.,
driving their car for 100kms / their daily commute / etc. can
further contextualize the action in relation to their other known
activities, thus rendering it intuitively graspable and easy to
comprehend.
Tangibility is also achieved by allowing a user to monitor
and compare current values or behaviours to past as well as
future (projected) instances. Thus, longitudinal information
output, e.g., in form of a histogram or similar visualizations,
adds tangibility in terms being able to relate current data
points to previous ones and easily see increases, decreases,
deviations, and the like. Lastly, additional tangibility can be
achieved by enabling intuitive qualitative goals, as described
in Pattern 1. If users can tailor their goals not just towards
units that they can intuitively comprehend but further into
units that they interact with in everyday life (e.g., glasses of
water consumed, nr. of gas tank refills, etc.), tangibility of
information presentation is increased, leading to more direct
engagement with the app.
3) Examples: The food app Lifesum [40] enables goals
to not only be set towards calories but additionally tracks
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats separately. Further tangibility
is added by tracking hydration goals (overall indication in
litres) via glasses of water consumed (see Figure 4). Additional
tangibility is achieved via statistical overview of past food con-
sumption behaviour, a so-called “LifeScore”, which provides a
single-number approximation regarding how healthy/unhealthy
the current eating habits are, and tracking of streaks. Streaks
(i.e., periods of uninterrupted goal achievement) provide an
easy way to track own achievements in a simple number
format and allow historical contrasting via comparison of
current to recorded highest streak.
Histograms and similar overviews are commonly used par-
Fig. 4. Separation of intake into carbohydrates, proteins, fats (and respective
maximum values) and water tracker from Lifesum.
Fig. 5. The AVA App labels values in its consumption histogram in relation
to how (in)expensive the price per kWh can be considered to be.
ticularly in Energy apps and provide reference to contrast daily
with periodic consumption and plan actions to achieve goals
accordingly. The AVA-App [41] can not only show data on
past consumption but also has indicators to denote the price
range within that period. The app differentiates on three levels
between expensive, medium priced, and low priced, which
further aid the user to assess their consumption in relation
to costs and can be used for more informed forecasting as
well. It has to be noted, though, that while the assessment of
whether a price is expensive or not can be done in relation
to market highs, lows, and averages, what a user considers
expensive will ultimately depend on their disposable income.
Thus, such margins are ideally customizable to fit the user’s
individual situation.
C. Pattern 3: Maintaining User Engagement via Effective
Tunneling
This pattern describes solutions to increase user engagement
and retention via tunneling strategies.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Fig. 6. The Wizard of the app YAZIO tunnels effectively by asking the user’s goals in steps and additionally captures their nutritional knowledge and impeding
factors.
1) Problem: Behaviour change is a continuous process.
As a consequence, in order for behaviour change apps to
be effective, users need to stay engaged in using the app
for an extended amount of time so that a lasting impact on
their behaviour can actually manifest. If there is insufficient
motivation for a user to keep returning to the app beyond initial
use, then the likelihood of impactful app use is low. Even more
critical are cases where apps repel users from repeated use due
to cumbersome navigation, convoluted interfaces, or lengthy
input sequences before each use. Such obstacles need to be
minimized in order to retain user engagement and ensure user
retention.
2) Solution: Tunneling is a strategy that can be employed
to lower the input barrier of complex or multi-step processes,
thus making them easier to handle and reducing the workload
on the user. Tunneling refers to guiding the user through
predetermined sequences of actions instead of giving them free
reign over all functionalities from the get-go. This means that
users need to give up a certain extent of freedom of interaction
and engage with parts of the system or engage in tasks they
might not otherwise have engaged in.
This has two important benefits: Since the tasks as well
as the ranges of possible tasks per step are pre-defined, the
complexity can be controlled and the interaction designed
so as to not overwhelm the user at any given point. Any
complex or lengthy process can be segmented into individually
manageable sequences via tunneling. The second benefit is that
users are more likely to commit to completing a sequence
to completion once they have begun engaging in it. Thus,
tunneling can be used to both lower the initial entry barrier
and keep the user engaged throughout the app use.
Effective tunneling means knowing when to employ tun-
neling, since the user will not always be willing to have their
freedom of choice reduced. Two fitting spots for tunneling
are: At the first start of using an app and at the start of a new
activity (task or info query). The former is usually handled via
Wizards, which help users set up the necessary profile data in
order to effectively start using the app.
When designing a startup-Wizard, it is important to de-
lineate the strictly necessary from the optional information.
During interaction with the Wizard, the user should always
be informed, what the information provided or setting chosen
will impact and whether a step can be skipped. The initial
tunneling should be kept flexible, so that the user can either
skip parts of the initial sequence or cancel it altogether and
still engage with the app on some level. They should also have
the opportunity to re-start the Wizard at any point in order
to complete their setup (or review information they require a
refresher on).
Pre-activity tunneling means that whenever a user decides
to begin a new activity, they are presented with a number
of predefined options and are then efficiently guided via a
sequence consisting of several choices. A well-established
solution is to follow a question-based approach. The first
question should ask the user what they want to achieve on
a general level (e.g., save money, maintain weight, reduce
gas consumption, eat more sustainably, etc.). The subsequent
questions should then allow them to specify how they want
to achieve their goal (by indicating tasks/activities they want
to do or by having them explicitly exclude activities they do
not want to perform or know to not work for them from past
experiences). The final step should then allow them to set
their goals and should always be in the form of modifiable
suggestions, so that the user can tailor if and when desired.
In the context of competency building as important compo-
nent of sustainable behaviour support, tunneling can be em-
ployed to provide pre-selected choices for areas of behavioural
adjustment or accordingly tailored actionable advice.
3) Examples: The food consumption app YAZIO tunnels
the user effectively upon initial use by using a Wizard and
following the goal-based question approach (see Figure 6). The
app tunnels effectively by asking primary and secondary goals
and then presents the app functionalities and brief explanations
on how each one can assist to achieve the user’s goals.
The query on healthy food consumption knowledge is well-
positioned and is not something a user easily or immediately
divulges on first use but can be used by the app to calibrate the
amount of info output in the following steps. Focus on habits
and explication of impeding factors help to further tailor the
suggested tasks. This allows the generation of a very detailed
and customized task profile with an interaction flow that never
exceeds a complexity of a six choice maximum presented to
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

the user.
V. DISCUSSION
In the following, we discuss the identified solutions, existing
best practices, and areas for improvement for each pattern.
A. Personalization
With regards to qualitative personalization, it is important to
design options under consideration of diversity-specific needs.
For food consumption these include in example elements such
as limited budget in the context of income, and/or time for
food purchase e.g., in relation to living phase and family
situation and preparation. In the context of mobility, traveling
with little children and with safety concerns which more
often affects women, status-related motivations which we see
more often with men, and with limited mobility as can be
relevant for the elderly and disabled but also people with care
responsibilities are some of the aspects to consider. Regarding
energy consumption relevant limitations to consider are e.g.,
availability for load shifting in relation to employment status,
life phase and gender as women often bear the main share
of housework and are also more often at home with young
children, as well as limited resources and possibilities in
relation to income, class and geographical location which are
also associated with household equipment, dwelling type and
ownership.
Of further importance on the quantitative level is sufficient
granularity for captured characteristics that e.g., avoids captur-
ing gender only as binary variable and takes the age of children
in the household into consideration. This is specifically impor-
tant in the context of ensuring the inclusion of marginalized
groups such as non-binary users. Options for quantitative
consumption should be designed with comprehensibility and
personal relevance for different user groups in mind. Even
seemingly very generalized translations, such as energy as
travel distance by car or hours watched on a TV, could be
less accessible for people who do not own cars or TVs.
B. Tangibility of Feedback
Presentation and flow (as well as quantitative goalsetting
from pattern 1) should not be in isolation and always stay
tied to user-specific motivations. Regarding timing, whether
a prompt is considered “timely” will differ between different
user groups, e.g., with regards to how much need to plan ahead
is needed and how “immediate” their possibility to interact
with the app is when a notification has been sent.
Suggestions for actions need to be strongly tied to possibil-
ities and there need to be ways to specify that specific types
of actions are not possible such as cycling due to a disability,
buying bulk due to food-related intolerances that do not allow
for contamination or using the tumble dryer less often if there
is insufficient space available to air-dry all laundry.
With any sort of visualization to provide feedback compre-
hensibility for different user groups also needs to be taken
into consideration and different forms should be provided if
needed. These forms, as other personalization options should
be developed under involvement of a diverse user group to
avoid the designer’s specific understanding and context to
shape the app to a degree that excludes potential user groups.
C. Tunneling
With tunneling it is particularly important to ask the right
questions that allow an understanding of given motivations,
abilities, and limitations with a diversity-sensitive approach so
that it can be employed in an effective manner but without re-
moving choices needed to indicate diversity-related conditions.
Similar considerations apply to tunneling of action-related
choices and and information that aim at building literacy and
competency. Particular care should therefore be applied in the
implementation.
More emphasis is needed on what the right time for which
type of assessment is. If users are confronted with one question
after another that they do not see relevant at that time, there
is a real risk of repelling them. If, however, the question is
woven into a task-specific interaction tunnel, then answering
a diversity-relevant question will be a logical and intuitively
graspable part of the interaction flow. A similar approach has
been suggested for communicating privacy-relevant informa-
tion [42]. Some practices exist on when to ask for sex, gender,
age, economic status but a more structured understanding
when and where to place which diversity-factor assessment
is required to better support tunneling within and across the
application domains.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented three design patterns for
diversity-sensitive design of behaviour change systems. These
patterns are based on results from a best practice analysis of
existing applications in the domains of nutrition, mobility, and
energy consumption on the Austrian market. The best practices
condensed into pattern solutions were chosen such so that they
match stated issues that inhibit the success of behavior change
support systems. The identified best practices can not yet be
considered comprehensive and often lack in explicitly targeting
diversity and are rather general design practices that can also
be used to support diversity-aware design. When diversity is
directly addressed, only a rather narrow range of relevant-
factors is currently considered. Including a wider range is
necessary to render in- as well as output naturally tied to
diversity factors instead of having them “tacked on”. We were
able to identify a number of concrete areas for advancement
for all three patterns and will further pursue refinement of
the pattern solutions in order to arrive at comprehensive and
actionable guidance for diversity-sensitive behavior change
system design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The financial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry for
Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation
and Technology through the Austrian Research Promotion
Agency (FFG) under grant number FO999892826 (Project:
biscuit4all) within the program “FEMtech” is gratefully ac-
knowledged.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

REFERENCES
[1] R.
Pachauri
and
L.
Meyer,
“Climate
change
2014:
Synthesis
report. contribution of working groups i, ii and iii to the fifth
assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change,”
Online,
2014,
IPCC,
Geneva,
Switzerland.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
[2] J. Himmelsbach, S. Schwarz, C. Gerdenitsch, B. Wais-Zechmann,
J. Bobeth, and M. Tscheligi, “Do we care about diversity in human
computer interaction: A comprehensive content analysis on diversity
dimensions in research,” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’19.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 1–16. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300720
[3] E. Dowler, S. Turner, B. Dobson, and C. P. A. G. G. Britain),
Poverty
Bites:
Food,
Health
and
Poor
Families,
ser.
Poverty
publication.
Child Poverty Action Group, 2001. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.at/books?id=fE-FAAAAIAAJ
[4] “biscuit4all,” 2023, Project Website, URL: https://biscuit4all.info/ [ac-
cessed: 15-05-2023].
[5] H.
Triandis,
Interpersonal
Behavior.
Brooks/Cole
Publishing
Company, 1977. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.at/books?
id=Sz63AAAAIAAJ
[6] I. Ajzen, From Intentions to Actions: A Theory of Planned Behavior.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1985, pp. 11–39.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-69746-3 2
[7] P. C. Stern, T. Dietz, T. Abel, G. A. Guagnano, and L. Kalof, “A
value-belief-norm theory of support for social movements: The case of
environmentalism,” Human ecology review, pp. 81–97.
[8] K. S. Wolske and P. C. Stern, “Contributions of psychology to limiting
climate change: Opportunities through consumer behavior,” in Psychol-
ogy and climate change.
Elsevier, pp. 127–160.
[9] H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “A systematic framework
for designing and evaluating persuasive systems,” in Persuasive
Technology, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, H. Oinas-
Kukkonen, P. Hasle, M. Harjumaa, K. Segerst˚ahl, and P. Øhrstrøm, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, no. 5033, pp. 164–176. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-68504-3 15
[10] B. J. Fogg, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What
We Think and Do. Morgan Kaufmann, google-Books-ID: r9JIkNjjTfEC.
[11] D. Costa Pinto, M. M. Herter, P. Rossi, and A. Borges, “Going green
for self or for others? gender and identity salience effects on sustainable
consumption,” International Journal of Consumer Studies, vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 540–549.
[12] B. Bloodhart and J. K. Swim, “Sustainability and consumption: What’s
gender got to do with it,” Journal of Social Issues, vol. 76, no. 1, pp.
101–113.
[13] L. M. Hunter, A. Hatch, and A. Johnson, “Cross-national gender
variation in environmental behaviors,” Social science quarterly, vol. 85,
no. 3, pp. 677–694.
[14] R. R¨aty and A. Carlsson-Kanyama, “Energy consumption by gender in
some european countries,” Energy Policy, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 646–649.
[15] J. Fathallah and P. Pyakurel, “Addressing gender in energy studies,”
Energy Research & Social Science, vol. 65, p. 101461.
[16] Z. A. Bulut, F. K¨okalan C¸ ımrin, and O. Do˘gan, “Gender, generation
and sustainable consumption: Exploring the behaviour of consumers
from Izmir, Turkey,” International Journal of Consumer Studies, vol. 41,
no. 6, pp. 597–604.
[17] L. C. Zelezny, P.-P. Chua, and C. Aldrich, “Elaborating on gender
differences in environmentalism,” Journal of Social issues, vol. 56, no. 3,
pp. 443–458.
[18] S. H. Schwartz and T. Rubel, “Sex differences in value priorities: cross-
cultural and multimethod studies.” Journal of personality and social
psychology, vol. 89, no. 6, p. 1010.
[19] J. Wilson, P. Tyedmers, and J. E. Spinney, “An exploration of the rela-
tionship between socioeconomic and well-being variables and household
greenhouse gas emissions,” Journal of Industrial Ecology, vol. 17, no. 6,
pp. 880–891.
[20] M. Sommer and K. Kratena, “The carbon footprint of european house-
holds and income distribution,” Ecological Economics, vol. 136, pp.
62–72.
[21] T.
L.
Milfont,
E.
Zubielevitch,
P.
Milojev,
and
C.
G.
Sibley,
“Ten-year panel data confirm generation gap but climate beliefs
increase at similar rates across ages,” Nature Communications, vol. 12,
no. 1, p. 4038. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41467-021-24245-y
[22] S. Kaplan, D. K. Wrzesinska, and C. G. Prato, “The role of human
needs in the intention to use conventional and electric bicycle sharing
in a driving-oriented country,” Transport policy, vol. 71, pp. 138–146.
[23] F. Bimbo, C. Russo, A. Di Fonzo, and G. Nardone, “Consumers’
environmental responsibility and their purchase of local food: evidence
from a large-scale survey,” British Food Journal, vol. 123, no. 5, pp.
1853–1874.
[24] L. Yan, H. T. Keh, and J. Chen, “Assimilating and differentiating: The
curvilinear effect of social class on green consumption,” Journal of
Consumer Research, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 914–936. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucaa041
[25] M. Anantharaman, “Elite and ethical: The defensive distinctions of
middle-class bicycling in Bangalore, India,” Journal of Consumer Cul-
ture, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 864–886.
[26] C. Thomson, J. Nash, and A. Maeder, “Persuasive design for behaviour
change apps: Issues for designers,” in Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists
and Information Technologists, ser. SAICSIT ’16.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2987491.2987535
[27] C. Alexander, The Timeless Way of Building.
New York, USA: Oxford
University Press, 1979.
[28] C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein, A Pattern Language:
Towns, Buildings, Construction.
New York, USA: Oxford University
Press, 1997.
[29] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.
Pearson Education,
1994.
[30] G. Meszaros and J. Doble, “Pattern languages of program design 3,”
R. C. Martin, D. Riehle, and F. Buschmann, Eds.
Boston, MA, USA:
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1997, ch. A Pattern
Language for Pattern Writing, pp. 529–574.
[31] J. Vlissides, Pattern Hatching: Design Patterns Applied.
Addison-
Wesley, 1998.
[32] M. V. Welie and G. C. V. D. Veer, “Pattern languages in interaction
design: Structure and organization,” in Proc. Interact ’03, M. Rauterberg,
Wesson, Ed(s). IOS.
IOS Press, 2003, pp. 527–534.
[33] J. O. Borchers, “A pattern approach to interaction design,” AI &
SOCIETY, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 359–376, 2001.
[34] K. Kalke, T. Ginossar, J. M. Bentley, H. Carver, S. F. A. Shah, and
A. Y. Kinney, “Use of evidence-based best practices and behavior
change techniques in breast cancer apps: Systematic analysis,” JMIR
Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 8, no. 1, p. e14082, Jan 2020. [Online].
Available: https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/1/e14082
[35] T. Ginossar, S. F. A. Shah, A. J. West, J. M. Bentley, C. A. Caburnay,
M. W. Kreuter, and A. Y. Kinney, “Content, usability, and utilization
of plain language in breast cancer mobile phone apps: A systematic
analysis,” JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 5, no. 3, p. e20, Mar 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://mhealth.jmir.org/2017/3/e20/
[36] A. G. Mirnig et al., “User experience patterns from scientific and
industry knowledge: An inclusive pattern approach,” International
Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 7, no. 3 and 4, pp. 200–215,
2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.thinkmind.org
[37] A. G. Mirnig, P. Fr¨ohlich, J. Schrammel, D. Falcioni, M. Gafert, and
M. Tscheligi, “Pattern languages in interaction design: Structure and
organization,” in Proceedings of The Twelfth International Conference
on Pervasive Patterns and Applications (PATTERNS 2020).
IARIA,
2020, pp. 63–69.
[38] “YAZIO,” 2023, YAZIO Gmbh, URL: https://www.yazio.com/ [ac-
cessed: 15-05-2023].
[39] “MyFitnessPal,”
2023,
MyFitnessPal,
Inc.,
URL:
https:
//www.myfitnesspal.com/ [accessed: 15-05-2023].
[40] “Lifesum,” 2023, Lifesum AB, URL: https://lifesum.com/ [accessed: 15-
05-2023].
[41] “AVA App,” 2023, Salzburg AG, URL: https://www.ava-assist.me/
[offline
as
of
30-05-2023],
Apple
Store:
https://apps.apple.
com/at/app/ava-energy-assistant/id1545318042,
Play
Store:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details/AVA Energy Assistant?
id=com.salzburgag.digitallab.stromzeiten&gl=US&pli=1
[accessed:
15-05-2023].
[42] L. Diamond and P. Fr¨ohlich, “Communicating privacy: User priorities for
privacy requirements in home energy applications,” in Human-Computer
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

Interaction – INTERACT 2021, C. Ardito, R. Lanzilotti, A. Malizia,
H. Petrie, A. Piccinno, G. Desolda, and K. Inkpen, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2021, pp. 665–675.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-049-0
PATTERNS 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applications

