Safety, Cybersecurity and Interoperability of Modern Nuclear Power Plants 
 
Asmaa Tellabi1, 4, Ines Ben Zid2, 4, Edita Bajramovic3, 4, Karl Waedt4 
1University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany 
2University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany 
3Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany 
4Framatome GmbH, Erlangen, Germany 
 
E-mail:{firstname.lastname}@framatome.com 
 
 
Abstract—The integration of digital equipment and diverse 
automation platforms in modern nuclear plants, including 
Nuclear Power Plants is due to the gradually increasing use of 
digital technologies. This digitalization either comes gradually 
based 
on 
a 
succession 
of 
refurbishment 
projects 
of 
Instrumentation & Control  and Electrical Power Systems or 
as comprehensive architectures with new-built power plants. 
Therefore, similar to any critical infrastructure facing a 
growing risk of cyber-attacks, cybersecurity for Nuclear Power 
Plants has become a subject of rising concern. We envision that 
the findings in this paper provide a relevant understanding of 
the threat landscape facing digital systems in nuclear power 
plants. The knowledge can be used for an improved 
understanding and a better identification of security risks 
during the analysis and design of supporting systems. This 
paper gives an overview of the security issues and 
vulnerabilities, helping to better understand the big picture of 
cybersecurity issues and vulnerabilities in Nuclear Power 
Plants. Identifying these vulnerabilities and issues helps to 
establish new security countermeasures. A new draft standard 
IEC 63096 is presented in this paper as well.  
Keywords-nuclear 
power 
plants; 
cybersecurity 
interoperability.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Digital Instrumentation and Control (I&C) systems are 
defined as computer-based devices that monitor and control 
nuclear power plants (NPP). Electrical Power Systems (EPS) 
provide the redundant power supply for different plant 
operation scenarios, which have to be fully supported. The 
EPS may include the connection to external highest voltage 
(e.g. 400 kW) or high voltage (e.g. 110 kV) grid connections, 
Emergency Diesel Generators, Station Blackout Diesel 
Generators, different Uninterruptable Power Supplies (UPS), 
e.g. for 2 hours and 12 hours.  
Furthermore, different inverters and rectifiers are 
responsible of controlling and monitoring the entire aspects 
of the plant’s health, all plant states and helping to respond 
with the care and adjustments as needed. They are seen as 
the nervous system of a nuclear power plants (NPP). 
Generation III+ and IV reactors are equipped with digital 
I&C systems, while analog systems in older reactors are 
being replaced with digital systems [1]. The high level 
communication between NPPs control networks is done by 
Supervisory 
Control 
and 
Data 
Acquisition 
systems 
(SCADA) in order to coordinate power production with 
transmission and distribution demands. Integration of digital 
I&C systems and the connectivity between NPPs control 
networks and external networks represent a threat for NPPs, 
making them a target to cyber-attacks which can include 
physical damage to reactors. With possibilities of cyber-
attacks targeting NPPs increasingly, cybersecurity has 
aroused as a significant problem [2].  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II gives background information on typical system 
architecture in NPPs. Section III outlines some of the 
notorious publically known cyber-attacks against NPPs. In 
section IV,  a new IEC 63096 standard [3] is described. We 
conclude the paper in Section V.  
II. 
NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS  
The general digital systems configuration of NPPs is 
almost similar to that of Industrial Control Systems (ICS) 
SCADA systems. The general architecture can be separated 
into two distinct domains: I&C systems, EPS and plant-local 
or corporate IT systems. The restriction on these networks is 
not similar, but also the nature of the traffic.  
According to Fig. 1, operations, such as office 
automation, document management, and email, which 
consist of conventional IT systems, such as PCs and 
enterprise workstations use the corporate network of the 
Utility. As an illustration, Internet access, FTP, email, and 
remote access will normally be allowed on the enterprise 
network level but should not be permitted on the ICS 
network level. 
Nuclear safety is the accomplishment of correct operating 
conditions, prevention of accidents or alleviation of accident 
consequences, ending up with the protection of workers, the 
public and the environment from extreme radiation hazards. 
On the other hand, nuclear security is the prevention and 
detection of, and response to, theft, sabotage, unauthorized 
access, illegal transfer or other malicious acts involving 
nuclear material, other radioactive substances or their 
associated facilities.  
Safety is expected to prevent accidents, while security is 
implemented to stop intended acts that might harm the NPP 
or lead to the theft of nuclear materials. Safety evaluations 
focus on risks arising from accidental events occurrences 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

originated from nature (such as earthquakes, tornadoes, or 
flooding), hardware failures, supplementary internal events 
or interruptions (such as fire, pipe breakage, or loss of 
electric power supply), or human mistakes (such as the 
incorrect application of procedures, or incorrect alignment of 
circuits). For security, the risks, or events, worried about 
result from malicious acts accomplished with the objective to 
steal material or to cause damage. Therefore, security events 
are based on ‘intelligent’ or ‘deliberate’ actions achieved 
intentionally for theft or sabotage and with the purpose to 
avoid protective measures [2]. 
Safety and security have various elements in common 
and both focus on protecting the plant with the eventual 
purpose of protecting people, society, and the environment. 
As stated above, the essential objective of each is identical 
— the protection of people, society and the environment. 
Whether it was a safety or a security event causing harm, the 
acceptable risk is likely the same, usually they both adopt the 
strategy of defense in depth, which is defined as the usage of 
layers of protection.  
First concern is given to prevention. Second, abnormal 
situations need to be identified early and take action 
promptly to avoid resulting damage. Mitigation comes in the 
third place of an operative strategy. Finally, considerable 
emergency planning should be implemented in case of the 
failure of prevention, protection and mitigation systems [2].  
I&C are censorious in NPPs. They are responsible of 
monitoring the operational state of the nuclear reactors 
through interaction with physical equipment, but also in 
charge of process control. With the introduction of digital 
technologies in the 2000s, I&C systems shifted from analog 
technologies to digital technologies. The usage of digital 
technologies has been steadily increasing [4]. NPPs I&C 
systems engage in environments dissimilar from those of 
typical IT systems. 
In a typical NPP, I&C architecture contains two types of 
systems: Non-safety and Safety systems. The Non-safety 
system is defined as a distributed computer system 
containing a number of remote control nodes spread across 
the NPPs, which uses redundant real time data network to 
communicate with each other and with the Human Machine 
Interface (HMI).  
Communication with third party systems and Operation 
Maintenance Corporate Systems (OMS) are also supported 
through open protocols like Object Embedding Linking 
Process Control, fieldbuses and Modbus-TCP [5].  
Additionally, monitoring and manual control of the NPPs 
processes is done by the use of HMI consoles connected in 
the non-safety system. In order to display critical information 
related to safety on the non-safety HMI, the safety system 
will communicate with the non-safety system through 
Interface gateways.  
On the contrary, a safety system is regularly based on a 
channelized Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) that 
holds a number of PLC nodes distributed across the NPPs. 
These PLCs and its cabinets are designed to resist seismic 
events, environmental events and cybersecurity attacks. 
Furthermore, they can still be able to operate safely.  
 
Figure 1.  General architecture in nuclear power plants [6]. 
The purpose of this distribution is to coordinate with 
safety components in the process system, and also to ensure 
a safe communication in a safety channel using the 
redundant real time data safety network or through dedicated 
high speed links in between safety channels. Distributed 
control systems (DCSs) or PLCs are common control 
components in I&C systems, they interact with physical 
equipment directly and industrial PCs or engineering 
workstations that are employed to configure control 
components and their related works. 
III. 
CYBERSECURITY AND CYBER WARFARE RELATED 
TO NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS 
Advancement in electronics and IT was the main 
motivation behind the replacement of traditional analog I&C 
systems in NPPs with I&C systems, e.g. systems based on 
computers and microprocessors. Also, digital systems allow 
superior reliability, improved plant performance and 
supplementary diagnostic aptitudes. The systems used today 
were designed to satisfy performance, reliability, safety, and 
flexibility requirements, most of them were created a long 
time ago before new technologies became a crucial part of 
business operations.  
In most typical implementations, these systems are 
physically isolated from outside networks and are based on 
proprietary hardware and software. The communication 
protocols include basic error detection and correction 
capabilities but lack the secure systems [5]. Accordingly, it is 
crucial not to connect such systems to an Intranet or the 
Internet. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

A. History of Selected Attacks in NPPs 
First, in this section we present some of the notorious 
attacks against NPPs. In [7], attack taxonomy is defined by 5 
dimensions: precondition, vulnerability, target, attack 
method, effect of the attack. It was combined with a new 
dimension target—the effect it has on the confidentiality, 
availability, integrity (CIA) of a system. 
1) Ignalina NPP (1992)  
At the Ignalina NPP in Lithuania, a technician 
intentionally introduced a virus into the industrial control 
system. 
 
Precondition: Direct access to the system. 
 
Attack method: Insider attack. 
 
Target: Availability and integrity. 
 
Effect of the attack: In this case, little harm was 
caused, but someone with malicious intent could 
have provoked a serious incident [8][9]. 
2) Davis-Besse NPP (2003) 
 This plant located in Ohio was infected by the Slammer 
worm (also called W32/SQLSlam-A or Sapphire). 
 
Precondition: Unpatched system. 
 
Attack method: At first, the worm scans and sends 
itself to random IP addresses; if worm reaches a 
machine that is running Microsoft SQL 2000, it 
infects that machine and begins scanning and 
sending itself to another machine. 
 
Target: Availability. 
 
Effect of the attack: The safety parameter display 
system (SPDS), responsible of collecting and 
displaying data regarding the reactor core from the 
coolant systems, temperature sensors and radiation 
detectors, was unavailable for nearly five hours 
[8][9]. 
3) Browns Ferry NPP (2006) 
This NPP located in Alabama experienced a malfunction 
of both reactor recirculation pumps (which use variable-
frequency drives to control motor speed and are needed to 
cool the reactor) and the condensate demineralizer 
controller (a type of PLC). 
 
Precondition: Device failure, attack method. Both 
of these devices contain microprocessors that 
communicate by sending and receiving data over an 
Ethernet network. 
 
Attack method: Ethernet operates by first sending 
data to every device on the network; then they have 
to inspect each packet to define if the packet is 
intended for them or if they can ignore it, making 
them vulnerable to failure if they accept enormous 
traffic.  
 
Target: Availability. 
 
Effect of the attack: The excess traffic produced by 
network broke down the reactor recirculation pumps 
and condensate demineralizer controller. As a 
consequence, the plant’s Unit 3 had to be manually 
shut down in order to prevent a meltdown [8][9]. 
 
4) Hatch NPP (2008) 
Hatch NPP located in Georgia experienced a shutdown as 
an unintended consequence of an update performed by 
contractor. An engineer contractor that manages the plant’s 
technology operations installed an update to a computer on 
the plant’s business network. 
 
Precondition: Human error. 
 
Attack method: The update was intended to 
synchronize data. The updated computer was 
connected to one of the plant’s industrial control 
system networks, consequently when the engineer 
restarted the updated computer; the synchronization 
changed the control system’s data to zero for a short 
moment. 
 
Target: Availability and integrity. 
 
Effect of the attack: The interpretation of the 
temporary changed values by the plant’s safety 
system was incorrect. The updated value to zero of 
the water level signified that there was not enough 
water to cool the reactor core, which conducted to 
automatic shutdown for 48 hours of the plant’s Unit 
2 [8][9]. 
5)  Natanz Nuclear Facility and Bushehr NPP – Stuxnet 
(2010) 
 First exposed to public in June 2010, the Stuxnet 
computer worm infected both the Natanz nuclear facility 
and the Bushehr NPP in Iran, partially destroying around 
1,000 centrifuges at Natanz. 
 
Precondition: Use of commercial-off-the-shelf 
(COTS)  Operating System (OS), Stuxnet infects 
computers using the Microsoft Windows operating 
system, exploiting vulnerabilities in the system that 
allows it to obtain system-level access. 
 
Attack method: The worm uses forged certificates 
as a result the installed files look to come from an 
authentic source, misleading antivirus. Iranian 
nuclear facilities work with Siemens Step 7 SCADA 
system. Once the machine is infected, Stuxnet 
inspects the network to find computers attached to a 
similar system. Stuxnet duplicate itself on other 
computers 
by 
exploiting 
another 
set 
of 
vulnerabilities found in print spoolers and also 
through USB flash drives, so it spreads to networks 
using shared printers. Stuxnet’s payload is activated 
only if the computer is connected to a similar 
Siemens system. It reprograms the system’s PLCs, in 
charge of controlling centrifuges applied in enriching 
nuclear fuel, so that they spin rapidly and eventually 
finish by break down. 
 
Target: Availability and integrity. 
 
Effect of the attack: As a result, Stuxnet destroyed 
over 1,000 centrifuges at Natanz [8][9]. 
6) Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co. Commercial 
Network (2014) 
 Hackers infiltrated and stole data from the commercial 
network of Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co., which 
operates 23 of South Korea’s nuclear reactors. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

 
Precondition: 
Human 
error: 
Access 
to 
the 
confidential data was obtained by hackers through 
phishing emails to the owner-operator’s employees. 
Some of them finished by clicked on the links and 
downloaded the malware. 
 
Attack method: Sending phishing emails to 
employees. 
 
Target: Confidentiality. 
 
Effect of the attack: The hackers acquired the 
blueprints and manuals of two reactors, electricity 
flow 
charts, personal data 
that belongs 
to 
approximately 10,000 of the company’s employees, 
also radiation exposure estimates for nearby 
residents [8][9]. 
B. Security Vulnerabilities   
In general, I&C in NPPs are physically isolated from 
external networks and have a different operational 
environment from that of conventional IT systems. As a 
result, NPPs were regarded as being safe from external 
cyber-attacks. However, continuous cyber-attacks against 
NPPs signified that NPPs are as susceptible to cyberattacks 
as other critical infrastructures [10] and conventional IT 
systems. 
ICS, usually control the physical world and IT systems 
manage data. ICS are different from traditional IT systems, 
including dissimilar risks and priorities. Some of the 
different characteristics include important risk to the health 
and safety of human lives, severe destruction of the 
environment, and financial problems such as production 
deficit, and undesirable effect to a nation’s economy. 
Performance and reliability requirements for ICS are distinct, 
by using operating systems and applications that may be seen 
unusual in a classic IT network environment. At first, ICS 
had slight similarities to IT systems in that ICS were 
inaccessible systems implementing proprietary control 
protocols with specific hardware and software. Commonly 
accessible, low-cost Ethernet and Internet Protocol (IP) 
devices are now 
substituting the older proprietary 
technologies, which raises the likelihood of cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and events. Currently, ICS are embracing IT 
solutions to endorse corporate connectivity and remote 
access abilities, and are being created and employed via 
industry standard computers, operating systems (OS) and 
network protocols, where the resemblance to IT systems 
comes from. This novel integration deploys IT capabilities, 
but it meaningfully offers less separation for ICS from the 
outside world than antecedent systems, increasing the 
necessity to secure these systems. Despite the fact that 
security solutions have been designed to deal with these 
security matters in characteristic IT systems, particular 
precautions must be engaged when presenting these similar 
solutions to ICS environments. ICS and IT systems operate 
in continuously changing environments. The environments 
of operation comprise, but are not limited to  the threat 
space, 
vulnerabilities, 
missions/business 
purposes, 
mission/business procedures, enterprise and information 
security architectures, information technologies, personnel, 
facilities, 
supply 
chain 
relationships, 
organizational 
governance/culture, 
procurement/acquisition 
processes, 
organizational 
policies/procedures, 
organizational 
assumptions, constraints, risk tolerance, and priorities/trade-
offs) [4]. 
1) Lack or Improper Input Validation  
Attackers exploit vulnerabilities in services and scripts 
written by I&C vendors, resulting from the non-secure 
coding practices, allowing attackers to send forged request in 
order to modify the program execution. In the same way, 
using vulnerable protocols with for networking will be 
exploited to create malformed packets. Vulnerabilities found 
in these protocols and services make an attacker able to 
manipulate plant component, via well-known attacks. 
Vulnerable modules that might be concerned include 
Workstations at Main Control Room (MCR), Remote 
Shutdown Station (RSS); Process Information and Control 
System (PICS); Safety Information and Control System 
(SICS); Human Machine Interface (HMI). The attacks that 
could take place by exploiting this vulnerability are buffer 
overflow, command injection, and SQL injection. 
2) Inappropriate Authorization  
Authorization guarantees access to resources only by 
authorized 
entities. 
Access 
control 
mechanisms 
are 
implemented to ensure appropriate authorization. Absence of 
or weak authorization mechanisms can be exploited by 
attackers to gain illegal access to resources and tamper I&C 
system 
components. 
Software 
installed 
at 
operator 
workstations side must perform access control checks, or it 
will open a new door for attackers to perform unauthorized 
actions. Vulnerable modules include Workstations at MCR, 
RSS, PICS, SICS, HMIs, Safety Automation System (SAS), 
Protection System (PS), Process Automation System (PAS). 
Existing module in I&C system must first verify whether the 
requesting module is allowed to access the resource. 
Escalation of privilege is one of the attacks that could be 
performed with authorization vulnerability. 
3) Improper Authentication 
The network protocols used within I&C system 
architecture during communication, frequently suffer from 
weak authentication mechanisms to verify the identity of the 
packet and also the user. Weak authentication vulnerabilities 
permit attackers to eavesdrop on network communications 
and capture the identity credentials of legal users, ending 
with an unauthorized privilege. Mutual authentication before 
sending or receiving data is not performed by the 
components of I&C. Not verifying the origin or authenticity 
of data, permits malicious data into components, credential 
theft, authentication bypass, etc. Furthermore, non-properly 
protected confidential data stored in databases can also be 
exploited. Vulnerable modules that might be touched by this 
are almost all I&C systems, sub-systems and components 
[9]. Often, I&C vendors leave behind authentication 
information from their product code or documentation, 
which can be definitely accessed and exploited by attackers. 
Weak passwords or using default passwords are another 
significant vulnerability to consider. There are numerous 
possible aspects that can be used to authenticate a person, 
device, or system, together with something the user knows, 
something the user has or something the user is. For instance, 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

authentication could be founded on something known (e.g., 
PIN number or password), something possessed (e.g., key, 
dongle, smart card), something the user is like a biological 
characteristic (e.g., fingerprint, retinal signature), a location 
(e.g., Global Positioning System (GPS), location access), the 
time a request is made, or a mixture of these attributes. 
Normally, the more authentication process includes more 
factors, the more strong the process will be. Multi-factor 
authentication refers to the process when two or more factors 
are used [4]. 
4) Unencrypted Sensitive Data  
Frequently data at rest and in transit is unencrypted, 
making them vulnerable to disclosure. Moreover, network 
packets exchanged between several components of I&C are 
not encrypted but in plaintext form. Vulnerable modules that 
might be touched by this are almost all I&C systems, sub-
systems and components [9]. Exposure of product source 
code, topology, legitimate user credentials, might result as a 
consequence. 
5) Incorrect Software Configurations and Management 
Security breaches and exploitations of plant operations 
are a result of misconfigurations or vulnerabilities found in 
I&C software. Modules that are seen vulnerable to this are 
Workstations at MCR, RSS, PICS, SICS, HMIs, SAS, PS, 
and PAS. The existence of these vulnerabilities is caused by 
poor patch management, poor maintenance, and built-in 
flaws in I&C products. Additionally, improper installations 
of applications also offer an opportunity to attackers to 
tamper the system.  
6) Lack of Backup Facilities  
Some of I&C systems in NPPs do not own backup and 
restore facilities dedicated to databases and software. NPPs 
that possess backup facilities often store them offsite, and 
they are not often exercised and tested. Vulnerable modules 
that might be concerned by lack of backup facilities are SAS, 
PS, PAS, Sensors, Actuators, PICS, and SICS [9]. NPPs 
must be operated 24/7 and the absence of a backup feature 
can result in catastrophic effects if an incident occurs. 
7) Absence of Audit and Accountability  
Some attacks are hard to detect since they are launched in 
a cautious manner like insider attacks. The nonexistence of 
auditing and logging mechanisms assists attackers into 
covering their tracks after attacks. Vulnerable modules that 
might be touched by this are almost all I&C systems, sub-
systems and components. Storing activity logs of I&C 
components and operator actions is vital in order to trace 
attack patterns, but also to avoid repudiation threats from 
insiders as well as actions in I&C components and systems. 
8) Absence of Security Awareness 
Technology advancements and the people using these 
technologies present multiple risks to information security. 
The human factor is considered as one of the major sources 
of information security risk, also one of the most difficult to 
control. According to a Deloitte’s Technology, Media, and 
Telecommunications (TMT) Global Security Study [11], 
70% of the TMT organizations surveyed rate their 
employees’ lack of security awareness as an “average” or 
“high” vulnerability, which was the case for Korea Hydro 
and nuclear Power Co. The security controls that conform to 
the NIST SP 800-53 Awareness and Training (AT) family 
offer policy and procedures for guaranteeing that each user 
of an information system is equipped with elementary 
information system security awareness and training materials 
before authorization to access the system is granted. Security 
awareness is a crucial part of ICS incident prevention, 
mainly when it comes to social engineering threats. Social 
engineering is seen as a method used to influence individuals 
into revealing private information, such as passwords. This 
information can then be exploited to endanger otherwise 
secure systems. Employing an ICS security program may 
bring changes to the means used by personnel to access 
computer programs, applications, and the computer desktop 
itself [8]. 
C. Industry and Government Responses to NPPs 
Cybersecurity 
In the previous section, known attacks and vulnerabilities 
in NPPs were underlined. Since they pose important risks to 
the economy and to national security, numerous attempts 
were made by international organizations, regulatory and 
research institutes, and governments to set up cybersecurity 
guidelines, standards, and frameworks dedicated to security 
of NPPs. 
For industry adoption and regulatory approval, three 
features of digital I&C systems are distinguishing. 
First, a digital I&C system is more complicated than its 
analog predecessor because of the number of connections it 
has among its many components. Second, the digital system 
rely more on software. Usually, a unit has around 10000 
sensors and detectors and 5000 km of I&C cables. The total 
mass components connected to I&C, is close to 1000 tones. 
Making I&C system one of the heaviest and most extensive 
non-building structures in any NPP. Third, the complete 
reliance on computers increases the importance of 
cybersecurity. The first two of these features, complexity and 
software-dependence, 
introduce 
new 
possibilities 
for 
common cause failures. 
The increased use of commercial “off-the shelf” software 
is considered as one practice hurting the nuclear industry. 
This type of software does not deliver a suitable level of 
protection from external threats and is often seen as a direct 
approach to penetrate a facility network. The use of 
insufficient software, mixed with executive-level ignorance 
of security risks, builds an easy way for an attacker to misuse 
assets. There is a common misrepresentation which refers to 
nuclear facilities as being “air-gapped” – totally inaccessible 
from the Internet – signifying that the industry is safe from 
cyber-attacks. Considerable commercial software offers 
Internet connectivity through virtual private networks 
(VPNs) or else Intranet. These connections often go unlisted 
and keep on being ignored while implementing software or 
deploying momentary Internet connections for a project. 
Furthermore, the focus has been given more to physical 
safety and protection instead of cybersecurity controls. 
Therefore, very few developments have been made to reduce 
cyber risks through standardized control and measures [10]. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

NPPs are securely maintained and considered as the most 
protected and secure facilities in the world. However 
accidents can happen, undesirably affecting environment and 
people. Vulnerabilities threatening the physical security of a 
NPPs and their ability to launch acts of terrorism were 
elevated to a national security issue following the attacks of 
9/11, 2001. Consequently, the American congress endorsed 
new nuclear plant security requirements and has frequently 
devoted attention on regulation and enforcement by the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).  Years passed after 
the 9/11 attacks, but security at NPPs persists as a vital 
matter. To decrease the likelihood of an accident, the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) supports 
Member States in applying international safety standards to 
reinforce safety in NPPs [9]. NIST has published a well-
established risk management framework in NIST Special 
Publications (SP) 800-30 [12], 800-37 [13], and 800-39 [14], 
which analyzes distinct threat scenarios and evaluates the 
various attack possibilities that can exploit system 
vulnerabilities. On the other hand, the NIST risk assessment 
framework, mentioned above, does not describe precise 
procedures on the approach a company should assess the 
quantification of risks, i.e. how and to what degree an attack 
can 
endanger 
system 
confidentiality, 
integrity, 
or 
availability. In 2008, NIST issued a guideline on securing 
ICS [4]. It systematically explained the security of ICS 
systems, mostly containing SCADA architecture, distributed 
control systems (DCS), secure software development, and 
deployment of controls in order to secure networks. NIST 
also came up with a guideline on the Security for Industrial 
Automation and Control Systems while working with the 
Industrial Automation and Control Systems Security ISA99 
Committee.  
The IEEE produced the SCADA cryptography standard 
in 2008 [15], which offers a comprehensive explanation on 
the way to found secure communication between SCADA 
servers and workstations. Organizations can also attain 
certification under this IEEE standard if they fulfill with the 
requirement. 
The 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization (ISO) has also issued a standard, ISO/IEC 
27002:2013 [16], which gives guidelines for initiating, 
implementing, maintaining, and improving information 
security 
management 
in 
organizations 
[9]. 
NRC’s 
cybersecurity regulations necessitate each NPPs to present a 
cybersecurity plan and implementation schedule. The plan 
must deliver “high assurance” that the digital computer and 
communications systems implemented in order to perform 
the next functions will deliver sufficient protection against 
design basis attacks: 
 
Safety-related Functions or vital to safety. 
 
Security functions. 
 
Emergency mobility functions, as well as offsite 
communications. 
 
Support 
systems 
plus 
equipment 
that, 
if 
compromised, would undesirably jeopardize safety, 
security, or emergency mobility functions [3]. 
As a result, cybersecurity has been adopted as NPPs 
regulation requirement under the US code of federal 
regulation (CFR) [2]. Also, regulatory agencies like the US 
NRC and IAEA created and distributed regulatory 
guidelines, considering construction of cybersecurity plans 
and programs for NPPs. The IAEA and World Institute for 
Nuclear Security (WINS) are multiplying their efforts in 
order to protect NPPs by addressing cybersecurity issues and 
challenges on a global scale. Currently, some of issues 
include  
 
Issuing multiple documents addressing cybersecurity 
on nuclear facilities.  
 
Providing technical and strategic security training to 
involved officials of member countries. 
 
Offering expert guidance and capacity building to 
officials and representatives.  
NSS-17 [17] was issued by IAEA as a technical guidance 
for guaranteeing computer security at nuclear facilities. 
Similarly, the IAEA NSS-13 [18] recommends that the 
available computer-based systems included in nuclear 
facilities must be protected against compromise, and also an 
appropriate threat assessment must be realized in order to 
prevent attacks.  
Threats were classified from various adversaries’ 
perspectives, detection and prevention mechanisms for 
compromises of NPPs information systems were also 
addressed. Additionally, nothing like usual ICS and SCADA 
systems, governments, and NPPs regulatory agencies specify 
that NPPs I&C systems must comply with the following firm 
safety requirements [4][19]: 
 
Requirements 
for 
annual 
maintenance, 
best 
availability 
and 
functionality 
levels, 
and 
environment tests. 
 
Nuclear reactor safety and also physical protection 
of nuclear material must be taking in consideration; 
 
Defining system security levels by bearing in mind 
safety level ranking, and evaluating safety risks in 
relation to security threats. 
 
Verification that security functions do not have 
opposing effects on the safety and functionality of 
facilities. 
 
Management and maintenance must consider the 
safety and reliability of systems, examination and 
also qualification by regulatory agencies. 
 
Redundancy and diversity must be taken in 
consideration in the design.  
However, all of these efforts are continuing and 
necessitate indefinite time to mature.  
The 
guidelines, 
standards, 
and 
recommendations 
provided by governments and regulatory authorities 
necessitate complete review to make sure that they describe 
and include the newest risk assessment developments, for 
example, cyber threat information sharing, risk assessment of 
tacit knowledge, dissemination of risk assessment results, 
etc. These features are obligatory in order to keep NPPs risk 
assessment up-to-the-minute on progressive cyber threats 
and to be able to manage cyber incidents in a proper manner.  
On the other hand, at present, the abovementioned 
guidelines do not provide a detailed approach on imposing 
security controls and avoiding cyber risks. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

IV. 
SECURITY CONTROLS FOR NUCLEAR POWER 
PLANTS  
Standards 
are 
endorsing 
the 
improvement 
of 
cybersecurity in NPPs. Fig. 2 shows the standardizing 
processes and procedures, which are important to accomplish 
an international rewarding collaboration. Abundant standards 
addressing information security were established in recent 
years. Still, not all of them are practical to apply in NPPs. 
Designed for I&C systems in NPPs, the new draft IEC 
63096 is expected to be published in 2019. The standard 
aims its attention specifically on the selection and application 
of cybersecurity controls from the contained security 
controls within the catalogue. Preventing, detecting, also 
reacting to digital attacks against computer-based I&C 
systems are the major functions of the selected and applied 
cybersecurity controls. Based on IEC 62645 [20], IAEA, in 
addition to country precise guidance in the technical and 
security application area. Designers and operators of NPPs 
(utilities), systems evaluators, vendors and subcontractors, 
and by licensors can use this standard. For that reason, the 
goal of this standard is to enlarge the SC45A series of 
documents focusing on cybersecurity with IEC 62645 [20] as 
its high-level document, by classifying nuclear I&C precise 
cybersecurity controls for I&C systems into Safety Classes 1, 
2, 3 and non-classified (NC) I&C systems. The major 
differences between this standard and usual IT systems or 
industrial automation systems standard are the safety 
classification of I&C nuclear systems and related safety 
requirements. IEC 62645 [20] was issued in August 2014, 
and IEC 62859 [21] was published in 2016, along with this 
new standard related to cybersecurity controls, are planned to 
be used for I&C systems and NPPs. The new standard is 
structured as follow: 
      The first main section designates the intended audience, 
which is distinguished by parties that are in charge of: 
 
I&C platform development. 
 
Project Engineering for I&C system, including 
installation and commissioning. 
 
Operation and maintenance of  I&C system. 
     In the second main section, a detailed description of each 
security control is explained. Inside this structured 
representation, the purposes of Security Degrees along with 
the specific control are defined either highly recommended 
or optional. As well, additional description specifies whether 
the control conserves the confidentiality, integrity or 
availability. Each section related to a security control 
provides specific implementation guidance on how to 
implement the control; it also differentiates between I&C 
platform development, project engineering or operation and 
maintenance. 
 Based on IEC 62645 [20], the third main section is 
dedicated to the process of selecting the available security 
controls. Controls are allocated depending on the security 
degree of the particular I&C system. Tools and Legacy 
systems are also considered in this standard. After selecting 
the security controls, a threat and risk assessment is required 
in order to detect a residual risk that necessitates the 
implementation of supplementary security controls. 
 
 
Figure 2. New IEC 63096 Security Controls standard in the SC45A 
standards hierarchy [3]. 
 
  Concerning controls three cases are distinguished, using 
the guidance provided by the Draft ISO/IEC 27009 [22] on 
sector specific security controls. The following three cases 
on the refinement of ISO/IEC 27002 security controls are 
examined [16]: 
 
Security controls are adopted from ISO/IEC 27002 
[16] without any adjustment. If needed, the 
obligatory details are added by the standardized 
structure. 
 
To meet requirements from the nuclear I&C 
domain, Security controls from ISO/IEC 27002 [16] 
were modified and described in details to better. 
 
In order to meet the particular requirements from 
the nuclear I&C domain, a new security control has 
been added and inserted into ISO/IEC 27002 [16] 
clause (5 through 18. This is the case where the 
ISO/IEC 27002 [16] does not define specific 
security controls needed in nuclear I&C. 
IEC 
62541 
[23] 
defines 
the 
open 
platform 
communication Unified Architecture (OPC UA), it is an 
automation middleware or machine-to-machine (M2M) 
protocol. The standard features an object-oriented meta-
model to characterize data structures and remote procedure 
calls, which can be dynamically explored and modified 
through IP communication, along with security mechanisms 
such as  authentication and encryption. OPC UA is adaptable 
to manufacturing software, it defines [23]: 
 
An information model for structure, behavior and 
semantics description. 
 
A 
message 
model 
for 
interactions 
between 
applications. 
 
A communication model to carry data between end 
points. 
 
And 
a 
conformance 
model 
to 
guarantee 
interoperability between systems.  
The communication services of OPC UA are mainly used 
in the following domains: Process automation, power plants 
with, traditional and renewable Building automation, and 
Factory automation (in particular robotics). 
The OPC UA specifications are made up by 13 parts, the 
first seven parts are related to the core specifications e.g. the 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

concept, security model, address space model, services, 
information model, service mappings and profiles. The parts 
eight to thirteen are related to access type specifications like 
data access, alarms and conditions, programs, historical 
access, discovery and aggregates. Interoperability is 
achievable by using a communication standard that is 
platform and vendor independent, such as IEC 62451 [23] 
(OPC UA) and IEC 61850 [24] (Communication Networks 
and Systems in Substations). OPC UA is a platform-
independent standard that helps into reaching interoperability 
between 
devices 
with 
dissimilar 
manufacturers 
and 
communication 
protocols. 
OPC 
UA 
simplifies 
communication by sending messages between OPC UA 
Clients and Servers. For example, its applicability to the 
nuclear context is demonstrated by Framatome. Recognizing 
the potential of OPC-UA in sensors, Framatome started 
incorporating them into monitoring instruments (SIPLUG®) 
for mountings and their related electric drives. The solution 
is employed in the nuclear Industry for monitoring critical 
systems in remote environments, without undesirably 
affecting the availability of the system [25]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper gave an overview of security vulnerabilities in 
I&C systems and EPS inside NPPs, by going through 
notorious attacks across history and listing some of the 
vulnerabilities that can be exploitable by malicious attackers. 
An introduction to a new draft standard, IEC 63096 [3] had 
being given. The improved performance digital technology 
has offered a significant influence on I&C systems design in 
NPPs. The nuclear industry has a conservative methodology 
in approaching safety, and a considerable effort is obligatory 
in order to provide the essential evidence and analysis to 
guarantee that digital I&C systems can be employed in 
safety-critical and safety-related applications. In general, 
I&C systems are inaccessible from outside communication 
systems. Still, this is not sufficient for secure operation 
inside NPPs, as in the case of Stuxnet. Interoperability has to 
be addressed from I&C architecture design phase, as the 
systems have to interact. The threat from cyber-attacks is 
more and more seen as a problem of national and 
international security as cyber-attacks evolve, become more 
advanced and as actors behind them are no longer limited to 
private hackers or organized criminals, but also nation states 
and insiders.  
In future work, we intend to focus more on the listed 
vulnerabilities, and introducing security in hardware by using 
a trusted platform module instead of only focusing on 
securing software, also some best practices to widen the 
protection area. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
Some of the addressed cybersecurity related topics are 
being elaborated as part of Framatome GmbH’s participation 
in the “SMARTEST” R&D (2015-2018) with German 
University partners, partially funded by German Ministry 
BMWi. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Rrushi, R. Campbel, “Detecting cyber attacks on nuclear 
power plants,” The International Federation for Information 
Processing (ICCIP 2008), Springer, Boston, vol. 290, 2008, 
ISBN: 978-0-387-88522-3. 
[2] INSAG-24, International Nuclear Safety Group, “The 
interface between safety and security at nuclear power 
plants,” IAEA, 2010. 
[3] J. Bochtler, E. Quinn, and E. Bajramovic, “Development of a 
new IEC standard on cybersecurity controls for I&C in 
Nuclear Power Plants – IEC 63096,” NPIC & HMIT 2017, 
San Francisco, 2017. 
[4] K. Stouffer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and A. 
Hahn, “NIST Special Publication 800-82: Guide to Industrial 
Control Systems (ICS) Security,”, NIST, 2011. 
[5] Andrews, M. Holt, “Nuclear Power Plant security and 
vulnerabilities,” Congressional Research Service, January 
2014. 
[6] W. Ahn, M. Chung, B. Min, and J. Seo, “Development of 
cyber-attack scenarios for Nuclear Power Plants using 
scenario graphs,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor 
Networks, vol. 11,  April 2015,  doi: 10.1155/2015/836258.A.  
[7] D. Papp, Z. Ma, and L. Buttyan “Embedded systems security: 
threats, vulnerabilities, and attack taxonomy,” 13th Annual 
Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), IEEE, 
2015, doi:10.1109/PST.2015.7232966. 
[8] C. Baylon, R. Brunt, and D. Livingstone, “Cybersecurity at 
civil nuclear facilities understanding the risks,” Chatham 
House Report, September 2015. 
[9] R. Masood, “Assessment of cybersecurity challenges in 
nuclear power plants security incidents, threats, and 
initiatives,” Cybersecurity and Privacy Research Institute the 
George Washington University, 2016. 
[10] B. Kesler, “The vulnerability of nuclear facilities to cyber-
attack,” Defense and Diplomacy Journal, vol. 5, No. 3, 2016. 
[11] Deloitte, ”Security Awareness: People and Technology,”  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www2.deloitte.com/,  
2017.12.19. 
[12] G. Stoneburner, A.Y. Goguen, and A. Feringa, “NIST Special 
800-30: Risk Management Guide for Information Technology 
Systems,”, NIST, 2002. 
[13] Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, “NIST Special 
Publication 800-37 Rev. 1: Guide for Applying the Risk 
Management Framework to Federal Information Systems: a 
Security Life Cycle Approach,” NIST, 2014. 
[14] E. Aroms, “NIST Special Publication 800-39: Managing 
Information Security Risk,” NIST,  2012. 
[15] “IEEE Trial-Use Standard for a Cryptographic Protocol for 
Cyber Security of Substation Serial Links,” in IEEE Std 1711-
2010, vol., no., pp.1-49, 2011. 
[16] ISO/IEC 27002:2013, Information Technology - Security 
Techniques - Code of Practice for Information Security 
Controls, ISO/IEC. 
[17] IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 17, “Computer Security at 
Nuclear Facilities,” IAEA, 2011. 
[18] IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13, “Nuclear Security 
Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
and Nuclear Facilities,” IAEA, 2011. 
[19] ISO/IEC 27001:2005, Information Technology –information 
security management systems –requirement, ISO/IEC. 
[20] IEC 62645:2014, Nuclear Power Plants – Instrumentation and 
Control Systems – Requirements for Security Programs for 
Computer-Based Systems, IEC.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

[21] IEC 62859:2016, Nuclear Power Plants - Instrumentation and 
control systems - Requirements for coordinating safety and 
cybersecurity, IEC. 
[22] ISO/IEC 20009-1:2013, Information technology – Security 
techniques – Anonymous entity authentication, ISO/IEC. 
[23] IEC 62451-1:2016, OPC Unified Architecture – Part 1: 
Overview and Concepts, IEC. 
[24] IEC 61850:2013, Communication networks and systems for 
power utility automation, IEC. 
[25] V. Watson, A. Tellabi, J. Sassmannshausen, and X. Lou, 
“Interoperability and security challenges of Industrie 4.0,” 
2017, doi:10.18420/in2017_100. 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-628-6
PESARO 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

