User Safety Performance Evaluation from Complex Systems Design Phases:
Application to Arduous Working Conditions
Remy Houssin
CSIP – ICube- University of Strasbourg
Strasbourg, France
e-mail : remy.houssin@unistra.fr
Muhammad Irshad Yehya
CSIP – ICube- INSA of Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France
e-mail : muhammad.irshad_yehya@insa-strasbourg.fr
Amadou Coulibaly
CSIP – ICube- INSA of Strasbourg
Strasbourg, France
e-mail : amadou.coulibaly@insa-strasbourg.fr
Abstract— Considering user requirements in the design of
production systems is a necessity imposed by directives and
standards. However, in spite of standards application by
companies, many user health problems still happen. So, it
becomes a goal of companies to design machines and install
manufacturing systems to improve the safety performance of
their artefacts. In this paper, we propose to collect data and
information concerning the difficult/harsh working conditions
when using the artefacts (machine or system) in order to
evaluate them from the conception phase to propose new more
ergonomic systems/machines. To do this, we analyzed a system
used by our partner company and completed our method,
which is already proposed in the literature. The application
hardness evaluation is presented in the article to demonstrate
and evaluate the advantages and limitations of the proposed
method.
Keywords- Arduous working conditions; Design method;
Performance evaluation; User safety.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since January 1st, 2015, in France, the “Pénibilité de
travail”,
(meaning,
in
English:
difficult/harsh
working
conditions, arduous working conditions) has been included
in the calculation of pension rights system. The related labor
code is [1], taken from the European framework directive of
June 12th, 1989. In the rest of the paper, we used “arduous
working conditions” and not “Job penibility” as noted in [2].
This had three effects:
1)
The first consists in establishing an inventory of
working conditions in the existing production workshops.
2)
The second, for works subject to arduous working
condition tasks, it implements preventive measures to
eliminate or reduce the arduous working conditions risk.
3)
The third, for companies designing machines and
installing manufacturing systems, is to take this difficulty
into account when designing these systems.
The objective of this paper is to propose a method to
formulate and evaluate ergonomic information (particularly
related to arduous working conditions) and to use it in the
design process. We know that the design from a technical
point of view [3][4] is no longer sufficient to design an
efficient system [5][6]. In this sense, the concept of
integrated prevention has been defined and presented in
numerous articles [7]-[13].
To be able to design a system that can be used in
companies with a minimum level of ergonomic and safety
risks authorized by law and standards, we propose to
measure and evaluate the arduous working conditions during
the use phase to estimate this for the design phase of a new
complex manufacturing systems in an Industry 4.0 context
[14].
A.
Field data and method followed
In the unique safety document of each company, it is
recommended to specify points such as the following:

Risk assessment per workstation.

Safety cards for the workstations.

User safety data card.

Assessment of musculoskeletal disorders for each
workstation.

Noise assessment for each workstation etc.
The question dealt with in this article is to identify and
evaluate, based on good industrial practices, the information
to be fed back in order to integrate the best ergonomic
specifications in design, particularly related to arduous
working conditions. For this, we used the DMAIC method:
Define,
Measure,
Analyze,
Improve
and
Control
the
preventive measures to be taken into account from the design
stage. This method is applied on an existing system with two
objectives, i.e., the first one is improving the design of future
similar systems. The second one is to propose an approach
that meets the conditions of use of such types of systems. For
this, we have followed the following steps:

Define the state of the art of the ergonomics and safety
conditions of all workstations in the workshop.

Choose and implement measurement tools and methods
to measure and manage risk factors.

Look for means and solutions to eliminate or reduce the
risks exceeding the thresholds.

Provide an assessment of the six factors increasing the
arduous working conditions of work presented in the
next section.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

B.
Components of the arduous working conditions
The Labor code stipulates that: it is necessary to
eliminate any exposure of the worker to one or more
occupational
risk
factors
likely
to
leave
permanent,
identifiable and irreversible traces on his/her health. Since
July 1st, 2016, L4121-3-1 [15] entered into force and ten risk
factors were identified as the origin of the increase in
arduous working conditions with their regulatory thresholds.
The 10 risk factors associated with arduous working
conditions are the following:

Manual handling of loads

Painful postures or forced positions

Mechanical vibrations

Activities carried out in a hyperbaric environment
(high pressures)

Hazardous chemicals, including dust and fumes

Extreme temperatures

Noise

Night work and work in successive alternating teams

Repetitive work
These ten factors are classified into three categories:
1)
Marked physical constraints
2)
Aggressive physical environment
3)
Certain working rhythms
In Section 2, the method of integrating to use information
from the first phase of the design is illustrated. In Section 3,
we develop our work on the identification, measurement,
evaluation and integration of arduous working conditions in
design and present the results obtained. In the last section,
we conclude and present some perspectives.
II.
INTEGRATION METHOD TO USE SYSTEM
INFORMATION IN DESIGN PROCESS
Considering the present methodologies' hysteresis and
cost
of
the
Human
Factors
and
Ergonomics
(HF/E)
integration in the design phase, Sun et al. [6] attempt to
develop a time saving, economic and standard approach for
designers to integrate the HF/E from the early design phase.
We use, in this work, the method proposed by Sun et al. in
[6]. Based on the feedback from the field, the final objective
is to demonstrate and analyze the feasibility of the method of
integration to use information from the first phase of the
design.
In [16][17], the authors presented rich state of the art
containing the integration of human and ergonomic factors in
the different phases and design processes. The key to
achieving this integration is to understand the design, whose
main goal is to get a product / system that matches the use
and user requirements from the point of view, ease of use,
user safety, reliability and efficiency in the workstation [18]
[19].
Sun et al. in [20] proposed a systematic method taking
into account related information to use. Sun et al. in [6]
improved the first proposition by integrating the three-level
“function-task-behavior” framework (Figure 1) and based on
the simultaneous design of the product / system and its
manual usage (Product manual).
The safety documents use in industries contain very little
information on the evaluation of use under the conditions
required by European directives. Many users do not rely on
these documents in the day-to-day use of their machine [21].
Figure 1. The Methodology proposed by [20]
In this method, the designer defines the initial product
manual which directs the functional specifications and the
mode of realization of the manual functions according to the
requirements of the use. At this level, the designer defines
the tasks to perform the functions provided for in the
specifications. He distinguishes between the tasks performed
by the product (system/machines) as technical tasks, and the
tasks performed by the user as socio-technical tasks. At the
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

second level, the initial product manual will be detailed to
give a conceptual product manual which is the guideline of
the detailed design. At this level, the designer will propose
the structure that fulfills the technical functions compatible
with the socio-technical (manual) tasks to be performed by
the user.
Finally, at the third level, after having completed the
detailed design of the structure, the designer refines the tasks
performed by the user and those to be carried out by the
technical structure after having completed the detailed design
of the structure. Then, he analyzes the interaction between
user behavior and system behavior in order to check the
overall performance of the system (machine) and its user.
It was noted that the guideline of the method is to avoid
bad interactions between the system (machine) and its user.
Overall, all interactions that cause an ergonomic problem, or
adversely affect the safety and health of the user should be
eliminated.
However, Sun did not present how this product manual
could be defined, served and evaluated on the three levels
listed below, nor from what data and information.
Additionally, the method proposes some steps to analyze
functions in tasks, then to characterize these tasks by
identifying who does it, when, using what tools, on which
part of system, etc. This method is a top-down method that
begins from client, marketing, user and others possible
requirements without any specific focus on how these
requirements could be identified, set out and evaluated to
know if they could be integrated in the design processes.
Here in particular, we considered how to do that for the
arduous working conditions that could appear during the use
of the artifact (system or machine).
III.
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE ARDUOUS WORKING
CONDITIONS FROM THE DESIGN PHASE
First of all, we defined the criteria considered in our
study:

Meet the legal obligation, according to the article
L4121-3-1 of the French Labor Art (Code).

Preserve the health and safety of workers: the need to
assess occupational risks does not only result from the
observation of the large number of work accidents and
occupational diseases, but also results from prevention
of their occurrence from the design phase.

Contribute to improving the performance of the
system: The important consequences from the human
point of view integration from design. This allows
reducing direct and indirect costs.

Improve and strengthen social relations: participatory
prevention approaches make it possible to promote
exchanges between user and designer.
Then, after having gathered the data necessary for a good
approach from a legislative point of view, we identify the
factors of arduous working conditions in the workshop of our
partner company. We have identified existing workstations
similar to the future workstation in which the system subject
to the design will be implanted and installed. On each
workstation,
we
observed
and
analyzed
the
working
conditions in comparison with the work evaluation required
in the unique safety document.

Only the workstation operator has knowledge of the
actual work. His/her active participation is the main key
to the success of our process.

Observation of workstations and especially dialogue
with
operators
is,
therefore,
essential
to
extract
information about their manner to use the system.

These make it possible to consider the actual work of
the operators, to visualize, to objectify and to assess the
risks of arduous working conditions.

In spite of standards application, the significant and
intolerant risks presented in Table 1 were identified.
In order to respect the confidentiality imposed by the partner
company, only two items are considered in Table 1.
TABLE I.
IDENTIFIED RISKS
Significant Risks
Raw Material
Flow
Thermal environment
Noise
Energy
Fire explosions
Contact with other users
Awkward postures
Driving equipment
Mechanical Vibration
Manual handling
Milling
Workshop
Noise
Awkward postures
Manual handling
Working Organization
External intervention
Mechanical vibrations
Hazardous chemical material
In comparison with the arduous working condition
factors, the following risks are selected. In the following, we
limit our observations to the factors related to the arduous
working conditions that appeared in 2016. In the partner
company only, the following factors were identified. The
other factors do not exist in this business. For example, there
is only one work shift and no night shift.
TABLE II.
RISKS RELATED TO ARDUOUS WORKING CONDITIONS
Significant Risks
Raw Material
Flow
Noise
Awkward postures
Mechanical Vibration
Manual handling
Milling
Workshop
Noise
Awkward postures
Manual handling
Mechanical vibrations
Hazardous chemical product
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

A.
Evaluation of arduous working conditions factor during
raw material flow:
The raw material flow is used to receive, store and debit
material either for subcontractors or for internal production
orders. The following arduous working conditions factors are
evaluated:
1)
Noise: The sources of noise are saws and the machine
that manufactures perforating blades. Personal protective
equipment used to reduce exposure to noise is earplugs.
2)
Awkward postures: Presence when pushing material
onto the conveyor because it is very high in relation to the
user.
3)
Mechanical vibration: Exposure to vibration comes
from the manual saw, but rarely comes into contact while
cutting operation.
4)
Manual handling: When transporting the material to
a shipping pallet or to the saw, the operator has to push the
long rods of material onto the forklift which is not very
suitable because a lot of effort is needed to move the
materials. For pushing the material onto the conveyor, this
is very difficult due to the poor condition of the conveyor.
B.
Evaluation of arduous working conditions factor in
milling workshop:
In the milling workshop we observed certain factors
identical to those observed in the raw material flow, but
which do not have the same origins and their evaluations are
different:
1)
Noise:
The
combination
of
running
machines
presents a high exposure, to the point of raising one’s voice
to speak with a person a meter away. Personal protective
equipment, ear plugs, are present.
2)
Awkward postures: The material is stored on trolleys
at a height close to the ground. The operator must bend to
pick up the parts and certain measuring tools are placed at a
height which implies restrictive positions.
3)
Manual handling: Loads are carried regularly from
the trolley to the workstation. For very heavy parts, an
electric bridge is available to move them. Handling is also
present when changing tools.
4)
Mechanical Vibrations: The sources of vibration to
which the operator may be exposed are all the machines that
operate in the workshops.
5)
Hazardous chemical agents: The products to which
operators are most exposed are cutting oils and some
grinding glues that will be identified later.
IV.
ASSESSMENT OF RISKS RELATED TO ARDUOUSNESS
In order to be able to assess the arduous working
conditions by factors, it is necessary to put in place some
tools to collect the data and compare it with the exposure
thresholds defined by the standards. Next, we detail the
evaluation carried out for each factor.
A.
Awkward postures
Awkward or strenuous postures are defined as forced
positions of the joints of the human body. When there are
situations with duration and intensity there is a risk of
arduousness. We meaasured the different postions illustraited
in Figure 2 and defined by standards as awkward postures.
Figure 2.
Different positions evaulated in Milling workshop
For each task done by the operator on each machine, we
applied the following stepes

Identified the angles of the position that exceeds the
thresholds allowed by standards.

Then, we timed the time of each task done in an
awkword posture. These represent approximately
15% of the time spent on to do the machine setting-
up tasks.

For each awkward posture, we gave a grade as
indicated in Figure 2.

Evaluate the exposition time per year as a function
of time and note.
Unfortunately,
our
industrial
partner
refused
to
communicate the final results of this evaluation.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

B.
Noise evaluation
We should remember that the exposure threshold is set
by standards at 81 decibels (A) over a reference period of 8
hours, either a number of 120 "shocks" per year at 135
decibels (C). Article R. 4431-2 of the Labor Code prohibits
companies from exposing employees to more than 87 dB
(A). Thus, to analyze and diagnose exposure to arduous
working conditions, a flowchart makes it possible to exclude
or not the factor for each position (Figure 3).
Figure 3.
Flowchart for the noise factor
As soon as the environment is observed to be noisy,
the sound intensity must be quantified. Here, we decided
to find out about personal exposure to noise. To assess the
noise and
collect the
necessary data,
we
used
an
Exposimeter to measure the intensity perceived by the
operator. It is more accurate for measuring personal
exposure to noise as operators move around a lot. It is
necessary to map the entire production workshop to have
usable data over time if there is no change in the location
of the workstations.
C.
Evaluation of mechanical vibrations
The 2016 reform requires cumulating the levels of
vibration transmitted to the hands and arms with those
transmitted to the whole body and comparing it to a
threshold of 450 hours per year.
After identifying the positions exposed to vibrations,
we quickly noticed that most machines exceed the
threshold of 2.5 m / s² for vibrations felt in the hands and
arms, where the Milling presents the greatest exposure
compared to the other workstations. To assess this factor,
we followed the same process by identifying the positions
that cause vibrations. Then, it was necessary to determine
the exposure times and compare the result with the
exposure thresholds.
We noted the duration of exposure by timing the tasks
performed by the different operators. The measurements
are taken over a normal working week (not too busy and
without layoffs). The maximum duration per day is 23
minutes which represents 15% of the time on a working
time of 8:30 am. The overall duration of use of some
machines does not exceed the thresholds per person
exposed because several operators use it.
TABLE III. OVERALL DURATION OF USE
In hours
Warehouse
Trolley
Assembly
Trolley
Milling
Averages / Day
1.26
0.18
0.16
Provisional
accumulation/Year
285.51
39,54
35.12
Max
1.90
0,53
0.31
Min
0.50
0.01
0.00
D.
Evaluate hazardous chemical products
The chemical risk assessment required a great deal of
investigation with the search for a way to assess and
standardize an approach with chemical products. The
assessment is based on the ND 2233 method and is a
common language for doctors, CARSAT, and the labor
inspectorate. The steps followed for the assessment of this
factor are as follows:
1)
Inventory of used chemical products and their
location in workshops, workstations and tasks.
a) List all the products in the chosen software with
their hazard statements.
b) Investigate their use by operators.
2)
Comparison with ERP data to know the quantities
used and ordered of each item codes.
3)
Select the chemical products containing the hazard
statements falling under the regulations on arduous
working conditions.
4)
Evaluate the duration of exposure for the products
concerned and compare them to the exposure thresholds.
Arduous
Working in noising environment
Yes
No
Not Arduous
Not Arduous
Sound pressure level ≥ 130 dB (C) 
Yes
No
At least 120 per year
Yes
No
Arduous
Noise exposure level ≥ 81 dB (A) 
Yes
No
At least 600 hours per year
Yes
No
Not Arduous
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

The products concerned are the products labelled as
dangerous chemical, or emitted in the processes. To
identify the products named to be eligible for the
arduousness, we proceeded by funnel effect. The products
with the terms of arduousness are identified and the
inventory
and
classification
by
workstation
and
by
machine made it possible to locate them.
Once
the
affected
products
were
identified,
we
quantified the duration of exposure for each operator
(times of use, duration and frequency of each exposure).
By timing the operators working, we obtained an exposure
time greater than the regulatory threshold of 150 hours /
year. Products exceeding the thresholds are identified.
These products are used for several tasks which multiply
the total exposure time.
We obtain the following exposure times per operator
(Table IV):
TABLE IV. EXPOSURE TIME TO CHEMICALS PRODUCT
Exposure Hour/Year
Product 1
125.32
Product 2
323.76
Product 3
131.95
For products exceeding the thresholds, risk prevention
means
should
be
considered.
Personal
protective
equipment is mandatory so that the operator is the least
exposed. This includes a diving suit and a specific suit. For
each of these products, exposure conditions must be
reduced and prevention improved by redesigning systems
in avoiding adding doors or boxing the machine which
decrease
the
visibility
and
the
accessibility
of
the
operators. In Figure 4, we show an extract of our results
(not clearly shown due to the confidentiality of data).
Figure 4.
An extract of the evaluation of chimical factor
V.
DISCUSSION
Our objective was to identify, through this field study,
the data, parameters, factors, etc. necessary to take into
account the arduous working conditions from the design
phase. The data collected during this field study is richer
than the data considered in the method proposed by Sun et
al. in 2018. Indeed, Sun’s method focused on the data for
tasks to be done by users that 1) has been deemed
necessary to define how the functions requested by the
customer will be carried out and 2) those necessary for a
safe use of the system. He took into account the factors:
the duration of the task, who does the task (machine or
operator), the order of the operating procedures as well as
the structure of the task (a task can be broken down into
sub-tasks, down to an elementary level).
On the other hand, the field data made it possible to
establish the need to know the nature of the materials
treated (chemical, wood, metals, etc.). But also, we were
able to establish the work organization (a task that can be
carried out by a single operator, it can be distributed over
several operators and in several time frames).
Also, the thresholds imposed by the legislations are not
sufficiently considered in the method employed by Sun.
Indeed, the concepts of risk assessment are based on the
product of a risk indicator calculated as a function of
hazardous
phenomena,
exposure
time,
frequency
of
exposure and severity [22].
Once these safety parameters are identified, they have
to be taken into account by the designer. Some methods
could be used, like the ones proposed in [23] and [24], on
the integration of safety user parameters in the design
process. In both these works, the authors proposed a
framework to consider standard data about user safety and
some
classical
known
parameters
about
hazardous
situation, but not about Arduous Working Conditions.
Taking our results in consideration in the design
process
could
influence
the
designer
decision.
For
example, instead of trying to change the cheap technical
solution that fulfills the function, but has very high level of
vibration by another one (which may be more expensive,
but cause less vibration), the designer could keep the first
solution too. He/she can either automate some of the
manual tasks to avoid or minimize human intervention
and, therefore, minimize exposure time. Or he/she could
specify in the documents provided to the user client that it
is necessary to avoid having a single operator working on
this machine all the time or for longtime and that it would
be good to alternate two operators during the work time.
Our industrial partner is a constructor of paper
machines. We did our analysis for them at a workshop of
one of their clients. Their objective was to optimize the
performance of their artefact in improving not only the
user safety by reducing the dangerous conditions and
dangerous zones in very short term (operating term) [24],
but also, by considering the very long-term dangerous
factors, like those of arduous working conditions. Our
work helped them evaluate these factors for the next
generation of machines.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
We can see that the integration of human factors in the
design of products, machines, systems has become more
and more important in order to improve the final
performance of the designed system. Many proposed
methods
are
constantly
improving
to
comply
with
regulations, but also go further than standards. In this
article, we first defined the framework of this work by
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

assessing the arduous working conditions to comply with
the labor code in order to be able to estimate it from the
design phase. For this, we based the work on a method
proposed in the literature to determine the data to be
sought after in the field at the user workshop and
potentially integrate it in the design of future similar
systems. These works have shown that the method takes
into account most technical and use data. However, we did
not find in literature any method considering the data
concerning
the
arduous
working
conditions and,
in
particular, the factors of which have recently changed. So,
we identified and evaluated
some arduous working
conditions factors in existing systems. Then, we proposed
to the designer to integrate them in his/her design process
and refine his/her decisions and choices. We found that
considering the materials used and the organization of
work in the design is possible and makes compliance with
standards easier. In future work, we will propose an
evaluation of the identified relevant parameters. Also,
other areas will be analyzed in other contexts of use to
propose a global and more complete approach in order to
provide designers with a method considering all field data
related to use conditions, but also propose a method to
integrate the identified parameters into the design process.
REFERENCES
[1]
Law,
“Labor
Code.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/codes/article_lc/LEGIA
RTI000023032092/2021-03-11/.
[2]
A.
Baurin
and
J.
Hindriks,
“Job
penibility:
measurements
and
policy
discussions.”
Université
Catholique de Louvain, 2018, [Online]. Available:
https://dial.uclouvain.be/memoire/ucl/en/object/thesis%
3A14438/datastream/PDF_01/view.
[3]
G.
Pahl
and
W.
Beitz,
“Engineering
design:
a
systematic approach (2d) Springer-Verlag.” London,
1996.
[4]
W. B. Rouse and W. J. Cody, “On the design of man-
machine systems Principles, practices and prospects,”
Automatica, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 227–238, 1988.
[5]
D. Zhou, J. Chen, C. Lv, and Q. Cao, “A method for
integrating ergonomics analysis into maintainability
design in a virtual environment,” Int. J. Ind. Ergon.,
vol. 54, pp. 154–163, 2016.
[6]
X. Sun, R. Houssin, J. Renaud, and M. Gardoni,
“Towards a human factors and ergonomics integration
framework in the early product design phase: Function-
Task-Behaviour,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 7543, pp. 1–
13, 2018, doi: 10.1080/00207543.2018.1437287.
[7]
NF EN ISO 12100 and CEN, “Safety of machinery:
General principles for design, Risk assessment and risk
reduction,” Bruxelles, p. 93p, 2010.
[8]
A. C. Falck and M. Rosenqvist, “What are the obstacles
and needs of proactive ergonomics measures at early
product development stages?–An interview study in
five Swedish companies,” Int. J. Ind. Ergon., vol. 42,
no. 5, pp. 406–415, 2012.
[9]
D. E. 2006/42/CE, “Directive 2006/42/CE : 9.6.2006, 
Official Journal of the European Union, L157/24,
Directive 2006/42/EC of the european parliament and
of the council of 17 may 2006.” .
[10]
J. Hoyos-Ruiz, J. F. Martínez-Cadavid, G. Osorio-
Gómez, and R. Mejía-Gutiérrez, “Implementation of
ergonomic aspects throughout the engineering design
process:
human-artefact-context
analysis,”
Int.
J.
Interact. Des. Manuf., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 263–277,
2017.
[11]
R. Ghemraoui, L. Mathieu, and N. Tricot, “Design
method for systematic safety integration,” CIRP Ann.,
vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 161–164, 2009.
[12]
M. Remiel , P. Martin, B. Daille-Lefevre, A. Etienne, J.
Marsot,
and
A.
Siadat,
“Safety
of
machinery:
requirement specification based on functional need and
work situations analysis,” 2017.
[13]
N. de Galvez, J. Marsot, P. Martin, A. Siadat, and A.
Etienne,
“EZID:
A
new
approach
to
hazard
identification during the design process by analysing
energy transfers,” Saf. Sci., vol. 95, pp. 1–14, 2017.
[14]
P. Martin et al., “New issues for workers safety in the
factory of the future,” in Advances on Mechanics,
Design Engineering and Manufacturing II, Springer,
2019, pp. 402–411.
[15]
Legifrance,
“Laborcode.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/codes/article_lc/LEGIA
RTI000029336807/2021-04-16/.
[16]
H. Sun, R. Houssin, J. Renaud, and M. Gardoni, “A
review of methodologies for integrating human factors
and ergonomics in engineering design,” Int. J. Prod.
Res., vol. 57, no. 15–16, pp. 4961–4976, 2019.
[17]
L. Sadeghi, J. Y. Dantan, A. Siadat, and J. Marsot,
“Design for human safety in manufacturing systems:
applications of design theories, methodologies, tools
and techniques,” J. Eng. Des., vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 844–
877, 2016, doi: 10.1080/09544828.2016.1235262.
[18]
D.
McRuer,
“Human
dynamics
in
man-machine
systems,” Automatica, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 237–253,
1980.
[19]
J. Redström, “Towards user design? On the shift from
object to user as the subject of design,” Des. Stud., vol.
27, no. 2, pp. 123–139, 2006.
[20]
H. Sun, R. Houssin, M. Gardoni, and F. de Bauvrond,
“Integration of user behaviour and product behaviour
during the design phase: Software for behavioural
design approach,” Int. J. Ind. Ergon., vol. 43, no. 1, pp.
100–114, 2013.
[21]
D. A. Norman, The psychology of everyday things.
Basic books, 1988.
[22]
R. Houssin and M. Gardoni, “Software framework for
the approach: computer aided Safety integration in
design process (CASID),” J. Adv. Manuf. Syst., vol. 8,
no. 01, pp. 27–45, 2009.
[23]
R. Hasan, A. Bernard, J. Ciccotelli, and P. Martin,.
"Integrating safety into the design process: elements
and concepts relative to the working situation." Safety
science., 41(2-3), 155-179 (2003).
[24]
R. Houssin, A. Bernard, P. Martin, G. Ris, and F.
Cherrier, “Information system based on a working
situation
model
for
a
new
design
approach
in
concurrent engineering,” J. Eng. Des., vol. 17, no. 1,
pp.
35–54,
2006,
[Online].
Available:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09544820
500276048#.VEkqLRbXy8w.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-840-2
PESARO 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

