Supporting Risk-Based Design by Computational Synthesis 
 
 
 
Mohammad Rajabalinejad, Robert Velten, Hans Tragter  
Department of Design, Production and Management 
Faculty of Engineering Technology, University of Twente, the Netherlands 
Email: M.Rajabalinejad@utwente.nl, R.h.e.velten@student.utwente.nl, H.Tragter@utwente.nl  
 
 
Abstract— Risk-based design often starts when the design 
details are available. Commonly used engineering tools focus 
on risk assessment for already-detailed designs. This study 
suggests using automated solutions for early design phases 
where efficient exploration of design space can lead to solutions 
that offer better performances with less risk. The paper states 
the problem, relevant works, and summarizes the steps taken 
in order to generate solutions for a product complicated to 
model. A real-world example application is presented. 
Keywords- risk-based design; automation; computational 
synthesis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Exploration of design space in early design phases is 
valuable for the project but is expensive. The importance of 
early design phases is discussed in different literatures [1, 2], 
yet there are other performance metrics forcing design 
engineers to assign a certain amount of resources to this 
phase.  
The normal design phase starts with a concept which will 
be embodied and detailed later on.  Since this process is time 
consuming and given the available resources, this often leads 
to limited choices for designers [3]. To overcome this 
limitation, the paper suggests using a detailed model in early 
design phases where automation provides many choices for 
the designer. From this palette of possibilities he or she can 
explore the design space easily and move toward the choices 
that are closer to the required performances and afford less 
risk. 
 
A. Risk-based design 
Risk is defined as multiplication of probability of failure 
and its consequence. In order to reduce risk, the probability 
of failure has to be small. Risk-based design is a promising 
approach for handling of complex problems [4, 5].  
A simple search on google scholar for “risk-based 
design” finds more than 2800 articles or books. Yet risk 
based approach is not limited to design. There are literature 
works for example about risk-based reliability analysis, risk-
based evaluation of design criteria, or risk-based decision 
making processes. 
The deterministic approach in design does not fully 
match the expectations for reliability of products or systems 
and 
reveals 
shortcomings 
for 
future 
development. 
Limitations of deterministic approaches e.g. the use of safety 
factors have been discussed for example in [2]. In 
deterministic approach, safety factors are used to incorporate 
uncertainty, whereas risk-based design methodology uses 
probability 
distributions 
for 
risk 
estimation. 
The 
deterministic approach also requires a full scale prototype to 
be built and tested under working conditions. This, however, 
is not always a possibility.  
In risk-based design process, the probability of failure is 
used to capture the uncertainties in the course of design 
process, often providing a more appropriate understanding of 
the problem. Furthermore, it can be utilized to make the 
design process more proactive and prepare for unexpected 
failures [2]. Risk-based design has been actively used in 
different industries producing standard methods for 
uncertainty measurement, risk assessment and management 
[6]. In many practices, however, this has been limited to 
realization of failure modes determined by designers or 
engineers. This is often possible only after having a detailed 
design which makes it costly and inefficient to come back 
and apply principal changes.  
This research moves toward automation of risk-based 
design process. Integration of risk-based design with 
automation creates the advantages of both approaches 
resulting in more efficiency and robustness. And the results 
are promising, as discussed through the paper. Yet, to 
achieve its full potential, insight and experience involving 
the methodology need to be acquired. This has led to the 
following research question: ”What are the key performances 
to achieve for design of a specific product?”. 
The methodology will be tested on a case by trying to 
find the best suited solution for this case. The automated part 
of the methodology uses a generic synthesis tool customised 
by the authors. The case needs to be translated into a model, 
which can be used in a computational design synthesis tool. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II and III respectively explain the problem and 
method. Section IV presents an example application, and 
Section V concludes the paper.  
 
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
The lengthy process of early design makes the risk-based 
design a passive process that interferes less little with the 
early choices, when the designers have the most freedom to 
choose and change. Therefore, the problem is that treatment 
of risk during the last design phases causes designers to be 
reluctant to major changes. In this paper, we explore possible 
solutions to overcome this issue.   
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

III. 
THE METHOD 
In order to design for risk effectively, one needs to bring 
the risk next to the other performance indicators considered 
by designers in early design. This will shorten the design 
process, and effectively make risk as one of the performance 
indicators through the design process. 
 
IV. 
EXAMPLE APPLICATION 
The example application presented here is an already 
existing pressure sensor produced by company STA (pseudo-
name, the actual company name is not disclosed). The sensor 
works at a maximum diesel pressure of 400 MPa and 
measures the pressure of the injected fuel in an internal 
combustion engine (see Figure 1).  
The sensor has screw-thread on the outside of the 
housing for screwing it in the common rail. Pressure of the 
diesel causes the topside to deform together with the attached 
strain gauges. The strain gauges provide the resulting 
information instantaneous to the engine’s control unit 
(ECU). Not providing this information will lead to 
unforeseen and costly failures. Important part of the case will 
be the potential failure of the walls and the top of the topside 
of the sensor. When failing, diesel could start leaking and 
combust within the engine bay. This would result in even 
higher costs or even worse. For this part, risk-based design 
will be implemented.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. The pressure sensor placed within the system of the engine. 
 
A. Downsized model 
After considering the whole sensor, it became clear that 
all the electronic parts of the sensor could be discarded in the 
design process, as well as the bottom standardized part of the 
sensor. These parts where not important in the design process 
of the sensor, because these parts where similar for all types 
of sensors. This resulted in neglecting most of the parameters 
for the bottom of the sensor and leaving only the topside of 
the sensor (see Figure 2).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Top (half) of the sensor known as the total sensor 
 
 
The topside of the sensor holds the key performances, 
risks and parameters to this design (see Figure 3). The 
optimal radius of the inside corners are already known at 
STA and thus will be used due to the fact that including them 
would overcomplicate the model (0.1 mm inside and 0.4 mm 
outside). For the same reason pre tensions from tightening 
the sensor will be excluded.   
 
 
 
Figure 3. Cross section of the total sensor with the indicated parts (capital 
letters) for the equation of production cost 
 
 
B. Model 
The variable input parameters, which describe the 
simplified model (used for the sake of quick calculations), 
will be divided into dimensions and material parameters (see 
Table 1). Four ranges of different materials are used: 
Aluminium, 42CrMo4 steel, 17-4PH stainless steel and 
PTFE.  
Having these parameters, one can calculate the weight, 
material price, inside volumes and production cost using the 
synthesis tool. Models have been constructed by the use of 
equations extracted from the disk and plate theory. For the 
ease of calculations, round disk/tube situations have been 
modeled to obtain the stress and deflection equations for the 
walls and topside. These models have been validated by a 
precise finite element model implemented in ANSYS 
software (www.ansys.com) given the accepted tolerance 
level of 10% (see Figure 4).  
 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

 
 
TABLE 1. PARAMETERS OF THE DIMENSIONS AND MATERIALS 
 
Dimensions 
Parameter 
in [mm] 
Radius inside (F) 
Rinside        [2, 4] 
Length walls (E) 
Lwalls          [3, 7] 
Length bottom sensor (B) 
Lbottom       [10, 20] 
Length depth gap (A) 
Lgap            [0, 3] 
Thinkness walls (D) 
Twalls          [1, 4] 
Thinkness topside (C) 
Ttopside        [0.5, 3] 
Material parameters 
Name/unit 
Name 
String 
Young's modulus 
E [Mpa] 
Poisson ratio 
v [-] 
Density 
Den [kg/mm³] 
Price 
P [€/kg] 
StressMax 
σmax [N/mm²] 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Deflection in the fixed round disk scenario (1,72e-2mm) 
 
 
To verify the equations and have certain accuracy in the 
solutions, the equations had to be within a maximum range 
of 15% of the finite element model. It became clear that the 
round corners had a positive influence on the deflection on 
the topside. An adjustment had to be made combining the 
equation for a fixed round plate with 20% of the equation of 
a hinged round plate (read topside). All other equations were 
within their maximum scope. 
  
C. Results 
The model was implemented in the computational 
synthesis tool resulting in a set of possible solutions with 
their corresponding input parameters and performances. Two 
example set of solutions are given in Table 2. 
 
TABLE 2. TWO SOLUTIONS OF THE MODEL (WITH THEIR INPUT 
PARAMETERS AND PERFORMANCES) GIVEN FOR TWO 
DIFFERENT MATERIALS 
 
Input parameters [mm] 
42CrMo4 
17-4PH 
Rinside  
2,44 
2,3 
Lwalls 
5,17 
4,43 
Lbottom 
16,76 
12,83 
Lgap 
0,76 
2,75 
Twalls 
3,98 
2,86 
Ttopside 
2,45 
1,08 
Performances 
  
Volume 1 [mm³] 
96,7 
73,7 
Volume 2 [mm³] 
409,8 
287,3 
Productioncost [$] 
0,92 
0,85 
Weight [kg] 
0,0102 
0,0002 
Price [€] 
0,00023 
0,00078 
Deflection [mm] 
0,0014 
0,0129 
Stress topside [N/mm²] 
547,76 
623,04 
Stress walls [N/mm²] 
263,29 
1215,18 
 
 
Both PTFE and Aluminium had no possible solution, 
within the range of input parameters, due to reaching the 
stress limit for these materials (as expected).  To be able to 
find the most appropriate solutions a trade-off needs to be 
made between different performances and input parameters. 
 We observed that the importance of a clear 
understanding of the key performances is significant. It is 
important to notice that the approach does not necessarily 
lead to the optimum solution, yet it helps designers to 
compare different possible choices and make we-informed 
choices 
with 
regard 
to 
different 
parameters 
and 
performances.  
The approach, therefore, supports designers to make 
better trade-offs by for example choosing the more 
appropriate material, thickness, etc.. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Automation of risk based design process and exploration 
of different solutions in early design phases provide further 
insights for designers and helps choose more appropriate 
solutions with regards to risk. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

To make well-informed choices and better trade-offs, a 
good understanding of key performance and key parameters 
is fundamental. In addition, a model with the right amount of 
information and detail is necessary. To properly utilize this 
process, a designer should be able to realize the key 
parameters and their relationship with the desire performance 
indicators e.g. risk. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
G. Pahl, W. Beitz, J. Feldhusen, and K.-H. Grote, Engineering 
Design A Systemmatic Approach. Springer, 2007. 
[2] 
B. S. Blanchard, W. J. Fabrycky, and W. J. Fabrycky, Systems 
engineering and analysis. Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1990. 
[3] 
J. M. J. Becker, "From how much to how many, Managing 
Complexity in Routine Design Automation," PhD, Twente, 
2010. 
[4] 
J. Faulin, A. A. Juan, S. Martorell, and J.-E. Ramírez-Márquez, 
"Simulation Methods for Reliability and Availability of 
Complex Systems," (Reliability Engineering. 2010, p.^pp. 
Pages. 
[5] 
M. Rajabalinejad, "Modelling and Prioritization of System 
Risks in Early Project Phases," International Journal on 
Advances in Telecommunications, vol. 9, no. 3-4, 2016. 
[6] 
BS EN 31010:2010 Risk management - Risk assessment 
techniques, 2010. 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

