An Intelligent System to Enhance Traffic Safety Analysis  
Andreas Gregoriades 
Dept of Computer Science and Engineering 
European University Cyprus, Cyprus 
a.gregoriades@euc.ac.cy 
  
Kyriacos C. Mouskos 
CTL Cyprus Transport and Logistics Ltd 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
mouskoskc@gmail.com 
 
Natalia Ruiz-Juri 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Austin, Texas, USA 
natiruizjuri@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Neville Parker 
Civil Engineering, CCNY-CUNY 
Director CUNY ITS 
New York, NY, USA 
parker@utrc2.org 
 
Ismini Hadjilambrou 
CTL Cyprus Transport and Logistics Ltd 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
topoismini@gmail.com 
 
Aneesh Krishna 
Dept of Computing 
Daculty of Science & Engineering 
Curtin University of Technology, Australia 
a.krishna@curtin.edu.au 
Abstract. Traffic phenomena are characterized by complexity 
and uncertainty, hence require sophisticated information 
management to identify patterns relevant to safety. Traffic 
information systems have emerged with the aim to ease traffic 
congestion and improve road safety. However, assessment of 
traffic safety and congestion requires significant amount of 
data which in most cases is not available. This work illustrates 
an approach that aims to alleviate this problem through the 
integration of two mature technologies namely, simulation-
based Dynamic Traffic Assignment (DTA) and Bayesian Belief 
Networks (BBN). The former generates traffic information 
that is utilised by a Bayesian engine to quantify accident risk. 
Dynamic compilation of accident risks is used to gives rise to 
overall traffic safety. Preliminary results from this research 
have been validated. 
 
Keywords - Traffic Safety; Dynamic Traffic Assignment; 
Bayesian Belief Networks. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
It is well recognized that traffic accidents contribute 
substantially to urban congestion and traffic safety. Even a 
minor accident can cause significant traffic congestion in 
directly impacted areas which can cause safety issues to the 
overall road network due to secondary crashes as a result of 
rerouting [3].  Therefore, predicting traffic dynamics has 
always been an important issue in road safety. However, 
predicting the behavior of a road network under extreme 
conditions using historical records is a complex task. This 
work addresses this issue through the development of a 
novel Intelligent Traffic Information System that leverages 
the capabilities of two mature methodologies namely 
simulation-based Dynamic Traffic Assignment (DTA) [9] 
and Bayesian Belief Networks (BBN) [1]. The former is 
widely used in transportation planning and operations to 
predict drivers’ decisions (where and when to travel on the 
road network), while the latter is powerful uncertainty 
modelling technique. Both technologies gained significant 
acceptance with the invention of powerful computational 
algorithms that enabled their exploitation. 
Simulation-based 
DTA 
models 
depart 
from 
the 
traditional static analysis of traffic phenomena that employ 
analytic approaches to represent traffic conditions. DTA use 
traffic simulation to replicate the complex traffic flow 
dynamics especially for signalized systems where the 
vehicle and signal interactions are difficult to model 
analytically. This enables dynamic control and management 
systems to anticipate problems before they occur rather than 
simply reacting to existing conditions. The main output of 
DTA is the dynamic user equilibrium paths of each Origin-
Destination (OD) pair [3]. These paths define the optimum 
route on the network that each vehicle will follow given its 
origin and destination.  
BBN are ideal for modelling problems that are 
characterised by complexity, uncertainty and incomplete 
information. They have been used extensively in reliability 
engineering, risk management and decision support. In our 
case BBN are used to model and assess accident risk using 
dynamic and static transportation information.  
The motivation of this work resides to the fact that 
current traffic information systems use multi-state safety 
databases that contain crash, roadway inventory, and traffic 
volume data. These are analysed to identify safety issues 
and evaluate the effectiveness of accident countermeasures. 
The main limitation of these systems is their retrospective 
approach. 
Effective 
safety 
management 
requires 
a 
prospective viewpoint. The proposed method combines 
dynamic modelling of traffic conditions with knowledge-
based accident prediction to leverage the benefits of 
42
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

computational intelligence in road safety and in this way 
provide forecasts of traffic safety. The paper illustrates the 
integration of  BBN accident risk technique with the VISTA 
(Visual Interactive Systems for Transport Algorithms) 
simulated DTA framework. The method is applied to study 
the future behaviour of a road network in Cyprus.  
The paper is organised as follows. Next section gives an 
overview of the literature. This is followed by the 
methodology. Subsequent sections concentrate on data pre-
processing and BBN development. The integration of 
VISTA with the BBN along with the results that emerge 
from the amalgamation of the two technologies is described 
next. The paper finishes with the conclusions section.  
 
II. RELATED WORK 
Traffic 
information 
systems 
mainly 
provide 
retrospective analysis of traffic safety using historical data 
[2] due to, coverage, cost and real-time issues of traditional 
sensor-based schemes to traffic data collection. To escape 
from this problem simulation based traffic estimation 
systems emerged.  The DTA simulation method employed 
herein constitute the state of the art in traffic forecasting. 
The two DTA approaches commonly used to emulate the 
path choice behavior of drivers are dynamic assignment en-
route and dynamic equilibrium assignment. The former 
models behavioral rules that determine how drivers react to 
information received en-route while the latter only pre-trip 
path choices are considered and the goal is to minimize each 
driver’s travel time by finding optimal or sub optimal paths 
[5]. This work is based on  latter approach. Alternative 
simulation methodologies such as CORSIM, VISSIM, 
PARAMICS, WATSIM, AIMSUN do not have a true 
traveler behavior routing component [10]. They instead 
move traffic by splitting it probabilistically at every 
intersection. Thus the above-mentioned simulation models 
cannot be used to accurately predict traffic flow of each 
road section. 
Related accident prediction approaches such as the one 
employed by Simoncic [6] utilise probabilistic modelling 
through BBNs. Their work illustrates the application of 
BBN to model road accidents and accordingly make 
inferences for accident analysis. The main limitation of this 
effort is that it concentrates solidly on the development of 
the BBN model without providing any substantial evidence 
of its performance. Work by Hu et al. [7] also uses a 
probabilistic approach to predicting road accidents through 
intelligent surveillance of vehicle kinematics; however, their 
method does not address the causal aspects that lead to 
observed behaviours and hence cannot be easily generalised. 
State-of-the-art tools in accident prediction, such as 
SafeNET 2 (Software for Accident Frequency Estimation 
for Networks), use traffic flows and geometric information 
to assess accident risk [8]. However, unlike our method, 
SafeNET 2 does not address the dynamic aspects of road 
networks using simulation. Hence, their traffic flow 
estimates are generic which in effect could lead in 
inaccurate conclusions. 
III. METHODOLOGY AND RATIONALE 
The traffic safety assessment system proposed herein is 
the amalgamation of probabilistic risk assessment [1] with 
mesoscopic traffic simulation [10]. The need for this 
integration boils down to the limitations of traditional traffic 
information systems that mainly concentrate of data 
warehousing. The methodology proposed utilises data marts 
to generate projections of future system behaviour. To that 
end, intelligent information management techniques have 
been employed to distil knowledge necessary for the 
development of models that enable the prospective analysis 
of system behaviour. The two models that emerged from 
this process are the accident risk assessment model and the 
traffic simulation model. The accident risk assessment 
employed is causality-based and uses a technique popular in 
the AI domain, namely, BBN. BBNs gained widespread 
acceptance 
with 
the 
introduction 
of 
computational 
algorithms that enabled their exploitation by Pearl [1]. 
BBNs are causal networks based on the concept of Bayesian 
probability, and provide a language and calculus for 
reasoning under uncertainty. A BBN in essence is a directed 
graph. It consists of vertices or nodes and directed edges 
(arrows). Each edge points from parent node to child node. 
In a belief network each node is used to represent a random 
variable, and each directed edge represents an immediate 
dependence or direct influence. Inference is achieved by 
belief propagation through the models topology.BBN 
technology is used to model how traffic and infrastructural 
factors influence accident risk. The second component of 
the approach is a road traffic simulator based on DTA. DTA 
evolved rabidly over the past two decades. This 
advancement has been fueled by the needs of application 
domains ranging from real-time operations to long term 
planning. DTA models constitute a natural progression in 
transportation [3] that evolved from static assignment 
approaches that assume that traffic flow is static and 
independent of time. One of the main features of DTA 
models is the dynamic analysis of road networks using time-
varying traffic demands. DTA models effectively the 
complex interactions between supply and demand in a 
transport network. As a result, they capture the spatio-
temporal trajectories (from origin to destination) of every 
vehicle and in return mimic in real-time the basic driver 
behaviors of road users. This constitutes a great advantage 
over traditional models that do not track the movement of 
individual vehicles but instead split traffic at intersections 
[3]. The DTA model is used in VISTA through the Dynamic 
User Equilibrium (DUE) model [4]. DUE assumes that no 
user can improve his/her travel time by changing their travel 
paths or by altering their departure or arrival times. DTA 
methods are divided into two groups the analytical and the 
simulation-based models. The former uses mathematical 
techniques to solve traffic problems while the latter 
43
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

represents problems as a set of interrelated components that 
dynamically change. The use of DTA model enhances the 
limitations of existing practices by providing a consistent 
way of producing estimates of traffic flow conditions of 
road networks using limited information from traffic flow 
detectors. Moreover, it produces timely and complete traffic 
volume estimates for all sections of a road network and 
hence, can be used to assess accident risk using time varying 
conditions. The integration of BBN with VISTA in the 
proposed traffic information system enables the dynamic 
assessment of accident risk using simulated traffic 
conditions and prior knowledge embedded in the BBN. A 
pilot study conducted with the system aimed to assess the 
safety performance of the Nicosia road network in Cyprus 
and to investigate how it will behave under different 
scenarios.  
Initially the road traffic model of Nicosia was specified, 
implemented, verified and validated in VISTA. Models in 
VISTA 
are 
represented 
by 
nodes 
connected 
by 
unidirectional links that represent flow of traffic in one 
direction. It is possible to have more than one link between 
two nodes to indicate separate lanes and lane direction. The 
completed VISTA simulation model was integrated with an 
accident risk assessor implemented in Java. The simulator 
provided the risk assessor with the traffic volumes of all 
road sections of the network for every 15 min interval. 
Traffic volumes in combination with infrastructural 
properties of the road network were used by the BBN to 
assess accident risk. Dynamic input to the BBN is provided 
by the DTA simulation on a step by step basis. For the 
development of the BBN topology and the parameterization 
of its prior knowledge, historical road accident data were 
complied. The BBNs accuracy was evaluated cross 
validation technique. 
 
IV. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE.  
The proposed system was developed using the 
component-based software engineering methodology. With 
the initial specification of the system requirements we 
proceeded in the identification of suitable software 
components that matched the initial system requirements. 
These components were subsequently integrated to 
implement parts of the system’s functionality. In particular 
the Bayesian inference engine and the charting components 
were selected after thorough investigation. The glue code 
that enabled components interaction was implemented in 
Java. The architecture of the system is comprised of five 
main components: the BBN accident assessor, the VISTA 
simulator, the data preprocessor, the results analyser and the 
results visualiser, as depicted in Figure 1. The risk assessor 
quantifies accident risk using a Bayesian inference engine 
that utilises a probabilistic model. Input to the BBN assessor 
is categorized into static and dynamic. The former is 
obtained from the VISTA database and the latter is the 
output of the VISTA simulation. Input evidence is pre-
processed before running the BBN model that propagates 
the evidence down the network to produce the posterior 
probability. The integration of the VISTA with the BBN 
model was realised through asynchronous data interchange. 
Inherently, results from the VISTA simulator were 
accumulated in a database along with infrastructural 
information for each road section. The Risk Assessor 
component accesses the traffic flow and infrastructure 
records from the database and accordingly propagates the 
input evidence down the BBN network to produce the 
posterior probability for accident risk.  
To establish communication between VISTA and the 
risk assessor it was imperative to pre-process VISTA’s 
output data prior to being utilised by the BBN of the risk 
assessor. Specifically, VISTA variables are continuous by 
nature, while the BBN model uses categorical/discrete 
variables. Hence, it was necessary to discretise the output 
from VISTA prior to instantiating the BBN model. For the 
discretisation process it was necessary to refer to domain 
experts that specified the cut-off values for each variable. 
Specifically, for traffic volume three states were defined, 
namely, low, average and high. The first corresponding to 
less than 100 vehicles per 15 time interval, the second to 
less than 350 and the last to greater than 350.  
BBN Engine
Accident Risk 
Assessor
Data Pre-processor
Visualiser
Results Analyser
Accident Risk 
Analyser
DTA Simulator
Geospatia editor
Simulation Model
GUI
Data Management
Geospatial data
Simulation Results
Infrastructural Data
VISTA
 
 
BBN
Figure 1. The System architecture 
V. DATA COLLECTION AND PRE-PROCESSING 
The development of the BBN required the specification 
of the topology and the parameterisation of its prior 
knowledge in conditional probability tables. To that end 
historical accident records were obtained from the Cyprus 
Police department specialising on traffic safety. Preliminary 
compilation of the data was performed with the SPSS 
statistical package. The accident dataset covered all 
accidents occurred in the Nicosia area from 2002 until 2008 
and comprised over 9000 records. Each record consisted of 
43 (six continuous and 37 categorical) input parameters 
covering global, local, temporal, accident, driver and car 
characteristics collected at the site of the accident by the 
police officers, eye witnesses and the involved parties. Each 
record was associated with a single categorical output 
parameter pertaining to accident severity, namely light, 
44
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

severe and fatal, as evaluated by the police officer at the site 
of the accident.  
However, for the development of the BBN’s topology it 
was 
imperative 
to 
specify 
also 
the 
influence 
of 
infrastructural properties to the accident risk. However, due 
to limited information regarding infrastructural properties in 
the accident reports, it was necessary to map each accident 
on a geospatial GIS platform and subsequently import these 
on VISTA to obtain more information regarding the 
infrastructure at the accident location. Once this mapping 
was achieved additional information regarding the dynamic 
aspects of the road network at the accident scene was 
obtained from VISTA. This helped to define the causal 
relationships of the BBN variables that described the 
infrastructure and the traffic dynamics. Figure 2 shows the 
accidents geospatial layer of the dataset on ARCGIS using 
the baseline map. Each lollypop on the map corresponds to 
one or more accidents that occurred at the specified 
location.  
 
 
Figure 2. Accident data on ARCGIS 
 
The same accident dataset was used to identify locations 
on the network with high accident frequency the so called 
black spots. These points were used to validate the system 
after it was implemented.  Specifically, a subset of the 
original dataset was used to validate the system. Black-spots 
(Figure 3) that were associated with that subset were used to 
test its performance on unknown conditions. 
VI. DEVELOPMENT OF THE BBN 
To develop the BBN model it was imperative to firstly 
identify the variables that adequately describe the problem, 
subsequently define the possible states that each variable 
could take and finally define the dependencies among them. 
A preliminary analysis of the accident data provided a 
generic indication of the influence of each variable to road 
accident. Database pre-processing involved two steps (a) 
replacement of missing and erroneous (e.g. falling outside 
the acceptable range) parameter values by the mean value of 
the parameter values of the other (assumed correct) records, 
and (b) grouping neighboring or related values of multi-
valued (i.e. containing more than 12 values) categorical 
parameters so as to have a manageable number of 
intelligible as well as regular categories per parameter.  
 
 
Figure 3. Network's Black Spots as overlaid dots 
 
Statistical analysis relating the 43 input parameters 
(independent variables) to accident type (dependent 
variable) reveals that the Spearman correlation coefficient 
values between the inputs and the output are low (Figure 4), 
while the Spearman p-values are relatively high. Owing to 
the sufficient size of the database however, it is still possible 
for some of the correlations to be statistically significant. In 
support of that, accident type prediction was found far from 
satisfactory when only the statistically significant/correlated 
parameters were employed, thus demonstrating that 
statistically derived feature selection cannot be performed 
on a statistical basis for extracting the input parameters that 
affect the output and discarding those that do not provide 
accident type-related information.   
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
correlation coefficients
num,ber of accurrences
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
p-values
number of occurrences
 
Figure 4. Statistically derived correlation coefficients (left) 
and p-values (right) between the 43 input parameters and 
accident type. 
 
To that end, the processed accident data was 
subsequently used to identify the core variables of the BBN 
model along with their dependencies. In order to reduce the 
Black spots 
45
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

complexity of the process and the model itself, the 
dimensionality of the initial data set was reduced using 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). This helped to 
identify the core variables of the model. In principle, PCA 
projects the original data into a new set of orthogonal axes 
in such a way that the original multidimensional dataset 
with possibly correlated parameters is linearly transformed 
into a novel dataset of identical dimensions but with totally 
uncorrelated parameters. Owing to the fact that each new 
axis is selected so as to maximally expose the (remaining) 
variability of the dataset, it is not unusual for the first few 
axes of the PCA mapping to account for most of its 
variability. Hence, small PCA axes are generally sufficient 
in representing the original data with minimal loss of 
information. Results from this process yielded 12 artificial 
variables. 
In addition, a subset of the accident data acquired by the 
police was mapped into ARCGIS geospatial application and 
subsequently on VISTA as a GIS layer. Afterward, VISTA 
was utilized to associate the accident parameters with the 
infrastructural properties of the road network at each 
accident point. Finally the traffic volumes along with traffic 
speed of vehicles were used to calculate traffic density of 
each road section of the network. These were subsequently 
associated with each accident record. Results from the 
dimensionality reduction using PCA together with the data 
merge that associated accidents locations with traffic density 
metric and infrastructure, yielded 19 candidate variables for 
the development of the BBN topology. The topology 
depicted in Figure 5, was initially learned from these 
processed data using the Expectation Maximisation 
algorithm. A refinement of the initial topology was 
performed using domain knowledge from the literature and 
subject matter experts. 
 
Figure 5. Learned BBN topology 
To validate the effect of each variable to the target 
variable, namely, accident risk, a preliminary validation 
study was conducted using attribute relevance analysis (Fig. 
6). Envisioner, data mining tool was used to compute the 
relevance between each identified causal factor to accident 
risk. The relevance of each variable to accident risk was 
compared against the learned conditional probability that 
emerged from EM algorithm and the posterior probabilities 
computed by the BBN with the independent instantiation of 
each of the leaf node variables. 
 
Figure 6. Relevance Analysis results. 
VII. MODEL VALIDATION 
To estimate the accuracy of the developed BBN model, 
five-fold cross validation has been employed. To that end 
the accident database that was enhanced with traffic data 
was randomly partitioned into five folds of equal number of 
records. Subsequently, and for each fold, four of the sets 
were employed for training the model while the remaining 
set was reserved for testing. Prediction accuracy was 
calculated by the weighted average of the test results of the 
five folds. Overall, the results of the validation process 
demonstrate that the model can accurately predict accident 
risks. However, the fact that the traffic volume used for 
validation is based on simulated results biases the outcome. 
To that end an additional validation study needs to be 
performed to verify that the model performs well in realistic 
settings.   
VIII. RESULTS 
Results from the accident risk assessor were used to 
calculate the accident risk index of each road section on the 
network. A road segment was labeled as accident prone if 
the predicted BBN accident risk probability was above a 
pre-specified threshold value. BBN estimates that fall below 
the cutoff value were ignored. This enables the safety 
engineer to alter the granularity of the analysis by altering 
the threshold value.  To produce the accident risk index is 
was imperative to normalize the number of accidents that 
were predicted by the BBN with the traffic volume per time 
interval, for each road section. This aimed to escape the 
Simpsons paradox that defines phenomena that falsely prove 
the reverse of the truth. Inherently the Sympson’s Paradox 
implies false causation, a logical fallacy by which two 
events that occur together are claimed to be cause and 
Effect of variables on 
accident risk 
high 
low 
46
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

effect. For example: statistically more accidents occur while 
the weather is good. Therefore, one erroneously could infer 
that good weather causes road accidents. The above 
argument commits to this fallacy, because in fact the 
explanation is that in good weather more cars are in the road 
and this causes more accidents. To find the actual effect of 
weather on accidents it is hence important to normalize the 
accidents that occurred in relation to the cars that are in the 
road. To that end, the proposed system uses a systematic 
approach that utilizes the traffic volume estimates from the 
VISTA simulation and the accidents predicted using the 
BBN risk assessor. Traffic volume acts as a normalizing 
factor for the number of accidents predicted using the BBN 
risk assessor. This gives rise to the accident risk index for 
each road section of the network that inherently highlight 
network's black spots. An illustration of the results produced 
by the traffic safety system is depicted in Figure 7. This 
figure illustrates a subset of the results and indicate that 
sections with IDs, 3, 21 and 47 have the highest accident 
risk index. The system enables the safety engineer to 
provide appropriate countermeasures to alleviate the 
problem. These are reported in the system and subsequently 
implemented in the simulation model. Each countermeasure 
then undergoes an evaluation procedure in the system to 
verify that the problem is eliminated prior to being 
implemented. 
 
Figure 7. Links on the road network with highest accident 
risk index 
IX. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The traffic information system described herein 
illustrates a novel approach to quantifying road safety using 
probabilistic inference with DTA simulation. Integration of 
VISTA with BBN, as presented, enables the combination of 
known 
and 
uncertain 
evidence 
for 
accident 
risk 
quantification. The system combines state of the art 
technologies in traffic simulation and accident risk 
assessment. Integration of these provides the safety engineer 
with the necessary mean to perform a holistic and intelligent 
analysis of road safety. The method escapes from the 
problem of traffic data shortage that most traditional 
approach are suffering, through the use of DTA simulation.  
VISTA provides complete traffic volume data estimates for 
all road sections of the network on a 24 hour basis. This 
constitutes advancement over existing methods that base 
their analysis on limited data obtained from a scarce number 
of traffic sensors on the network. Therefore, the proposed 
method and the supporting system enable the identification 
of safety hazards in road networks using dynamic data and 
thus improved safety analysis that escapes the Sympson’s 
paradox.  
It should be noted that, once a black spot is identified, it 
requires a microscopic safety analysis to examine the 
behavioral aspects of the vehicle kinematics that leaded to 
an accident. This requires the development of the 
corresponding 
microscopic 
simulation. 
This 
requires 
detailed specification of roadway geometry, comprehensive 
traffic control data, lighting, environmental and traffic 
conditions in a microscopic simulation model. A future 
enhancement of our method will be developed to 
incorporate the above attributes into a model that will inherit 
properties from the mesoscopic analysis described in this 
study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was co-funded by the Cyprus Research 
Promotion Foundation under the program: Targeted 
International Collaboration (ΔΙΕΘΝΗ/ΣΤΟΧΟΣ/0308). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of 
Plausible Information. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988. 
[2] C. Kapp, "Who acts on road safety to reverse accident trends", The 
Lancet, vol. 362, 2003, pp. 1125-1125. 
[3] V. Sisiopiku and X. Li, "Overview of Dynamic Traffic Assignment 
Options" Proceedings, 2006 Spring Simulation Multiconference, 
Society for Modeling and Simulation International, 2006, Huntsville, 
AL, pp. 110-116. 
[4] A. Ziliaskopoulos and S. Lee, "A Cell Transmission Based 
Assignment-simulation Model for Integrated Freeway/Surface Street 
Systems", Proc., 75th Transportation Research Board Annual 
Meeting, 1996, Washington, DC, pp. 427-444. 
[5] M. Florian et al., "Application of a simulation-based dynamic traffic 
assignment model", European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 
189, 2008, pp. 1381–1392 
[6] M. Simoncic, “A Bayesian Network Model of Two-Car Accidents” 
Journal of Transportation and Statistics, vol. 7, no. 2,3, 2004, pp13-
27. 
[7] W. Hu, X. Xiao, D. Xie et al., “Traffic accident prediction using 3-D 
model-based vehicle tracking”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, vol. 53, no. 3, 2004, pp. 677-694. 
[8] TLR, “SafeNET2”, 
http://www.trlsoftware.co.uk/news/detail.asp?pid=51&iid=29,   
2007. 
[9] H. Lo, "A dynamic traffic assignment formulation that encapsulates 
the cell transmission model", In A. Ceder (ed.) Transportation and 
Traffic Theory, Pergamon, Oxford,1999, pp. 327-350. 
[10] FHWA, "Surrogate Safety Measures From Traffic Simulation 
Models", FHWA-rd-03-050 U.S. Department of Transportation 
Federal Highway Administration Research, Development, and 
Technology, 2010 
Highest accident risk index 
47
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

