FITness Assessment
Hardware Algorithm Safety Validation
Andreas Strasser, Philipp Stelzer, Christian Steger
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
Email: {strasser, stelzer, steger}@tugraz.at
Norbert Druml
Inﬁneon Technologies Austria AG
Graz, Austria
Email: norbert.druml@infineon.com
Abstract—Error Correction Codes (ECC) are important safety
methods for digital data to gain control of Single Event Upsets
(SEU) in integrated digital circuits. SEU are responsible for single
bit ﬂips inside a digital circuit caused by ionizing radiation. This
effect does not affect the physical structure of the components
but the correctness of data inside ﬂip ﬂops. Consequently, data
gets corrupted and the correct program ﬂow gets disturbed.
This effect needs to be considered especially for safety-critical
systems. In the new ISO 26262 2nd Edition, the automotive
domain suggests controlling SEU effects by algorithms that
correct Single Bit Errors and Detect Double Bit Errors (SEC-
DED). This raises the question what kind of impact Double
Bit Error Correction (DEC) will have on the overall safety
level for LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) systems. In
this publication, we determine the difference between two ECC
algorithms from a safety point of view: Hamming’s code (SEC-
DED) and Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem-Code (DEC). For this
purpose, we developed a novel method for algorithm safety
validation and applied it to both algorithms.
Keywords–Safety Validation FPGA, Failure-in-Time Analysis
FPGA, Error Correction Codes, ISO 26262 2nd Edition, Algorithm
Validation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Fully autonomous driving will change our society, as well
as individuals’s daily routines and will improve overall road
safety. To achieve the goal of autonomous driving, novel
Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS) are necessary.
The two best-known ADAS are the Electronic Stability Control
Figure 1. PRYSTINE’s concept view of a fail-operational urban surround
perception system [1].
and the Anti-Lock Braking System, especially for their positive
effect on active safety. Moreover, in the last years, a new
generation of ADAS such as the Adaptive Cruise Control
(ACC) has been established in middle class cars to avoid
collisions. The next big step is introducing a comprehensive
system enabling the perception of urban environment, which
is one of the main goals of the PRYSTINE project [1].
PRYSTINE stands for Programmable Systems for Intelli-
gence in Automobiles and is based on robust Radar and LiDAR
sensor fusion to enable safe automated driving in urban and
rural environments, as seen in Figure 1. These devices must
be reliable, safe and fail-operational to handle safety-critical
situations independently [1]. In contrast to Radar, LiDAR has
not been implemented in middle class cars yet but there are
basic approaches in the automotive industry such as the 1D
MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR system as seen in Figure 2 [2].
This modern LiDAR system consists of an emitter and receiver
path. The emitter path contains the Microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS) mirror and the MEMS Driver Application-
speciﬁc integrated circuit (ASIC). Druml et al. [2] indicate
that the MEMS Driver and its precision of sensing, actuation
and control directly inﬂuence the complete LiDAR system’s
measurement accuracy. Consequently, the LiDAR system’s
control-related digital circuits need to be correct and fault-
tolerant. Fault-tolerant digital circuits struggle mainly with
random hardware faults like Single Event Upsets which are soft
errors in semiconductor devices induced by ionizing radiation
[3]. These events do not physically harm the semiconductor
components but may alter the logical value of a ﬂip ﬂop
[4]. These errors have been affecting digital integrated circuits
for decades and therefore, Error Correction Codes (ECC) are
used for safety-critical systems [5]. ECCs are self-repairing
algorithms with the ability to correct certain bit errors and
maintain data correction during runtime [6]. The effect of SEU
exponentially increases with higher packaging density as less
electrons are representing a logic value [4]. As the demand for
semiconductor devices rises due to ADAS, packaging density
needs to increase even faster to satisfy computation power for
real-time video signal processing [7]. Nevertheless, this trend
also introduces drawbacks, especially from a safety point of
view, as the enhancement of packaging density also increases
the sensitivity to SEU [4]. Consequently, the automotive in-
dustry needs regulations and standards for safety-related semi-
conductor devices. For safety-related electrical and electronic
devices, the automotive industry considers the functional safety
ISO 26262 standard. In nine normative parts, this standard
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-698-9
PESARO 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

System 
Safety 
Controller 
(AURIX)
Laser Illumination
MEMS Mirror
MEMS
Driver
ASIC
Actuation
Sensing
 
Reflected 
Signal
Photo Diodes
dt
Emitted 
Signal
Point 
Cloud 
Data
Trigger and 
Laser Power Setting
FPGA / Dedicated 
LiDAR Hardware 
Accelerators
Receiver 
Circuits
Raw Data
Emitter Path
Receiver Path
Trigger and 
Gain Setting
Config 
and
Status
Figure 2. Overview of a LiDAR system for automonomous driving [2].
describes best practices to support engineers and managers
in developing fail-safe automotive parts [8]. In the last years,
this standard has been extended and the new version will be
released end of 2018. The new version is called ISO 26262 2nd
Edition and will include a part for semiconductors describing
functional safety concepts for semiconductor devices [9]. For
soft error mitigation, the standard suggests the use of Single
Error Correction and Double Error Detection algorithms to
protect digital circuits [9]. For semiconductor devices SEC-
DED was already used in 1984 [5]. At that time, semiconductor
devices were not that highly integrated and the packaging
density was not as high as nowadays. Already in 1984, Chen
et al. [5] described that in future semiconductor devices will
use more complex ECC algorithms such as Double Error
Correction and Triple Error Detection (DEC-TED). Contrary
to the prediction of Chen et al. [5], the automotive industry
still suggests using SEC-DED ECC algorithms 34 years later.
This raises the question whether there are any disadvantages
on DEC-TED algorithms or if the SEC-DED still fulﬁlls the
requirements for fail-safe automotive systems.
For this purpose, we will elaborate on the following two
research questions:
•
How can different ECC algorithms be validated from
a safety point of view?
•
Are Double Error Correction algorithms for LiDAR
systems safer than SEC-DED algorithms?
II.
RELATED WORK
The need for error correction has always been vital for
digital semiconductor devices due to possible alterations of
ﬂip ﬂops caused by SEU. Already in 1984, Chen et al.
described the application of these codes for semiconductor
memory applications [5]. However, the history of ECC already
began with punched card read errors in 1950. In this year,
Hamming introduced his new approach for an automatic Error
Correction Code during run-time to solve read errors [10].
Hamming’s code is widely known and used for ECC. The
algorithm corrects Single Bit Errors and is able to Detect
Double Bit Errors (SEC-DED) by adding an additional parity
bit [11]. For correcting more bits, other ECC algorithms are
necessary. One of them is the concept of Bose-Chaudhuri-
Hocquenghem-Codes (BCH-Codes). BCH-Codes can be used
for multiple bit error corrections [12]. These two algorithms
are the most important ECC concepts for digital integrated
circuits and were already described by Chen et al. in 1984
[5]. Even modern and highly integrated complex systems still
make use of Hamming’s code and BCH-code [13] [14]. The
novel ISO 26262 2nd Edition still refers to Hamming’s ECC
code to accomplish fail-safe digital circuits.
In the automotive industry, the ISO 26262 standard is used
for functional safety. The new version ISO 26262 2nd Edition
suggests ECC for diagnosing memory failures and rates the
resulting diagnosis coverage as high. Therefore, this measure
is often used for safety critical digital components [9] [13]
[14]. For ECC, the standard still suggests the use of SEC-
DED algorithms such as the Hamming code [9]. This raises
the question whether SEC-DED has any advantages over DEC
algorithms or vice versa. Still, novel safety critical automotive
approaches, such as the fault-tolerant cache system for an
automotive vision processor from Han et al. use SEC-DED
[14].
The validation of algorithms is an important method for
achieving certain requirements such as area, power dissipation
or run time. Therefore, there are numerous articles about
enhancing efﬁciency of fault-tolerant mechanisms through
algorithm substitution [15] [16] [17]. Rossi et al. analyze
the power consumption of fault-tolerant busses by comparing
different Hamming code implementations with their novel
Dual Rail coding scheme [15]. Also, Nayak et al. emphasize
the low power dissipation of their novel Hamming code
components [16]. Another example is the work of Shao et
al. about power dissipation comparison between the novel
adaptive pre-proccesing approach for convolutional codes of
Viterbi decoders with conventional decoders [17]. Khezripour
et al. provide another example for validating different fault-
tolerant multi processor architectures by power dissipation
[18]. Unfortunately, power dissipation is just one factor for
reliability of safety-critical components and insufﬁcient for
safety validation. The most important indicator for safety at
hardware level is the component reliability, which is measured
in failure in time (FIT) rates [9]. Component reliability is the
main indicator for safe hardware components and describes
the quantity of failures in a speciﬁc time interval, mostly
one billion hours [9]. These values can be calculated by
speciﬁc standards for electronic component reliability such as
the IEC TR 62380 [19] or statistically collected by ﬁeld tests.
Oftentimes, these ﬁeld test have already been conducted by
the manufacturers and are compiled in speciﬁc datasheets for
component reliability [20]. For each component, the datasheets
usually contain the speciﬁc FIT Rate for a certain temperature.
To determine the FIT Rate for other temperatures, the Arrhe-
nius equation as seen in (1) can be used.
DF = e
Ea
k ·(
1
Tuse −
1
Tstress ))
(1)
where:
DF
is Derating Factor
Ea
is Activation Energy in eV
k
is Boltzmann Constant (8.167303 x 10-5 ev/K)
Tuse
is Use Junction Temperature in K
Tstress
is Stress Junction Temperature in K
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-698-9
PESARO 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

The Arrhenius Equation requires the Junction Temperature
instead of Temperature values. The Junction Temperature rep-
resents the highest operation temperature of the semiconductor
and considers the Ambient Temperature, Thermal Resistance
of the package as well as the Power Dissipation as seen in (2).
Tj = Tamb + Pdis · θja
(2)
where:
Tamb
is Ambiant Temperature
Pdis
is Power Dissipation
θja
is Package Thermal Resistance Value
The validation of ECC algorithms is crucial for designers to
pick the optimal ECC. Rossi et al. analyzed SEC-DED and
DEC codes on area overhead and cache memory access time
but their work did not consider the impact of different ECC
algorithms from a safety point of view [21]. For designers of
safety-critical digital circuits, it would be helpful to be able
to pick the most safe ECC with the advantage of lower FIT
Rates. Especially for automotive Tier-1 companies lower FIT
Rates imply higher component reliability which is crucial for
the economic success or failure of the whole system as proﬁt
margins are that small that every defect matters. Therefore, to
support designers of safety-critical digital circuits, this paper’s
contributions to existing research are:
1)
Developing a novel method for safety validation of
algorithms on Field Programmable Gate Array that
is based on the approved ISO 26262 2nd Edition
methods.
2)
Applying the novel method to quantify the differences
between SEC-DED and DEC from a safety point of
view.
3)
Recommendation of ECC algorithm for safety-critical
automotive LiDAR systems, based on the novel
method of this paper.
III.
FITNESS ASSESSMENT
To validate different ECC algorithms, it is necessary to
quantify the essential values. Based on the functional safety
standard ISO 26262 2nd Edition’s approved methods, the FIT
Rate is the most important factor for safety-critical hardware
components. As stated in the Related Work section II, the
Derating Factor inﬂuences the FIT Rate and is expressed in
the Arrhenius equation (1). Combined with the Temperature
Junction equation it is obvious that the power dissipation is the
most signiﬁcant quantity that can be inﬂuenced by designers
of digital circuits (see (3)).
DF = e
Ea
k ·(
1
Tuse −
1
Tamb+Pdis·θja ))
(3)
Consequently, by decreasing Power Dissipation the de-
signer
increases
component
reliability.
For
Field
Pro-
grammable Gate Array (FPGA), the power dissipation primar-
ily depends on static and dynamic power consumption. Based
on these physical principles, our novel method FITness Assess-
ment for algorithm safety validation on FPGAs is segmented
in the following parts, as seen in Figure 3:
Simulation Process
Algorithm 
Implementation
Power 
Consumption 
Measurement
Determination of 
Base FIT Rate
Derating Factor 
Calculation
Identification of 
Effective FIT Rate
Calculating FIT 
Rate for 
Implementation
Increase 
Temperature 
Value
Validate
Algorithms
Temperature 
Range 
Completed
Figure 3. Workﬂow overview of our novel method FITness Assessment for
algorithm validation from a safety point of view in Business Process Model
and Notation.
1)
Algorithm Implementation
To guarantee similar conditions for different algo-
rithms, it is necessary to implement a generic frame-
work that allows implementing algorithms without
major changes.
2)
Power Consumption Measurement
For each algorithm, a particular measurement is
recorded. It is advisable to record the generic frame-
work without any algorithm to be able to determine
the algorithms’ power consumption by subtraction.
3)
Determinination of Base FIT Rate
The Base FIT Rate may be calculated by using the
IEC TR 62380 [19] standard or analyzed statistically
by ﬁeld tests. Oftentimes, these ﬁeld test have already
been conducted by the manufacturers and are com-
piled in speciﬁc datasheets for component reliability.
4)
Derating Factor Calculation
The Derating Factor can be calculated with the
Arrhenius equation and the related Thermal Junction
equation as seen in (1) and (2).
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-698-9
PESARO 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

5)
Identiﬁcation of Effective FIT Rate
The Effective FIT Rate reﬂects the Base FIT Rate for
a speciﬁc temperature and can be calculated with:
FITef = FITbase · DF
(4)
where:
FITbase
is Base FIT Rate from FPGA Reliability
Datasheet
DF
is Derating Factor as seen in (1)
6)
Calculating FIT Rate of the Implementation
The Effective FIT Rate as seen in (4) represents the
component reliability for the whole FPGA. However,
an FPGA is made up of many different logic ele-
ments. Consequently, the Effective FIT Rate can be
broken down into the amount used by each logical
element as seen in (5).
FITimp = FITef
Nle
(5)
where:
FITef
is Effective FIT Rate as seen in (4)
Nle
is Total Number of Logic Elements of the
speciﬁc FPGA taken out from Datasheet
7)
Validate Algorithms
The resulting FIT Rate of the implementation repre-
sents the FIT Rate of the speciﬁc algorithm and can
be used for validation. It is adviseable to measure
each algorithm once at room temperature conditions
and simulate the rest of the temperature range by
starting with the Derating Factor Calculation.
IV.
TEST SETUP
In our research question, we analyze the differences be-
tween SEC-DED and DEC. For this purpose, we chose the
Hamming code for SEC-DED as this code is recommended
in the new ISO 26262 2nd Edition and the BCH-code for
DEC, especially because other ECC algorithms are often
based on this concept and both algorithms fulﬁl the following
requirements:
•
32 Bit data size
•
Combinatorical Logic
•
Including Fault Injection Module
•
SEC-DED or DEC Functionality
The generic algorithm framework contains a testbench with
an automatic up-counter as well as a validator (see Figure 5).
Both algorithms can be exchanged in the framework without
any major changes. This enables a precise validation from a
safety point of view.
In our test setup, we use the MAX1000 - IoT Maker
Board by Trenz Electronic. This device is a small maker board
for prototyping with sparse additional components. The main
controller is the MAX10 10M08SAU169C8G, an FPGA device
by Intel. For our research, the main advantages of using this
board are:
•
Small amount of additional hardware components
•
Availability of Reliability Datasheet
  Data In
Write Data
32
  Data Out
32
Single Error
Corrected
Double Error
Detected/Corrected
No Error
Encoder
Register
Decoder
32 + p
32 + p
Fault
Injector
Failure Mode
2
32 + p
Figure 4. Pin conﬁguration of both algorithms including an overview of
functional blocks inside.
Encoder
Fault 
Injection
Decoder
 Testbench
Counter
Validation
  ECC Algorithm Under Test
Figure 5. General framework for ECC algorithm validation including
testbench and ECC algorithm.
Software:
 Intel Quartus Prime
 Power Tool
Diagnostic Device:
Power Monitor
Measurements:
 
Average Power
 
Average Current
 
Average Voltage
FPGA Board:
MAX1000 – IoT Maker Board
FPGA
Figure 6. Overview of the entire measurement setup including software and
hardware components.
This board also contains an FTDI chip that draws about 50
mA on average, which we will subtract out for our analysis.
The power consumption measurement is performed by the
Mobile Device Power Monitor of Monsoon Solutions. The big
advantage of this power monitor is the direct measurement of
USB devices. The entire measurement setup is shown in Figure
4 and 6 and contains the following software and hardware
parts:
•
Quartus Prime 18.0 (Intel)
•
Power Tool 5.0.0.23 (Monsoon Solutions)
•
Mobile Device Power Monitor (Monsoon Solutions)
•
MAX1000 - IoT Maker Board (Trenz Electronic)
V.
RESULTS
This section summarizes our results of the comparison
of SEC-DED and DEC ECC algorithm. The validation was
performed with our novel FITness Assessment method for
algorithm validation from a safety point of view as described
in Section III.
The ﬁrst algorithm we implemented was the Hamming
code, which is a SEC-DED ECC algorithm. The implemen-
tation reserves 45 logic elements of the used FPGA and the
whole board has an average power dissipation of 571.78 mW.
With the second BCH-code DEC ECC algorithm, the board
consumes an average of 599.05 mW and assignes 65 logic
elements. The ﬁrst result shows a difference between both
algorithms in logic elements as well as in power dissipation
resulting in a varying FIT Rate. The next step is the simulation
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-698-9
PESARO 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Temperature [°C]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
FIT [10-9h]
FIT Rate In Comparison with Temperature
BCH Code DEC
Hamming Code SEC-DED
Figure 7. Simulation results of the resulted FIT Rates between -40◦C and
125◦C for both ECC implementations.
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Temperature [°C]
1.5
1.52
1.54
1.56
1.58
1.6
1.62
1.64
1.66
1.68
1.7
Ratio [1]
FIT-Ratio
BCH DEC / Hamming SEC-DED
Figure 8. Overview of the FIT Rate overhead between SEC-DED and DEC
ECC algorithm.
process over the whole temperature range. We selected a
temperature range between -40◦C and 125◦C and the values of
Table I were used for the simulation process. In our simulation
we neglected the alteration of power dissipation through tem-
perature because it would affect both ECC implementations
evenly.
Figure 7 points out that both algorithms vary in their FIT
Rate and rise exponentially with increasing temperature. The
FIT Rate may be neglected for temperatures up to 40 ◦C.
The Hamming code with SEC-DED shows a better FIT Rate
indicating more reliability of the hardware components which
results in a higher safety level. The reason for this difference
is the greater number of logic elements used for the DEC ECC
algorithm and the resulting increase of power dissipation. The
higher power dissipation results in a higher Thermal Junction
temperature as seen in (2) which leads to a higher FIT Rate.
Both algorithms were implemented without any safety
measures. This means that any damage to the Logic Element
of the FPGA leads to failure of the whole ECC algorithm and
TABLE I. RESULTS OF THE RESERVED LOGIC ELEMENTS AND
AVERAGE TOTAL POWER DISSIPATION OF BOTH ECC
IMPLEMENTATIONS.
Hamming Code
BCH-Code
Used Logic Elements
45
65
Total Average Power Dissipation
571.78 mW
599.05 mW
the safe memory block. The ECC algorithm is the measure
against SEU related altered ﬂip ﬂops inside the memory
block which decreases the speciﬁc FIT Rate of the memory
block. The results of Figure 7 do not represent the FIT Rates
of the memory block but the FIT Rate of the pure ECC
implementation. It is important to understand that the ability
of more bit error correction is not considered for the algorithm
validation because it only positively inﬂuences the FIT Rate
of the memory block.
Moreover, it is important to understand that the absolute
values of the FIT Rate always correlate to a speciﬁc FPGA.
Consequently, it is advantageous to look at the ratio between
the algorithms because this gives a better overview of the
overhead. The SEC-DED/DEC ECC FIT Ratio is depicted in
Figure 8. The FIT Ratio overhead of the DEC ECC algorithm
is slighly decreasing with increasing temperature, which is
negligible in practice.
We recommend using the Hamming code algorithm for
SEC-DED error correction for 32 bit memory size registers in
automotive LiDAR systems. The SEC-DED algorithm used in
our experiment resulted in a FIT Rate that was at least 52%
lower than the DEC ECC algorithm.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we analyzed SEC-DED and DEC ECC
algorithms from a safety perspective. In Section III, we intro-
duced the FITness Assessment, a novel method for algorithm
validation from a safety point of view. This method is based
on approved methods of the novel automotive functional safety
standard ISO 26262 2nd Edition. The result clearly shows
that different algorithms lead to different FIT Rates. FITness
Assessment allowed the measurement of each algorithm’s
speciﬁc FIT Rate, facilitating the selection of the most reliable
ECC algorithm. Our case shows a DEC ECC algorithm that
has a higher FIT Rate than the SEC-DED ECC algorithm. The
FIT Rate reﬂects component reliability which is an important
hardware indicator for safety.
The paper’s ﬁndings demonstrate that algorithm validation
from a safety point of view is possible and that different
ECC algorithms also result in different FIT Rates. These
differences should not be neglected from a safety as well as
from a business point of view. The FIT Rate also statistically
indicates the amount of defective components, which is an
economically important indicator as lower FIT rates also result
in less defect components. Our results also give an explanation
why the automotive industry still suggests using SEC-DED
ECC algorithms instead of DEC ECC algorithms as SEC-DED
offers a lower FIT Rate than DEC. In our case, the difference
in FIT Rate was at least 52% and consequently, we suggest
using SEC-DED for LiDAR systems.
The automotive industry is disrupted by autonomous driv-
ing which is why fault-tolerance, safety and reliability will
become increasingly important in the next years. Our novel
method FITness Assessment enables the validation of different
algorithms to be able to select the most reliable one, which
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-698-9
PESARO 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

helps improve the overall safety level of the automotive vehicle
by increasing component reliability.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank all national funding
authorities and the ECSEL Joint Undertaking, which funded
the PRYSTINE project under the grant agreement number
783190.
PRYSTINE is funded by the Austrian Federal Min-
istry of Transport, Innovation and Technology (BMVIT) un-
der the program ”ICT of the Future” between May 2018
and April 2021 (grant number 865310). More information:
https://iktderzukunft.at/en/.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Druml, G. Macher, M. Stolz, E. Armengaud, D. Watzenig, C. Steger,
T. Herndl, A. Eckel, A. Ryabokon, A. Hoess, S. Kumar, G. Dim-
itrakopoulos, and H. Roedig, “Prystine - programmable systems for
intelligence in automobiles,” in 2018 21st Euromicro Conference on
Digital System Design (DSD), Aug 2018, pp. 618–626.
[2]
N. Druml, I. Maksymova, T. Thurner, D. Van Lierop, M. Hennecke,
and A. Foroutan, “1D MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR,” in Conference
on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications (SENSORDEVICES),
09 2018.
[3]
B. D. Sierawski, J. A. Pellish, R. A. Reed, R. D. Schrimpf, K. M.
Warren, R. A. Weller, M. H. Mendenhall, J. D. Black, A. D. Tipton,
M. A. Xapsos, R. C. Baumann, X. Deng, M. J. Campola, M. R.
Friendlich, H. S. Kim, A. M. Phan, and C. M. Seidleck, “Impact of
low-energy proton induced upsets on test methods and rate predictions,”
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 56, no. 6, Dec 2009, pp.
3085–3092.
[4]
R. Islam, “A highly reliable SEU hardened latch and high performance
SEU hardened ﬂip-ﬂop,” in Thirteenth International Symposium on
Quality Electronic Design (ISQED), March 2012, pp. 347–352.
[5]
C. L. Chen and M. Y. Hsiao, “Error-Correcting Codes for Semiconduc-
tor Memory Applications: A State-of-the-Art Review,” IBM Journal of
Research and Development, vol. 28, no. 2, March 1984, pp. 124–134.
[6]
J. Singh and J. Singh, “A Comparative Study of Error Detection
and Correction Coding Techniques,” in 2012 Second International
Conference on Advanced Computing Communication Technologies, Jan
2012, pp. 187–189.
[7]
H. Shaheen, G. Boschi, G. Harutyunyan, and Y. Zorian, “Advanced
ECC solution for automotive SoCs,” in 2017 IEEE 23rd International
Symposium on On-Line Testing and Robust System Design (IOLTS),
July 2017, pp. 71–73.
[8]
R. Mariani, “An overview of autonomous vehicles safety,” in 2018 IEEE
International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), March 2018, pp.
6A.1–1–6A.1–6.
[9]
I. n. E. ISO, “Draft 26262 2nd Edition: Road vehicles-Functional
safety,” International Standard ISO/FDIS, vol. 26262, 2018.
[10]
R. W. Hamming, “Error detecting and error correcting codes,” The Bell
System Technical Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, April 1950, pp. 147–160.
[11]
H. Liu, D. Kim, Y. Li, and A. Z. Jia, “On the separating redundancy
of extended hamming codes,” in 2015 IEEE International Symposium
on Information Theory (ISIT), June 2015, pp. 2406–2410.
[12]
Z. Xie, N. Li, and L. Li, “Design and Study on a New BCH Coding
and Interleaving Techniques Based on ARM Chip,” in 2008 4th IEEE
International Conference on Circuits and Systems for Communications,
May 2008, pp. 315–318.
[13]
S. Sooraj, M. Manasy, and R. Bhakthavatchalu, “Fault tolerant FSM
on FPGA using SEC-DED code algorithm,” in 2017 International
Conference on Technological Advancements in Power and Energy (
TAP Energy), Dec 2017, pp. 1–6.
[14]
J. Han, Y. Kwon, K. Byun, and H. Yoo, “A fault tolerant cache system
of automotive vision processor complying with ISO26262,” in 2016
IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May
2016, pp. 2912–2912.
[15]
D. Rossi, A. K. Nieuwland, S. V. E. S. van Dijk, R. P. Kleihorst,
and C. Metra, “Power Consumption of Fault Tolerant Busses,” IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 16,
no. 5, May 2008, pp. 542–553.
[16]
V. S. P. Nayak, C. Madhulika, and U. Pravali, “Design of low power
hamming code encoding, decoding and correcting circuits using re-
versible logic,” in 2017 2nd IEEE International Conference on Recent
Trends in Electronics, Information Communication Technology (RTE-
ICT), May 2017, pp. 778–781.
[17]
W. Shao and L. Brackenbury, “Pre-processing of convolutional codes
for reducing decoding power consumption,” in 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, March 2008,
pp. 2957–2960.
[18]
H. Khezripour and S. Pourmozaffari, “Fault Tolerance and Power
Consumption Analysis on Chip-Multi Processors Architectures,” in
2012 Seventh International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
Security, Aug 2012, pp. 301–306.
[19]
T. IEC, “Iec 62380,” Reliability data handbook–universal model for
reliability prediction of electronics components, PCBs and equipment
(emerged from UTEC 80-810 or RDF 2000), 2004.
[20]
“Reliability Report,” Jul 2018, [retrieved: 01, 2019]. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/programmable/support/
quality-and-reliability/reports-tools/reliability-report/rel-report.html
[21]
D. Rossi, N. Timoncini, M. Spica, and C. Metra, “Error correcting code
analysis for cache memory high reliability and performance,” in 2011
Design, Automation Test in Europe, March 2011, pp. 1–6.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-698-9
PESARO 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

