An Evaluation Scenario for Adaptive Security in eHealth
Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
wolfgang.leister@nr.no
Mohamed Hamdi
School of Communication Engineering
Tunisia
mmh@supcom.rnu.tn
Habtamu Abie
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
habtamu.abie@nr.no
Stefan Poslad
Queen Mary University
London, UK
stefan.poslad@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract—We present a scenario and storyline that are part
of a framework to evaluate adaptive security in the Internet of
Things, also denoted as the IoT. The successful deployment of
the IoT depends on ensuring security and privacy, which need
to adapt to the processing capabilities and resource use of the
IoT. We develop a scenario for the assessment and validation of
context-aware adaptive security solutions for the IoT in eHealth.
We ﬁrst present the properties to be fulﬁlled by a scenario
to assess the adaptive security solutions for eHealth. We then
develop a home scenario for patients with chronic diseases using
biomedical sensors. This scenario is then used to create a storyline
for a chronic patient living at home.
Keywords—Internet of Things; assessment scenarios; eHealth
systems; adaptive security.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Body Sensor Networks (WBSNs) improve the
efﬁciency of eHealth applications by monitoring vital signs of
a patient using low-rate communication media and constitute
an important part of the Internet of Things (IoT) by bringing
humans into the IoT. However, the successful deployment of
the IoT depends on ensuring security and privacy, which need
to adapt to the processing capabilities and resource use of
the IoT. The “Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of Things
in eHealth” (ASSET) project researches and develops risk-
based adaptive security methods and mechanisms for IoT that
will estimate and predict risk and future beneﬁts using game
theory and context awareness by Abie and Balasingham [1].
The security methods and mechanisms will adapt their security
decisions based upon those estimates and predictions.
The main application area of ASSET is health and wel-
fare. Health organisations may deploy IoT-based services to
enhance traditional medical services and reduce delay for
treatment of critical patients. A case study will evaluate the
developed technologies for adaptive security using both sim-
ulation and implementation in a testbed based upon realistic
cases. Blood pressure, electrocardiogram (ECG) and heart rate
values will be gathered from patients and made anonymous.
The sensor data will be stored in different biomedical sensor
nodes that are capable of communicating with any of the
following connectivity options available: ZigBee, Wi-Fi, 3G,
GPRS, Bluetooth, and 802.15.4. For instance, a smartphone
with a suitable transceiver could act as an access point between
sensor nodes and a medical centre. For the evaluation in
the case study, we developed a set of scenarios to assess
the adaptive security models, techniques, and prototypes that
will be introduced in ASSET. These scenarios describe the
foreseeable interactions between the various actors and the
patient monitoring system based on IoT.
In computing, a scenario is a narrative: it most commonly
describes foreseeable interactions of user roles and the techni-
cal system, which usually includes computer hardware and
software. A scenario has a goal, a time-frame, and scope.
Alexander and Maiden [2] describe several types of scenarios,
such as stories, situations (alternative worlds), simulations,
story boards, sequences, and structures. Scenarios have inter-
action points and decision points where the technology under
consideration can interact with the scenario. This means that
the scenarios developed for a particular situation have to take
into consideration the technologies used by the different actors.
The importance of scenarios in the assessment of security
solutions has been discussed in the literature [3], [4]. This
work focuses on the development of scenarios that support
the evaluation of adaptive security techniques for the IoT in
eHealth.
In this paper, we develop a framework for the assessment
of adaptive security solutions. For this, we study a scenario
for the home environment, where different Quality of Service
(QoS) requirements, contexts and adaptive security methods
and mechanisms are analysed. We ﬁrst deﬁne the properties
that must be fulﬁlled by a scenario to assess adaptive security
schemes for eHealth. We show the interaction between the
scenarios, the threats, and the countermeasures in a global
assessment framework for the ASSET project. Second, the
scenarios that have been proposed by Leister et al. [5] are
reviewed and their adequacy to the evaluation of adaptive
security techniques for the IoT is analysed. Finally, we propose
a storyline that can support requirements analysis, as well
as adaptive security design, implementation, evaluation, and
testing.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II
speciﬁes the requirements of adaptive security for the scenario.
In Section III, we describe the extension of a previously devel-
oped generic system model, which is used for the structure of
the scenario in Section IV. In Section V, we present a storyline
for our home scenario. Finally, Section VI offers concluding
remarks and future prospects.
II. ADAPTIVE SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
Designing the scenarios is of central signiﬁcance for the
ASSET project. They depict the operation of systems, here ap-
plied to IoT-based eHealth systems, in the form of actions and
event sequences. In addition, scenarios facilitate the detection
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Fig. 1.
The ASSET assessment framework.
Fig. 2.
Illustration of context changes during the execution of a storyline.
of threat occurrences and the identiﬁcation of the solutions to
cope with these threats. In a scenario-based assessment, a set
of scenarios is developed to convey the design requirements.
With regard to the speciﬁc objectives of IoT-based systems,
the scenarios should capture two types of requirements:
1) Security requirements: Novel adaptive security and pri-
vacy mechanisms and methods are required that adapt
to the dynamic context of the IoTs and changing threats
to them. Thus, the scenarios should be generic enough
to capture the security needs for the data processed and
exchanged within a patient monitoring system. This is
particularly challenging because this system encompasses
multiple networking technologies, data, users, and appli-
cations, addressing varying processing capabilities and
resource use.
2) Quality of service requirements: Unlike traditional appli-
cations and services relying on communication networks,
eHealth applications have stringent QoS requirements.
Items such as the communication delay, the quality of
the communication channels, and the lifetime of the self-
powered sensor nodes are crucial context parameters that
have signiﬁcant impact on the safety of the patient. The
scenarios should highlight the needs in terms of QoS and
illustrate the dynamic interplay between these needs and
the security requirements.
The ASSET scenarios appear as a component of an assess-
ment framework that will serve to improve the applicability of
the security techniques proposed in the frame of the project.
The other components of the assessment framework are (i) a
set of threats describing the actions that violate the security
requirements, (ii) a set of security solutions that mitigate
the aforementioned threats, and (iii) a set of system states
representing the dynamic context in which the patient monitor-
ing system operates. Fig. 1 illustrates the ASSET assessment
framework. The security and QoS requirements are the output
of the scenario design activity. In other terms, the scenarios
should give information about the set of reliable states from
the security requirements and the set of states where the QoS
is acceptable. The intersection of these sets is the set of
desirable states, denoted in Fig. 1(a) by D (Desirable), where
the security and QoS requirements are balanced.
One of the intrinsic features of the ASSET scenarios is that
the sets of security requirements and QoS requirements could
vary in time and space. This will make the threats and the
security solutions also vary in time and space. Threats are
viewed as actions that generate insecure system states while
countermeasures are assumed to thwart the effects of these
threats. A threat reduces the set of secure states generated
by the scenario of interest and affects the QoS requirements.
This is represented by the region I (Impact) in Fig. 1(b). This
region represents a set of states that do not fulﬁl the security
or QoS requirements. The countermeasures reduce the size
of the set of insecure states generated by the threats. Fig. 1(c)
illustrates the effect of the security solutions through the region
M (Mitigate). This region extends the set of secure states.
Nonetheless, the security solutions can have a negative effect
on the QoS, represented by the region C (Cost), consisting of
power, processing, memory, and communication overhead.
The elements of this representation will be used in the
scenarios during the assessment of adaptive security schemes.
The scenarios allow evaluating the potential brought by the
security techniques to minimise the effect of the attacks on
the context.
For adaptive security solutions, the proposed protection
techniques will vary in time and space according to the
context. This is not conveyed by the scenario representation
of Fig. 1. To overcome this issue, we derive a set of storylines
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

from the ASSET scenarios. These can be viewed as a sequen-
tial application of the scenarios in a way that the selection of
the appropriate countermeasures must take into consideration:
• The space transition between scenarios. Space encom-
passes much useful information that affect the security
decision-making process. For instance, the location of
the WBSN might increase/decrease its vulnerability to
threats. Moreover, mobility introduces signiﬁcant chal-
lenges including horizontal and vertical handover man-
agement.
• The time transitions between scenarios (with its impli-
cations on the context). The time interplay between the
potential threats and countermeasures has a substantial
and dynamic impact on the environment where the patient
monitoring system is deployed. The amount of energy,
memory, and processing resources are crucial parameters
from the QoS perspective and the security solutions
have to adapt accordingly. In addition, the state of the
communication channel and the proper temporal interplay
in all these contexts are important in the selection of the
appropriate security decisions.
Fig. 2 illustrates the evolution of the storyline and the un-
derlying impact on the context. Of course, the sequence of
scenarios forming a storyline should be consistent so that it
translates a real-case situation.
For the assessment of adaptive security protocols and algo-
rithms we can employ multiple tools such as implementation
in a lab [6], simulation, and formal reasoning [7]. Here, the
scenarios can be connected to the arrangements, which are
sets of conﬁguration settings that inﬂuences how the formal
model operates. Moreover, the properties of a model checker
can directly be extracted from the requirements generated from
the scenarios.
In the following sections, we develop the scenarios of the
ASSET project and show how storylines can be extracted. We
also underline the role of the storyline in the assessment of
adaptive security techniques for eHealth. Before delving into
the details of scenario and storyline engineering, we highlight
the major properties that a scenario should have in order to
be useful for adaptive security.
III. EXTENDED GENERIC MODEL FOR EHEALTH
SCENARIOS
Patient monitoring systems are a major data source in
healthcare environments. During the last decade, the develop-
ment of pervasive computing architectures based on the IoT
has consistently improved the efﬁciency of such monitoring
systems thereby introducing new use cases and requirements.
It is important that these monitoring systems maintain a certain
level of availability, QoS, and that they are secure and protect
the privacy of the patient. Previously, we have analysed the
security and privacy for patient monitoring systems with an
emphasis on wireless sensor networks [8] and suggested a
framework for providing privacy, security, adaptation, and
QoS in patient monitoring systems [9]. We divided patient
monitoring systems into four Generic Levels (GLs): (0) the
Fig. 3.
Generic eHealth framework indicating the use cases in ﬁve levels
(Extended from [8]).
patient; (I) the personal sensor network; (II) devices in the
closer environment following several scenarios; and (III) the
healthcare information system.
In this work, we extend the generic model presented by
Leister et al. [9] by the deﬁnition of three new levels related
to the monitoring of chronic diseases, the communication
between multiple healthcare providers, and the communi-
cation between healthcare providers and medical research
institutions, respectively. Consequently, the extended generic
model is composed of ﬁve levels numbered from (0) to (IV)
depending on the logical distance to the patient to whom
Level (0) is assigned. Multiple types are considered at Level
(II). Note that only one of these types applies at a time.
However, it must be possible to switch between the types in
Level (II) depending on the activity of the patient. To this
purpose, the communication between Levels (II) and (III) is
two-way. The key levels of our extended generic model are as
follows, as shown in Fig. 3:
(0)
Patient. This is the actual patient.
(I)
Personal sensor network. The personal sensor net-
work denotes the patient and the sensors measuring
the medical data. These sensors are connected to each
other in a WBSN. While this sensor network can
be connected randomly, in most cases one special
WBSN node is appointed to be a Personal Cluster
Head (PCH), which forwards the collected data out-
side the range of the WBSN.
(IIa)
Paramedic. The WBSN is connected to the medical
devices of an ambulance (car, plane, and helicopter)
via the PCH. The devices of the ambulance can work
autonomously, showing the patient status locally.
Alternatively, the devices of the ambulance can com-
municate with an external healthcare infrastructure,
e.g., at a hospital.
(IIb)
Smart home. The patient is in a smart-home envi-
ronment where the personal sensor network interacts
with various networks and applications within this
environment. The smart home infrastructure might
be connected to a healthcare enterprise infrastructure
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

using long-distance data communication.
(IIc)
Mobility. The patient is mobile, e.g., using public
or personal transportation facilities. The personal
sensor network of the patient is connected to the
infrastructure of a healthcare enterprise via a mobile
device, e.g., a mobile Internet connection.
(IId)
Intensive care/surgery. During an operation the
sensor data are transferred to the PCH or directly
to the hospital infrastructure over a relatively short
distance. The sensors are in a very controlled envi-
ronment, but some sensors might be very resource
limited due to their size, so extra transport nodes
close to the sensors might be needed.
(IIe)
Pre- and postoperative. During pre- and postoper-
ative phases of a treatment, and for use in hospital
bedrooms, the sensor data are transferred from the
sensor network to the PCH and then to the healthcare
information system.
(IIf)
Chronic disease treatment. The WBSN data are
used by healthcare personnel in non-emergency treat-
ment of individual patients with a chronic disease.
(III)
Healthcare information system. This is considered
a trusted environment. It consists of the hospital
network, the computing facilities, databases, and
access terminals in the hospital.
(IVa) Inter-healthcare provider. Information is shared
between different healthcare providers concerning
medical information of an individual patient.
(IVb) Healthcare provider and research. Information is
shared between healthcare providers and medical
research organisations for the purposes of research,
new solutions development, etc.
Through the potential interactions between these levels,
notice that the model can support the elaboration of multiple
scenarios where the actors interact by switching from a level
to another. The scenarios in healthcare using biomedical
sensor networks are quite complex. Therefore, they need to
be efﬁciently structured. We consider two main scenarios
(hereafter denoted as overall scenarios) and we decompose
them into sub-scenarios (hereafter denoted as core scenarios).
A particular interest is given to the transitions between the core
scenarios since these transitions constitute substantial sources
of threats. For ASSET, we consider a home scenario (A) and
a hospital scenario (B).
Each of these overall scenarios contain a set of core sce-
narios which are denoted by the scenario identiﬁer A or B,
followed by a dash and the core scenario numbering in roman
numbers. The transitions between these core scenarios model
the interaction between the various components of the patient
monitoring system. In this paper, we focus on the Home
Scenario (A) where the patient is supposed to be monitored
outside a hospital performing normal daily actions. However,
to extract useful technical cases for the evaluation phase we
need to structure the scenario according to the patient’s actions
and situation.
A-ii
home s.
diabetes
A-i
home
situation
A-iii
moving
A-vi
shop
A-vii
caf´e
visit
A-xv
ambu-
lance
A-iv
publ.
transp.
A-v
vehicle
transport
A-ix
waiting
room
A-viii
doctor’s
ofﬁce
B
B
B
Fig. 4.
The Home Scenario with the underlying core scenarios and their
transitions.
IV. THE STRUCTURE OF THE HOME SCENARIO
Home Scenario (A) envisages that the monitored patient
can be in various contexts performing normal daily actions.
For example, for a patient with diabetes the following core
scenarios can apply:
• The patient is at home or a nursing home using monitor-
ing equipment.
• The patient uses sensors and communicates electronically
with the doctor’s ofﬁce.
• The patient uses speciﬁc monitoring equipment for dia-
betes.
• The patient visits the doctor’s ofﬁce regularly and uses
public transport or a car to get there;
• At the waiting room the patient can communicate data to
the health care infrastructure of the doctor’s ofﬁce.
• The patient regularly takes walking or jogging trips.
• The patient regularly visits a caf´e with friends; this
includes walking or commuting with public transport.
• In case of an emergency or planned surgery, the patient
may be sent to a hospital with an ambulance.
This list of situations is not yet a useful narrative. It
needs to be structured and enriched with, such as the speciﬁc
context information, the necessary devices of the IoT, the
communication channels, and actions of the involved actors.
This is done in the core scenarios that describe a speciﬁc part
of an overall scenario; e.g., a situation a patient experiences.
Each core scenarios can be part of several overall scenarios.
1) Home Situation (monitored at home) (A-i): Biomedical
sensors are employed in an environment where the patient is
at home or in a nursing home. The patient is monitored by a
WBSN, and the sensor data and alarms can be transmitted to
medical centres and emergency dispatch units.
Here, the sensors might not be monitoring or transmitting
the physiological patient data continuously in order to reduce
battery power consumption. Depending on a predeﬁned al-
gorithm, abnormal sensor data from certain sensors may be
used to activate other sensors autonomously before an alarm
is triggered, and sent to a central monitoring unit. In this
scenario, the following characteristics are given:
1) Ease of use and non-intrusiveness are important issues.
2) Very low power consumption, enabling a long life span
of the batteries, is required.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

3) A network infrastructure is available, such as access to
the Internet via LAN, WLAN, or mobile networks.
4) Limited mobility, handoff is possible, but infrequent.
Core Scenario A-i could be split up into several sub-
scenarios, if necessary, depending on the patient’s activities,
time of the day, etc. These sub-scenarios may include sleeping,
watching TV, kitchen work, or other household activities.
We created a specialised scenario for patients living at
home with diabetes monitoring (A-ii). The patient uses a
smartphone with a health-diary software that also implements
personal health records (PHR) and stores measurements. The
measurements are performed using special devices that com-
municate with the smartphone using Bluetooth. Note that such
specialisations also could be described as a part of the storyline
of a separate core scenario.
On a regular basis, the patient transmits measurements
to the doctor’s ofﬁce, thus synchronising the PHR with the
hospital information system; the patient also has an audio-
/video-conversation where medical questions are discussed.
During these sessions the patient might take pictures with the
smart phone camera or perform other measurements.
2) Moving (Walking and Jogging) Scenario (A-iii): The
patient does daily training, i.e., jogs in the nearby park, or
does shorter walks from the home to the public transport, to
the caf´e, shop, or doctor’s ofﬁce. A common feature in these
situations is that the patient needs to use a smartphone as a
device that collects sensor data, using the mobile networks
to transmit the data. When walking or jogging in the park
many other people and their devices might interfere with the
communication of the smartphone.
When walking in the woods, there might be several spots
which are not covered by a mobile network. In this case, the
signal is so weak that only an emergency calls from another
provider can be done. While data trafﬁc is not possible, SMS
messages can be used to send data with very low bandwidth,
possibly after several retries. For an average walking trip, this
outage may last for some minutes.
3) Transport Scenarios: Core Scenario A-iv presents a
situation where a patient commutes to a doctor’s ofﬁce or
to a caf´e using public transport. Here, the patient needs
to use a smartphone as a device that collects sensor data,
using the mobile networks to transmit the data. Blind spots
without connectivity to a mobile network, roaming, varying
data transmission quality, etc., are parts of this scenario. This
scenario can be applied to long-distance trains, planes, etc.
Core Scenario A-v represents the scenario where a patient
uses his own or another’s (private) car to commute to a shop,
a caf´e, or the doctor’s ofﬁce. Here, the patient needs to use
a smartphone as a device that collects sensor data, using the
mobile networks or networks installed or used in the car to
transmit the data. Blind spots without connectivity to a mobile
network, roaming, varying data transmission quality, etc., are
parts of this scenario.
4) Caf´e Scenario (A-vii): The patient visits a caf´e. Here,
the patient needs to use a smartphone as a device that collects
sensor data, using mobile networks or caf´e’s WLAN zone
for data transfer. Switching between the WLAN and mobile
networks may occur, the WLAN might be of varying quality,
many other caf´e visitors may interfere, or the WLAN might
not actually be connected to the Internet.
5) Doctor’s Ofﬁce Scenario (A-viii): The patient is in the
doctor’s ofﬁce, usually after some time in a waiting room
(A-ix). Here, the patient can have extra sensors attached.
These extra sensors, as well as the existing sensors, can
communicate with the doctor’s infrastructure either through
the smartphone of the patient, or directly, depending on the
needs. A doctor can change a sensor’s characteristics, which
requires the possibility to re-program the sensor devices.
6) Waiting Room Scenario (A-ix): The patient is in a
waiting room at a doctor’s ofﬁce or a hospital. Patients that are
known to the healthcare system can be connected from their
smartphone to the healthcare network; here, speciﬁc actions
for collecting data from the device or other preparations can
be performed. Once the patient is in the range of the waiting
room, the smartphone can transfer large amounts of stored
patient data directly to the infrastructure of the medical centre
via short-range communication, instead of using long-range
mobile communication.
7) Other scenarios: In ASSET other scenarios have been
developed which are omitted here. Most of these are speciﬁc
to the hospital scenario B. For completeness, we mention
a scenario where patients are brought to a hospital in an
ambulance (B-xv).
V. STORYLINE FOR THE HOME SCENARIO
We developed the storyline for the home scenario as follows:
Petra has both a heart condition and diabetes. In a hospital,
she had two sensors placed in her body: one heart sensor and
one blood sugar sensor. In addition, she uses external sensors
to measure blood pressure, heart beat, inertial sensors, etc., as
well as a camera. Petra is living in her home that has been
prepared for the monitoring system and is commissioned with
the necessary data connections so that her vital signs can be
periodically reported to the healthcare personnel in levels (II)
(nurse or doctor) or (III) (patient records) as introduced in
Fig. 3; several technologies can be applied to achieve this.
The patient monitoring system is set up so that the sensor
data are transmitted wirelessly (several transmission technolo-
gies are possible) to a smartphone that acts as PCH. The PCH
communicates with the hospital infrastructure (Level (III)).
1. Petra is now being monitored at home but data is acquired
remotely (A-i); the following requirements are important:
a. Petra wants her data to remain conﬁdential from neigh-
bours, i.e., people close-by, but outside her home;
b. Petra wants her data to remain conﬁdential from visitors,
i.e., people inside her home.
2. Petra takes a bath in her home (planned sensor acquisition
disruption; A-i);
a. the sensors are water-proof; the PCH is close enough to
receive signals;
b. the sensors need to be removed;
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

i. a change in the values implicitly indicates the sensor
removal; or
ii. patient must notify the PCH about the sensors going
off-line;
3. Petra is sleeping and sensors fall off (unplanned sensor
acquisition disruption; A-i).
4. Petra leaves her home for training outdoors or a stroll in
the park nearby (A-iii).
5. Petra leaves her home to visit her friends in a caf´e (A-vii,
A-iii, A-iv, A-v).
6. Petra visits her regular doctor for a check-up; the doctor’s
ofﬁce is in walking distance from her home (A-iii, A-viii,
A-ix).
7. Petra becomes ill and is transported by an emergency
ambulance to the hospital (B-xv); transition to the Overall
Hospital Scenario B.
To conduct an efﬁcient threat analysis of this storyline,
we apply security objectives introduced by Savola and Abie
[10] and Savola et al. [11], who stated that adaptive security
decision-making should adapt requirements for privacy and
data conﬁdentiality based on the data processing needs, roles
of stakeholders, regulations and legislation, and the privacy
level of data indicated by privacy metrics. For example, the
security requirement pointed out in Step 1.a of the storyline
is related to conﬁdentiality and privacy, which are often
emphasised in healthcare. Strong conﬁdentiality algorithms,
key distribution, associated processes, and compliance to ap-
propriate privacy legislation and regulations are crucial.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We highlighted the role of the scenarios in the assess-
ment framework for IoT-based adaptive security solutions in
eHealth. This is based on a generic system model, the re-
quirements for eHealth applications, and a generic assessment
framework. The Home Scenario of the ASSET project covers
multiple core scenarios representing various situations. These
address speciﬁc requirements related to the context, the data-
communication, the devices, and the actions of the involved
actors. The core scenarios are speciﬁc to the eHealth case,
and make it possible to identify relevant cases that need to
be evaluated, such as situations where IoT devices need to
be removed or disconnected, the use ample communication
channels, or the impact of mobility.
A storyline for a home patient with chronic diseases has
been described and analysed. In the future, the overall sce-
narios, as well as the underlying core scenarios and storylines
will be used in the ASSET project to evaluate the developed
algorithms within adaptive security.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented here has been carried out in the project
ASSET – Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of Things
in eHealth (2012–2015) funded by the Research Council of
Norway in the VERDIKT programme. We wish to thank our
colleagues involved in this project for helpful discussions that
made this study possible.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Abie and I. Balasingham, “Risk-based adaptive se-
curity for smart IoT in eHealth,” in BODYNETS 2012
– 7th International Conference on Body Area Networks.
ACM, 2012.
[2] I. F. Alexander and N. Maiden, Eds., “Scenarios, Stories,
Use Cases: Through the Systems Development Life-
Cycle”.
John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[3] S. Faily and I. Flechais, “A meta-model for usable secure
requirements engineering,” in SESS – ICSE Workshop on
Software Engineering for Secure Systems.
Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2010.
[4] H. Mouratidis and P. Giorgini, “Security attack testing
(SAT)–testing the security of information systems at
design time,” Information Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, Jan.
2007, pp. 1166–1183.
[5] W. Leister, H. Abie, and S. Poslad, “Deﬁning the
ASSET
scenarios,”
Norsk
Regnesentral,
NR
Note
DART/17/2012, Dec. 2012.
[6] Y. B. Woldegeorgis, H. Abie, and M. Hamdi, “A testbed
for adaptive security for IoT in eHealth,” in ASPI 2013 –
International Workshop on Adaptive Security & Privacy
management for the Internet of Things.
ACM, 2013.
[7] W. Leister, J. Bjørk, R. Schlatte, E. B. Johnsen,
and A. Griesmayer, “Exploiting model variability in
ABS to verify distributed algorithms,” International
Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol. 5,
no. 1&2, 2012, pp. 55–68. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/ [Accessed:
1. Dec 2013].
[8] W. Leister, T. Fretland, and I. Balasingham, “Security
and authentication architecture using MPEG-21 for
wireless
patient
monitoring
systems,”
International
Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 2, no. 1, 2009,
pp. 16–29. [Online]. Available: http://www.iariajournals.
org/security/ [Accessed: 1. Dec 2013].
[9] W. Leister, T. Schulz, A. Lie, K. H. Grythe, and I. Bal-
asingham, “Quality of service, adaptation, and security
provisioning in wireless patient monitoring systems,” in
Biomedical Engineering Trends in electronics, commu-
nications and software.
INTECH, 2011, pp. 711–736.
[10] R. Savola and H. Abie, “Metrics-driven security objective
decomposition for an e-health application with adaptive
security management,” in ASPI 2013 – International
Workshop on Adaptive Security & Privacy management
for the Internet of Things.
ACM, 2013.
[11] R. Savola, H. Abie, and M. Sihvonen, “Towards metrics-
driven adaptive security management in e-health IoT
applications,” in BODYNETS 2012 – 7th International
Conference on Body Area Networks.
ACM, 2012.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

