Integral Safety Layers for Residential System
Development
Mohammad Rajabali Nejad
Department of Design, Production, and Management
University of Twente
Enschede, the Netherlands
e-mail: M.Rajabalinejad@utwente.nl
Chua Eu Chieh
Student of Mechanical Engineering
University of Twente
Enschede, the Netherlands
e-mail: chuaec2@gmail.com
Abstract—Integrally safe, or integral safety, is a challenge
because safety is in different hierarchical layers across the
entire life cycle for products and systems. Safety is beyond a
specific layer, and challenges for safe integration are present
through the complete chain of hierarchy. The system hierarchy
helps to understand the system as a part of an integral whole,
composed of components which interact with its environment.
This paper provides an overview of integral safety, aiming to
present an organisational view of the system’s structure under
consideration both internally and externally through the concept
of safety layers. The paper builds upon the currently established
hierarchical concepts and explains how the concept is applied
in the tiny house project, where technology was successfully
integrated with residential areas.
Keywords - Safety layer; product safety; system integra-
tion; hierarchy.
I. INTRODUCTION
A hierarchy is an arrangement of items (objects, names,
values, categories, etc.) in which the items are categorised
as being ‘above’, ‘below’, or ‘at the same level’ as one
another. According to the Oxford English dictionary, levels in
a hierarchy may also represent authority, control or ownership
of lower levels (command structure). It is important to note
that the depth of the hierarchy is adjusted to fit the complexity
of the system. Moreover, for the sake of efficiency, a system
may focus on specific levels. Logical hierarchy, also known
as a conceptual order, has uses in various disciplines, such
as risk assessment or system governance as presented by
[1]. Leveson had proposed the hierarchy model called the
Systems-Theoretic Accident Model and Processes (STAMP)
as an alternative safety incident investigation and to improve
the performance analysis of a system [2].
The logic of hierarchy is closely related to the sequence
of integration. In engineering practices, creation comes before
integration. That is a logical approach where the functionalities
are first identified, the systems and subsystems are designed,
and then the components or subsystems are built and inte-
grated. Systems engineering discipline pays extra attention to
the importance of integration. It defines the purpose of the
integration process as ‘to synthesise a set of system elements
into a realised system (product or service) that satisfies system
requirements, architecture, and design’, see [3]. This discipline
mainly focuses on subsystems and integration. The concept of
integration has been extended from just a technical integration
in various literature, for example, [1] [4]. This study aims to
propose a framework for integrating the technical and non-
technical elements.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2,
we introduce the seven layers for safe integration introduced
in [4], [5]. Then, in Section 3, we present its application
to the LIFE project. And finally, in Section 4, we offer our
conclusions.
II. LAYERS OF SAFE INTEGRATION
Through the concept of hierarchy, safe integration starts
with the integration of components, where a combination of
two or more parts or elements makes a subsystem. Then,
integrating all the subsystems together with the human inter-
actions results in the technical system. Integration of humans
with the technical system is known as system integration.
The integration of various systems is also known as systems
integration or System of systems (SoS). SoS need to offer
social services to function, and that leads to sociotechnical
integration. National governments’ control and monitoring of
sociotechnical systems reflect the conformity with societal
values regarding national norms, standards, and policies. And
they also need to comply with regional, continental, or inter-
national regulations. Each integration layer applicable for safe
products or systems is elaborated on below.
1) Safe integration of subsystems refers to a combination
of two or more components or elements that make a
subsystem. Subsystems or components are parts of a
system and often do not function independently. There-
fore, component integration or subsystem integration is
often the earliest action in physical integration. The
integration of components often occurs in the production
or assembly stage.
2) Safe integration of technical system refers to the integra-
tion of components, elements or subsystems, or human
interactions to realise a system that accomplishes the
system objectives. In the system engineering community,
a system is defined as ‘an integrated set of elements,
subsystems, or assemblies that cooperate to accomplish
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-943-0
PESARO 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

a defined objective’. These elements include technolog-
ical products (hardware, software, firmware), processes,
people, information, techniques, facilities, services, and
other support elements, according to [6]. The Systems
Engineering (SE) handbook defines integration as a
technical process making integration of the elements of
a system possible. In this context, successful system
integration is a system that works and delivers the
required functionalities without failures. The failures
that happen in this process are seen as defects of a
component or interface. At this level, the main focus
is on components, subsystems, or interfaces. The SE
Handbook does recognise that the integration of humans
and systems is not a technical process and therefore rec-
ommends focusing on human systems integration (HSI)
across the design or engineering of systems instead.
3) Safe integration of humans with technical system (HTSI)
refers to the integration of the humans and technical sys-
tems. HTSI focuses on the human, an integral element of
every system, over the system life cycle. It is an essential
part of engineering systems, as it promotes a ‘total sys-
tem’ approach that includes humans, technology (e.g.,
hardware and software), the operational context, and the
necessary interfaces between and among the elements to
make them all work in harmony, see [7].
HTSI ensures consideration of the human in the system
capability definition and system development. Here, the
human is considered an element of the system; its
integration with the system must be fully accomplished.
It includes domains, such as human factors engineering
(human performance, human interface, user-centred de-
sign), workload (regular and emergency), training (skill,
education, attitude), personnel (knowledge, attitudes,
career progression), working conditions and health (er-
gonomics, occupational standards, and hazard and acci-
dent avoidance), e.g. [6].
4) Safe integration of System of Systems refers to the
integration of two or more systems. According to [8],
a system of systems is a set of systems and system
elements that interact to provide a unique capability that
none of the individual systems ever could accomplish
on their own. A system of systems is, in itself, wholly
integrated. Also, it has elements that are managerially
or operationally independent. Mo Jamshidi considers
integration as the critical viability of any system made of
systems [9]. To achieve optimal results, having shared
objectives among organisations, co-creation of desired
capabilities and co-integration of interoperable services
are crucial to success, according to [10].
5) Safe integration with sociotechnical systems focuses on
the integration of the system of systems or related ser-
vices with society. In other words, a system of systems
needs to be up-to-date with social demands in order
to function optimally. A system of systems requires to
conform to regulations, norms, values, and culture [11].
For example, the language of communication has an
impact on the sustainable performance of the system of
systems [12].
6) Safe integration with political system refers to the con-
trol or monitoring of sociotechnical systems by national
governments and makes societal policies. Governments
have the task of controlling sociotechnical systems while
maintaining societal values and policies. Organisational
chains of responsibility, authority, and communication
ought to measure and control mechanisms to effectively
drive the organisation and enable people to perform their
roles and responsibilities, see [13].
7) Safe integration with global system refers to shared
concerns of human societies which may, for example,
be represented by international regulations. Globally
essential considerations, such as the use of green energy,
reducing the usage of fossil fuels, and minimising CO2
emissions.
An illustration of the layers is provided via the application of
the concept, which is described in Section 3.
III. EXAMPLE APPLICATION
A. Introduction to LIFE
The University of Twente, in 2019, initiated the ’Living
project for Future Innovative Environments’ project or more
conveniently referred to with its acronym ’LIFE’. The project
aimed to research the interplay between the technology, hu-
mans and the infrastructure system in supporting society’s
transition towards a future of low carbon footprint, climate-
friendly living, and a circular economy [14]. Ten small-
and-medium enterprises around the Twente region, known as
the LIFE Project Partners, contribute to the project over the
entire lifecycle, starting from conceptual design to equipment
installation, support, maintenance and eventual disposal.
The aspiration is that the residential buildings become
autarkic, meaning that they are self-sufficient in water and
energy. Solar panels will be used to generate electricity and
capture heat. A hydrogen system and batteries will act as
electrical energy storage, charged and discharged cyclically.
Heat is stored in an underground buffer and distributed via
a heat pump throughout the house. Rainwater is harvested
and treated before use. Used water is also treated and re-used
wherever possible. The conceptual idea of LIFE can be seen
in Figure 1.
The project will span over ten years, with six ’tiny house’
units built initially as a pilot and function as ’living labs’.
Energy generation and consumption data will be collected to
enable researchers to evaluate the residents’ interaction with
installed technology.
B. Integration levels in the project
The hierarchy of integration for the LIFE project can be de-
picted in Figure 2. Various elements of the project residing at
each hierarchy level are represented by dots. Lines connecting
the dots suggest a direct influence, or interaction, between the
elements. The elements within each hierarchy were identified
simply from a brainstorming exercise.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-943-0
PESARO 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Figure 1. Conceptual depiction of the LIFE Project. Graphics from the LIFE project documents [14]
The inner-most box contains the various subsystems. Col-
lectively, these subsystems are integrated to form the technical
system, i.e., the ’tiny house’. The figure does not make a rigid
distinction between components, subsystems, and systems. For
example, the thermal energy subsystem consists of several
components, of which a few are depicted in the figure. The
electrical energy storage subsystems comprise several battery
types and a hydrogen system. The hydrogen system can be
broken down further into equipment and components used in
hydrogen production and storage and the fuel cells.
The ’tiny house’ technical system naturally has interfaces
with human elements at the various asset lifecycle phases.
For example, during the ’design’ and ’construction’ phases,
the ’tiny house’ has the most interaction with the building
designer, builders and subsystem providers. In contrast, the
homeowner, inhabitants and the facility manager come to the
fore during the ’use’ and ’disposal’ phases.
Human systems integration is critical to ensure that the LIFE
system’s envisioned benefits can be realised. For example,
human-related activities, such as misoperations and mistakes
during maintenance, account for most hydrogen subsystems
accidents [15]. Therefore, proper communication and system-
atic sharing of information among the relevant stakeholders are
essential to reduce the human-factor failures during all phases
of an asset lifecycle.
The ’tiny houses’ exist within a more extensive system
of systems, interacting with elements, such as the electrical,
water and sewage network. Should a complete autarky design
be impossible, the ’tiny houses’ are connected to the local
water, electricity, and sewage grid. Even if total autarky can
be achieved, the ’tiny houses’ must be connected to the
University of Twente’s emergency response system since it is
considered a working laboratory. The laboratory administrators
must comply with existing procedures for managing hazardous
activities and the organisational structure of the emergency
response.
The sociotechnical system integrates the social aspects with
the system of systems. For instance, society’s acceptance
of ’tiny houses’ is underpinned by the ability to satisfy
environmental concerns and affordability while also providing
a quality of living. Assurance is also needed that the novel
technologies deployed, such as the electrical energy storage
subsystems, do not endanger public safety. There is also the
expectation that research organisations contribute to society’s
advancement by providing empirical data and being a catalyst
for innovation. The LIFE project’s ’living lab’ concept enables
researchers to collect information about society’s energy con-
sumption behaviour - from a small control group with above-
average skills and capability in using novel technologies -
when living in a building equipped with relatively state-of-
the-art energy systems.
The political system balances the need to protect consumers,
avoid the potential unintended consequences of technological
disruption, and foster innovation. Government bodies create,
maintain and enforce regulations in line with national policies
and laws. Commercial bodies also are interested in trends that
can impact their business model.
Following the example of energy storage subsystems,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-943-0
PESARO 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Figure 2. Hierarchy of integration of the LIFE project.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-943-0
PESARO 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

energy-related national policies and regulations should be
aligned to remove implementation barriers. For example, hy-
drogen is considered an industrial gas subject to strict legal
and safety requirements in the Dutch context. Therefore, the
installation of hydrogen systems in residential zones would
still require compliance with national legislation similar to
that of industrial sectors, such as the ’Major accidents decree
(BRZO), the ’Public Safety Decree’ (BEVI), the ’Spatial
Planning Act’ (WRO) and the ’General Provisions Environ-
mental Legislation Act’ (WABO) [16]. On the other hand,
regulations around using batteries in residential buildings are
less restrictive, leading to situations where more guidance
would help manage the associated safety hazards.
Commercial interests would also need to be considered.
Insurance companies providing cover for buildings equipped
with novel energy generation and storage technologies would
naturally strive to balance profitability with risks by seeking
more assurance of such equipment’s safety levels. In addition,
stakeholders involved in power generation, transmission and
distribution would be interested in emerging trends that impact
revenue and expenditures.
At the all-encompassing hierarchical level, global or re-
gional systems represent the various concerns of the worldwide
society. Internationally-adopted agreements, such as the Paris
Agreement 2016, provide the impetus for changes in national
policies around funding and technology deployment to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. Such a mandate makes a clear case
for the need for energy storage technology. EU directives
necessitate some changes in its member states national laws,
while harmonised standards become references for national
standards and regulations. According to van der Meer et al.,
the five EU directive that affects the deployment of hydro-
gen technology are the Major Accident Hazards Directive
2012/18/EU (”Seveso III”), ATEX Directive 2014/34/EU (the
recast of ”ATEX 95”), Industrial Emissions Directive (IED)
2010/75/EU, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Di-
rective 2001/42/EC and the Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) Directive 2011/92/EU [16]. In addition, Laumann et al.
mentioned that hydrogen systems would need to obtain the
’CE’ mark by complying with these directives: Machinery
Directive 2006/42/EC, Low Voltage Directive 2014/35/EU,
Electromagnetic Compatibility Directive 2004/108/EC, Pres-
sure Equipment Directive (PED) 2014/68/EC and ATEX di-
rectives [17].
The technical standards can address safety, quality and
cost concerns for designers, producers, installers, and end-
users and reduce market barriers for products. For instance,
the recently published NEN 4288 by the Royal Netherlands
Standardization Institute is expected to provide clarity and
guidelines around the safe use and operation of batteries
storage technologies in homes by business providers. This
standard, in turn, should help assure end-users of the safety
of battery systems [18].
C. Discussion
The safety layers can describe how technologies are interre-
lated with individuals, organisations, other supporting systems,
the society, and (inter)national authorities in a broad eco-
system. In general, all the layers for safe integration are mu-
tually supportive of one another. For example, the acceptance
of buildings conceptually similar to the LIFE project could be
high if there is public trust in its safety and the perception
that such a design can effectively reduce the carbon footprint
of society’s lifestyle.
It should be noted that the elements within each layer could
be competing with one another (e.g., commercial versus soci-
ety concerns) or setting constraints for others (e.g., regulations
vs innovation). These interactions need to be evaluated during
a product’s conception.
By applying the safety layers to the LIFE project, we
learned that a system integrator could use the hierarchy of
integration to identify a stakeholder map to aid the communi-
cation and information flow between the various stakeholders
and system elements. Safety hazards can be systematically
identified through these interactions, and the risks assessed
accordingly. The priorities and concerns of each stakeholder
might differ and need to be considered. For example, the sub-
system provider’s most significant concern would be whether
the supplied subsystems are inherently safe, while the first
responders’ foremost concern is personnel safety.
With this, we summarise our observations through the
following propositions:
• From the methodological point of view, we find it neces-
sary to distinguish between the ‘technical system’ and the
‘humans’ who interact with the system aiming for safe
integration. Therefore, although it may sound trivial, we
find it helpful to use ‘human and technical system integra-
tion’ instead of ‘human system integration’. That makes
the integration goals more transparent. In other words,
as smart appliances and novel technology become more
pervasive in our daily lives, we propose that the ‘human
and technical system integration (HTSI)’ provides more
transparency for achieving safe integration as practised in
system safety discipline.
• We observed that integration at the technical system level
is different from integrating humans with a technical
system. Therefore, we propose that humans are not best
described as a subsystem or an element of the system
(as conventionally practised by systems engineering dis-
cipline) but are considered a separate category.
We suggest that the conventional view may imply that
technical tools are meant to provide a higher level of
control when in principle, it should be humans that should
dictate the manner of their interaction with technology.
The latter perspective requires a different starting point of
a technology’s design philosophy, utilising a more diverse
set of knowledge, tools, and methods.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-943-0
PESARO 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

IV. CONCLUSIONS
The seven layers for safe integration, described in this
paper, create the ‘big-picture’ of the residential system devel-
opment. The starting integration levels (e.g., technical system
or system integration) align with the systems engineering
standard practice. Yet, the proposed approach encourages the
designer to look beyond the direct system stakeholders or
system environment. The integration considerations beyond
the technical system are rather critical for introducing new
technologies.
We also observed that a clear distinction between the
technical system and the humans in the system provides further
transparency into what the LIFE project is meant to deliver.
The LIFE project was still in development at the time of this
study, and the operational aspects of the project need further
elaborations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors acknowledge the support of all the collaborators
for the LIFE project, including Y.Hajimolana, M.Winkler,
G.Hoogsteen and the Project Partners, such as SuperB, HyGear
and Volterion and Brandweer Twente. The co-author Eu Chieh
was a Master’s student at the University of Twente when this
paper was written, but he has since graduated.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Leveson, Engineering a Safer World.
Cambridge, Massachusetts,
London, England: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2012.
[2] N. Leveson, “A new accident model for engineering safer systems,”
Safety science, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 237–270, 2004.
[3] D. D. Walden, G. J. Roedler, K. J. Forsberg, R. D. Hamelin, and T. M.
Shortell, Systems Engineering Handbook A Guide For System LiFe Cycle
Processes And Activities. International Council on Systems Engineering
(INCOSE), 2015.
[4] M. Rajabali Nejad, L. Dongen, and M. Ramtahalsing, “Systems inte-
gration theory and fundamentals,” Safety and Reliability, vol. 39, no. 1,
pp. 83–113, 2020.
[5] M. Rajabali Nejad, Safety by Design Engineering Products and Systems.
first ed., 2020.
[6] ISO, IEC, and IEEE, ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288, First edition 2015-05-15,
Systems And Software Engineering — System Life Cycle Processes.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015(E), Switzerland: International Organization
for Standardization, International Electrotechnical Commission, Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 2015.
[7] ISO, IEC, and IEEE, ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148 Systems And Software Engi-
neering —Life Cycle Processes — Requirements Engineering. Switzer-
land: International Organization for Standardization, International Elec-
trotechnical Commission, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers, Inc., 2011.
[8] ISO, IEC, and IEEE, ISO/IEC/IEEE/DIS 21840 Systems And Software
Engineering — Guidelines For The Utilization Of Iso/Iec/Ieee 15288
In The Context Of System Of Systems (Sos) Engineering. Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization, International Electrotech-
nical Commission, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.,
2019.
[9] M. Jamshidi, “System of systems engineering new challenges for the 21’
century,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 23,
no. 5, 2008.
[10] A. M. Madni and M. Sievers, “System of systems integration: Key
considerations and challenges,” Systems Engineering, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 330–347, 2014.
[11] D. M. Woo and K. J. Vicente, “Sociotechnical systems, risk manage-
ment, and public health: comparing the north battleford and walkerton
outbreaks,” Reliability Engineering and System Safety, vol. 80, no. 3,
pp. 253–269, 2003.
[12] K. Davis, T. Mazzuchi, and S. Sarkani, “Architecting technology
transitions: A sustainability-oriented sociotechnical approach,” Systems
Engineering, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 193–212, 2013.
[13] M. Cantor, “Cantor, m. 2006. estimation variance and governance. in
ibm developerworks. accessed on 15 september 2011.,” IBM devel-
operWorks. Available online at http://www.ibm.com, vol. Available at
http://www.ibm.com, 2006.
[14] E. C. Chua, Management of safety hazards in residential buildings with
multiple electrical energy storage systems. Msc, University of Twente,
2021.
[15] Y. Suwa, H. Miyahara, K. Kubo, K. Yonezawa, Y. Ono, and K. Mikoda,
“Design of safe hydrogen refueling stations against gas-leakage, explo-
sion and accidental automobile collision,” in Proceedings of the 16th
World Hydrogen Energy Conference, vol. 139, Citeseer, 2006.
[16] J. van der Meer, R. Perotti, and F. de Jong, “Hylaw national policy paper
for the netherlands,” 2018.
[17] F. Laumann, F. Verbecke, A. Duclos, A. Zanoto, and L. Zhiyong,
“Description of selected fch systems and infrastructure, relevant safety
features and concepts, delivery 2.1,” 2015.
[18] NEN,
NEN
4288:2020
Bedrijfsvoering
van
batterij-
energieopslagsystemen - Aanvullende eisen op NEN 3140. Vlinderweg
6, 2623 AX Delft: NEN - Royal Netherlands Standardization Institute,
2020.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-943-0
PESARO 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

