Performance-oriented Adaptive Design for  
Complex Military Organizations 
Liu Zhong+, Huang Jincai+, Tan Yuejin+, Wang Chaoyang+, Ma Jianguang++, Yang Guoli+ 
+School of Information System and Management, National University of Defense Technology 
++School of Training, National University of Defense Technology 
Changsha Hunan, China 
e-mail: phillipliu@263.net, {huangjincai,yjtan,cywang,jgma}@nudt.edu.cn, greenyoung@126.com
Abstract—Traditional military organizations are designed 
mainly based on the missions, categorized as mission-
oriented design. The paper proposes a new framework that 
revises the design process, aiming at the organization 
performance, which comes from the new semantic model 
eFINC and performance metrics. First, a complete model of 
military organization is proposed, i.e., eFINC, which extends 
semantic contents of functional units in complex military 
organizations, provides the formulization method for the 
nodes, edges and visual representation. Secondly, the 
performance metrics of military organizations are defined 
for eFINC model normatively. The metrics are classified as 
Response Speed, Coordination Capacity, Execution Capacity 
and Information Support. And then, the adaptive design 
model is proposed based on the eFINC model and metrics. 
Two design strategies are introduced which will lead to a 
high-performance design of military organizations. Then, 
Performance Rate is defined as the main reference for the 
adaptive organization design. The adaptive design procedure 
for military organizations is illustrated in detail. Finally, the 
practical case study is conducted to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of our model. 
Keywords- Complex Military Organization; eFINC model; 
Performance-Oriented;Adaptive design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. Motivation 
The term C4ISRK is used by the US army to refer to 
the complex systems to carry out missions by military 
forces [1, 6], can also be viewed as a ‘super-system’ 
comprised of varied functional units that are themselves 
complex, interacting with each other to achieve the 
common shared goals of military systems [3]. The 
structure of traditional C4ISRK is typically hierarchy. 
With the development of networking and computer 
technology, more and more varied modes of C4ISRK 
system structures come into being. Meanwhile, the ideas 
of modern military operations heavily rely on more 
flexible and more robust structures, such as Network 
Centric Warfare (NCW) [2]. Network Centric Warfare is 
becoming the major type of wars, which focus on overall 
performance of military systems instead of that of 
individual component for single task. 
Military organizations can be viewed as a subset or 
‘overlay network’ of C4ISRK system, which are designed 
to execute some mission over them. Given a fixed 
C4ISRK system, how to design an efficient military 
organization to meet the need of some mission is a 
challenging problem. Military organizations are assigned 
to accomplish varied tasks. The challenges that military 
organization designers are facing upon are how to describe 
their structures, and how to analyze their performance 
under uncertain and changing environment. Levchuk had 
proposed the normative design of task-based organization 
in the way of three-phase process [7,8,9]; however, the 
effort is insufficient for organization design, especially in 
the 
networking 
environment. 
All 
the 
subsequent 
improvements for Levchuk’s work are based on the similar 
ideas [8, 9]. These works can be categorized as mission-
oriented design. Military organizations with mission-
oriented design strategies are difficult to adapt to the 
complex 
and 
volatile 
external 
changing. 
These 
organizations will reduce the adaptability of the structure 
while only aiming at the pursuit of mission efficiency. 
It has become an essential need to make design for 
adaptive military organizations to achieve the high 
performance for military missions. It have coming into 
being that the military organizations with adaptive features 
will play an important role in the war. Traditional 
organizations are designed mainly based on the 
organization efficiency. The paper proposes a new 
framework that revises the design process, aiming at the 
performance, not just the task efficiency of the 
corresponding organizations. 
B. Related Work 
Many researchers have conducted much research work 
in this field. Anthony put forward four principles for the 
evaluation of NMO architecture based on Social Network 
Analysis (SNA) and FINC methods [5, 16, 17]. SNA 
performs network analysis of relations between individuals 
within the organization, and is originally inspired from 
graph theory, and is often applied in military organizations, 
sociology and anthropology. FINC (Force, Intelligence, 
Networking and C2) method is used to evaluate 
effectiveness of different organization architecture, the 
evaluation 
metrics 
include 
information 
delay, 
collaboration delay, intelligence factor and other indices. 
FINC method proposes some ideas of modeling and 
analysis of military organizations, but has some difficulties 
to describe the formal characteristics of military 
organizations. Anthony also researched the relationship 
13
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

between the robustness and organization structure based 
on FINC model [5, 16, 17]. Jeff has also researched the 
problems of distributed networked operations, building the 
networked models for military organization [13]. But 
these models do not have the abilities of performance 
analysis over the organization structures. 
Kathleen have put forward a PCAN method to model 
C2 organization by using the network form [4, 12]. PCAN 
model is consisted of multiple networks, but each network 
is isomorphism (All the nodes are of same types.), and 
each network is deterministic (all the nodes are connected 
or disconnected). The work of Kathleen focuses on 
analysis for networked features of military organizations. 
The analysis is independant to the design of military 
organizations. 
Levchuk had proposed the normative mission-based 
design of organization in the way of three-phase process 
He presents a design methodology for synthesizing 
organizations to execute complex missions efficiently. It 
focuses on devising mission planning strategies to 
optimally achieve mission goals while optimally utilizing 
organization’s resources. Effective planning is often the 
key to successful completion of the mission, and 
conversely, mission failure can often be traced back to 
poor planning. First, corresponding to this framework, 
military organizations are designed based on highly 
abstracted system models, without considering constrains 
of basic characteristics of existing C4ISRK systems. 
Secondly, Levchuk has provided only simple metrics to 
evaluate the performance of target organizations, i.e., task 
accomplishment time and so on. Jincai and Baoxin has 
researched other metrics to measure the performance, but 
the improvement can be viewed as the extension of time-
based metrics [10, 11, 15]. The effort of these works is 
insufficient for performance-oriented design. 
C. Our Contributions 
By extending the FINC model, this paper provides a 
new approach for organization performance evaluation and 
builds a new performance-oriented design methodology. 
Our contributions of this paper are following: 
(1) A complete model of military organization is 
proposed, i.e., eFINC, which comes from the FINC model. 
Contrary to the traditional FINC model, eFINC extends 
semantic contents of functional units in organizations, 
provides the formulization method for nodes, edges and 
visual representation. 
(2) The performance metrics of military organizations 
are defined for eFINC model normatively. The metrics are 
classified as Response Speed, Coordination Capacity, 
Execution Capacity and Information Support. Contrary to 
these of FINC model, the metrics are systematic and 
meaningful. 
(3) The adaptive design model is proposed based on 
the eFINC model and its metrics. First, two design 
strategies are introduced which will lead to a high-
performance design of military organizations. Then, 
Adjusting Value (AV) is defined, which implies the 
performance rate, as the main reference for the adaptive 
organization design. At last, the adaptive design procedure 
for military organizations is illustrated in detail. 
(4) Finally, the practical case study is conducted in 
Section V to demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. 
II. 
THE EXTENDED FINC MODEL FOR COMPLEX 
MILITARY ORGANIZATION 
The traditional FINC model is leveraged to describe 
the military organizations consisting of force units, 
intelligence units, networking units and C2 units. As we 
mentioned before, FINC model is constrained with its 
semantic representation for nodes and edges. Based on the 
graph theory, the paper extends the semantic expression of 
varied functional units in the military organizations and 
provides a method of visual representation for the 
organization topology. The new model here is named as 
eFINC. 
A. Node Model of eFINC 
On the basis of FINC model, there are four types of 
organization functional units: C2 unit (C2), intelligence 
unit node (I), force unit (F) and communication unit 
(Comm). Communication unit is a special type of units, 
which builds a relation between different other units. Here, 
nodes are modeled as C2, I or F. Communication unit will 
be discussed, together with EDGE model in next section. 
NODE ::= < C2| I | F > 
(1) C2. C2 units receive information transferred from I 
or F, makes decisions, and takes charge of I and F. The 
representation form is as follows: 
C2 :: =< Delay, InEdges, OutEdges> 
where Delay is the time delay for information handling, 
InEdges and OutEdges are respectively the input and 
output edges of the C2 unit. 
(2) I. Intelligence units includes the detection and 
surveillance systems that provide space information about 
entities in the battle fields, receives and transfers these 
information to C2 unit or force units. Scouts, radars, early-
warning aircrafts and satellites are typical examples. The 
representation form is as follows: 
I :: =<Quality, Radius, InEdges, OutEdges> 
where Quality represents the intelligence quality offered 
by intelligence units; Radius represents the detecting 
radius accordingly. 
(3) F. Force units are any entities that can be able to 
receive orders from C2 units and take actions to the targets 
and feedback the action effects to C2 units, such as tank 
bands, armored vehicles, fighters. The representation form 
is as follows:  
F :: =<Radius, InEdges, OutEdges> 
where Radius is the combat radius of the force units. 
B. Edge Model of eFINC 
Edge indicates a relation between two different nodes, 
which is constrained with a communication unit in military 
organizations. The number of types of arbitrary directed 
relation between different units with unit types is 9, named 
as EC2-C2, EC2-I, EC2-F, EI-C2, EI-I, EI-F, EF-C2, EF-I, EF-F. Each 
edge is dependant with some communication unit. All the 
14
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

relations are sharing same basic parameter structure, 
defined as below: 
EDGE :: =<EdgeType, Delay, Accuracy, InPort, 
OutPort> 
where Delay indicates the delay time from start node 
InPort to end node OutPort, Accuracy is the information 
transferring accuracy, and EdgeType :: = < EC2-C2| EC2-I|  
EC2-F| EI-C2| EI-I| EI-F| EF-C2| EF-I| EF-F>. 
C. Edge Model of eFINC 
The complete model of eFINC can be described as a 
three-tuple: 
eFINC ::= <NODE,EDGE,VP> 
where NODE, EDGE are defined in Section II.A and II.B 
respectively, which describe the components and structure 
of military organizations. Accordingly, VP defines the 
visual primitives for nodes and edges in eFINC, as shown 
in Figure 1. The square nodes represent fire units (F) , 
rounded boxes nodes represent intelligence units (I) , circle 
nodes represent C2 units (C2), lines with arrows are one-
way information flows, while lines without arrows are two 
way information flows, and the weights on the lines are 
delay time when the information is transmitted through 
them.  
In order to more clearly illustrate our model, here the 
paper gives an example of eFINC, shown in Figure 1, with 
10 elements [1]. 
 
Figure 1.  Military Organization Structure based on FINC 
According to the organization shown in the figure, the 
parameters are assumed as below ( the delay of each edge 
is depicted in Figure 1): 
Radius (Scout1) = Radius (Scout2) = 100;  
Radius (STRAT INT) = 400; 
Radius (BDE1) = Radius (BDE2) = 100;  
Radius (STRAT AIR) = 400; 
Quality (Scout1) = Quality (Scout2) = 0.5; 
Quality (STRAT INT) = 0.3; 
III. ORGANIZATION PERFORMANCE MODELING 
The role of eFINC model is to evaluate organization 
performance 
according 
to 
organization 
networking 
topology and node capacities. These performance metrics 
directly 
determinate 
the 
adaptability 
of 
military 
organizations while they execute missions. Performance 
metrics  are modeled from four aspects, i.e., response 
speed, cooperation degree, execution capability and 
information support. These performance metrics are based 
on the process of OODA process, which is the C2 model 
for military organizations [2]. 
A. Response speed analysis 
Response speed is concerned with the mean speed of 
information flows from intelligence units, via C2 units, to 
force units, indicating the speed of the whole progress 
from intelligence-obtaining to intelligence-employing. The 
main consideration is the delay time on the links between 
intelligence units and force units. 
On the link <I(p)-F(q)>, the information delay time 
from intelligence unit I(p) to force unit I(q) is the sum of 
total edge delay time and total C2 delay time, namely, 
delay(I(p)-F(q))=∑delay(Edgei) 
+ 
∑delay(C2i). 
The 
Information Flow Coefficient (IFC) defined in this paper is 
used as the metric to measure the organization response 
speed. When the organization consists of n <I-F> links, 
the IFC can be represented as below: 
1
( ( ),
( )) /
IFC
delay I p
F q
n
= ∑
                    (1) 
IFC implies the control ability and response speed of 
military organizations over emergency situations. The 
larger IFC is, the faster the response speed is, and the 
stronger the control ability is. 
In terms of the military organization from Figure 1, the 
delay time of each <I-F> link is: 
delay (Scout-BDE1) = 4.0;  
delay (Scout2-BDE1) = 8.0;  
delay ( STRAT INT-BDE1) = 7.0; 
delay (Scout1-BDE2) = 8.0;  
delay (Scout2-BDE2) = 4.0;  
delay (STRAT INT-BDE2) = 7.0; 
…… 
B. Coordination capacity analysis 
Coordination capacity is very important especially 
when the 
C4ISRK system 
is highly 
networked. 
Coordination implies an organized group of units working 
together aiming at bringing about a purposeful task such as 
attacking a plane. Here, only coordination between two 
units with the same type, such as two force units, C2 units 
or intelligence units, are considered. 
(1) Coordination analysis of force units 
The cooperation capacity of force units indicates the 
cooperation degree while they executing a mission. The 
main consideration is the delay time in information 
transmission between force units. The less the delay time 
is, the faster they exchange information with each other 
and the higher the degree of coordination is. The shortest 
link between force unit F(p) and F(q) is marked as <F(p)-
F(q)>, and the transmission delay as delay(F(p),F(q)). The 
metrics defined to measure coordination extent between 
force units is denoted as Force Coordination Coefficient 
(FCC). 
1
( ( ), ( ))/
FCC
delay F p F q
n
=∑
                        (2) 
In terms of the military organization in Figure 1, the 
delay time of each link is 7, and FCC=0.1433.  
(2) Coordination analysis of C2 units 
The Coordination analysis of C2 units mainly shows 
the transmission efficiency of C2 network and the 
15
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

connectivity of C2 network. C2 Coordination Coefficient 
(C2CC) is defined to weigh the coordination degree 
between C2 units. 
1
2
( 2( ), 2( ))/
C CC
delay C
p C
q
n
= ∑
                  (3) 
 (3) Coordination analysis of intelligence units 
Coordination 
analysis 
of 
intelligence 
units 
demonstrates the performance of intelligence network, and 
then reflects the organization capabilities of information 
obtaining 
and 
sharing. 
Similarly, 
Intelligence 
Coordination Coefficient (ICC) is defined to weigh the 
coordination degree between intelligence units. 
1
( ( ), ( )) /
ICC
delay I p
I q
n
= ∑
                   (4) 
C. Execution capability analysis 
Execution capability is to indicate the capabilitiues of 
taking orders and executing missions with the use of 
obtained intelligence information. In this paper, Execution 
Capability Coefficient (ECC) is defined to value the 
execution capability of force units. The larger ECC is, the 
more obvious the advantage of intelligence is, and also the 
better the execution capability of the force unit is.  
( ( ))2
( ( ))
q
ECC
R F q
EIQ F q
=
×
∑
                    (5) 
where，(F(q)) is the combat radius of force unit F(q), 
and EIQ(F(q)) is the effective intelligence quality that 
force unit F(q) receives. Effective intelligence quality is 
the value which Q(I(p)) is divided by delay(I(p), F(q)). 
D. Information support analysis 
As we all know, intelligence is also an important basis 
of C2 to carry out situation evaluation and decision 
making. The analysis of information support capacities is 
to measure timeliness, accuracy and sufficiency of 
intelligence. Information Support Coefficient (ISC) is 
defined in this paper to measure the information support 
capacities. 
(
2( ))
i
ISC
IG C
i
= ∑
                               (6) 
IG(C2(i)) is the total information quantity that C2 unit i 
obtains. Assume that IG=R×R×Q is the initial information 
quantity that the intelligence unit supplies for. Because of 
the changing combat environment and the transmission 
error, the total information quantity IG becomes 
IG×Accuracy/delay after transmission. 
IV. THE ADAPTIVE DESIGN BASED ON 
PERFORMANCE RATE 
In practice, the structure and performance is hardly 
optimally matched in the progress of mission executing. 
Generally speaking, mission enforcing organization could 
hardly run with the best performance, which calls for an 
exploration of an adaptive organization design method to 
adjust the organization structure so as to achieve better 
performance. 
Even the performance metrics of military organizations 
can be calculated and evaluated; there are still many 
choices for adjusting the structure. It concerns with the 
matter of adjusting strategies. The following two strategies 
are to be complied with to adjust the structures of 
organizations to achieve better performance. 
(1) Completeness Strategy: ensuring the completeness 
of basic command and control relationship, precluding the 
isolated units. Organizations heavily rely on the proper 
working state of every basic functional unit, and the task 
couldn’t be executed successfully with the deficiency of 
any basic command and control relationship. As a result, 
the completeness of command and control relationship is 
essential to the performance of organization structure. 
Meanwhile, as we see in Section III, performance will 
decrease dramatically while a link is broken (It means that 
the delay time is infinite.)  
 (2) Tightness Strategy: strengthening the information 
exchange between different task modules. Different task 
modules maybe exist simultaneously corresponding to the 
multiple tasks which are executed at the same time. They 
have very strong internal connections but weak external 
connections, which cause negative effect in term of 
coordination of the whole mission. So it is vital to 
strengthen the information exchange between different 
task modules.  
The above two strategies will lead the adaptive 
organization design to the right direction, where the 
performance is optimal. These strategies emphasize the 
importance of organization structures, not just the abilities 
of single unit as in previous models. 
 
Figure 2.  The Tasks Sequence of Mission M 
A certain mission M is assigned to the C4KISR system, 
which is composed of multiple tasks. These tasks are 
organized as shown in Figure 2. 
Before the mission to be executed, there exists a 
certain initial organization O0 whose structure will turn to 
O1, O2... with the changing of tasks. Here, we only 
consider the situation where adjustments are triggered by 
the tasks in turn. When task T1 over O0 is in its turn, IFC, 
CC, ECC and ISC can be calculated. After a certain 
adjustment, O0 turning to O0´, these four metrics will 
changed to IFC´, CC´, ECC ´and ISC´. Now Adjusting 
Value (AV) is defined, which implies the performance rate, 
as the main reference for the adaptive organization design. 
'
'
'
'
IFC IFC CC CC
ECC ECC
ISC ISC
AV
IFC
CC
ECC
ISC
−
−
−
−
=
+
+
+
          (7) 
In term of a certain adjustment, the positive AV value is 
indicative of that this adjustment makes the overall 
performance increase, the greater the value is obtained, the 
more significant that, after this adjustment, the overall 
performance of the organization has been enhanced, then 
16
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

the necessity of this adjustment will become increasingly 
obvious. Otherwise, the negative value of AV shows the 
downside of the adjustment. The adjustment will be 
accepted, which accords with the maximum performance 
value to generate a new organization structure O1 while it 
can meet the needs of the task T1. The process can be 
formalized as below: 
Oi = argmax {AV( Oi-1´, Oi-1)| Oi-1´ supports task Ti }    (8) 
Subsequently, a similar process is used to obtain the 
structures of T2, T3 ... Tn, and their optimal organizational 
structures O2, O3 ...On until the mission is finished. The 
flow of the adaptive organization design based on 
performance rate is shown as the following Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  The adaptive organization design flowchart based on 
performance rate 
To save the space of this paper, how to search the 
satisfied organization for a task is not elaborated here 
(please refer to [7, 8]). Here, based on the example in 
Figure 1, the adjustment process is illustrated as below. 
Assuming that the organization will execute the task Ti 
over Oi-1, then IFC=0.175, CC=0.6433, ECC=47659.2, 
and ISC=84630.0. Under the precondition that certain link 
needs to be added and removed in the terms of task Ti, the 
Adjusting Value (AV) corresponding to the adjustment is 
obtained. Such as, Adding a link BDE HQ1- BDE HQ2 
makes  AV=0.2792; Removing a link BDE HQ1-DIV HQ, 
AV=-2.1719. 
The facts show that better performance value can be 
gained due to some link adjustment. However, negative 
value can also be acquired. That indicates these 
adjustments could cause negative effects on the 
organization performance. In the process of adaptive 
organization design, the searching of the maximum AV 
could lead the organization to better performance. The 
optimal organization Oi of Task Ti is acquired when the 
Adjusting Value is not positive any longer.  
 
Figure 4.  Optimal Structure of the Military Organization for Task Ti 
After three adjusting periods, Oi is gained and shown 
in Figure 4, and it shows that compared with original tree 
structure, the networking structure has more performance 
advantage. 
V. 
 CASE STUDY 
To illustrate our model, here a practical detailed case is 
given. The proposed model in Section III, IV will be 
demonstrated. 
Figure 5 shows a C4ISRK system architecture for 
some military operation scenario. In order to block the 
attack of RED Army, the BLUE army is ordered to defend 
the towns Alpha and Beta. The main attack mission 
consisting of force defense and cannon defense provided 
by Force A, CAN A, Force B, and CAN B (square boxes). 
The secondary mission is asked to support the main attack 
provided by AID A and AID B (square boxes). The C2 
units are coordinated by small headquarters elements, A 
HQ and B HQ, in towns of Alpha and Beta, and by an 
intermediate headquarters in GAMMA, but are ultimately 
organized form a military headquarters back MIL HQ. The 
secondary attack, on the other hand, is coordinated form 
the mining town of DELTA, and also ultimately organized 
from aid headquarters AID HQ. Form the original 
organization structure, we cannot find any coordination of 
main attack and secondary attack, namely there is no 
military and aid efforts whatsoever. What’s more, the 
intelligence units mainly include Weather, Satellite, 
Political, CIS , etc. [1, 16]. 
 
Figure 5.  The original organization structure 
The detailed parameters of this organization are 
showed in the following. 
Radius (OBS A) = Radius (OBS B) = 100;  
Radius (Force A) = Radius (CAN A)  
= Radius (Force B) = Radius (CAN B) = 100;  
Radius (AID A) = Radius (AID A) = 100;  
Accuracy = 0.9;  Quality = 1. 
Based on the performance model, we now obtain the 
four main metrics values as shown in Table I (Value for 
Figure 5). 
Then the adaptive organization design can be carried 
out based on the performance rate, in which the AV of all 
the probable organizations can be obtained. According to 
the model mentioned in Section IV, we will get the 
improved organization structure shown as Figure 6. The 
main coordination site now is GAMMA, and then a 
coordination planning could be done there by main attack 
17
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

staff and secondary attack staff together. This is a good 
choice, since GAMMA is in fact the most central node in 
the original structure. All information (other than reports 
from the field) is now provided directly to the shared 
headquarters at GAMMA. 
 
Figure 6.  The Improved Organization Structure 
The performance metrics improved of organization 
structure are shown in Table I (Value for Figure 6) . The 
obvious improvements have achieved, which is expressed 
by the Advance Extent in the table. 
TABLE I.  
THE IMPROVED ORGANIZATION EFFICIENCY METRICS 
Indices 
Metrics 
Value for 
Figure 5 
Value for 
Figure 6 
Advance 
Extent 
Response 
Speed 
IFC 
0.145 
0.2 
37.9% 
Coordination 
Capacity 
CC 
0 
0.53 
∞ 
Execution 
Capability 
ECC 
33285.7 
41481.5 
24.6% 
Information 
Support 
ISO 
845442 
1313100 
55.3% 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We have presented a methodology for representing 
organization structures, which is called as eFINC. By this 
methodology, we perform a new way to evaluate the 
performance of the organization on the basis of functional 
unit’s abilities and network topology. In terms of response 
speed, coordination capacity, performing capability and 
information support effectiveness, this paper proposes a 
quantitative explanation, and proposes four types of 
metrics. Based on the metrics, the process model of 
adaptive organization design is put forward. The case 
study can show that the model is effective. 
To the best of our knowledge, there are still not any 
models which take account into performance while 
designing the organization. Our method is performance-
oriented, not just other methods that are task-oriented. 
Performance-oriented design will be more suitable to the 
networking and dynamic combat fields where military 
organizations are performing the tasks. 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The paper is supported by NSFC projects (70771109, 
60504036) .  And thank for their grateful support. 
 
[1] 
Dekker A.H. (2002). Applying Social Network Analysis Concepts 
to Military C4ISR Architectures, Connections, the official journal 
of the International Network for Social Network Analysis, 24(3) , 
pp. 93-103 
[2] 
Sean D., Shannon R. B., Ghaith A. R., and Andreas T. (2009). 
Applying the Information Age Combat Model: Quantitative 
Analysis of Network Centric Operations. The International C2 
Journal, http:// www.dodccrp.org/ files /IC2J_v3n1_06_Deller. Pdf 
on March 2, 2011 
[3] 
Lyons J. B., Swindler S. D., White J. A. (2008). Dynamic 
Complexity in System of Systems[R]. International Symposium on 
Collaborative Technologies and Systems, pp.367-374 
[4] 
Kathleen M. C. (2003). Dynamic Network Analysis, Dynamic 
Social Network Modeling and Analysis: workshop summary and 
papers, National Academies Press 
[5] 
Anthony H. D. (2002). C4ISR Architectures, Social Network 
Analysis and the FINC Methodology: An Experiment in Military 
Organization Structure, Australia Department of Defense, Defense 
Science and Technology Organization (DSTO) report: DSTO-GD-
0313, Jan 2002 
[6] 
Dekker A.H. (2005). Network Topology and Military Performance. 
International Congress on Modeling and Simulation, 2005, pp. 
2174-2180 
[7] 
Levchuk G. M., Levchuk Y, N., Luo J., Pattipati K. R., and 
Kleinman D. L. (2002). Normative design of organizations- Part I: 
Mission planning. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part A, 32(3), pp. 346-359 
[8] 
Levchuk G. M., Levchuk Y, N., Luo J., Pattipati K. R., and 
Kleinman D. L. (2002). Normative design of organizations-Part II: 
Organizational Structure. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part A, 32(3), pp. 360-375 
[9] 
Levchuk G. M., Levchuk Y, N., Meirina C., Pattipati K. R., and 
Kleinman D. L. (2004). Normative design of project-based 
organizations-Part III: modeling congruent, robust, and adaptive 
organizations. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part A, 34(3) , pp. 337-350 
[10] Jincai H., Shidong Q., and Zhong L. (2010). The Modeling and 
Evolvement Analysis Method of Operation System of Systems 
based on Extension Space, IEEE International Conference on ICIS 
2010, pp. 113-117 
[11] Jincai H., Weiming Z., Guoli Y., and Shidong Q. (2010). The 
modeling and efficiency analysis method of C2 System Of 
Systems based on FINC model, IEEE International Conference on 
MLC 2010, pp. 2026-2030 
[12] Kathleen M. C., Jana D., Jeffrey R., and Maksim T. (2007). 
Toward an interoperable dynamic network analysis toolkit. 
Decision Support Systems, 43(4), pp. 1324-1347 
[13] Jeff 
C. 
(2005). 
Distributed 
Networked 
Operations: 
The 
Foundations of Network Centric Warfare. Alidate Press 
[14] Kathleen M. C. (2006). Modeling Community Containment for 
Pandemic Influenza: A Letter Report [R], Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press. 
[15] Baoxin X. and ML L. (2010). Robustness analysis of military 
organization,  IEEE International Conference on MLC2010, pp. 
1971-1975 
[16] Anthony H. D. and Bernard D. C. (2004). Network Robustness and 
Graph Topology. ACSC '04 Proceedings of the 27th Australasian 
conference on Computer science, pp. 359-368 
[17] Anthony H. D. (2005). Simulating Network Robustness for Critical 
Infrastructure Networks. ACSC '05 Proceedings of the 28th 
Australasian conference on Computer Science, pp. 59-67 
18
PESARO 2011 : The First International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-132-8

