Determination of the Environmental Conditions by the Evaluation of Test Drive Data
Steffen Wittel∗, Daniel Ulmer∗ and Oliver B¨uhler∗
∗Steinbeis Interagierende Systeme GmbH, Esslingen, Germany
Email: {steffen.wittel,daniel.ulmer,oliver.buehler}@interagierende-systeme.de
Abstract—With taking full responsibility for the driving maneu-
vers automatically performed by the vehicles, the automobile
manufacturers are responsible that the vehicles can handle the
spectrum of possible trafﬁc situations in the automated driving
mode. The vehicles have to either cope with the trafﬁc situations
without the help of the human driver or to handover the control
to the human driver in a safe manner. For the handover, a
reasonable warning period is required, in which the automated
driving has to be maintained. Therefore, the warning period
depends on the distraction of the human driver and the current
trafﬁc situation. The time must be sufﬁcient, so that the human
driver can perceive the trafﬁc situation and react appropriately.
The testing of automated driving is considered as a major
challenge for the automotive industry, because so far the human
driver was considered as an immediate fallback level in trafﬁc
situations that cannot be handled by the vehicle software. Hence,
robustness testing becomes more and more important to ensure
a safe operation of the vehicles within different environmental
conditions. This paper presents an approach that determines the
environmental conditions encountered during test drives based
on trafﬁc theory. The approach provides metrics, which describe
the trafﬁc situations of test drives from an environmental point
of view. Hence, the consideration of the metrics can ensure
comparable trafﬁc situations for the evaluation of the vehicle
behavior between different versions of an automated driving
system. Moreover, they can point to areas of the vehicle software
that have not yet been tested and thus can be used to track the
progress of the testing during the development.
Keywords–Automated Driving; Environmental Conditions; Test
Drives.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Driving in a dynamic environment is subject to a variety of
cognitive demands of the human driver as shown in [2]. The
human driver has to correctly perceive the trafﬁc situation,
interpret it, and derive actions from it. Moreover, she or he
has to recognize new circumstances and make appropriate
adjustments well enough in advance. Overall, driving is a
complex task and offers the possibility to make mistakes.
Approximately 94 % of the road accidents, as published in [3],
are caused by the human driver due to incorrect performing of
driving maneuvers, wrong decisions or carelessness. Therefore,
the human driver is considered as the main cause of the
majority of all road accidents, which offers a great potential
to improve the trafﬁc safety by the automation of driving. The
automated driving relieves thereby the human driver of speciﬁc
driving tasks in certain driving scenarios.
The road accidents statistic [1] based on the police report-
ing in Germany covers mainly road accidents with serious con-
sequences and usually none with material damages or minor
injuries. For each reported road accident, the police determine
the main cause that led to the road accident, which is part of the
statistic. The main causes provided by the Federal Statistical
Ofﬁce of Germany [4], as summarized in Figure 1, shows that
a large number of road accidents in urban environments (about
40 %) could not be assigned to one of the major causes listed
in the summary. Collisions at intersections (32.8 %) are the
main cause for road accidents in urban environments, whereas
leaving the carriageway (32.3 %) is the main cause in non-
urban environments. The main cause of almost half of all road
accidents on the freeways that represent only a small percent of
the entire road network of Germany, but with a high dwell time
of the road users, are rear-end collisions followed by leaving
the carriageway (27.5 %) and collisions during the lane change
(13.5 %). Almost 90 % of all road accidents on the freeways
can be assigned to three causes, which can be extensively
tested by the automobile manufacturers. Hence, it is hardly
surprising that they are going to provide their ﬁrst automated
driving functions for the use on freeways [5]. Freeways provide
a manageable complexity, both in the tasks to be performed by
the driver of a vehicle and in their construction. Simpliﬁed, it
can be said that the vehicle control is limited to approaching
and overtaking other vehicles. The characteristics of a freeway
are usually clearly deﬁned by the government, e.g., in the
German Road Trafﬁc Act as shown below:
a)
Only for motor vehicles
b)
Entry and exit only at marked locations
c)
Trafﬁc on the continuous road has the right of way
d)
Turning and reversing are prohibited
e)
Stopping is prohibited
According to SAE J3016 [6], the currently available com-
fort functions for speciﬁc driving scenarios, i.e., an Adaptive
Cruise Control or a Parking Assist, belong to the driving
automation level ”Partial Automation”. In this driving au-
tomation level, the vehicle control is automated in the lateral
and in longitudinal direction. Thereby, the human driver is
considered as an immediate fallback level in trafﬁc situations,
which cannot be handled by the vehicle. The next generation
of comfort functions will belong to the next higher driving
automation level ”Conditional Automation”. After a warning
of the system, the human driver has to react only within
a reasonable time. The necessary time for the handover of
the vehicle control, which is expected to be in the double-
digit seconds range [7], differs depending on the degree of
distraction of the human driver and the complexity of the
current trafﬁc situation. This means, e.g., that a handover just
before a collision, in which the human driver has no possibility
to avoid the collision, is not acceptable.
The spectrum of possible trafﬁc situations and their tem-
poral sequences in the road trafﬁc are challenges for the
automated driving. In practice, they are usually not adequately
considered by current test methods and thus it is hardly possi-
ble to draw any conclusions about the robustness of the vehicle
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Figure 1. Summary about road accidents in Germany in 2015 [1] separated by the street location: a) urban environments b) non-urban environments c)
freeways.
software. In contrast to a drive within a deﬁned environment,
an automated vehicle has to cope with a large number of differ-
ent environmental conditions in the road trafﬁc. Therefore, not
only the starting point and the destination are critical factors
of a drive, but also a combination of many factors unknown
before. Drives between the same starting point and destination
differ at least in the number of encountered road users and their
driving behavior. In any case, the automobile manufacturers
have to ensure that the vehicle reaches its intended destination
or a safe state without endangering the occupants or other road
users in compliance with the road trafﬁc regulations.
The following section shows the related work. In Section
III, an approach is presented, which determines the environ-
mental conditions encountered during test drives based on
trafﬁc theory to provide metrics, which describe the trafﬁc
situations of the test drives from an environmental point of
view. The metrics represent, among others, the complexity and
the criticality of the coped trafﬁc situations. Based on these
metrics, the vehicle behavior can be evaluated in similar trafﬁc
situations to ﬁnd deviations from the speciﬁcation. The metrics
can also point to areas of the vehicle software that have not yet
been tested and thus they can be used to track the progress of
the testing during the development. Finally, Section IV shows
a case study to discuss the idea behind the presented approach
on the example of a simulated drive on the freeway.
II.
RELATED WORK
In [8], the authors claim that in relation to automated driv-
ing the deﬁnitions of the terms ”scene”, ”situation” and ”sce-
nario” are often vague or even contradictory. To cope with this,
they did a review of existing deﬁnitions including a detailed
comparison between them. Moreover, the authors suggest their
own deﬁnition and provide an example, which demonstrates
the usage of the deﬁnition, for each term. According to these
deﬁnitions, a scene describes a snapshot of the environment
that is all-encompassing only in the simulation, whereas it
is incomplete, incorrect, uncertain and subjective in the real
world. A situation can be derived from a scene, which is
deﬁned as the entirety of circumstances and entails all relevant
conditions, options and determinants. A sequence of scenes
forms a scenario that describes the temporal development.
The study [9] shows that there is currently a lack of
metrics, which can be used to compare different versions of an
automated driving system. In [10], it is assumed that a single
metric has no signiﬁcance and that comparability can only
be achieved by using several independent metrics. Moreover,
it is shown that reaching a statistical goal does not make a
statement about the coped trafﬁc situations during the test
drives and therefore cannot be used as an appropriate metric.
The authors argue that no real test drive is identical, even if it
is performed between the same starting point and destination.
Thus, test methods using systematic approaches, taking into
account the time behavior, are required, which cover a wide
spectrum of the system input and have a better performance
than brute force. According to [11], simulation can offer a way
to perform the expected number of tests.
Different data collection methods are explained in [12],
which can be used to monitor the road trafﬁc. Thereby the
authors differ between trajectory data, ﬂoating-car data and
cross-sectional data. The trajectory data is determined by
recording the position of all vehicles within a deﬁned area from
one or more external observation points for a certain time. It
allows the direct determination of the road trafﬁc density and
the lane changes. Floating-car data are captured from specially
equipped vehicles, which are part of the road trafﬁc. They
record their location obtained from the GPS and their speed. In
contrast to ﬂoating-car data, cross-sectional data are captured
by detectors.
An approach is described in [13] that evaluates the criti-
cality of trafﬁc scenarios from the viewpoint of an external
observer by using a parameterizable distance model. The
model spans safety areas around the road users, which are
dynamically adapted to the current trafﬁc situation. Thereby,
the dynamic behavior of the distance model allows, e.g., an
increase in the size of the safety areas in speciﬁc directions
depending on the velocity of the road users. The authors argue
that the safe distance between road users depends on the trafﬁc
situation and cannot be speciﬁed by generally valid values.
These values, which are considered as safe, vary, among others,
with the driving direction or the environmental conditions. In
the presented case study, the distance model was parameterized
according to the two-second rule, which states that a driver of
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

a vehicle should stay at least two seconds behind the vehicle
in front. Based on the information provided by the distance
model, a classiﬁcation of the current trafﬁc situation was done
using the three classes: ”unsuspicious”, ”hazardous” or ”event
of damage”.
III.
APPROACH FOR TEST DRIVES
During the development, different versions of an automated
driving system have to be evaluated to decide whether the
changes made have only the desired and no unintended effects.
Especially with real vehicles, it is difﬁcult to reproduce the
environmental conditions and the temporal development as
speciﬁed in the test scenarios, and thus to decide if a test
scenario was executed as speciﬁed and if the evaluation criteria
are passed or not. Only if the test scenario was executed as
speciﬁed, the behavior of the vehicle can be compared between
different test runs. As discussed in [9], there is currently a
lack of metrics, on the basis of which a decision can be
made. The presented approach shall close this gap by providing
metrics about the trafﬁc situations of test drives that represent
the encountered environmental conditions and the behavior of
the test vehicle. With the help of such metrics, the approach
allows the developers and testers not only to compare the
data, but also to have a better understanding of the vehicle
behavior within different environmental conditions. Moreover,
the metrics can be used to track the progress of the testing
by showing areas that have not yet been tested or areas that
have an above-average coverage rate. An above-average test
coverage rate does not necessarily increase the quality of the
automated driving system, but rather reduces the efﬁciency of
the testing.
The presented approach not only works with data from
simulations, but also with data captured from real test vehicles.
Within an all-knowing simulation, the entire data of the test
drive are available, whereas the data from a real test vehicle
only contains the information within the sensor range of
the vehicle. The information outside of the sensor range is
therefore considered as not relevant for the approach.
A. Evaluation of the Test Drive Data
The test vehicle and the other road users, also called
objects, are both part of the road trafﬁc and therefore they
can inﬂuence each other. The trajectory data of the road users
describe their dynamic behavior and possible inﬂuences on
a high abstraction level from the viewpoint of an outside
observer. In addition, information about the road characteristics
is required to determine the orientation of the test vehicle
on the road. Some information depends on the vehicle line.
Other information is obtained from sensors of the test vehicle
that provide physical quantities about the test vehicle itself
and its environment. The road characteristics are obtained
from vehicle-mounted cameras or high-deﬁnition maps. All
the required information and data are stored within an internal
representation of the test drive. Overall, the following infor-
mation is evaluated by the approach:
a)
Test vehicle
1)
Length and width
2)
Mounting positions of the sensors
3)
Absolute velocity
4)
Absolute acceleration
b)
Environment
1)
Object sizes
2)
Relative object positions
3)
Relative object velocities
4)
Relative object accelerations
5)
Lane types
6)
Lane positions
B. Determination of the Environmental Conditions
Based on the internal representation, a determination of
the environmental conditions is performed by the approach.
Therefore, it is sufﬁcient to analyze only the information within
the sensor range of the test vehicle as described before. Objects
outside of the sensor range have no direct inﬂuence on the
current behavior of the automated driving system and only
play a role, when they are coming into the sensor range at a
later point in time or have an inﬂuence on objects within the
sensor range. The approach provides the following data about
the environmental conditions:
a)
Velocity of the road users
b)
Acceleration of the road users
c)
Jerk of the road users (third derivative of the displace-
ment)
d)
Distance between two road users
e)
Time to the preceding road user
f)
Time to the following road user
g)
Collisions between road users
h)
Trafﬁc density (number of road users within a road
segment at a point in time)
i)
Trafﬁc ﬂow (number of road users that cross a point
on the road within a period of time)
If necessary, the road users are expanded around the center of
gravity and thus collisions with other road users are checked.
In case of a road with several lanes, a separate analysis is
performed for each lane.
For a ﬁrst overview of the trafﬁc situations, the spatio-
temporal context, which reﬂects the place and the time, is used
to characterize the type and the properties of motion [14] as
commonly applied in the trafﬁc theory. In this way, aggregated
values (e.g., for the density, the velocity and the acceleration)
are provided for deﬁned road sections at certain periods of
time. This is followed by a detailed analysis of the dynamic
behavior of the test vehicle, which can be experienced directly
by its passengers. Therefore, the approach analyzes the third
derivative of the displacement, named jerk, to ﬁnd points in
time with rapid changes in the dynamics that exceed a limit.
Metrics are provided by the approach for the complexity
and the criticality of a trafﬁc situation, and how the test
vehicle handles the trafﬁc situation. The complexity metric is
determined on the basis of the road characteristics, as well as
on the trafﬁc density and the trafﬁc ﬂow in the surroundings
of the test vehicle. The criticality metric is calculated based
on the evaluation of the distances to other road users and
their changes, as well as on the position of the test vehicle
within its own lane. Usually rapid changes in the dynamics
are not desired for comfort functions and are mainly caused
by emergency functions, e.g., the Collision Mitigation System,
or malfunctions of the vehicle software. Rapid changes in the
dynamics of the test vehicle can be indicators for interventions
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Figure 2. Schematic representation of the road characteristics.
of the automated driving system, which are necessary to pre-
vent collisions with other road users or obstacles. Otherwise,
rapid changes can be caused within a certain range to comply
with legal requirements, e.g., to maintain the safety distance or
the speed limit. Thus, the dynamic behavior of the test vehicle
is used to deﬁne the metric for how the automated driving
system copes with the trafﬁc situation. If an unusual behavior
of the test vehicle is found at the system-level, further efforts
are necessary to ensure that the trafﬁc situation is within the
operating limits of the automated driving system and, if this
is conﬁrmed, to ﬁnd the cause of the issue at lower levels.
IV.
CASE STUDY
In this section, an example that was done as a case study
is discussed to show the idea behind the presented approach to
determine the environmental conditions by evaluating the data
captured during a simulated test drive.
A. Generation of the Test Drive Data
The test drive data for the evaluation was generated with
a microscopic trafﬁc simulator [15] that provides different
car-following and lane-changing models. For the other road
users, the ”Enhanced Intelligent Driver Model” (ACC) [16]
and the ”General Lane-Changing Model” (MOBIL) [17] were
used, whereas a custom car-following model was implemented
for the test vehicle. The car-following model behind the test
vehicle has the functionality of an autonomous cruise control
system, which maintains a distance to the preceding vehicle
on the same lane by automatically adjusting the velocity.
The trafﬁc scenario of the example represents a freeway
constructed with ﬁve straight road segments, as shown in
Figure 2. Each road segment has three lanes by default with the
exceptions of the second and the fourth road segment, which
have an additional lane on the right side as off-ramp and on-
ramp respectively. There are speed limitations in the third and
the fourth road segment, which facilitate the lane change of the
entering vehicles from the on-ramp lane. Both the off-ramp and
the on-ramp cause an increased occurrence of lane changes in
their road segments. On the one hand, there is a lower trafﬁc
density in the road segment of the off-ramp. On the other
hand, there is an increased trafﬁc density in the road segment
of the on-ramp. The number of vehicles entering the freeway is
Figure 3. Spatio-temporal diagrams of density, velocity and acceleration including the trajectory of the test vehicle.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Figure 4. Jerk of the test vehicle during the test drive.
determined by the inﬂow rate of the trafﬁc simulation. Based
on the trafﬁc composition conﬁguration, previously deﬁned
vehicle classes are created, which can differ in the parameter
set used for the simulation. Overall, there are two classes of
vehicles used in the example, a slower and a faster one.
B. Applying the Approach
According to the presented approach, the spatio-temporal
context of the captured test drive is ﬁrstly analyzed to obtain
an overview, in this case an all-knowing overview due to the
simulated test drive, about the encountered trafﬁc situations.
The spatio-temporal context, as visualized in Figure 3, shows
an increasing of the vehicle density over the entire freeway
with advancing time in the density diagram, and the speed
limitations and the resulting backlog of the trafﬁc with an
aggregated velocity, lower than the speciﬁed speed limitation
in the velocity diagram. The acceleration diagram ﬁnally
shows road sections on the freeway, where there was a strong
acceleration or deceleration of the road users. The position
of the test vehicle and its sensor range are simply marked
as a circle in the three diagrams, whose area represents the
surroundings of the test vehicle and thus the environmental
conditions processed by the automated driving system. Since
the example is a straight road, the color within the circles of the
density diagram illustrates the value of the complexity metric.
The evaluation is continued with an analysis of the move-
ment of the test vehicle. Based on the jerk, as displayed in
Figure 4, points of interest are searched in the test drive with
an absolute value greater than a speciﬁed limit, on which a
closer look could be worthwhile. At time 35 s, a signiﬁcant
change in the signal sequence of the jerk occurred followed by
a reaction in the opposite direction only a few seconds later. In
the remaining time, the value of the jerk changes only slightly.
The signiﬁcant change can be an indicator for an intervention
of the automated driving system to prevent a collision.
Finally, the environmental conditions encountered during
the test drive are analyzed to check whether a reaction of
the automated driving system was necessary and if it was
within the speciﬁed limits. For this purpose, Figure 5 shows
the objects within an assumed sensor range of 100 m ahead
of the test vehicle for each lane of the freeway. The color of
an object represents the relative approaching between the test
vehicle and the object. The object comes closer with a positive
value and moves away with a negative value. A trajectory of an
object starts after entering a sensor range of the test vehicle at a
speciﬁc lane. The trajectory ends, if the object leaves the sensor
range of the test vehicle or after a lane change. After a lane
change within the sensor range, the trajectory has to start at the
new lane. In the example, only the third lane has a relevance to
the movement of the test vehicle when driving straight ahead.
Figure 5. Objects within the sensor range of 100 m ahead of the test vehicle separated by lanes.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

The analyzed data shows that the point of interest was caused
by a lane change of a road user, who wanted to leave the
freeway at the off-ramp. For this purpose, the road user has
used the safety gap between the test vehicle and the preceding
road user to move from the second lane to the third lane and at
last to the off-ramp. Therefore, the automated driving system
slowed down the test vehicle to restore the safety distance. At
the point of interest, the value for the criticality metric is high
due to the fast approaching of the preceding road user on the
same lane as the test vehicle. After the road user had left the
freeway, the test vehicle was able to strongly accelerate.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper has discussed that robustness testing is necessary
to ensure a safe operation of an automated driving system
within different environmental conditions. With reaching the
driving automation level ”Conditional Automation”, the full
responsibility for the vehicles and possible damages lies with
the automobile manufacturers until the takeover of the vehicle
control by the human driver. The warning period for the
handover will increase due to the allowed distraction of the
human driver towards the surroundings of the vehicle. This
means that the automated driving system must never get into
a state, starting from its activation to the completion of the
handover, in which the human driver is needed to cope with a
trafﬁc situation. In contrast to the currently performed testing,
which only show that the human driver is rarely needed as an
immediate fallback level, the testing for those systems should
cover the spectrum of possible trafﬁc situations.
It has been shown that the presented approach contributes
to the testing of automated driving systems. Based on the
evaluation of the test drive data, the environmental conditions
can be determined and further analyzed. The analysis provides
metrics about the environmental conditions, from which the
complexity and the criticality of the trafﬁc situations can
be derived. The approach can be used with both data from
real test drives and with data obtained from simulations.
Therefore, it must be taken into account that the data captured
during a real test drive can be inaccurate and incomplete, and
data recorded from the simulation might be not realistic. A
sufﬁcient imitation of the real-world system is supposed to
be precise enough for the simulation, so that it is usually not
necessary to consider all eventualities in the simulation.
It is left for future work to evaluate, how signiﬁcant the
determined environmental conditions and the derived metrics
are, and how the approach can be integrated in the development
process. Particularly in the ﬁeld of testing, application areas
are seen in the search for comparable trafﬁc situations, in the
detection of software areas that have not yet been tested and
thus to track the progress of the testing, as well as in the test
optimization to contribute to an effective testing. In the next
step, the approach shall be used to evaluate trafﬁc situations of
a staged test drive captured from a real test vehicle to compare
the determined and the real environmental conditions.
REFERENCES
[1]
Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of Germany, “Road Trafﬁc Accidents -
2015 (”Verkehrsunf¨alle - 2015”),” 2016, [Online]. Available: https:
//www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/TransportVerkehr/
Verkehrsunfaelle/VerkehrsunfaelleJ2080700157004.html
[retrieved:
March, 2017].
[2]
D. R¨osler, “The relevance of trafﬁc elements in driving situations
deﬁnition, measurement, and application,” Ph.D. dissertation, Chemnitz
University
of
Technology,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://nbn-
resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:ch1-201000403
[3]
NHTSA’s National Center for Statistics and Analysis, “Critical Reasons
for Crashes Investigated in the National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation
Survey,” 2015, [Online]. Available: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/
Public/ViewPublication/812115 [retrieved: March, 2017].
[4]
Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of Germany, “About Us - Federal Statistical
Ofﬁce (Destatis),” 2017, URL: https://www.destatis.de/EN/AboutUs/
AboutUs.html [retrieved: March, 2017].
[5]
Verband der Automobilindustrie e.V., “Automation - From Driver
Assistance Systems to Automated Driving,” 2015, [Online]. Available:
https://www.vda.de/dam/vda/publications/2015/automation.pdf
[retrieved: March, 2017].
[6]
SAE International, “Automated Driving - Levels of Driving Automation
are Deﬁned in New SAE International Standard J3016,” 2014, [On-
line]. Available: https://www.sae.org/misc/pdfs/automated driving.pdf
[retrieved: March, 2017].
[7]
Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e.V., “Takeover
times in highly automated driving - Compact accident research,” 2016,
[Online].
Available:
https://udv.de/en/publications/compact-accident-
research/takeover-times-highly-automated-driving
[retrieved:
March,
2017].
[8]
S. Ulbrich, T. Menzel, A. Reschka, F. Schuldt, and M. Maurer,
“Deﬁning and Substantiating the Terms Scene, Situation, and Scenario
for Automated Driving,” in 2015 IEEE 18th International Conference
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Sept 2015, pp. 982–988.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2015.164
[9]
Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO, “Highly Auto-
mated Driving on Freeways - Industrial Policy Conclusions (”Hochau-
tomatisiertes Fahren auf Autobahnen
Industriepolitische Schlussfol-
gerungen”),” 2015, [Online]. Available: http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/
DE/Downloads/H/hochautomatisiertes-fahren-auf-autobahnen.html [re-
trieved: March, 2017].
[10]
S. Wittel, D. Ulmer, and O. B¨uhler, “Challenges in Functional Testing
on the Way to Automated Driving,” in The Twelfth International
Conference on Systems, 2017.
[11]
H. Winner, W. Wachenfeld, and P. Junietz, “Safety Assurance for
Highly
Automated
Driving
The
PEGASUS
Approach,”
2016,
[Online]. Available: http://www.fzd.tu-darmstadt.de/media/fachgebiet
fzd/publikationen 3/2016 5/2016 Wi Wf Ju TRB AUVSI AVS
San Francisco.pdf [retrieved: March, 2017].
[12]
M.
Treiber
and
A.
Kesting,
Trafﬁc
Flow
Dynamics.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 7–24. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32460-4
[13]
S. Wittel, D. Ulmer, and O. B¨uhler, “Automatic Test Evaluation for
Driving Scenarios Using Abstraction Level Constraints,” in The Eighth
International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation
Lifecycle, 2016, pp. 14–19. [Online]. Available: http://www.thinkmind.
org/index.php?view=article&articleid=valid 2016 2 20 40023
[14]
R. Kosinski and R. Stepien, “Simple quantitative analysis of spatio-
temporal diagrams for domain wall dynamics,” Acta Physica Polonica
A, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 575–583, Mar 1995. [Online]. Available:
http://przyrbwn.icm.edu.pl/APP/PDF/87/a087z3p02.pdf
[15]
M. Treiber and A. Kesting, “An Open-Source Microscopic Trafﬁc
Simulator,”
IEEE
Intelligent
Transportation
Systems
Magazine,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 6–13, Fall 2010. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MITS.2010.939208
[16]
A. Kesting, M. Treiber, and D. Helbing, “Enhanced intelligent
driver
model
to
access
the
impact
of
driving
strategies
on
trafﬁc capacity,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
vol. 368, no. 1928, pp. 4585–4605, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/368/1928/4585
[17]
M. Treiber and A. Kesting, Modeling Lane-Changing Decisions
with MOBIL.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009,
pp. 211–221. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-
77074-9 19
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

