Monitor for Safety-Critical Mirror Drivers of
MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR Systems
Philipp Stelzer, Andreas Strasser, Philip Pannagger, Christian Steger
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
Email: {stelzer, strasser, steger}@tugraz.at
pannagger@student.tugraz.at
Norbert Druml
Inﬁneon Technologies Austria AG
Graz, Austria
Email: norbert.druml@infineon.com
Abstract—In future, more and more cars will be equipped
with Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS) like Adaptive
Cruise Control (ACC), Collision Avoidance System and many
more. Currently, the driver is responsible by law to perceive
the environment and take over control if it is required. But
in foreseeable future highly automated vehicles or even fully
automated vehicles will appear on the road; where the vehicle is
responsible for perceiving the environment, operating the vehicle
and intervening in hazardous situations. At the latest then it will
be necessary that systems shall not fail unnoticed. Therefore,
it is mandatory to monitor safety relevant components. For
instance, also Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) Systems
like the 1D Micro-Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS) Micro-
Scanning LiDAR, which will be part of intelligent sensor fusion
in ADAS. Due to the fact that highly automated vehicles often
have various safety monitors installed, our novel Monitor for
the Safety-Critical MEMS Driver is an alternative approach to
the well-known Built-In Self-Test (BIST). In this publication,
we introduce a novel system architecture that is able to verify
the correct functionality of internal control systems in MEMS-
based LiDAR systems. To evaluate the effectiveness of our novel
monitoring approach, we have implemented the procedure on a
1D MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR prototype platform.
Keywords–ADAS; LiDAR; Signal Monitor; 1D MEMS Mirror;
Safety Monitor
I.
INTRODUCTION
Fully automated driving is gaining more and more atten-
tion. Therefore, industry and academia put a lot of effort
into researching in the ﬁeld of sensor fusion and functional
safety for sensors in the automotive domain. Key enablers of
highly automated vehicles will be robust Radio Detection and
Ranging (RADAR) and Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)
solutions with additional support from vision cameras. By
fusion of sensor data and control functions it is intended
to enable safe automated driving as well in rural as also in
urban environments. In the project PRogrammable sYSTems
for INtelligence in automobilEs (PRYSTINE) the consortium
aims for a Fail-operational Urban Surround perceptION (FU-
SION) [1]. For years, various Advanced Driver-Assistance
Systems (ADAS), such as Electronic Stability Control (ESC)
and Anti-lock Braking System (ABS), have been mandatory
in new cars in the European Union [2]. ESC and ABS are
ADAS, which are active safety components in contrast to
passive safety components, such as seat belts and airbags [3].
For highly automated vehicles, it is indispensable that ADAS
Figure 1. PRYSTINE’s concept view of a Fail-operational Urban Surround
perceptION (FUSION) [1].
are reliable and therefore to ensure the safety for the driver,
passengers and all other road users. Due to quantity and
reliability of such ADAS and integrated systems the Society
of Automotive Engineers (SAE) has introduced six levels of
driving automation. The higher the SAE level, the higher
ranked is the driving automation of the vehicle. Due to the
competences that the systems take over in the vehicle, it
is possible to declare the SAE level of the vehicle [4]. No
matter whether a vehicle, according to the manufacturer, would
support higher automation levels, it is currently necessary
in many countries that the driver continues to observe the
environment and in an emergency can take over control [5]. For
example, according to Article 8 of the Vienna Convention on
Road Trafﬁc, the driver must be able to control the vehicle
continuously. The Vienna Convention on Road Trafﬁc was
ratiﬁed by the majority of EU member countries and several
others. Large countries, such as the USA, China or England,
are not among the signatories [6]. Due to legal and technical
barriers, driving automation levels of vehicles are currently
not beyond SAE level 2. In order to introduce vehicles with
SAE Level 3 and higher in the future, it is imperative to adapt
the law from a legal point of view and to develop ADAS
with a higher level of safety, reliability and availability. In
projects like PRYSTINE, it is the goal to develop components
and systems for high reliable and safe ADAS [1]. To ensure
the proper functionality of systems it is mandatory to monitor
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-773-3
PESARO 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

the system especially safety critical parts of it. In case of
a malfunction the system has to be degraded and in worst
case suspended. Hence, these safety monitors are essential for
ADAS in vehicles of SAE level 3 and above. Misbehaviour of a
system is only detectable if the system is monitored. Therefore,
we have been engaged in monitoring the critical signals of a
1D MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR System.
With our paper contribution we:
•
create a novel test opportunity for control loops,
•
ensure the detection of malfunction during test run and
•
enhance safety due to this diverse monitoring ap-
proach.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The
overview on related work of MEMS-based LiDAR systems
is given in Section II. The architecture of a novel safety
monitor for safety-critical signals in a MEMS-based LiDAR
System will be presented in detail in Section III and the
achieved results including a short discussion will be provided
in Section IV. A summary and short discussion of the ﬁndings
will conclude this paper in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
LiDAR technologies, which are currently available in the
market are very bulky and cost intensive like the Velodyne
HDL-64E [7]. Therefore, industry and academia put a lot of
effort into the research of automotive qualiﬁed, long-range
and low-cost LiDARs. Druml et al. have introduced a 1D
MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR, which is able to perceive
the environment up to 200m, shall cost less than 200$ and is
qualiﬁed for automotive applications due to its robustness [8].
The functional principle of the 1D MEMS-based LiDAR by
Druml et al. is depicted in Figure 3. Several lasers are shot on
the 1D MEMS mirror. A vertical laser beam is deﬂected by the
mirror into the scenery. This vertical line is moved horizontally
across the Field-of-View(FoV) by oscillation of the mirror and
the reﬂected light of the obstacle is captured by a stationary
detector.
System 
Safety 
Controller 
(AURIX)
Laser Illumination
MEMS Mirror
MEMS
Driver
ASIC
Actuation
Sensing
 
Reflected 
Signal
Photo Diodes
dt
Emitted 
Signal
Point 
Cloud 
Data
Trigger and 
Laser Power Setting
FPGA / Dedicated 
LiDAR Hardware 
Accelerators
Receiver 
Circuits
Raw Data
Emitter Path
Receiver Path
Trigger and 
Gain Setting
Config 
and
Status
Figure 2. System concept of a 1D MEMS-based automotive LiDAR system
by Druml et al. [8].
Figure 3. Functional principle of a 1D micro-scanning LiDAR [8].
A. 1D MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR
In this section, the 1D MEMS-based LiDAR System by
Druml et al. is presented. The system concept of the MEMS-
based LiDAR is depicted in Figure 2. Druml et al.’s system
consists in general of an emitter path, a receiver path and the
System Safety Controller (AURIX). In the emitter path are
included a laser illumination unit, the MEMS mirror and the
actuation and sensing unit of the mirror, the MEMS Driver
ASIC. Within the receiver path are an array of photo diodes
and the receiver circuits. The System Safety Controller is
the central unit, which is responsible ,e.g., for monitoring,
controlling and signal processing. According to the signal
processing part, the task of the System Safety Controller is to
compute and provide a 3D point cloud for dedicated ADAS [8].
Due to the dependence of correct position, direction and
veriﬁcation signals of the mirror, the Driver ASIC, which is
responsible for the actuation and sensing of the MEMS mirror,
is described in particular. The MEMS Driver is providing
crucial signals to the System Safety Controller and therefore
it is mandatory that the delivered information is reliable.
By reference to the correctness of these crucial signals, the
System Safety Controller will create with the raw data from
the receiver circuits a plausible 3D point cloud. If the crucial
signals were corrupted the 3D point cloud would be useless
due to wrong assumptions of the reﬂected laser origin.
In Figure 4, the crucial signals are illustrated, which are
provided by the MEMS Driver ASIC. These signals are needed
to monitor during operation the current status of the MEMS
mirror. The POSITION L represents whether the mirror is
Figure 4. Crucial signals of the MEMS Driver ASIC from Druml et al.’s
LiDAR system [8].
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-773-3
PESARO 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Figure 5. A basic Built-In Self-Test Architecture [9].
aligned to the left or to the right side; logical high means
an alignment to the left and logical low to the right. DI-
RECTION L indicates in which direction the movement is
located; logical high means moving to left and logical low
to the right. Precise and high-frequent phase information of
the current mirror position is provided by a PHASE CLK
signal that counts from 0 to nmax in equal time steps during
one mirror oscillation. Furthermore, an ANGLE OK signal is
available besides the tracking signals. This ANGLE OK signal
notiﬁes to the System Safety Controller if the Driver ASIC
operates according to the programmed speciﬁcation (e.g., angle
setpoint is reached). To be able to ensure functional-, eye-,
and skin-safety this notiﬁcation is mandatory: MEMS mirror’s
current position and MEMS Driver ASIC’s internal position
information must match to allow a laser shooting [8].
B. Test Facilities
One of the major objectives of the automobile industry is
to evolve the individual trafﬁc. The coexistence of partial auto-
mated, highly automated and fully automated cars will be the
reality in the near future. In conventionally equipped vehicles,
the driver is responsible for environment perception, operation
of the vehicle and intervention in hazardous situations. In
prospective automated cars more and more competences will
move from the driver to the car. Based on information, which
is obtained from ADAS, the vehicle will make decisions.
Therefore, it is apparently necessary that this information is
reliable. To ensure safe and reliable operation of ADAS and
their embedded components like LiDAR, it is mandatory to
test the behaviour for correctness. BISTs and a wide variety
of safety monitors can be used for this purpose.
1) Built-In Self-Test:
A Built-In Self-Test (BIST) is thought to run simultaneously
to the circuit and is monitoring or checking the output of a
circuit to check its validity. The BIST needs a strategy for
generating input signals for the circuit and has to know how
to evaluate the correlated output. The circuit or device which
is tested is called the Circuit Under Test (CUT). A basic BIST
architecture is shown in Figure 5. A realization of a BIST
fundamentally needs to implement four new functions to the
existing system. First of all, there is the Test Pattern Generator
(TPG), which is responsible for generating the input signals
and for the test. The test pattern consists of multiple sets of test
cases, which theoretically simulates all possible combinations
of input signals. The complement to the TPG is the Output
Response Analyzer (ORA). Its task is to know every correct
output response of the CUT and decides whether the current
output is faulty or valid. To create a meaningful and valid test it
is important to isolate the test from any other input. Therefore,
the Input Isolation Circuitry (IIC) is implemented. Its task is
to decouple all input signals, which are commonly provided
to the CUT and replace them with test-signal coming from the
TPG. Last but not least, to synchronize the behaviour of the
TPG, ORA and IIC the Test Controller is implemented. It ﬁrst
initializes a speciﬁc test then decouples the System Inputs and
ﬁnally activates the ORA which then outputs a Fail or Passed
signal [9][10].
2) Safety Monitor Approaches:
Besides BISTs, there are also other monitors, which verify the
behaviour of circuits and overall systems. Schuldt et al. [11],
for example, are strive to test and validate ADAS efﬁciently by
reference to systematically generated virtual test scenarios. The
idea hereby is to identify the factors, which are affecting the
assistance system. Hence, the test scenarios will be generated.
By reference to the test scenarios a test will be executed and
due to a variety of scenarios a evaluation of the results can
be done. Another approach to monitor ADAS is presented
by Mauritz et al. [12]. With this approach results obtained
from simulations are transferred to the road. They ensure a
consistently behaviour of the ADAS in both worlds due to a
simulation of realistic driving conditions and by utilization of
a set of runtime monitors. Furthermore, Meany [13] elucidated
that in all modern safety-critical systems the Integrated Circuits
(IC) are the root. According to Meany, besides redundant and
diverse development, it is necessary to monitor the ICs to be
fault-tolerant. There are several ways to monitor the IC during
operation. Meany addresses in his paper several opportunities
of IC diagnostics.
III.
CORE CONCEPT AND ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we present our concept and architecture
for a novel safety monitor of MEMS-based LiDAR systems.
The reliability of the Driver is a sensitive topic, therefore it is
indispensable to monitor and test the Driver extensively and
diverse. Due to that we have introduced this novel procedure
to be able to test and monitor the Driver in a new way.
At ﬁrst, the architecture modiﬁcations are highlighted and
described. Furthermore, we go through the process ﬂow of
the monitoring and test period. With this new monitor there
is another possibility to detect faults in the Driver module at
an early stage and to take appropriate measures. Due to the
diversity of the testing module it should be possible to prevent
undetected faults even better.
In Figure 6, the modiﬁed block diagram is illustrated. In
principle, it is a common phase-locked loop (PLL), which is
essential for the MEMS mirror actuation, the System Safety
Controller, the MEMS mirror and our novel Safety-Critical
Mirror Driver Monitor (SCMDM). The HV(On/Off) signal
sets the points in time in the internal schedule at which
the High Voltage (HV) is switched on or off. This internal
schedule is administrated by the Mirror Subtiming block.
How fast or slow this schedule is processed is dependable
from the PLL and thus, we aimed to test the PLL on its
functionality. Due to this we have designed a SCMDM and
also adapted the existing architecture and integrate our novel
monitor into it. The core of the SCMDM is consisting of
a mirror simulation part and a decision part. The decision
part is responsible to decide when the test run is conducted
and for notiﬁcation to the System Safety Controller. With the
start of the test run and the accompanying monitoring of the
system, it is also necessary to decouple the Driver from the
physical MEMS mirror. Hence, there were switches for the
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-773-3
PESARO 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Analog
Core
Phase Error
Detector
Loop
Filter
DCO
System
Safety
Controller
Mirror 
Subtiming
HV(On/Off)
ZCref
FDCO
p(n)
Mirror
Position
Information
ZCmeas
Safety-Critical Mirror Driver
Monitor
ZCsim
ZCfs
MEMS 
Mirror
MEMS Mirror Movement  
Simulation
CLTM
HVfs
MEMS Mirror 
Movement
Simulation Controller
Figure 6. Block diagram of a PLL architecture with the novel adaptions to include a Safety-Critical Mirror Driver Monitor module in the system.
Zero-Crossing measured (ZCmeas) and High Voltage On/Off
(HV(On/Off)) signals implemented. In case of test run started
the SCMDM block disables the switch for ZCmeas signal by
Zero-Crossing forwarding stop (ZCfs) signal and the switch for
HV(On/Off) signal by High Voltage forwarding stop (HVfs)
signal. Furthermore, the SCMDM notiﬁes the System Safety
Controller about a test run by the Control Loop Test Mode
(CLTM) signal.
After a test run is started (can be started at at a vehicle
start or when stopping in front of a trafﬁc light) the Zero-
Crossing simulated (ZCsim) signal is instead of the ZCmeas
forwarded to the Phase Error Detector (PD) block. In case
of a vehicle start, the frequency of the simulated MEMS
mirror movement is set to a random but plausible frequency.
Otherwise, the frequency is set to a different frequency than
the actual mirror swing to test and monitor the behaviour of
the MEMS Driver during control operation. To be able to adapt
the simulated frequency of the Zero-Crossing (ZC) a MEMS
Mirror Movement Simulation Controller (MMMSC) is imple-
mented in the simulation part of the SCMDM. By reference to
the PLL error this controller is adapting the simulated MEMS
mirror frequency and works contrary to the PLL. Due to the
characteristics of the MEMS mirror concerning acceleration
and deceleration, the control loop of the simulation must take
these into account. This is necessary to be able to emulate the
physical MEMS mirror’s behaviour after frequency increase
respectively decrease. The acceleration of the mirror requires
more energy effort than its deceleration. Thus, the integrator
values have to be chosen accordingly to that fact. How the
ﬂow of this procedure looks alike is depicted in Figure 7. The
test cycle and monitoring procedure is divided in the following
steps:
1)
Checking for Driving Cycle
In the background, it is continuously checked whether
the vehicle is in the driving state or not. A stopped
driving cycle is, for example, a vehicle stop before
a trafﬁc light or a vehicle start. A test cycle with
subsequent mirror restart usually lasts much shorter
than 1s. In both cases, trafﬁc light stop and vehicle
start, there is at least 1s time to perform the test and
monitoring cycle. Hence, the SCMDM is started after
a stop of the driving cycle is detected.
2)
Safety-Critical Mirror Driver Monitor Enable
After the driving cycle check gives green light for
the SCMDM the SCMDM is enabled and notiﬁes the
System Safety Controller via the CLTM signal about
the test cycle. Next step is to adjust the frequency for
the simulated mirror.
3)
Frequency Adjustment
On the basis of a simulated mirror movement the
adequate and orderly function of the MEMS Driver
Start
Driving Cycle
Enable 
Safety-Critical 
Mirror Driver 
Monitor
No
Enable 
Zero-Crossing
Signal 
Forwarding
Yes
Disable 
Safety-Critical 
Mirror Driver 
Monitor
PLL Error 
greater than
Treshold
Disable
Zero-Crossing
Signal 
Forwarding
PLL Error 
smaller than 
Threshold
End
Set
Simulated 
MEMS Mirror‘s 
Frequency
Disable
HV On/Off
Signal 
Forwarding
PI Control
Enable
HV On/Off
Signal 
Forwarding
Compliance 
with Timing 
Constraints of 
Test
Yes
Disable 
Safety-Critical 
Mirror Driver 
Monitor
No
Notify
System Safety 
Controller
Figure 7. Process ﬂow of the Safety-Critical Mirror Driver Monitor module.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-773-3
PESARO 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

ASIC’s PLL shall be proved. Therefore, it is neces-
sary to set a start frequency for this simulated mirror
with a signiﬁcant difference to the actual frequency of
the physical MEMS mirror. In case of a vehicle start it
is only necessary to choose a frequency within given
limits of the physical MEMS mirror. If the MEMS
mirror has already been in operation, the frequency
to be set must then be selected within plausible limits
and the selected frequency must also be sufﬁciently
different from the actual mirror frequency. After the
initial frequency of the mirror simulation is set the
system has to be decoupled from the physical MEMS
mirror during the test cycle.
4)
Decoupling
Switches have been integrated into the existing ar-
chitecture to decouple the system from the MEMS
mirror. By means of HVfs the HV(On/Off) signal is
decoupled from the physical mirror and thus prevents
an unwanted mirror actuation. During the test phase,
the mirror is actuated in a open loop mode with the
HV(On/Off) value, which is conﬁgured before the
test is started. In order to prevent a disturbance of
the control loop in the test mode by the ZC of the
physical mirror, the ZCmeas signal is switched off.
Thus, only the ZCsim signal is forwarded to the PD
block and the PLL is not affected of two different,
actual and simulated ZC, signals.
5)
PI Control
Then the control of the PLL and the simulated mirror
frequency begins. The PLL is operating as usual
and tries to match the internal adjusted frequency
with the simulated mirror frequency. The simulated
mirror is also adapting the frequency with respect
to the speciﬁcs of the acceleration and deceleration
of the physical mirror. By reference to the obtained
PLL error the MEMS Mirror Movement Simulation
(MMMS) part is informed whether an acceleration
(frequency increase) or a deceleration (frequency
decrease) has to be simulated. It is necessary to know
whether the simulated mirror needs to be accelerated
or decelerated because the integrator values of accel-
eration and deceleration are different. This is the case
because there is a difference in energy consumption
between acceleration and deceleration. This control
happens until either the simulated mirror has the
desired frequency or a time limit is reached.
6)
End of PI Control
a)
Control Success
After the control process was successful,
the SCMDM is disabled and the physical
MEMS mirror is integrated into the control
system again instead of the simulated one. To
re-integrate the MEMS mirror, the ZCmeas
signal is forwarded to the PD block and the
HV(On/Off) signal of the Mirror Subtiming
block is forwarded to the Analog Core that
connects to the physical mirror.
b)
Control Abort
In the case that the control is aborted by
reaching the time limit, the SCMDM is also
disabled. In contrast to successful control,
however, a notiﬁcation of failure is trans-
mitted to the System Safety Controller. The
System Safety Controller is then responsible
for what measures are taken. Such measures
could possibly be a further test run or a
degradation of the system.
7)
Encoupling
After the test run is ﬁnished, the physical mirror is
coupled back into the system. This works in principle
similar to the start-up procedure. The physical mirror
in open loop mode is put back into closed loop mode
by activating the PLL. This completes the test run
and the system continues to operate as before.
With this novel procedure there is another possibility to
check the function of a control loop for MEMS-based LiDAR
systems. Especially for safety-critical components in environ-
mental perception systems, it is important that there is not
only redundancy of tests and monitors but also diversity. The
most important thing is to ensure the correct functioning of the
systems that provide information for ADAS and other fusion
components. The following section discusses and explains the
results of the novel monitor approach.
IV.
RESULTS
In this section, we provide the measurement results of our
novel monitoring procedure, which has been introduced in
Section III.
Figure 8 shows the start of the novel monitor procedure.
After 427 mirror half periods, the frequency of the simulated
mirror is changed. The Angle Ok signal can be used as an
indicator for a frequency shift between mirror and driver be-
cause it indicates whether the angle setpoint is reached or not.
At the beginning of the frequency mismatch this is also clearly
visible in the ZC measurement. The red signal corresponds to
the ZC reference signal of the MEMS mirror Driver and the
blue one to the ZCsim signal. After the 427 mirror half period
it is clearly visible that the reference and the simulated ZC
signal are no longer synchronous. The exemplary course of
the mirror is recorded at Mirror Angle. The red curve indicates
the course of the mirror at the same frequency and the blue
curve looks like the course when the new frequency is set for
425
426
427
428
429
430
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Angle_OK [1]
425
426
427
428
429
430
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Direction_L [1]
425
426
427
428
429
430
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Zero-Crossing [1]
425
426
427
428
429
430
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Position_L [1]
425
426
427
428
429
430
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
Mirror Angle [°]
Figure 8. Measurement with the initial frequency adaption of the simulated
MEMS mirror.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-773-3
PESARO 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

1706
1707
1708
1709
1710
1711
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Angle_OK [1]
1706
1707
1708
1709
1710
1711
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Direction_L [1]
1706
1707
1708
1709
1710
1711
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Zero-Crossing [1]
1706
1707
1708
1709
1710
1711
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
1
Position_L [1]
1706
1707
1708
1709
1710
1711
Mirror Half Periods [1]
0
Mirror Angle [°]
Figure 9. Measurement with the frequency match of the simulated MEMS
mirror and the MEMS Driver.
the simulated mirror. Figure 9 shows that the frequency of the
mirror has been adjusted again and that the angle setpoint has
been reached again from the 1709 mirror half period onwards.
Here the Angle Ok signal is essential for detecting whether
the angle setpoint has already been reached again. It looks as
if the frequencies of mirror and Driver are equalized before
the 1709th mirror half period. The exemplary courses of the
mirror overlap almost completely and reference and simulated
ZC signal also occur again almost simultaneously. For our
measurement, the control required 1282 mirror half periods to
adjust the frequencies. That was about 220ms at this frequency.
Depending on the frequency difference between mirror and
Driver, this control time can be extended or shortened. Finally,
the results of the frequency adaption duration are summarised
and shown in Table I.
TABLE I. MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Begin
End
Time
in ms
Duration of Frequency Adaption
427
1709
∼ 220
V.
CONCLUSION
In our paper, we have introduced a novel architecture for
a Safety-Critical Mirror Driver Monitor. With this monitor a
new possibility is created to test the control of a MEMS-based
LiDAR system and to monitor the functionality of the Driver
during the test cycle. The diversity of system monitor options
is further increased with this new SCMDM, along with BIST
and other diagnostic variants, further reducing the likelihood of
malfunctions remaining undetected. With a duration of around
220ms, this test run is also well under 1s. So it is no problem
to perform this procedure while the start of the vehicle or
a vehicle stop in front of a trafﬁc light. Even if the trafﬁc
starts to move again, not even 1s passes until the LiDAR
system is operational again. Due to the speed at which the
vehicle starts to move (usually a slow start), it is only a
few centimetres at the most that the vehicle does not receive
any information from the LiDAR. By further optimizing the
parameters, the time required for the test run can probably
be shortened considerably. Our intention was to show that in
principle it is possible to simulate the mirror and thus create
a further possibility for MEMS Driver monitoring by means
of the novel monitor. Monitors such as these will be even
more important in the future for highly automated vehicles
than they already are in safety-critical vehicle components.
The top priority is to ensure the safety and reliability of the
ADAS in the vehicles and also to check whether this is the
case.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all national funding
authorities and the ECSEL Joint Undertaking, which funded
the PRYSTINE project under the grant agreement number
783190.
PRYSTINE is funded by the Austrian Federal Ministry
of Transport, Innovation and Technology (BMVIT) under
the program ICT of the Future between May 2018 and
April 2021 (grant number 865310). More information: http-
s://iktderzukunft.at/en/.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Druml, G. Macher, M. Stolz, E. Armengaud, D. Watzenig, C. Steger,
T. Herndl, A. Eckel, A. Ryabokon, A. Hoess, S. Kumar, G. Dimi-
trakopoulos, and H. Roedig, “PRYSTINE - PRogrammable sYSTems
for INtelligence in AutomobilEs,” in 2018 21st Euromicro Conference
on Digital System Design (DSD), Aug 2018, pp. 618–626.
[2]
European Road Safety Observatory, “Advanced driver assistance sys-
tems,” https://ec.europa.eu/transport/road safety/specialist/observatory/
analyses/trafﬁc safety syntheses/safety synthesies en, retrieved: Oc-
tober, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/transport/road
safety/sites/roadsafety/ﬁles/pdf/ersosynthesis2018-adas.pdf
[3]
M. Lu, K. Wevers, and R. V. D. Heijden, “Technical Feasibility of
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) for Road Trafﬁc Safety,”
Transportation Planning and Technology, vol. 28, no. 3, 2005, pp. 167–
187. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/03081060500120282
[4]
SAE, “SAE International Standard J3016 - Taxonomy and Deﬁnitions
for Terms Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving
Systems,” SAE International, Standard, January 2014.
[5]
C. Br¨unglinghaus, “Wie das Recht automatisiertes Fahren hemmt,”
ATZ - Automobiltechnische Zeitschrift, vol. 117, no. 4, Apr 2015, pp.
8–13. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s35148-015-0039-0
[6]
United Nations Conference on Road Trafﬁc, “19 . Convention
on
Road
Trafﬁc,”
https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetailsIII.aspx?
src=TREATY&mtdsg no=XI-B-19&chapter=11&Temp=mtdsg3&
clang= en,
retrieved:
October,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetailsIII.aspx?src=TREATY&
mtdsg no=XI-B-19&chapter=11&Temp=mtdsg3&clang= en
[7]
Velodyne LiDAR, “HDL-64E,” 2016.
[8]
N. Druml, I. Maksymova, T. Thurner, D. Van Lierop, M. Hennecke, and
A. Foroutan, “1D MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR,” in The Ninth Inter-
national Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
(SENSORDEVICES 2018), 09 2018.
[9]
C. E. Stroud, A designers guide to built-in self-test.
Springer Science
& Business Media, 2006, vol. 19.
[10]
E. J. McCluskey, “Built-In Self-Test Techniques,” IEEE Design Test of
Computers, vol. 2, no. 2, April 1985, pp. 21–28.
[11]
F.
Schuldt,
F.
Saust,
B.
Lichte,
M.
Maurer,
and
S.
Scholz,
“Efﬁziente systematische testgenerierung f¨ur fahrerassistenzsysteme
in virtuellen umgebungen,” 2013, retrieved: October, 2019. [Online].
Available:
https://publikationsserver.tu-braunschweig.de/receive/dbbs
mods 00052570
[12]
M. Mauritz, F. Howar, and A. Rausch, “Assuring the Safety of Advanced
Driver Assistance Systems Through a Combination of Simulation and
Runtime Monitoring,” in Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods,
Veriﬁcation and Validation: Discussion, Dissemination, Applications,
T. Margaria and B. Steffen, Eds.
Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2016, pp. 672–687.
[13]
T.
Meany,
“Functional
Safety
for
Integrated
Cir-
cuits,”
July
2018,
retrieved:
November,
2019.
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.analog.com/en/technical-articles/
a54121-functional-safety-for-integrated-circuits.html
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-773-3
PESARO 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

