ERTMS Challenges for a Safe and Interoperable European Railway System 
Katja Schuitemaker 
Design, Production and Management Department, 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
email: k.schuitemaker@utwente.nl 
Mohammad Rajabalinejad 
Design, Production and Management Department, 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
email: m.rajabalinejad@utwente.nl 
 
 
Abstract— The European Railway Traffic Management system 
(ERTMS) aims at replacing the different national train control 
and command systems in Europe and will serve to make rail 
transport safer. In order to provide insight into safety 
developments within the European railway system, the present 
study evaluates ERTMS at both national and international 
integral level. For this purpose, the international data from 
European ERTMS implementations is combined with national 
data obtained from interviews with Dutch ERTMS stakeholders 
and 
safety 
experts. 
Effects 
of 
deregulation, 
dynamic 
specifications, interoperability and time drain make that 
allowing an interoperable railway system by implementing 
ERTMS appears not to be self-explanatory. Also, without an 
overarching process, cross-discipline understanding and 
improved ascribing meaning to data, implementing ERTMS 
does not mean the railway system will become safer.  
Keywords - ERTMS; safety; integral assessment; socio-
technical safety. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As early as the 1990s, the European Commission (EC) 
decided passenger trains should be able to travel across 
international borders in Europe. In 1998, the EC requested the 
foundation of the Union Industry of Signalling (UNISIG) and 
assigned this with the task of drafting technical specifications 
of the European Railway Traffic Management System 
(ERTMS). ERTMS was designed to be fully interoperable 
across the European Union and has become the European 
standard for the Automatic Train Protection (ATP) that allows 
an interoperable railway system in Europe.  
The International Union of Railways states that the goal of 
ERTMS is “to enhance cross border interoperability and 
signalling procurement by creating a single Europe wide 
standard for railways with the final aim of improving 
competitiveness of the rail sector” [1]. According to the EC, 
ERTMS is a project which will serve to make rail transport 
safer [2]. Some explanations on why ERTMS is considered to 
increase railway safety include: 
 
Continuous supervision of the train speed [2]. This 
means that the train can receive authorization to 
continue running at maximum allowed speeds 
continuously through the GSM-R system (only 
available at ERTMS level 2). 
 
Reduce the risk for human errors [3]. For example, 
work related errors caused by stress, sleepiness, 
fatigue, and sleep disturbance. 
 
Decreasing the amount of Signals Passed At Danger 
(SPAD) [4]. This can be explained by the difference 
with previous ATP systems. ERTMS is able to 
influence trains driving under 40 km/h.  
However, it appears that implementation of ERTMS does 
not automatically mean a safer railway system. For instance, 
in practice, in the Netherlands, the amount of SPADs under 
ERTMS (both Level 1 and Level 2) was 11 in 2013, and 17 in 
2015 [5]. Though, these numbers are low, so they can be 
considered as an indication, not necessarily as a trend. More 
studies, both scientific and industrial, question the safety level 
through implementation of ERTMS. 
At the international level: 
 
Smith et al. addresses issues relevant to safe 
introduction of ERTMS into European railway 
systems [6]. These issues include technical system 
integration, technical system failures and human 
factor considerations. 
 
Laroche and Guihéry study the European Transport 
Policy, the role played by the EC, the ERTMS 
innovation process in accordance with innovation 
process in surface transport, and the difficulties for 
the implementation of an intelligent transportation 
system innovation [7]. 
 
Ghazel addresses the regular evolving documents [8]. 
 
The EC itself has studied past and current problems 
with ERTMS implementation [9]. 
At the national Dutch level: 
 
The Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, 
ProRail and NS have collected (im)possibilities of 
ERTMS [10]. 
 
ProRail and NS executed a pilot for gaining 
experience with driving under ERTMS [11]. 
 
A specialized team investigated the sequence of 
events and decision making processes in the 
Netherlands, which have led to delays in deployment 
of the ERTMS train signalling systems in the HSL 
railway project [12]. 
Most importantly, ERTMS principles have led to 
assumptions regarding safety. This paper studies safety 
implications of ERTMS at the integral level, questioning: 
 
Assumption 1: the fact that ERTMS aims at replacing 
the different national train control and command 
systems in Europe [13]. The risk comes from the idea 
that ERTMS is considered to be a replacing system, 
instead of a new system with new interfaces in itself. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

 
Assumption 2: the fact that ERTMS will serve to 
make rail transport safer [2]. This is not self-evident. 
Parties may gradually sail closer to the wind, thereby 
unintentionally and unnoticed, compromising too 
much on safety. Only when things go wrong - as in 
the Hilversum derailment – it becomes clear that a 
threshold has been passed [14]. 
Section 2 provides an overview of the background of 
railway deregulation, ERTMS specifications, European 
interoperability, and cost reduction as a result of a change in 
organisational behaviour. The methodology is discussed in 
Section 3. Section 4 explains findings with regard to the safety 
architecture and sociotechnical safety of ERTMS. Findings 
are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 summarizes, concludes 
and highlights challenges.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The railway system includes technical, managerial, 
organizational, and regulatory aspects. The subsystems can 
work perfectly individually, but together they can create a 
hazardous state. Many factors, both technical and socio-
institutional in nature should be combined to turn a serious 
challenge of one European train system into a great success 
satisfying social needs of lower costs, better utilization of an 
infrastructure and less complex logistics [15]. 
A. Deregulation 
Starting with the 90s, in order to promote greater 
competition, the rail industry in Europe was restructured. On 
one hand, the vertical separation means management and 
ownership of infrastructure are totally separated from other 
rail activities. On the other hand, various operators are using 
infrastructures. Deregulation is the reduction or elimination 
of government power in industry, usually enacted to create 
more competition within the industry. In addition, safety 
regulation has increased a hundred-fold between 1947 and 
2008 [16]. At last, the ERA explains a shift from quantitative 
safety data to qualitative safety data [17]. 
The privatization and deregulation has led to an increased 
involvement of private actors, national and international [18].  
B. ERTMS specifications 
The Union Industry of Signalling (UNISIG) was founded 
in 1998/99 at the specific request of the European 
Commission (EC) [19]. It was created to develop ERTMS 
specifications. The final version of ERTMS specifications is 
published by the EC following the approval of the Member 
States. 
In November 2012, the EC intentionally deleted ERTMS 
Functional 
Requirement 
Specifications 
making 
these 
specifications no longer mandatory. The remaining System 
Requirements Specifications are written in natural language, 
which allows multiple interpretations [20]. 
C. Interoperability 
The meaning of interoperability is two-fold. On one hand, 
interoperability refers to a geographical interoperability 
between countries and between projects. On the other hand, 
it also refers to interoperability between suppliers. This opens 
the supply market and increases competition within the 
industry [21]. The result of this is the absence of a single 
entity that is responsible for the railway system as a whole. 
D. Cutting cost and time 
Dutch national safety goals are approached through use of 
the As Low As Reasonably Practicable-principle (ALARP) 
and standstill-principle [22]. For risks in the “ALARP area”, 
all potential risk reducing measures must be evaluated in 
terms of cost efficiency, cost-benefit balance or some similar 
economic measure. Finally, selected risk-reducing measures 
may be introduced based on experience or best practice in 
combination with cost-efficiency considerations [23]. 
According to Rasmussen [24], systems and organizations 
continually experience change as adaptions are made in 
response to local pressures and short-term productivity and 
cost goals. Several accidents such as Bhopal, Flixborough, 
Zeebrugge, and Chernobyl demonstrate that they have not 
been caused by a coincidence of independent failures and 
human errors, but by a systematic migration of organisational 
behaviour toward accident under the influence of pressure 
toward cost-effectiveness in an aggressive, competitive 
environment. There happens to be a standing request to be 
cost-effective in risk management [25]. According to the 
ERTMS strategy group of Great Britain, initially the 
principal requirement for ERTMS was to improve safety. 
“Over approximately the last ten years, capacity became a 
more significant influence and then, more recently, cost 
reduction [26].” 
III. 
METHOD 
In order to investigate the nature of phenomena, a 
qualitative approach in the form of interviews was executed. 
The findings in this paper are based on international data from 
European ERTMS implementations linked with national data 
obtained from semi-structured interviews with Dutch ERTMS 
key stakeholders and safety experts from train operating 
companies, infrastructure managers and self-employers 
involved with the ERTMS national program. In total, 15 semi-
structured interviews have been held, performed face to face, 
lasting between 30 and 90 min. All interviews were audio 
recorded and transcribed verbatim. 
Emphasis was placed on the ERTMS safety architecture 
and on social technical safety of ERTMS on both Dutch 
national and international level. The topics discussed included 
effects 
from 
deregulation, 
ERTMS 
specifications, 
interdisciplinarity and time drain.  
Transcriptions were processed through qualitative 
inductive content analysis in order to develop a theory and 
identify themes through repeated examination, comparison, 
abstraction and data reduction. The material was abstracted 
and reduced to a set of themes. The procedure was repeated to 
refine chosen themes. Two main categories were identified as 
a thread through transcriptions: (1) implications with regard 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

to the safety architecture, (2) implications with regard to 
socio-technical safety. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
A. Safety architecture 
With the implementation of a single signalling system 
through Europe, the EC has opted for radical innovation for 
all Member States. Similarly, engineers are often in favour of 
the most innovative, not yet proven technology [27]. At the 
same time, instable specifications make it difficult to adopt a 
radical innovation [7] and issues occur with adapting the new 
system to the old one. Once a hazard scenario is identified, it 
is not trivial to identify all the possible causes in the system 
[28]. In other words, a system that is new, or particularly 
complex can generate scenarios that are not included in the 
standard set. 
Earlier studies explain that ERTMS specifications are 
instable [7], [26], written in  informal language [8], non-
consolidated [6] and incomplete [15], [27]. Up until today, 
stakeholders indicate specifications are not sufficient. To be 
more specific, missing parts concern management, integral 
system integration and physical design. 
As a result, updates are postponed in anticipation of new 
specifications, covering multiple requirements through one 
update.  
For specifications, preferences vary on both international 
and national level. The signalling system for the trajectory the 
Netherlands – Germany (remote monitoring) differs 
significantly from the signalling system for the trajectory the 
Netherlands – Belgium – France (more autonomy for the train 
driver, missing track signalling), which is more in line with 
ERTMS Level 2. Therefore, to migrate to ERTMS Level 2, 
France does not have to change much. To migrate to ERTMS 
Level 2, Germany and the Netherlands face a discontinuation 
with the past. The signal systems as well as the automatic train 
protection systems are still different from one EU country to 
the next [28]. In addition, the various ERTMS levels include 
different technical requirements and applications. A higher 
level involves less track side equipment, but more on-board 
equipment. This change also implies that the costs of the 
signalling system will migrate from infrastructure managers 
to train operators [12]. Infrastructure managers might 
anticipate on the developments, where operators do not like to 
upgrade existing rolling stock [29]. 
In the same line, various subsystems of the railway system 
are tendered. At the national level, the 5 ERTMS-projects are 
explained in table 1. 
TABLE I.  
ERTMS-PROJECTS IN THE NETHERLANDS 
Project 
Supplier 
ERTMS 
level 
In service 
date 
Betuweroute 
Alstom 
2 
2007 
Port Rotterdam 
Alstom 
1 
2009 
High-Speed 
Line South 
Thales/ 
Siemens 
1/2 
2009 
Lelystad-Zwolle 
railway 
Alstom 
2 
2012 
Amsterdam-
Utrecht railway 
Bombardier 
1/2 
2013 
 
Various ERTMS levels result in multiple transitions. 
Table 2. shows all the 21 possible transitions between ERTMS 
levels [31]. 
TABLE II.  
ERTMS POSSIBLE TRANSITIONS 
From        to 
0 
STM 
1 
2 
3 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
STM 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In practice, the choice for no nationwide rollout of one 
ERTMS variation results in many transitions between various 
subsystems. In other words, realization of implementation is 
unique for every project, and dependent on stakeholders, 
environment and activities. As is also explained by Leveson 
[31], the interconnectivity and interactivity between system 
components make that greater complexity leads to vastly more 
possible interactions than could be planned, understood, 
anticipated or guarded against. In reality, Table II shows just 
a fraction of the number of transitions. As is also concluded 
by Smith [6], existence of many ETCS versions with technical 
problems require the need for a backup system. 
As a result, systems can be incompatible, for example, the 
two implementations made by Alcatel (Dutch part of the 
railway) and Alstom (Belgium part of the railway).   
In the end, with ERTMS, complexity of technology, use, 
and processes of the railway system increases. Interviewees 
indicated that the technological development in ERTMS is 
underestimated. A failure with ETCS can have up to 100 
causes where train drivers and signalmen must find a solution 
through difficult procedures and processes, with limited 
technical system knowledge. 
B. Sociotechnical safety 
Deregulation has led to considerably more actors on the 
market. As is also concluded by [6], incomplete/unstable 
specifications of ERTMS are further hampered by companies 
involved. With Dutch automatic train protection (ATB) 
tracks, only one manufacturer (Alstom) was involved. With 
ERTMS and the tendering of subsystems, various 
manufacturers are involved. Stakeholders within the ERTMS 
program come from, among others operating companies, 
infrastructure provider and self-employers. 
In the first place, the rising number of parties involved 
entails a considerable amount of points of view, skills, 
responsibilities and interests to the interaction. Boundaries of 
what constitutes the system become fuzzy; interdependencies 
and interactions multiply and mushroom [32]. With so many 
interests, there is a risk of compromising too much on safety. 
In this context, the train derailment in Hilversum teaches us 
that the related interests can gradually and unnoticed apply 
pressure on the management of safety risks [14]. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Second, qualitative data uses subjective indexes and is 
based on logical reasoning from multiple experts. Differences 
in both language and culture can be major barriers to 
multidisciplinary work [33]. On top of this, countries are using 
their own language, making intersectional issues even more 
complex. For these reasons, on both international level and 
national level, stakeholders experience difficulties with 
understanding their respective system. This is also described 
by Forsberg [3], who states that the new societal organization 
indicates that intersectional issues and decisions have 
increased between the various actors, particularly since 
mishaps or accidents often are caused by circumstances or 
weak links between them.  
Then, for interoperability, without legal entity, it is 
difficult for the national ERTMS program to allocate 
responsibility of interface risks to a stakeholder. What makes 
this even more difficult, is a missing central designer, or any 
party, that knows the entire complex system. As is also 
described by Baxter [33], borders between disciplines have 
been largely maintained despite efforts at creating 
interdisciplinary teams by involving domain specialist in the 
design process. One discipline does not fully understand what 
other disciplines can do, because it essentially stops after 
collecting data rather than analysing data to ascribe meaning 
to it so that it could be more readily used by others. Although 
the European exposed Common Safety Method (CSM) aims 
at an integral safety approach, the final report on the ERTMS 
pilot between Amsterdam and Utrecht explains that 
“overarching 
processes 
between 
railway 
and 
train 
transportation are missing and that these are necessary for 
optimum implementation of ERTMS”. Employees are often 
focused on their own job, knowing a lot about their own 
subject. In practice, data is set and sent to the next. 
Organizations feel responsible for their own processes, not for 
the integral railway system as is also recognized by the Dutch 
Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment [11]. 
As it is also described by Nusser [34], “Black box” 
approaches are regarded with suspicion – even if they show a 
very high accuracy on the available data – because it is not 
feasible to prove that they will show a good performance on 
all possible input combinations. This makes it possible to 
make a decision based on hidden factors. For example, as 
safety is sometimes seen as hindrance to effective marketing 
solutions, focus can be on finishing on time and approve of 
design.  
This is also questioned by Enserink: “It is strange to see 
how in many large projects, such as the Westerschelde tunnel, 
the Betuwelijn, and the ‘Groene Hart’ bored tunnel of the high 
speed rail line south, the discussions of safety issues and 
safety management took place at a very late stage in the 
project cycle” [35]. He also explains: In all the examples in 
the planning phase, the analysts neglected the safety issues or 
these issues were temporarily stalled because of their 
complexity. Many have been investigated with the aim of 
apportioning blame or liability and although safety 
recommendations are often made, they frequently fail to 
identify some of the underlying causes of whatever went 
wrong [28]. 
As for time drain, with such a large number of 
stakeholders, it is not always possible to involve every 
stakeholder in substantive discussions. As a result, 
stakeholders try to represent another’s perspective. In addition 
to this, stakeholders are involved in multiple projects resulting 
in conflicting goals. In other words, the decision-making 
process can be person related, instead of organization related. 
According to the parliamentary commission Fyra, it seems 
like safety has become a subject for negotiation [36]. In 
practice, the safety case HSL-Z resulted in only mitigating 
major issues due to time pressure [37]. 
In the end, any of these effects enable local actors to 
change their conditions in one of its corners for a very good 
reason without apparent implications. This can bring 
immediate gains on some local goal trade-off. Both Leveson 
[31] and Dekker [32] explain that with a vast number of 
widely distributed interacting components in an organization, 
small ‘drifts’ in procedure or policy will not necessarily be 
identified as risks to the safety of the SoS. Figure 1 shows the 
interrelationships between the effects of deregulation, 
dynamic specifications, interoperability and time drain 
involved with ERTMS. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Safety architecture 
Both internationally and nationally, stakeholders have 
different preferences for ERTMS design. In addition, 
specification interpretations by manufacturers vary. This in 
turn leads to a system of a wide variety of subsystems and the 
associated increase of transitions. This, whilst the ERTMS 
program tries to prevent transitions between subsystems [38]. 
The checking of the critical specifications in the natural 
language is a burdensome task. At the same time, new trains 
are designed, without required ERTMS specifications. In 
practice, the instable specifications and various interpretations 
are a major issue when dealing with such systems. The 
consequences are significant: the 5 ERTMS-projects 
(Betuweroute, Port of Rotterdam, HSL South, Amsterdam-
Utrecht and Lelystad-Zwolle) are all different [10], let alone 
the European variations. 
Both international and national preferences, changing 
specifications, 
changing 
stakeholders 
and 
varying 
manufacturers led to a unique realization for every subsystem. 
Along the same line, the occurrence of further transitions with 
accompanied complexity and procedures and processes that 
multiply and have wider ramifications. 
To pick up from the assumption that ERTMS replaces the 
national train control and command systems, all in all, it can 
be concluded that the greater complexity leading to vastly 
more possible interactions, was and is, unforeseen. As of 
today, the goal for one interoperable railway system is not 
achieved. Challenges concern systems thinking accompanied 
by complex interdisciplinary systems. 
B. Sociotechnical safety 
With ERTMS and the tender strategy, information has 
become more sensitive. As a result, stakeholders lack insight 
into cross-border information. Also, ERTMS involves an  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Interrelationships between effects of deregulation, dynamic specifications, interoperability, and time drain of ERTMS. 
increased number of stakeholders that differ in both language 
and culture. As for safety, this means that lack of availability 
of information makes it difficult to determine a root cause. 
A central designer that knows or has the responsibility 
over the entire complex system misses. This, in combination 
with stakeholder involvement in multiple projects, make 
local-goal trade-offs possible. Since there is no integral view, 
local actors can change their conditions without apparent 
implications. 
Time drain and pressure towards cost-effectiveness can 
inadvertently lead to generating adaptive responses, 
wrong/missing identification of hazards and safety risks and 
also to safety concessions. In the same line, if only 
catastrophic issues are addressed, many other hazards may go 
uncorrected, which may have a costly impact. 
To pick up from the assumption that ERTMS will serve to 
make rail transport safer, both implicit data-exchange and a 
missing integral view make it hard to perform a 
comprehensive safety assessment. Challenges concern the 
overarching process, cross-discipline understanding and 
ascribing meaning to data. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In present study, the effects of deregulation, dynamic 
specifications, interoperability, and time drain on the 
European railway system have been researched. 
First, allowing an interoperable railway system by 
implementing ERTMS appears not to be self-explanatory. 
Second, implementing ERTMS does not mean the railway 
system will become safer. 
Specifications allowing multiple interpretations result in 
various design choices, disparities between systems, possible 
little recognition of hazards and risks, and cumbersome 
procedures. Realizations are dependent on stakeholders, 
environment and activities. As of today, the goal for one 
interoperable railway system is not achieved. Challenges 
concern systems thinking accompanied by complex 
interdisciplinary systems. A missing central designer and 
overall process lower the degree to which the parties succeed 
in correctly harmonizing various processes. Since there is no 
integral view, local actors can change their conditions without 
apparent implications. 
As is also concluded by the Dutch Safety Board [39], 
railway undertakings should make transparent as to why they 
decide to implement certain measures or not. Challenges 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

concern 
the 
overarching 
process, 
cross-discipline 
understanding and ascribing meaning to data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] International Union of Railways, “SafeCulture: A method for 
assessing organisational safety at interfaces,” UIC, 2004. 
[2] European Commission, “ERTMS – European Rail Traffic 
Management 
System,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ec.europea.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[3] R. Forsberg, “Conditions affecting safety on the Swedish 
railway – Train drivers’ experiences and perceptions,” Safety 
Science, vol. 85, pp. 53-59, 2016. 
[4] Ministry 
of 
Infrastructure 
and 
the 
Environment, 
“Beleidsimpuls 
Railveiligheid,” 
2016 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[5] Prorail, 
“Jaarrapport 
2015. 
Analyse 
STS-passages” 
Unpublished. 
[6] P. Smith, A. Majumdar, and W. Y. Ochieng, “An overview of 
lesson learnt from ERTMS implementation in European 
railways,” Journal of Rail Transport Planning & Management, 
vol. 2, pp. 79-87, 2012. 
[7] F. Laroche, and L. Guihéry, “European Rail Traffic 
Management System (ERTMS): Supporting competition on 
the European rail network?” Research in Transportation 
Business & Management, vol. 6, pp. 81-87, 2013. 
[8] M. Ghazel, “Formalizing a subset of ERTMS/ETCS 
specifications for verification purposes,” Transportation 
Research Part C, vol. 42, pp. 60-75, 2014. 
[9] European Commission, “ERTMS – FAQ on ERTMS,” 
Available from: http://www.ec.europa.eu [retrieved: March, 
2017]. 
[10] Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, “ERTMS 
kennisboek 
versie 
2.0,” 
2014 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[11] Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, “Eindrapport 
Lessen uit het rijden onder ERTMS Level 2 in Dual Signalling 
omstandigheden,” 
2015 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[12] J. Stoop, J. Vleugel, and J. Baggen, “Testing the untestable: 
towards pro-active safety assessment,” Proceedings of the 9th 
International probabilistic safety assessment and management 
conference (PSAM 9), May 2008, pp. 784-791, ISBN: 978-
988-99791-5-7. 
[13] UNIFE, 
“ERTMS 
in 
brief,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ertms.net [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[14] The Dutch Safety Board, “Train Derailment Hilversum,” 2014  
Available from: http://www.onderzoeksraad.nl [retrieved: 
March, 2017]. 
[15] L. de Haan, J.L.M. Vrancken, and Z. Lukszo, “Why is 
intelligent technology alone not an intelligent solution?” 
Futures, vol. 43, pp. 970-978, 2011. 
[16] A. S. Townsend, “Safety Can’t Be Measured – An Evidence-
based Approach To Improving Risk Reduction,” Gower 
Publishing, 2013. 
[17] European Railway Agency, “Intermediate report on the 
development of railway safety in the European Union,” 2013 
Available from: http://www.era.europa.eu [retrieved: March, 
2017]. 
[18] G. Alexandersson, and S. Hultén, “The Swedish Deregulation 
Path,”Review of Network Economics, vol. 7, issue 1, pp. 1-19, 
March 2008. 
[19] UNIFE, “UNISIG, An industrial consortium to develop 
ERTMS/ETCS technical specifications,” Available from: 
http://www.ertms.net [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[20] European Union, “Commission Decision of 25 January 2012 
on the technical specification for interoperability relating to the 
control-command and signalling subsystems of the trans-
European rail system,” Official Journal of the European Union, 
vol. 55, pp. 1-51, February 2012. 
[21] UNIFE, “A Unique Signalling System For Europe. The long 
journey to an interoperable railway system,” Availale from 
htttp://www.ertms.net [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[22] Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, “Derde 
Kadernota 
Railveiligheid,” 
2010 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[23] N.P. Hoj, and W. Kroger, “Risk analyses of transportation on 
road and railway from a European Perspective,” Safety 
Science, vol. 40, pp. 337-357, 2002. 
[24] J. Rasmussen, “Risk management in a dynamic society: a 
modelling problem,” Safety Science, vol. 27, pp. 183-213, 
1997. 
[25] ERTMS Strategy Group, “National ERTMS Business 
Requirements,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rssb.co.uk 
[retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[26] H. Priemus, “Mega-projects: Dealing with Pitfalls,” European 
Planning studies, vol. 18, pp. 1023-1039, 2010. 
[27] T. Pasquale, E. Rasaria, M. Pietro, and O. Antonio, “Hazard 
Analysis of Complex Distributed Railway Systems,” 
Proceedings of the 22nd International Symposium on Reliable 
Distributed Systems (SRDS’03), October 2003, pp. 283-292, 
ISSN: 1060-9857, ISBN: 0-7695-1955-5. 
[28] European Transport Safety Council (ETSC), “Transport 
accident and incident investigation in the European Union,” 
Available from: http://www.etcs.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[29] European 
Railway 
Agency, 
“Analysis 
of 
Potential 
Interoperability Problems Final Report WP4,” Available from: 
http://www.era.europea.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[30] European Railway Agency, “Subset-026—2 v300,” Available 
from: http://www.era.europea.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[31] N. Leveson, “A new accident model for engineering safer 
systems,” Safety Science, vol. 42, pp. 237-270, 2004. 
[32] S. Dekker, “Drift into failure: from hunting broken components 
to understanding complex systems,” CRC Press, 2011. 
[33] G. Baxter, and I. Sommerville, “Socio-technical systems: From 
design methods to systems engineering,” Interacting with 
Computers, vol. 23, pp. 4-17, January 2011. 
[34] S. Nusser, “Robust Learning in Safety-Related Domains. 
Machine Learning Methods for Solving Safety-Related 
Application Problems,” Doctoral Thesis, Univ., Fak. Für 
Informatik, 2009. 
[35] B. Enserink, “Integral assessment – putting safety on the 
agenda for mitigation and preparedness,” Safety Science, vol. 
39, pp. 93-105, 2001. 
[36] Tweede Kamer Der Staten-Generaal, “Verslagen van de 
openbare 
verhoren,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.tweedekamer.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[37] K. Schuitemaker, J.G. Braakhuis, and M. Rajabalinejad, “A 
Model Based Safety Architecture Framework for Dutch High 
Speed Train Lines,” Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on System of Systems Engineering (SoSE), May 
2015, pp. 21-29, 2015. 
[38] Ministry of Infrastucture and the Environment, “Uitrolstrategie 
ERTMS,” 2016 Availble from http://www.tweedekamer.nl 
[retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[39] The Duth Safety Board, “Train collision Amsterdam 2012 
Westerpark,” Available from: http://www.onderzoeksraad.nl 
[retrieved: March, 2017]. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-549-4
PESARO 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

