A Call Center Model for Online Mental Health Support
Tim Rens de Boer
CWI
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: trdb@cwi.nl
Saskia M´erelle
113 Suicide Prevention
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: s.merelle@113.nl
Sandjai Bhulai
Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: s.bhulai@vu.nl
Rob van der Mei
CWI and Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: mei@cwi.nl
Abstract—Helplines for mental healthcare differ from other
call centers in various aspects. Many agents are volunteers, the
conversations are often more complex and emotional, and many
helplines use a triage system. In this paper, we first propose
a call center model that includes the specifics of online mental
health helplines, including features such as a triage system for
chats and service times consisting of a warm-up, conversation,
and wrap-up cool-down periods. The model is validated using
a trace-driven simulation based on real-life (anonymous) data
provided by 113 Suicide Prevention. The results show that
the model can simulate the waiting-time performance of the
helpline accurately. Second, we focus on forecasting the number
of chats and telephone calls. Our results show that (Seasonal)
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average ((S)ARIMA) models
trained on historical data perform better than other models in
the case of short-term forecasting (five weeks or less ahead), while
using linear regression works best for long-term forecasts (longer
than five weeks).
Keywords—call
center
models;
queueing;
mental
health;
helplines; data analytics; forecasting
I. INTRODUCTION
There are many forms of mental health, with many countries
having one or multiple helplines. Examples of mental health
helplines in the Netherlands are 113 Suicide Prevention [1],
the helpline for help-seekers with suicidal thoughts, the listen
helpline (Dutch: luisterlijn) [2], and the Kindertelefoon [3]
for children. Recently, mental-support helplines have received
much attention due to the increase in call volumes related to
the (partial) lockdown to combat the spreading of corona [4],
[5]. This paper focuses on call center modeling for the suicide
prevention helplines. However, the results can also be used for
modeling the waiting-time performance of other mental health
helplines.
Suicide is a worldwide health problem. In 2020, on average,
five persons died each day by suicide in the Netherlands alone.
Suicide is a leading cause of death among adolescents [6];
worldwide, more than 700,000 people die from suicide every
year [7]. In many countries, people struggling with suicidal
thoughts can contact a helpline to get support to prevent and
reduce suicidal thoughts [8]. In the Netherlands, persons with
suicidal thoughts can contact 113, either by telephone or by
chat [9], and are helped by volunteers and professionals. It
is crucial that help seekers are answered swiftly. Therefore,
it is important that adequate staffing is present to answer
telephone calls and chat requests, minimizing the waiting times
and abandonments (i.e., sudden termination of ongoing calls
or chats while waiting). In order to calculate proper staffing
levels (e.g., [10]), a good understanding of the processes of
call center system for mental health is required.
Mental health helplines differ in various aspects from classi-
cal call centers. First, the subjects of conversations are mental
health concerns, e.g., loneliness, substance use [11]–[13].
Second, agents often have to handle complex conversations
with the patient-in-need, and may themselves require support
during or after a difficult conversation [14]. Therefore, an
important aspect is that agents often need some time to cool
down after emotionally difficult conversations. Third, when a
chat or telephone call enters the system, it has to be determined
which agent is best capable of handling the call, which results
in a warm-up time before the call is taken into service.
Lastly, chat conversations that enter the system first go through
a triage phase. The inclusion of triage plays an important
role, and functions as a filter [15] to chat requests, checking
whether these help seekers are at the right helpline or might
require emergency care. The triagist can also estimate the
conversation’s difficulty to best match an agent with enough
experience to handle the chat. So, the model for such a mental
health helpline needs to meet the following requirements: (1)
the possibility of abandonments, (2) a service time consisting
of multiple phases, (3) a warm-up and cool-down time, (4)
inclusion of chats and telephone calls, and (5) triage.
Classic call center models were considered for modeling this
helpline, see [16] for an excellent overview on queuing models
for call centers. The Erlang-C model is proven to be inaccurate
when modeling call centers with abandonments [17]. The
Erlang-A model includes abandonments [18], but does not
include multiple skills, triage, and warm-up times. Multi-skill
call center models, such as an N-configuration [16], were also
considered. The N-configuration model includes two types of
arrivals, which in this case would be telephone and chat, and
assumes that new chat arrivals can be picked up before triage.
However, in the mental health helpline of [1], it is crucial
that chats first go through triage. The importance of modeling
triage is already shown in the emergency domain [19], [20].
Therefore, in this paper, we modify the N-configuration model
in such a way that it includes the specifics of mental health
helplines.
This paper introduces a new queuing model to include the
possibility of triage. The model is built based on anonymized
call and chat data, made available by [1]. The records used
cannot be traced back to individual callers, as only timestamps
and durations are used. The anonymous data is also used to
validate the model and determine different patterns that can
be helpful for forecasting demand.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
different patterns found in the data. In Section III, the proposed
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-019-3
PREDICTION SOLUTIONS 2022 : International Conference on Prediction Solutions for Technical and Societal Systems

Queued
Arrival
Accepted
Disconnected
Completed
Pre-queue
Waiting time
Call duration
Wrap-up time
Figure. 1. Timeline of a call from the perspective of the caller.
model is described. In Section IV, the model is validated,
using a combination of data and trace-driven simulation. Next,
Section V explains how the demand call volumes can be
predicted based on historical data. Finally, in Section VI, the
conclusion and discussion are given.
II. DATA ANALYSIS
The data for this research is provided by 113 Suicide
Prevention [1], throughout referred to as ‘113’. Its mission is
to prevent suicides and break the taboo surrounding suicide.
Help seekers struggling with suicidal thoughts can contact 113
24/7 by either chat or telephone. Apart from that, 113 also
provides online therapy, self-tests, and self-help courses [21].
Call data is provided over the period 2016-2021 and consists
of around 250,000 chats and 175,000 telephone calls. Each
call or chat has the following elements: (1) the arrival time,
(2) the time entering the queue, (3) the time of acceptance by
an agent, (4) the disconnection time, and (5) the completion
time. Each call also has a contact id and an initial contact id,
which may be different if a call is a forwarded telephone call
or chat.
The time between the arrival of a call and the time entering
the queue is the time spent by the caller in a menu. This phase
does not require resources from the helpline and, therefore,
falls outside the scope of this paper. The waiting time is
defined as the time between entering the queue and the time
that an agent accepts the call. The call duration where the
agent and the help seeker are actually connected is defined as
the time between acceptance of a call and the disconnection
time. Finally, after each call, the agent has to fill in a
wrap-up form, which is the time between disconnection and
completion. A visual representation of this timeline is given
in Figure. 1.
Recall that there are two options for help seekers to contact
the helpline: via telephone or chat. These two contact types are
mostly handled by the same type of agents but differ in some
important aspects. Traditionally, there used to be more chats
than telephone calls. However, the difference has diminished
in recent years, and the numbers are comparable. However, the
chat and telephone calls do follow different patterns, which are
shown in Figs. 4 to 5. Figs. 2 and 3 show the week patterns; in
both cases, the weekends see a lower number of calls. We also
observe that most telephone calls arrive between 12:00 and
20:00, while chats have a clear peak at 20:00. Both telephone
and chat call arrivals show a decrease during the night and
early morning.
Only part of the incoming chats after triage gets sent to
another agent. The percentage of chats that an agent handles
Figure. 2. Weekly pattern of incoming telephone calls.
Figure. 3. Weekly pattern of incoming chats.
Figure. 4. Daily pattern of incoming telephone calls.
Figure. 5. Daily pattern of incoming chats.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-019-3
PREDICTION SOLUTIONS 2022 : International Conference on Prediction Solutions for Technical and Societal Systems

Figure. 6. Histogram of telephone call durations.
Figure. 7. Histogram of chat triage durations.
after triage is around 50% during day shifts, but this differs
over the day. During the night shifts, fewer chats are forwarded
to an agent. The different nature of night conversations may
cause this. The triage plays an important role in filtering chats,
as seen by the percentage of chats that get through triage.
Chats are filtered out due to various reasons. For example, the
chatter may be at the wrong helpline and or is identified as a
prank chatter [22].
In the data, we distinguish three service time distributions:
for the duration of (1) telephone calls, (2) chats during triage,
and (3) chats after triage. The empirical distribution of phone
call durations can be found in Figure. 6. On average, a
telephone call takes around 18 minutes. The duration of chats
in triage can be seen in Figure. 7, and the duration of chat
conversations after triage can be seen in Figure. 8. As can
be seen, the chats that have gone through triage tend to take
much longer than the chats during triage: on average, chats in
triage take 19 minutes versus 34 minutes after triage.
Remark 1: The effect of experience of agents
Mental health helplines often use a mix of paid professionals
and volunteers, where an agent’s responsibilities depend on
experience and other factors. Analysis of our data pointed out
that there seems to be no significant difference in service time
distribution between different volunteers and professionals.
There might be a difference, but this could be obscured due to
many other factors, such as experienced agents handling the
Figure. 8. Histogram of durations of chat conversations after triage.
more complex conversations. Based on this observation, the
call duration distributions are assumed to be the same for all
agents.
Remark 2: The effect of media events on arrivals
The possible effects of media events concerning suicide were
also studied. If shown to have a significant and long-lasting
effect, these media events could be used to help predict
demand. To analyze this, multiple events were considered,
ranging from national and international suicides to political
news concerning suicide. The effect of suicides of celebrities
on suicides is well-documented. It has been found that during
and after the suicide of a celebrity, the number of suicides
increases [23]. Rather surprisingly, we observed that most
events do not have a large or long-lasting effect on the number
of call arrivals, often having no effect or only a short-term
effect for 1 or 2 days.
III. MODEL DESCRIPTION
There are two types of calls: (1) chat calls, and (2) telephone
calls. Incoming chat calls first enter the triage system that
consists of ctriage triage agents. When a chat call finds a triage
agent available, it enters the triage immediately. Each triage
agent can handle ntriage simultaneously without perceivable
slow-down; this way, there are ctriagentriage ‘triage slots’ for
chat calls. The service time of a chat call in triage, denoted
Bchat, is the convolution of four random variables Bchat =
Bwarm-up + Bconversation+Bwrap up + Bcool-down, drawn from some
probability distribution, which can be estimated from the data.
A visual representation of the service time can be seen in
Figure. 9. Incoming chat calls that find all ctriagentriage triage
slots occupied, take place in an infinite-sized queue and are
handled on a First Come First Serve (FCFS) basis.
A key aspect of the model is the inclusion of impatience,
i.e., the maximum amount of time that a help seeker is willing
to wait before he abandons the system. The impatience of
a help seeker who enters the system via a chat is modeled
as an independent sample from some probability distribution
with mean µchat-impatience. After service completion at the triage
center, a chat is either sent through to the helpline (HL) for
assistance (with probability psent-through), or the chat leaves
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-019-3
PREDICTION SOLUTIONS 2022 : International Conference on Prediction Solutions for Technical and Societal Systems

Acceptance 
of call
Ready
Disconnected
Completed
Ready
Warm-up
Call duration
Wrap-up time
Cooldown
Figure. 9. Timeline of call from the perspective of the agent.
Telephone calls
Chat calls
Triage
HL
Chats identified as at the wrong helpline
Sent to HL with priority
Helped chat and telephone conversations
Figure. 10. Illustration of the model.
the system. Note that during the warm-up period Bwarm-up,
the agent is busy, but the help seeker is not yet answered.
Therefore, help seekers may abandon the queue during that
period.
Different from chat calls, incoming telephone calls do not go
through a triage phase and arrive directly at the HL. This is the
core part of the system where most of the service processing
occurs. The HL is equipped with cHL agents, each of which
can handle both chat calls and telephone calls, not more than
one call at a time. When a telephone call finds an HL-agent
available, he enters service immediately. If the telephone call
arrives and no agent is available, the call enters an infinite-
sized queue that is handled on an FCFS basis.
The HL processes both telephone calls and forwarded chat
calls (i.e., those that have passed through the triage phase).
Here, chat calls have non-preemptive priority over telephone
calls. Thus, when an HL-agent becomes idle, he first checks
whether there is a chat call pending (while keeping a triage slot
occupied), and, if so, starts to service the longest-waiting chat
call. If no chat call is pending, the agent checks if telephone
calls are pending.
Similar to the modeling of chat sessions, the duration
of phone calls also consists of four subsequent independent
phases: (1) warm-up, (2) conversation, (3) wrap-up, and (4)
cool-down, where each phase has its own probability distribu-
tion.
The impatience of help seekers via telephone is modeled as
a sample from some probability distribution that can be ob-
tained from the data. Calls abandon the queue if their waiting
time exceeds the impatience. When service is completed, the
calls exit the system. Note that agents are busy during the
warm-up period, similar to abandonments at the triage, but
the help seeker does not perceive this and can therefore still
abandon the queue during the warm-up phase. See Figure. 10
for an illustration of the model.
IV. MODEL VALIDATION
The model is validated using trace-driven simulation. For
this, the following data is used for each call: (1) arrival time,
(2) conversation duration, and (3) wrap-up duration. However,
for the simulation, the following missing values have to be
filled in: (a) the conversation and wrap-up duration of calls
that were unanswered, (b) impatience of help seekers, and
(c) warm-up and cool-down durations. The missing values of
conversation and wrap-up durations were filled in using hot-
deck-imputation [24]. This method samples from the known
values to fill in the missing values. The distinction was made
between the different types of conversations: telephone, chats
during triage, and chats after triage. The impatience of help
seekers is mainly unknown due to the limited availability. Only
a small percentage of telephone calls and chats were unan-
swered. Warm-up and cool-down durations were not present
in the data. Therefore, the missing values of impatience,
warm-up, and cool-down were all drawn from exponential
distributions. The parameters were estimated using expert
opinions from paid professionals and volunteers. Impatience of
chat conversation is determined by the sum of a constant 300
seconds and a duration drawn from an exponential distribution
with a mean of 300 seconds. The impatience of a telephone
caller is drawn from an exponential distribution with a mean
of 240 seconds. The warm-up for both chat and telephone is
drawn from exponential distributions with means of 60 and 45
seconds for telephone and chat, respectively. Lastly, the cool-
down durations of chat and telephone are both drawn from an
exponential distribution with a mean of 120 seconds.
Moreover, based on current practice at 113, for the experi-
ments, we assume that ntriage = 5. Thus, each triage agent can
handle a maximum of five triage chats simultaneously. Further,
the simulations are trace-driven, and follow the realizations of
the time variations of (1) the arrival processes for chat and
telephone, (2) the number of triage- and HL-agents, and (3)
the fraction of triage call that is forwarded to the HL system.
Figure. 11 shows both the simulated and realized aver-
age waiting times for telephone calls as a function of the
cumulative number of call arrivals. The results show that
for a small number of calls, the average waiting time is
rather sensitive to outliers but quickly stabilizes over time.
The average waiting time of the data and simulation both
converge to the same value, around 80 seconds. This validation
experiment is repeated for chat call arrivals, which show
similar convergence, see Figure. 12.
In summary, these validation results show that the model
works well in predicting waiting times.
V. DEMAND FORECASTING
Demand forecasting concerns itself with predicting the call
volumes for both telephone and chat calls. The time window
for predictions ranges from 1-day ahead to 8-weeks ahead.
Various models and features were considered. More specifi-
cally, the following forecasting models were considered: (1)
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), (S)ARIMA [25], Linear
regression [26] and different baseline models. The parameters
of (S)ARIMA models are chosen using auto-ARIMA [27],
which are (5, 1, 1) for ARIMA and (1, 1, 1)(0, 1, [1, 2], 7) for
SARIMA. As baseline, the prediction of day i is the volume
measured on day i−7 (baseline model 1) and i−58 (baseline
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-019-3
PREDICTION SOLUTIONS 2022 : International Conference on Prediction Solutions for Technical and Societal Systems

Figure. 11. The average waiting time of telephone calls in the simulation and
the data.
Figure. 12. The average waiting time of chat calls in the simulation and the
data.
model 2). The following aspects were seen as important: trend,
seasonality and the influence of media events concerning sui-
cide. The provided data shows that there is an increasing trend
present and that weekly cycles seem to be predominant. The
assumption was that media events also influence the number
of arrivals and should, therefore, be included in forecasting.
However, our data analysis showed that in most cases, this
assumption is invalid (see also Remark 2 above), although
some events did have a large effect. However, for forecasting
purposes, it is not possible to predict when such an event
would take place and if such an event would lead to a long-
lasting effect. Therefore, it is chosen to focus on forecasting
using historical data of the call volumes. The models will be
evaluated using the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE).
The results of the forecast can be seen in Figs. 13 and 14.
We find that (S)ARIMA models perform best (in terms of
the MAPE), especially when forecasting for five weeks (or
six in the case of chats) ahead or less. For longer forecasting
windows, it turns out that a simple linear regression model
might provide more accurate forecasts in the case of telephone
arrivals. However, both (S)ARIMA and linear regression mod-
els have a lower MAPE than the baseline models. The LSTM
model has the highest error term in this situation. It could be
the case that with more time and optimization, the LSTM will
perform better. However, it is questionable if the model would
perform better than the (S)ARIMA models. The performance
Figure. 13. The error when forecasting telephone.
Figure. 14. The error when forecasting chat.
of (S)ARIMA models can be attributed to the flexibility of
the models. If an event results in a long-lasting effect on
arrivals, the (S)ARIMA model can quickly adapt and include
this increase or decrease in demand. An example of how
these predictions compare to the actual data can be seen in
Figure. 15.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a new call center model for mental
helplines. The model is validated based on data from [1],
the suicide prevention helpline in the Netherlands. The re-
sults show that the model accurately predicts the waiting-
Figure. 15. Comparison between the actual number of chats.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-019-3
PREDICTION SOLUTIONS 2022 : International Conference on Prediction Solutions for Technical and Societal Systems

time performance of the call center. We emphasize that the
model is also applicable to other mental helplines with triage
and complex conversations requiring warm-up and cool-down
periods, possibly with minor modifications.
The warm-up and cool-down durations are estimated mostly
based on experience from agents. There is a difficulty in
accurately measuring these durations. For future research,
these durations could be based on data and possibly correlated
to the duration of the call and wrap-up. This could be done
by measuring when agents log off and log back on.
The second contribution of this research is centered around
demand forecasting. Various models were tested for forecast-
ing the number of arrivals per day. (S)ARIMA models were
among the best in terms of MAPE. We also considered the
inclusion of significant media events, such as the suicide of
a celebrity. Most remarkably, data analysis shows that these
do not have a large or long-lasting effect in most cases. These
events cannot be predicted ahead of time. Since the (S)ARIMA
models look back at the previous data points, this model is able
to adapt if such an event has a long-lasting effect.
This paper aims to provide a complete view, but some
aspects require follow-up research. For example, the level of
experience of volunteers and paid professionals might affect
call durations. Preliminary data analysis into this topic shows
no, or at best limited, correlation, but further investigation is
needed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Robin Costers, Sophie de
Vries Robles, Menno Zwart, and Kim Setkowski from 113
Suicide Prevention for their great support during this project.
REFERENCES
[1] “About us 113 Suicide Prevention.” (”Over ons—113 zelfmoordpre-
ventie.”) [Online]. Available: https://www.113.nl/over-113/over-ons (ac-
cessed Jun. 24, 2022)
[2] “The
listen
helpline.”
(“De
luisterlijn.”)
[Online].
Available:
https://www.deluisterlijn.nl/ (accessed Jun. 24, 2022)
[3] “The helpline for children.” (“Kindertelefoon.”) [Online]. Available:
https://www.kindertelefoon.nl/ (accessed Jun. 24, 2022)
[4] J. Scerri et al., “Reaching out for help: calls to a mental health helpline
prior to and during the covid-19 pandemic,” International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 18, no. 9, p. 4505,
2021.
[5] M. Br¨ulhart, V. Klotzb¨uucher, R. Lalive, and S. K. Reich, “Mental health
concerns during the covid-19 pandemic as revealed by helpline calls,”
Nature, vol. 600, no. 7887, pp. 121–126, 2021.
[6] J. Hoogenboezem and T. Traag, “Zelfdoding in nederland: Een overzicht
vanaf 1950,” Aug 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.cbs.nl/nl-
nl/longread/statistische-trends/2021/zelfdoding-in-nederland-een-
overzicht-vanaf-1950?onepage=true
[7] WHO,
“Suicide.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide
[8] M. S. Gould, J. Kalafat, J. L. HarrisMunfakh, and M. Kleinman, “An
evaluation of crisis hotline outcomes. part 2: Suicidal callers,” Suicide
and Life Threatening Behavior, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 338–352, 2007.
[9] J. K. Mokkenstorm et al., “Evaluation of the 113online suicide preven-
tion crisis chat service: outcomes, helper behaviors and comparison to
telephone hotlines,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, vol. 47, no.
3, pp. 282–296, 2017.
[10] N. Izady and D. Worthington, “Setting staffing requirements for time
dependent queueing networks: The case of accident and emergency
departments,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 219, no.
3, pp. 531–540, 2012.
[11] M. E. Pratt, “The future of volunteers in crisis hotline work,” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2013.
[12] R. C. W. J. Willems, C. H. C. Drossaert, P. Vuijk, and E. T. Bohlmei-
jer,“Mental wellbeing in crisis line volunteers: understanding emotional
impact of the work, challenges and resources. a qualitative study,”
International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being,
vol. 16, no. 1, p. 1986920, 2021.
[13] S. Salmi, S. M´eerelle, R. Gilissen, R. D. van der Mei, and S. Bhulai,
“Detecting changes in help seeker conversations on a suicide prevention
helpline during the covid- 19 pandemic: in-depth analysis using encoder
representations from transformers,” BMC public health, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 1–10, 2022.
[14] F. Sundram, T. Corattur, C. Dong, and K. Zhong, “Motivations, expec-
tations and experiences in being a mental health helplines volunteer,”
International journal of environmental research and public health, vol.
15, no. 10,p. 2123, 2018.
[15] M. D. Christian, “Triage,” Critical care clinics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
575–589, 2019.
[16] N. Gans, G. Koole, and A. Mandelbaum, “Telephone call centers:
Tutorial, review, and research prospects,” Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 79–141, 2003.
[17] T. R. Robbins, D. J. Medeiros, and T. P. Harrison, “Does the erlang
c model fit in real call centers?” in Proceedings of the 2010 Winter
Simulation Conference. IEEE, 2010, pp. 2853–2864.
[18] O. Garnett, A. Mandelbaum, and M. Reiman, “Designing a call center
with impatient customers,” Manufacturing & Service Operations Man-
agement, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 208–227, 2002.
[19] M. van Buuren, G. J. Kommer, R. D. van der Mei, and S. Bhulai,
“Ems call center models with and without function differentiation: A
comparison,” Operations Research for Health Care, vol. 12, pp. 16–28,
2017.
[20] M. van Buuren, G. J. Kommer, R. D. van der Mei, and S. Bhulai, “A
simulation model for emergency medical services call centers,” in 2015
winter simulation conference (WSC). IEEE, 2015, pp. 844–855.
[21] M. C. A. van der Burgt, S. M´erelle, A. T. F. Beekman, and R. Gilissen,
The Impact of COVID-19 on the Suicide Prevention Helpline in the
Netherlands. Crisis. 2022.
[22] A. Weatherall, S. Danby, K. Osvaldsson, J. Cromdal, and M. Emmison,
“Pranking in children’s helpline calls,” Australian Journal of Linguistics,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 224–238, 2016.
[23] R. Whitley, D. S. Fink, J. Santaella-Tenorio, and K. M. Keyes, “Suicide
mortality in Canada after the death of Robin Williams, in the context
of high-fidelity to suicide reporting guidelines in the Canadian media,”
The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 805–812, 2019.
[24] P. Verboon and E. Schulte Nordholt, “Simulation experiments for hot
deck imputation,” Statistical Data Editing, Methods and Techniques, vol.
2, pp. 22–29, 1997.
[25] S. Siami-Namini, N. Tavakoli, and A. S. Namin, “A comparison of
ARIMA and LSTM in forecasting time series,” in 2018 17th IEEE
international conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1394–1401.
[26] B. M. Pavlyshenko, “Machine-learning models for sales time series
forecasting,” Data, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 15, 2019.
[27] R. J. Hyndman and Y. Khandakar, “Automatic time series forecasting:
the forecast package for R,” Journal of statistical software, vol. 27, pp.
1–22, 2008.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-019-3
PREDICTION SOLUTIONS 2022 : International Conference on Prediction Solutions for Technical and Societal Systems

