191
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Applying Soft Systems Methodology to Complex
Problem Situations in Critical Infrastructures:
The CS-AWARE Case Study
Veronika Kupfersberger∗, Thomas Schaberreiter∗, Chris Wills†, Gerald Quirchmayr∗ and Juha Röning‡
∗Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna (Vienna, Austria)
e-mail: veronika.kupfersberger@univie.ac.at
e-mail: thomas.schaberreiter@univie.ac.at
e-mail: gerald.quirchmayr@univie.ac.at
†CARIS Research Ltd. (Fowey, United Kingdom)
e-mail: ccwills@carisresearch.co.uk
‡Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering
University of Oulu (Oulu, Finland)
e-mail: juha.roning@oulu.fi
Abstract—Modern technology, in addition to all its beneﬁts,
creates new threats and attack vectors to individuals and or-
ganisations. In the past years, the number of cyber attacks has
increased drastically as has the extent of their effects. These
circumstances clearly show that a different approach to cyber-
security is required: a holistic, collaborative strategy to improve
the security situation for society and the economy as a whole.
In the European Union, the legal framework that is currently
developing (like the network and information security (NIS)
directive), recognises the increasing need for cooperation and
collaboration among individual actors to improve cybersecurity.
Information sharing is therefore one of the key elements of the
NIS directive. In this paper, we present and demonstrate a system
and dependency analysis based on soft systems thinking. This
approach is able to capture the relations between assets and
their internal and external dependencies in the complex systems
of organisations. It is applicable to critical infrastructures or
other organisations that base their operations on complex systems
and interactions. The analysis approach introduced is done in
a socio-technological manner; the human aspect of the systems
is considered as important as the technical or organisational
aspects. The case study presented in this paper, covering the
ﬁrst steps towards the development of a holistic cybersecurity
awareness solution, is based on three focus points: an initial
threat assessment for local public administrations (LPAs), an
analysis of external information sources and an analysis of the
piloting scenarios based on the ﬁrst round of soft systems analysis
workshops. The results of which are essential to the development
of the solutions implementation framework and further software
development.
Keywords–Cybersecurity; Critical Infrastructures; System Anal-
ysis; Soft Systems Methodology; Socio-technological Analysis; Cy-
ber Situational Awareness; Information Sharing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity is one of today’s most challenging societal
security problems, affecting both individuals and organisations,
such as strategic/critical infrastructures, large commercial en-
terprises, SMEs, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) or
governmental institutions. The extensive variety of these at-
tacks is one of the issues, as is the lack of communication
between organisations and administrations that have been the
target of an attack. Deliberate or accidental threats and attacks
threaten digitally administered data and digitally handled pro-
cesses. Sensitive data leaks can ruin the reputation of compa-
nies and individuals, and the interruption of digital processes
that organisations rely upon in their daily work ﬂow can cause
severe economic disadvantages. This work builds on the paper
on how to adress complex situations in critical infrastructure
published in SECURWARE 2017 [1]. Reaching beyond the
technology-focused boundaries of classical information tech-
nology (IT) security, cybersecurity strongly interrelates with
organisational and behavioural aspects of IT operations, and
the need to comply with the current and actively developing
legal and regulatory framework for cybersecurity. For example,
the European Union (EU) recently passed the NIS directive that
obliges member states to get in line with the EU cybersecurity
efforts [2]. Most EU member states and the EU itself have a
cybersecurity strategy in place which will eventually lead to
the introduction of laws and regulations that fulﬁl cybersecurity
requirements. One of the main aspects of the NIS directive, as
well as the European cybersecurity strategies, is cooperation
and collaboration among relevant actors in cybersecurity. En-
abling technologies for coordination and cooperation efforts
are situational awareness and information sharing. Situational
awareness in this context is a runtime mechanism to gather
cybersecurity relevant data from an IT infrastructure and visu-
alise the current situation for a user or operator. Information
sharing refers to the ability to share this information with
cybersecurity information sharing communities, like the NIS
relevant authorities. In the long term, it is expected that due
to the awareness generated information sharing can improve
cybersecurity sustainably and beneﬁt society and economy as
a whole.
One of the major aspects of information sharing to facilitate
collaboration and cooperation, is a proper understanding of
the cybersecurity relevant aspects within an organisation’s
systems. This is a complex and often neglected task that
will, as we argue in this paper, greatly improve the cy-

192
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
bersecurity of organisations in the context of cybersecurity
situational awareness and cooperative/collaborative strategies
towards cybersecurity. We introduce and demonstrate a system
and dependency analysis methodology to analyse the envi-
ronment and: (a) Identify the assets and dependencies within
the system and how to monitor them; (b) capture not only
technological aspects, but the socio-technical relations within
the organisation; (c) identify external information sources that
could either be provided by ofﬁcial and cybersecurity speciﬁc
sources (for example, legal/regulatory framework, standardisa-
tion, cybersecurity information sharing communities), or more
general publicly available information relating to cybersecurity
(for example, social networks or twitter); (d) provide the results
in a form that can be utilised by support tools.
We base our work around established and well proven
methods related to systems thinking, the soft systems method-
ology (SSM) and PROTOS-MATINE/GraphingWiki. The case
study presented in this paper tests the idea of using these
methods to analyse complex domains and derive a coherent
analysis. The results of the case study will be critical in
assuring a high quality software development of a cyber-
security awareness solution for local public administrations.
As of now, the ﬁrst round of user workshops, the initial
threat assessment and the analysis of external information
sources have yielded essential information for deﬁning an
implementation framework. The upcoming second and third
round user workshops held in the pilot municipalities will work
mainly with information collected during the before-mentioned
analysis of threats, external sources and the ﬁrst workshops.
The paper is organised as follows: Section II discusses
background and related work, Section III details our system
and dependency analysis approach. In Section IV, an example
in the context of CS-AWARE, a European H2020 project
which uses the presented system and dependency analysis as
a core part of its cyber security solution, is introduced and
followed by the summary of the ﬁrst round of workshops in the
pilot scenarios in Section V. Section VI discusses the results
of approach and Section VII concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
In December 2015, the European Parliament, the Euro-
pean Council and the European Commission agreed on the
European NIS directive as the ﬁrst EU wide legislation on
cybersecurity [2]. The directive lays down the obligations of
member states concerning NIS. Most notably for this work,
it requires the implementation of proper national mechanisms
for incident prevention and response, in addition to information
sharing and cooperation mechanisms. The NIS directive is the
main action stemming from the EU cybersecurity strategy [3],
which emphasises the need for a decentralised prevention
and response to cyber incidents and attacks. By now, most
EU countries have put a national cybersecurity strategy in
place [4] that is in line with many actions proposed by the
NIS directive. Coordination and information sharing are key
elements of the strategy, with the requirement for national NIS
authorities, national law enforcement and defence authorities
to interact with each other, as well as their EU counterparts.
International cooperation and coordination is envisioned at the
EU level. On the standardisation front, the ISO/IEC 27000 [5]
standard is the ﬁrst in a series of standards on information
security management that have provided organisations with
a best practice framework for assessing security risks and
implementing security controls as countermeasures. Similarly,
the privacy focused ISO/IEC 29100 [6] standard provides
a framework to help organisations to manage and protect
personally identiﬁable information. In 2011 the European
standardisation organisations CEN, CENELEC and ETSI have
formed the cybersecurity coordination group (CSCG), which
was converted to the focus group on cybersecurity in 2016 [7],
in order to undertake the strategic evaluation of IT security,
cybersecurity and NIS standardisation.
The systems analysis methodology which will be mainly
used in this work is the Soft Systems Methodology developed
by Peter Checkland [8][9]. Cognitive mapping, casual loop
diagrams [10] or a combination of stakeholder analysis and
cognitive mapping as suggested by Ferretti [11], would have
been alternatives. Generally, the key thought behind the soft
systems methodology is that it is hard to completely analyse
and describe a complex system, especially if human interaction
plays a key role. SSM represents an analysis methodology that
aims to achieve an holistic understanding of the system while
at the same time only focusing on the actual problems at hand.
Soft Systems Methodology has been used in an extraordinarily
wide variety of problem domains as diverse as knowledge
management in the building industry [12], to evaluating gov-
ernment policy to promote technological innovation in the
electricity sector [13]. In the case of the building industry
example, the tacit knowledge held by staff involved in the
tendering process was made explicit by the application of SSM.
In the case of the electricity supply industry, SSM was used
understand how better to to promote and foster technological
innovation in the sector.
The PROTOS-MATINE methodology [14] is another ap-
proach that relates to systems thinking. While the SSM fo-
cuses on understanding complex systems and processes by
interviewing its users, PROTOS-MATINE takes the standpoint
that a truly holistic view on complex situations can only be
achieved if as many relevant information sources as possible
(e.g., technical, organisational, human on all organisational
levels as well as external and publicly available information),
are combined to create a complete picture and eliminate
discrepancies between information from different sources. The
key to PROTOS-MATINE is that collected information from
different sources is set in context to each other and graphically
processed and visualised to make it simple for domain experts
to identify discrepancies in information coming from different
sources. For this purpose, GraphingWiki [15], a graphical
extension to the MoinMoin Wiki, was developed to visualise
dependencies between semantic data collected in Wiki pages in
the context of PROTOS-MATINE. The methodology was used
in many case studies, for example for highlighting vulnerabil-
ities in anti-virus software [16] and for a socio-technological
analysis of a VoIP (voice over IP) provider [17]. In [18], the
methodology was extended for analysing complex systems in
the critical infrastructure context, where the analysis goal is
to achieve a dependency graph of critical infrastructure assets,
dependencies between the assets and measures to observe those
assets (base measurements).

193
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III.
SOFT SYSTEMS ANALYSIS IN THE CONTEXT OF
CYBERSECURITY FOR COMPLEX SYSTEMS
The system and dependency analysis proposed in this
paper is seen as the basis for the automatic incident detec-
tion and cybersecurity situational awareness efforts of future
cybersecurity initiatives, as discussed in the related work. The
objective is to identify in the speciﬁc organisational context
what needs cybersecurity protection and what are the main
threats it needs protection from. More speciﬁcally, this means
that the challenge for system and dependency analysis is to
identify the assets within an organisation and their internal and
external dependencies in order to be able to protect them from
cybersecurity threats. Observable information sources that can
be used to determine the on-line state of those assets need to
be identiﬁed to allow for monitoring and detecting abnormal
behaviour, thus describing the security state. Furthermore, the
goal of the system and dependency analysis is to identify
external information sources that can provide information to
help detect and classify security threats correctly. Those in-
formation sources can be dedicated cybersecurity information
providers like, for example, computer emergency response
teams (CERTs) or other threat and vulnerability databases,
or they can be publicly available information sources via,
for example, platforms like Twitter, Facebook or Google+.
The usage of open source intelligence (OSINT) has been
proved to be valuable before in other contexts like disaster
management. Sail Labs Media Mining System is an example
of a system which makes use of freely available information. It
aims to allow accurate situational analysis of crisis locations by
analysing different relevant data feeds. It gathers information
from multiple sources including television, radio and various
Internet sources and uses data mining techniques to extract
information about the content [19].
Since technology is only one factor in cybersecurity, the
system and dependency analysis is designed to capture and
monitor the socio-technical nature of an IT infrastructure. It
takes into account the human, organisational and technological
factors, as well as other legal/regulatory and business related
factors that may contribute to the cybersecurity in a speciﬁc
context. As can be seen in Figure 1, systems thinking is a way
of looking at some part of the world, by choosing to regard it
as a system, using a framework of perspectives to understand
its complexity and undertake some process of change. The key
concepts are holism - looking at things as a whole and not as
isolated components and systemic - treating things as systems,
using systems ideas and adopting a systems perspective.
Figure 1. Systems thinking - The systems approach
Two concepts of systems thinking are hard systems think-
ing and soft systems thinking. Hard systems design is based
on systems analysis and systems engineering. It assumes that
the world is comprised of systems that we can describe and
that these systems can be understood through rational analysis.
It is based on the assumption that it is possible to identify
a “technically optimal” engineering solution for any system
and that we can then write software to create the “solution”.
Hard systems design assumes that there is a clear consensus
as to the nature of the problem that is to be solved. It is
unable to depict, understand or make provisions for “soft”
variables such as people, culture, politics or aesthetics. It
is based on the assumption that it is possible to identify a
“technically optimal” engineering solution for any system. It
assumes that those commissioning the system have the ability
and power to implement the system. While hard systems
design is highly appropriate for domains involving engineering
systems structures that require little input from people, the
complex systems and interactions in critical infrastructures or
other organisations - especially with cybersecurity in mind -
usually do not allow this type of analysis. Hard systems design
is inappropriate and unsuitable for analysing human activity
systems that require constant interaction with, and intervention
from people. Such systems are complicated, fuzzy, messy and
ill deﬁned and are typiﬁed by unclear situations, differing
viewpoints and unclear objectives, containing politics, emotion
and social drama. This is the type of system domain for which
an SSM design approach is highly appropriate and to which it
should be applied. That is not to say that the SSM approach
cannot or should not be used in the design of engineering
systems and structures, indeed one of the authors has used
this approach very successfully in many complex and diverse
problem domains. For example, SSM has been used by one
of the authors in the design of naval command and control
systems for the British Navy and in the design of system
architectures for automated fare collection in very large light
railway and mass transit operations.
Figure 2. Soft systems design
An overview of the stages of SSM is set out in Figure 2.
The SSM methodology has 7 steps: (1) Enter the problem
situation; (2) Express the problem situation; (3) Formulate root
deﬁnitions of systems behaviour; (4) Build conceptual models
of systems in root deﬁnitions; (5) Compare models with real-
world situations; (6) Deﬁne possible and feasible changes;
(7) Take action to improve the problem situation. A detailed
description of the approach is beyond the scope of this paper,

194
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
however, reader may wish to refer to Checkland’s work [8][9].
In this work, we will focus on the earlier steps of the SSM
that deal with the system analysis and problem deﬁnition
(speciﬁcally, steps 1-4). One key element of this phase is that
systems stakeholders (users, managers, administrators, etc.) are
engaged in workshops to deﬁne the problems they are facing,
since those who are using systems on a daily basis are the
ones that have the most information about it. Since this is
not explicit knowledge, but tacit knowledge, it is important to
create an environment that facilitates information sharing. The
SSM utilises rich pictures for this purpose, and depicting the
problem in a rich picture is a key stage early in the process.
Rich pictures are a representation of the problem domain.
They utilise “cartoon-style” techniques to portray a complex
situation and concentrate on:
•
Structure - Key individuals, organisations etc.
•
Process - What could be or is happening?
•
Climate - Pressures, attitudes, cultures, threats etc.
An example of a Rich Picture depicting a malfunctioning
airline passenger check-in system appears in Figure 3, outlin-
ing different viewpoints in case the system goes off-line.
Figure 3. Rich picture of an airline check-in system
Rich pictures are a tool for understanding where we are
and are a mix of drawings, pictures, symbols and text. They
represent a particular situation or issue and they are depicted
from viewpoint(s) of the person or people who drew them.
They can both record and evoke insight into a situation. Rich
pictures are pictorial ’summaries’ of a situation, embracing
both the physical, conceptual and emotional aspects of a
problem situation. They can depict complicated situations or
issues, and relevant systems are identiﬁed from the rich picture.
These systems are described in Root Deﬁnitions, which are
then used in conjunction with the rich pictures to develop
Conceptual Models. These are formed from the actions stated
or implied in the Root Deﬁnition(s). Of course, each rich
picture may be interpreted from quite differing ‘world view
points’. A Conceptual Model is like an activity sequence
diagram, but is aimed at representing a conceptual system as
deﬁned by the logic of the Root Deﬁnition and not just a set
of activities.
The role of PROTOS-MATINE and GraphingWiki in this
proposed analysis method is to complement the information
gathering effort in the user workshops with information from
other sources, and provide a solid base for discussion in
those workshops through visualisation. The main additional
sources are expected to be legal requirements and regulatory
efforts like the NIS directive; cybersecurity relevant stan-
dardisation like the ISO/IEC 27000 family of standards and
information about relevant and current risks and threats via
ofﬁcial sources like CERTs, or more dynamic information
sources like social media. Where relevant, the information
received via rich pictures from the workshop participants can
easily be complemented by more detailed information available
such as, for example, technical manuals, business continuity
plans or disaster recovery plans. One of the capabilities of
GraphingWiki is to instantly link gathered information to
other relevant information and thus allowing to update the
graphical representation of the analysed system as soon as new
information arrives. We hope to utilise this feature in the user
workshops to create more dynamic discussions and give even
more incentive to the participants to create a system model
that is as close to reality as possible.
The expected result of the proposed system and dependency
analysis will be a dependency graph containing an organisa-
tions security relevant or critical assets and the dependencies
among them. Furthermore, observable measurements that are
able to determine the security state of those assets are identiﬁed
and associated to them. Through GraphingWiki this depen-
dency graph is in digital form and can be further utilised as
the basis for advanced cybersecurity situational awareness and
monitoring services. One example of such a service will be
given in the next section.
IV.
THE CS-AWARE APPROACH
CS-AWARE is a European H2020 project that was funded
by the European Union under the project number 740723. The
aim of the project is to improve the cybersecurity situation
in local public administrations (LPAs). While the project is
focused on LPAs, the ideas and methods developed in this
project are applicable to any organisations that rely on complex
systems, interactions and procedures (like strategic/critical
infrastructures, large organisations or SMEs).
As can be seen in Figure 4, the main building blocks of the
CS-AWARE solution are the system and dependency analysis,
data collection and data analysis to achieve the project’s goals
of cybersecurity situational awareness, cybersecurity informa-
tion exchange and system self-healing. The proposed solution
aims at improving automated situational awareness in small-
to medium-sized IT infrastructures, however it is expected that
the same principals would also apply to large organisations or
critical infrastructures. The system and dependency analysis
presented in the previous section is an integral part of two
project phases. Besides the actual system and dependency
analysis, which will be conducted according to the method-
ology presented in Section III (Steps 1-4 of the SSM as well
as PROTOS-MATINE/GraphingWiki related aspects), it will
provide the main input for the self-healing component, based
on steps 5-7 of the SSM.
The core idea of the CS-AWARE project is to automate the
cybersecurity effort of organisations as much as possible, and
provide an on-line situational awareness tool that aims to base
its recommendations on a holistic view of an organisation’s
IT systems and dependencies, but also on the cybersecurity

195
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. CS-AWARE overall concept
situation in general (for example by observing the risk and
threat landscape). The end users of the CS-AWARE solution
are expected to be the people responsible for cybersecurity
in an organisation, such as the chief security ofﬁcer (CSO),
or system administrators. CS-AWARE is a decision support
system that will allow its users to detect cybersecurity inci-
dents quickly and identify the affected systems, since the key
assets and security relevant dependencies have been identi-
ﬁed during system and dependency analysis. Countermeasures
can be initiated by the people responsible for cybersecurity
in a timely manner. Besides manual countermeasures, CS-
AWARE includes a self-healing component that is closely tied
to the system and dependency analysis. The later steps of
the SSM (especially steps 5-7) are concerned with deﬁning
solutions to the problems identiﬁed during analysis. In CS-
AWARE one focus point will be to identify and develop
possible countermeasures to cybersecurity threats and deﬁne
policies and procedures that can be invoked if such a threat
materialises. Those policies and procedures will be utilised
by the self-healing component and can be conﬁgured to be
invoked automatically if a threat materialises. This will allow
the system, depending on the scenario, to prevent or mitigate
the damage and/or recover from the incident.
The intelligent and fully automated part of the CS-AWARE
project are the data collection and storage and the analysis
and decision making components. Based on the system and
dependency analysis results, the base measurements from
internal and external sources are observed and when rele-
vant data points are collected, pre-processed and stored. The
data analysis component is capable of detecting suspicious
behaviour like threat and attack patterns in the data sets it
receives and will classify and rank them accordingly, as an
input to the decision support in the situational awareness and
visualisation component. The accuracy of the decision making
component will depend on the cooperation and collaboration
efforts and the quality of data that is provided by information
sharing authorities. It is envisaged that threat detection can
achieve highly accurate unsupervised results once cybersecu-
rity information exchange is an established concept and can
provide accurate information relating to cybersecurity threats
and attack patterns.
The cybersecurity situational awareness and visualisation
component is the user interface to the CS-AWARE solution. It
will visualise the security relevant aspects of an organisations
socio-technological systems, based on the dependency graph
received during system and dependency analysis. State changes
triggered by the decision making component will cause a
visualisation of the affected components and its dependencies.
Possible countermeasures will be suggested and self-healing
procedures can be conﬁgured and invoked, where relevant.
The cybersecurity information exchange is the connection
point to the cybersecurity information sharing authorities, for
example NIS competent authorities like national or EU CERTs.
While cybersecurity information sharing is currently still in its
infancy, it is seen as one of the major building blocks to a
safer cyberspace in future. The CS-AWARE solution will on
the one hand, beneﬁt from the information provided by those
authorities and on the other hand, provide information about
newly detected and unmatched incidents (like threat or attack
patterns). It is assumed that with more and more tools that
provide capabilities for organisations to participate in security
related information sharing, the beneﬁt of sharing information
for the common good will become evident and encourage
organisations to engage in cybersecurity related information
sharing. Cybersecurity information exchange would in that
case become one of the most important information sources
for cybersecurity awareness and threat detection.
In order to deal with the expected language barriers and
usability concerns in the context of European local public
administrations, the main focus of the CS-AWARE project,
multi-lingual semantics support will be part of this project’s
solution. Where relevant, security related information coming
from within the end user organisations, or information from
external information sources, will be automatically translated
to beneﬁt from the information of different cultural contexts.
The project includes two pilot scenarios in the LPA con-
text: the municipalities of Larissa (Greece) and Rome (Italy).
This set-up will allow us to develop tailored system and
dependency analysis procedures for the LPA context. The
project will commence with workshops in both municipalities.
A representative cross section of the LPA’s staffs will be
formed in each LPA and will use SSM in a workshop setting,
where the LPA’s staff, facilitated by the project team can help
create a detailed understanding of the problem domain and the
system dependency analysis, together with security experts,
legal experts and CERT representatives.
V.
CASE STUDY
The ﬁrst step in applying the introduced approach was
to determine the largest threats to LPA’s based on expert
knowledge and state-of-the-art research on the topics. This
analysis was followed by evaluating the most valuable external,
preferentially publicly available, information sources for cyber
crime related data. This analysis was also based on expert
knowledge and collected in a detailed report. Finally, with the
speciﬁc information on potential threats and available external
sources, the SSM workshops in the pilot cities were conducted.

196
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Initial Threat Assessment
During the threat assessment we have determined that the
main asset to be threatened from the cyber domain for local
public administrations will most likely be the data that is
managed by the administrations, including personal citizen
and employee data. The main cybersecurity challenge in local
public administrations is assumed to be the prevention of
unauthorised data access, modiﬁcation and destruction of those
data. It was assessed that local public administrations are
not a high valued target for potential threat actors, as for
example critical infrastructures (potential large-scale disruption
of economy) or ﬁnancial institutions (potential high ﬁnancial
gain) are. However, there is a certain level of risk associated,
since there are relevant threat actors that may have a vested
interest in gaining unauthorised access to data managed in
LPAs. We assume a low to medium level of risk against
LPA managed data from the cyber domain. Additionally, we
have identiﬁed that the most valued asset in LPAs is the
potentially sensitive and/or private citizen and employee data
that is managed by LPA systems, and that unauthorised data
access, modiﬁcation and destruction as well as data theft are
the most relevant threats towards LPAs.
Table I shows the results of the initial analysis of potential
threats and their risk level, based on the expert analysis and
internationally acclaimed cybercrime threat reports [20] [21].
TABLE I. LPA RISKS GROUPED BY THREAT
Threat
Risk level
High
Medium
Low
Unauthorised data access, modiﬁcation, destruc-
tion
X
Data Theft
X
Extortion
X
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)
X
Ransomware (untargeted)
X
Ransomware (LPA speciﬁc)
X
Distributed Denial of Service - DDoS (untargeted)
X
Distribtued Denial of Service - DDoS (LPA spe-
ciﬁc)
X
Web page defacement / shaming
X
Malware infection
X
In Table II the most likely threat actors and their corre-
sponding risk levels have been summarised. We assess that
untargeted large-scale attacks with the goal of extortion, like
Ransomware or Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks
carry a higher risk for LPAs. We have identiﬁed the cyber-
criminal (high) as well as the malicious insider (medium) as the
most relevant threat actors. Furthermore, disgruntled citizens,
script kiddies and hacktivists are also seen as relevant threat
actors, but we assess the risk from those actors to be low due
to low potential pay-off for those actors as well as the low
expected damages for LPAs.
TABLE II. LPA RISKS GROUPED BY THREAT ACTOR
Threat
Risk level
High
Medium
Low
Cyber criminal
X
Malicious insider
X
Disgruntled citizen / script kiddie
X
Hacktivist
X
B. Analysis of External Information Sources
As part of this initial analysis of cybersecurity relevant
information sources, the main categories and respective sources
which were identiﬁed can be seen in Table III.
The ﬁrst possible information sources are related to organ-
isations that the European Cybersecurity Strategy (European
Commission and High Representative of the European Union,
2013) classiﬁes as one pillar of coordination and information
sharing efforts. While the CS-AWARE project does not expect
as much cooperation with law enforcement as with NIS com-
petent authorities due to the higher requirements for protecting
information relating to cybercrime, we have identiﬁed several
organisations that may be able to provide relevant information
for CS-AWARE. For the open source data providers, we
focused on sources that provide loosely structured information
without a dedicated feed or data format, or if they provide a
feed the provided data is usually utilised by aggregated data
providers. The information sharing tools discussed are mainly
community efforts to provide mechanisms for data aggregation.
While data aggregation is already covered in the CS-AWARE
solution, it is worth looking at those tools to see if it would
help us to further simplify the data aggregation effort in CS-
AWARE.
CS-AWARE will try to rely solely on free and open source
data, it is however worth investigating which commercial data
sources exist in case the free and open source data is not
available. We may try to ask some of those companies for free
access to their data in the context of this European research
project. Overall, it seems that the sources listed provide
up-to-date information, at least in the cases where the refresh
time interval was stated explicitly or was easily veriﬁable
(e.g., by accompanying timestamps). For retrieving data from
the sources listed in this section some demo prototypes are
available (mainly implemented in Python and Java), which
were used by CS-AWARE partners for evaluation and testing
the provided feeds. The idea of malware analysis tools is
to be able to get a detailed report, listing the behaviour of
a suspicious executable in a controlled environment (e.g.,
sandbox). In general we expect to collect fast but not in-depth
reactions to currently ongoing security incidents from social
media sources. While this information may lack the level
of depth we expect from more security focused information
sources, information collected from social media may help
CS-AWARE to react to quickly evolving incidents. While one
of the main public data sources provided by NIS competent
authorities like CERTs is about vulnerabilities, it is still a
good idea to have a look at the most well-known vulnerability
trackers. For many years, the CVE list provides a standardised
way of enumerating software vulnerabilities.
Our analysis concluded that the most valuable cyberse-
curity related information (or cybersecurity intelligence) for
CS-AWARE can be found from both ofﬁcial organisations,
for example NIS competent authorities or law enforcement
organisations, as well as private efforts, for example for-
proﬁt companies or non-proﬁt communities/ projects. More
generalised data, not necessarily provided by the security
community, can be found from social media or data visual-
isation focused data sources. For CS-AWARE we will focus
on information that is freely available from either the NIS
competent authorities, from companies that provide free data

197
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III. EXTERNAL INFORMATION SOURCES
Topic
Source
Link
NIS Competent Authorities
European Union Agency for Network and Information Se-
curity (ENISA)
https://www.enisa.europa.eu
European Public Private Partnership for Resilience (EP3R)
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/national-cyber-security-strategies/
ppps/public-private-partnership/european-public-private-partnership-\
for-resilience-ep3r
Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs)
https://cert.europa.eu
Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs)
http://www.cert.org/incident-management/national-csirts/
national-csirts.cfm
Law Enforcement Agencies
Europol
https://www.europol.europa.eu/activities-services/services-support/
intelligence-analysis/cyber-intelligence
Interpol
https://www.interpol.int/Crime-areas/Cybercrime/Cybercrime
Cyber Intelligence Sources and
Shadowserver
https://www.shadowserver.org/wiki/
Information Sharing Tools
Abuse.ch
https://abuse.ch/
Spamhaus
https://www.spamhaus.org/
SANS Internet Storm Center
https://isc.sans.edu
Commercial Providers
Flashpoint
https://www.ﬂashpoint-intel.com/solutions/
Checkpoint
https://www.checkpoint.com/
DCU Microsoft
https://news.microsoft.com/presskits/dcu/
AbuseSA / Clariﬁed Networks
https://www.clariﬁednetworks.com
Cybersecurity Intelligence Data Feeds
AlienVault OTX
https://otx.alienvault.com/
Advanced Cyber Defence Center
https://www.acdc-project.eu/
Hail a Taxii
http://hailataxii.com
Facebook Threat Exchange
https://developers.facebook.com/products/threat-exchange/
Honey DB
https://riskdiscovery.com/honeydb/
Malware Analysis
Hybrid Analysis
https://www.hybrid-analysis.com/
VirusBay
https://beta.virusbay.io/
VirusTotal
https://www.virustotal.com/en/
Social Media
Xing
https://www.xing.com/
Reddit
https://www.reddit.com/
Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/
Twitter
https://twitter.com/
Google+
https://plus.google.com/
Vulnerability Data
CVE List
https://cve.mitre.org/cve/cna.html
National Vulnerability Database (NVD)
https://nvd.nist.gov/
CVE-SEARCH
https://www.cve-search.org/
or, probably most relevant, open source intelligence (OSINT)
focused communities and projects. However, we will keep the
option in mind to ask for-proﬁt companies for access to their
cybersecurity intelligence data in the context of this European
project, if relevant.
C. Analysis of Pilot Scenarios
A crucial part for designing an effective cybersecurity
awareness solution for local public administrations was to gain
in-depth knowledge on LPA’s, the services they provide, their
inner workings and how similar these are across different city
sizes and European countries. As of now, we have held the ﬁrst
round of SSM user workshops in the two piloting cities, Roma
Capitale (RC) in Italy and Larissa, Greece. The main goal for
this round of analysis was to gain an initial understanding
of the complexities within LPAs and identify realistic and
meaningful piloting scenario that can be managed with the
resources available for this project. During the analysis we
have met and even exceeded the expectations we set for our
ﬁrst round of analysis. In both piloting scenarios we have now
a clear understanding of the critical assets and their dependen-
cies to other critical assets that need to be taken into account,
and we have identiﬁed how those assets can be monitored.
By now we have conducted the ﬁrst of three rounds of user
workshops at our piloting partners. We have seen that if the
participants of the user workshops have prepared themselves
and have comprehended the added value of system analysis
using rich pictures, this method is a powerful tool. It allows
the participants to quickly gain a common understanding of the
systems and interactions from a high level overview down to
more detailed technical speciﬁcations. The right composition
of participants in the user workshops is crucial. Only if
representatives from all relevant organisational levels (such
as managers and technicians) are present in the workshops,
a complete and holistic understanding of the problem domain
will be achieved. It have become clear that it is essential to
have stable workshop groups – those who decide to be part
of the workshop need to be there for the whole duration
of the analysis. We argue that in complex systems good
cybersecurity awareness can only be provided if the relevant
relations between the mission critical aspects of the system are
understood, and relevant case speciﬁc monitoring points can be
utilised. The ﬁrst round of analysis has only strengthened our
argument. In both municipalities, we were able to achieve good
analysis results and were able to identify the most mission
critical systems and their dependencies, as well as potential
monitoring points for CS-AWARE. The individual set-ups
and procedures in the two municipalities differ signiﬁcantly
from each other, especially due to the substantial difference
in complexity in the operations of the two very differently
sized municipalities. Nevertheless, we were able to draw some
generalised conclusions that will allow us to develop guidelines
and procedures that will help to further simplify future analysis
efforts in LPAs.
1) Municipality of Larissa, Greece: In general, the analyst
team was satisﬁed with the outcome of the workshop, and that
the Larissa team could be already released after three days
of data gathering, after the required level of analysis detail
had been achieved. The two main factors contributing to this
result were the manageable complexity of systems in a mid-
sized municipality, as well as the excellent preparedness of the
team in Larissa. The team had familiarised themselves with the

198
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
CS-AWARE project ideas as well as with the analysis method-
ology, which allowed the analysis team to quickly achieve
excellent results. As outcomes of the workshop the analysts
concluded that the most interesting connection points for CS-
AWARE are monitoring on the service level, the network level,
as well as monitoring existing security mechanisms. At the
service level, the analysts concluded that it was only necessary
to concentrate on two mission critical services. These two
systems both store and process personal and sensitive data
and both are critical to the operation of the City. Therefore,
the proposed CS-AWARE solution will seek to monitor these
systems and networks. In both cases, it was established that
activity could be recorded and saved to the database via
built-in auditing mechanisms, meaning SQL queries could
be used to capture audit information about data operations
(although any personal data will need to be anonymised at
source). Furthermore, similar data can be gathered from built-
in database auditing mechanisms.
Figure 5. System Rich Picture
Figure 5 shows an anonymised representation of one of
the rich pictures created by the team members of the Larissa
LPA. As mentioned in Section II they used cartoon-style
visualisations of the current situation, in this case part of their
network infrastructure.
2) Municipality Roma Capitale, Italy: As expected, the
Roma Capitale (RC) systems are much more complex than
those that have been seen in the Municipality of Larissa, due
to the extraordinary size of Roma and the number of on-
line services that are provided to citizens and employees of
RC. The attendees were divided into four groups, which were
asked to draw a high level understanding of the systems and
dependencies relating to their area of expertise, identifying
mission critical systems as well as those parts of the systems
that handle sensitive data. This resulted in four initial rich
pictures, and while having a unique view on RCs systems, each
included many aspects of other parts of the systems that other
teams had been investigating in more detail. In the end we
were able to identify a piloting scenario that will be possible
to manage with the resources available within the CS-AWARE
project: It was discussed to focus for now only on one relevant
critical service - as well as all systems it depends on. It was
identiﬁed that the most relevant critical dependencies can be
found within the RC data centre (where the application service
as well as the relevant application database are running), the
web portal together with the identity and access management
system (IAM), and several security appliances (like ﬁrewalls,
proxies and SIEM (Security Information and Event Manage-
ment) systems) that contain information relevant to service
related operations. In the end, we were able to gain a good
understanding of the overall architecture of RC systems and
dependencies and a more detailed understanding of the system
aspects that are the most relevant to CS-AWARE, identifying
possible monitoring points for all relevant parts.
VI.
DISCUSSION
In Section I, four main points were mentioned by the
authors to be essential in creating the introduced strategy of
addressing complex situations in large infrastructures by use
of a soft system thinking approach.
•
Identifying assets and their dependencies
Based on the results of the two SSM workshops, gen-
eral assets and their dependencies could be identiﬁed
and were grouped into four main categories: Network,
Database, Service and Security-appliance level.
The ﬁrst question we asked the participants in both
workshops was: "Which systems are mission criti-
cal and/or handle sensitive data?". Mission critical
systems were different between the two LPAs, but
shared common characteristics such as complementing
infrastructure could be identiﬁed.
•
Identifying technological and socio-technical relations
in the organisation
Next to identifying mission critical systems, the tech-
nical infrastructure and organisational structure in
which these systems are used were determined. During
the workshops, the socio-technical characteristics of
the assets and the processes they are used in were
determined.
•
Identifying external information sources
The external information sources used to comple-
ment the internal data collected by CS-AWARE were
analysed extensively by experts and will be selected
according to their relevance and quality of input they
offer. Next to Social Media sites, such as Twitter
and Reddit, Open Source Intelligence platforms and
Commercial Providers, many other potential sources
were identiﬁed and summarised in Table III.
•
Providing results in reusable form
Besides compiling a detailed deliverable on the re-
sults of the SSM analysis for external and internal
information sources, the GraphingWiki mentioned in
Section IV was used to produce a visual representation
of the dependencies in the systems. Additionally to the
graph, the tool produces a JSON formatted summary
of the features of the system, which will be used for
conﬁguration purposes by the other components to
specify the individual settings of each LPA implemen-
tation.
The exemplary dependency graph in Figure 6, depicting
part of the LPA’s system, shows how the components are
linked to each other. Each of the components as well as the
different relations between them have a Wiki-page where all
relevant information is summarised. These include knowledge
obtained in all aforementioned steps of the analysis - the pilot
workshops as well as the external sources. An example for

199
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6. Larissa Dependency Graph
how such a Wiki-page can be structured is shown in Figure 7,
including the individual categories selected for this project as
well as the semantic text relevant for this component.
Figure 7. Router Gateway Wikipage
All information collected during these workshops was
summarised in the dependency graph and can be extracted in
a JSON ﬁle to use in external applications. For the purpose of
CS-AWARE, this will function as a basis for implementing
and conﬁguring the other components in the system. CS-
AWARE combines multiple existing tool providers to a single,
holistic cyber security awareness solution as can be seen in
Figure 4. The System Dependency Analysis described and
demonstrated in this paper builds the foundation on which
the conﬁgurations of the other components depend on. It can
specify, next to generalised conﬁguration settings applicable
for all LPAs, speciﬁc parameters for the individual LPA in
question. For the deployment of CS-AWARE in any new LPA,
generalised conﬁguration settings can be extracted from the
GraphingWiki, which then can be manually imported in the
other components.
In both municipalities, we were able to achieve good
analysis results and were able to identify the most mission
critical systems and their dependencies, as well as potential
monitoring points for CS-AWARE. While the individual set-
ups and procedures in the two municipalities are signiﬁcantly
different from each other, especially due to the substantial
difference in complexity in the operations of the two very
differently sized municipalities, we were able to draw some
generalised conclusions that will allow us to develop guidelines
and procedures that will help to further simplify future analysis
efforts in LPAs. In line with the initial risk assessment we
have identiﬁed that the potentially sensitive and/or private data
managed by LPAs is their most valuable asset. A cybersecurity
awareness solution has to monitor the possible data ﬂows in
day-to-day operations. We have investigated potential monitor-
ing points at 4 different levels that allow to identify suspicious
behaviour related to data operations: The database level, the
application/service level, the network level and the security
appliance level.
The ﬁrst steps of the SSM were applied during the user
workshops in the municipalities - entering the problem situa-
tion, expressing the problem situation and formulating the root
deﬁnitions of the systems behavior. The following steps will be
undertaken in the upcoming workshop iterations in the pilots:
building conceptual models and comparing model to real-life
situations. This will allow for an even better understanding
of the internal system and its information ﬂows. Based on
the received feedback possible changes are deﬁned and the
model revised accordingly. The ﬁnal model will satisfy the last
step of the SSM - improving the problem sitation by guiding
implementation procedures in the respective municipalities.
The Soft Systems Methodology approach provided usable
results on which the further development of the CS-AWARE
solution have been based on. While it was surprisingly easy to
obtain relevant results in a short period of time in Larissa,
the complexity of the Roman infrastructure required more
extensive work time allocation. Nevertheless, both ﬁrst Soft
Systems Workshops were highly successful and we are eager

200
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to continue deepening the knowledge on the respective systems
in the upcoming second round.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a system and dependency
analysis methodology for complex systems based on soft
systems thinking within the context of cybersecurity. The
target for the analysis are organisations that rely on complex
systems and procedures for their operation, like critical infras-
tructures, large organisations or SMEs or public institutions.
The analysis methodology is focused on providing a holistic
socio-technological view of the analysed system, based on the
combination and visualisation of different relevant information
sources. Since one of the greatest sources of information about
a system is coming from its users, workshops where users from
all organisational levels and with different backgrounds work
together to deﬁne the problem situation are a central aspect
of this methodology. We have argued that each organisational
set-up is different, which makes generalised cybersecurity
solutions difﬁcult. We have shown that the presented system
and dependency analysis methodology can be seen as an
abstraction layer that allows to apply generalised cybersecurity
solutions on top of it. As an example, we have presented
the EU H2020 project CS-AWARE that utilises the presented
system and dependency methodology as a central part of its
cybersecurity solution. The goal of CS-AWARE is to develop
an automated cybersecurity situational awareness and decision
support solution relying on cooperative and collaborative ap-
proaches, as laid out by the NIS directive. The case study
presented in this paper applied the introduced Soft Systems
Methodology to conduct an initial risk assessment, identify
potential external sources as well as hold the ﬁrst round of
SSM workshops in the pilot municipalities.
We have been quite happy with the results of the ﬁrst
round of system and dependency analysis workshops. In some
aspects we achieved much better results than we had expected,
quickly identifying the four main levels requiring our attention:
database, application/service, network and security appliance
level. In other aspects it took a bit longer than expected to
gain a common understanding of the workshop goals, before
achieving the expected results. Based on the experiences we
have gained so far, we are conﬁdent that we have chosen
the right approach for CS-AWARE and with some tweaks to
accommodate for individual cultural aspects, we expect even
better results during the second round of workshops. Based on
the analysis results described in Figure 6, more detailed tacit
knowledge of the participants will be obtained regarding the
socio-technical and infrastructural aspects of the LPA internal
systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the EU H2020 project CS-
AWARE ("A cybersecurity situational awareness and infor-
mation sharing solution for local public administrations based
on advanced big data analysis", project number 740723) and
the Austrian national KIRAS project CERBERUS ("Cross
Sectoral Risk Management for Object Protection of Critical
Infrastructures", project number 854766) for supporting this
work. The Biomimetics and Intelligent Systems Group (BISG)
would like to acknowledge the support of Infotech Oulu.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Schaberreiter, C. C. Wills, G. Quirchmayr, and J. Röning, “Address-
ing complex problem situations in critical infrastructures using soft
systems analysis: The cs-aware approach,” in Proc. SECURWARE, pp.
99–105, 2017.
[2]
European Commission, “Proposal for a directive of the european
parliament and of the council concerning measures to ensure a high
common level of network and information security across the union,”
COM(2013) 48 ﬁnal, 2013.
[3]
European Commission and High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, “Cybersecurity strategy of the
european union: An open, safe and secure cyberspace,” JOIN(2013) 1
ﬁnal, 2013.
[4]
ENISA, “National cyber security strategies in the world,” accessed:
2018-011-13. [Online]. Available: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/
national-cyber-security-strategies/ncss-map
[5]
ISO/IEC 27000:2016, “Information technology — security techniques
— information security management systems — overview and vocab-
ulary,” ISO/IEC, Standard, 2016.
[6]
ISO/IEC 29100:2011, “Information technology — security techniques
— privacy framework,” ISO/IEC, Standard, 2011.
[7]
CEN,
CENELEC
and
ETSI,
“Focus
Group
on
Cybersecurity
(CSCG),”
accessed:
2018-011-13.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.cencenelec.eu/standards/sectors/
defencesecurityprivacy/security/pages/cybersecurity.aspx
[8]
P. B. Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice.
John Wiley &
Sons Ltd. 1981, 1998.
[9]
P. B. Checkland and J. Scholes, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice.
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 1991.
[10]
S. Robinson, “Conceptual modelling for simulation part ii: a framework
for conceptual modelling,” Journal of the Operational Research Society,
vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 291–304, 2008.
[11]
V. Ferretti, “From stakeholders analysis to cognitive mapping and multi-
attribute value theory: An integrated approach for policy support,”
European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 253, no. 2, pp. 524–
541, 2016.
[12]
T. Maqsood, A. D. Finegan, and D. H. T. Walker, “Five case studies
applying soft systems methodology to knowledge management,” in 7th
Annual Conference on Systems Engineering Research, 2009, p. 18.
[13]
C. H. Antunes, L. Dias, G. Dantas, J. Mathias, and L. Zamboni,
“An application of soft systems methodology in the evaluation of
policies and incentive actions to promote technological innovations in
the electricity sector,” Energy Procedia, vol. 106, pp. 258 – 278, 2016.
[14]
J. Eronen and M. Laakso, “A case for protocol dependency,” in First
IEEE International Workshop on Critical Infrastructure Protection
(IWCIP’05), Nov 2005, p. 9.
[15]
J. Eronen and J. Röning, “Graphingwiki – a semantic wiki extension
for visualising and inferring protocol dependency,” in First Workshop
on Semantic Wikis – From Wiki To Semantics, 2006.
[16]
J. Eronen et al., “Software vulnerability vs. critical infrastructure – a
case study of antivirus software,” International Journal on Advances in
Security, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 72–89, 2009.
[17]
P. Pietikainen, K. Karjalainen, J. Roning, and J. Eronen, “Socio-
technical security assessment of a voip system,” in 2010 Fourth In-
ternational Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and
Technologies, July 2010, pp. 141–147.
[18]
T. Schaberreiter, K. Kittilä, K. Halunen, J. Röning, and D. Khadraoui,
Risk Assessment in Critical Infrastructure Security Modelling Based on
Dependency Analysis.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013, pp. 213–217.
[19]
G. Backfried et al., “Open source intelligence in disaster management,”
in 2012 European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference,
Aug 2012, pp. 254–258.
[20]
European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, “Internet
organised crime threat assessment 2017,” accessed: 2018-011-13.
[Online]. Available: https://www.europol.europa.eu/activities-services/
main-reports/internet-organised-crime-threat-assessment-iocta-2017
[21]
European
Union
Agency
for
Network
and
Information
Security,
“Threat
landscape
report
2016,”
accessed:
2018-011-
13.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
enisa-threat-landscape-report-2016

