Protecting Data Generated in Medical Research: Aspects of Data Protection and 
Intellectual Property Rights  
Iryna Lishchuk, Marc Stauch 
Institut für Rechtsinformatik 
Leibniz Universität Hannover 
Hannover, Germany 
e-mail: lishchuk@iri.uni-hannover.de, stauch@iri.uni-hannover.de 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates legal approaches towards 
protecting the data generated in medical research. One of the 
core features of the rules for the processing and sharing of data 
generated in medical research is their complexity. Thus, data 
containing personally identifiable information would qualify as 
personal data and the processing of such data would be subject 
to the law on data protection. Equally, the generation of data in 
the course of medical research may involve considerable 
investment or effort and have an economic or scientific value for 
the researcher or right holder, including through use in 
publications, and may well be considered as Intellectual 
Property (IP). Contractual approaches may also define the rules 
how the data may be used and shared.  
Keywords-IP rights; data rights;  medical data; data curation; 
personal data; data protection. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
IT developments in the field of bioinformatics have 
opened new ways of data procession. The creation of new 
data, as well as new knowledge, derived out of existing 
datasets as a result of medical research, may well be 
considered as an IP and qualify as an object of protection by 
IP rights [1]. Equally, data generated in medical research, 
which by one or another parameter may be related to an 
identifiable natural person, also have the quality of personal 
data with the resulting protection by the law on data 
protection. 
 Innovative genome sequencing techniques are able to 
process 4 PB data per year (11 TBytes per day), thus reaching 
the level of Twitter with the processing power of 12 Terabytes 
per day [2]. Mathematical and computational modeling is used 
to integrate and interpret the massive amount of data, 
uncovered in molecular and cell biology [3]. Cancer system 
biology, which studies how individual components interact to 
give rise to the function and behavior of the cancerous system 
as a whole [4], produces a number of data types: molecular 
data, epigenetic data, clinical data, imaging data, pathology 
data and other laboratory data.  
In the process, the availability of a large amount of data 
collected in the clinical trials combined with modern data 
processing techniques have allowed the discovery of new data 
correlations. For instance, the SIOP 2001/GPOH trial of 
patients with Nephroblastoma (a malignant tumor arising 
from the embryonic kidney that occurs in young children, 
especially in the age range 3–8 years [5]) revealed that 
whereas 90 % of patients respond to preoperative 
chemotherapy with tumor shrinkage, in about 10 % the tumor 
does not shrink, but increases in return, thus making the 
situation worse [6]. Such discoveries necessitate in-depth 
research and application of powerful data analytics techniques 
to identify correlations between negative tumor response and 
specific characteristics of the non-responding patients. 
Thus, advances in data-mining and analytics have made it 
possible to generate new data and derive new knowledge from 
existing datasets. This, as well as new methods of 
differentiating and capturing biological phenomena (including 
at the micro-level) has led to an exponential growth in 
available medical data. In principle, such data, recorded in 
patient or research databases can be of tremendous value when 
analyzed, in revealing linkages, e.g., between environmental 
and/or genetic factors and diseases, as well as for comparing 
patient responses to different treatment therapies. A major 
advantage too is that such connections can often be identified 
straight from the records, without the need for further invasive 
and potentially risky research. 
At the same time, as the potential value of health data 
becomes better understood, efforts to monopolize clinical data 
by exclusive IP or proprietary rights are also expanding. 
Copyrights, patent rights, sui generis database rights and the 
legal regime of undisclosed information may come into 
consideration, depending, however, on the data – the subject 
matter of protection. For instance, there are cases when the 
commercial use of health related data has been asserted under 
the coverage of database rights [7]. Patentable inventions have 
also been derived out of the biological material and associated 
data of the patients and successfully commercialized [8]. The 
property rights in medical research data may also be claimed 
under contractual schemes [9]. At some point copyrights may 
also come to consideration for monopolizing data in medical 
domain [10]. 
However, as a precondition for allowing a significant 
amount of clinical data to be usefully exploited, there is an 
important initial step required in the form of data curation. In 
this regard, as we analyze below, most types of IP protection 
are tailored to protect specific objects that have already passed 
a certain threshold of maturity (data repositories, confidential 
information with assignable commercial value, etc.); but, as 
we discuss, none as such guarantees adequate protection to 
protect the prior investment made in curating the data. 
In what follows, we begin by describing the data curation 
process in medical research in Section II, explore the complex 
nature of medical data in terms of law in Section III, proceed 
to the requirements of data protection for the processing of 
personal data in Section IV. In Section V, we investigate the 
potential options of protecting the medical research data by IP 
90
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

rights and in Section VI then consider their application in the 
context of a concrete research initiative, namely the EU FP7 
project ‘CHIC’. Thereafter, contractual approaches towards 
the government of rights in data are examined in Section VII, 
before Section VIII concludes by suggesting a potentially 
more effective approach to protecting researcher investment 
in curation. 
II. DATA CURATION  
The clinical data provided for e-health research usually 
comprises a large mass of data of multiple data types, 
formats, words, figures, numerical parameters, abbreviations, 
etc. Furthermore, even where data is of the same underlying 
type, this will often have been recorded in different ways – 
using different clinical concepts and/or measuring systems. 
This reflects the decentralized, autonomous nature of health 
care delivery, with different institutions and clinicians often 
employing different classificatory descriptions and/or record 
systems. 
Data integration is key here, but the format, scope, 
parameter, structure, context, terminology, completeness, 
etc., of the individual and heterogeneous data are not 
standardized, which may affect their quality, and ultimately 
their interoperability and integration [11]. This could also 
potentially affect collaboration of the different researchers in 
this field if they use different semantics and techniques to 
describe, format, submit, and exchange data.  
From a technical standpoint, data integration is still a 
significant challenge. The curation required to ensure the data 
relates to and measures the same phenomena with sufficient 
accuracy to be usable is a large and painstaking task. It 
includes the problem of dealing with incomplete data fields 
and cross-checking that various indices were measured and 
recorded in a similar way (e.g., images were taken using 
similar equipment, co-morbidities were classified using the 
same terminology, etc.). In the process the curator may often 
wish to add metadata to alert the data user to such issues. It is 
evident too that considerable expertise and skill is required 
for the task to be performed well: the curator needs to have a 
real feel and understanding for the subject matter in order to 
make sensible judgments in resolving various gaps and 
uncertainties. 
In this regard, a starting point in the context of curation 
may be to see raw data in terms of the ‘given’, which as yet 
lacks semantic meaning, with the latter only emerging 
through the addition of an interpretive context (which also 
marks the change in state from data into information). It is 
suggested 
that 
the 
technological 
development 
and 
transformation of raw or incompletely processed data into 
information (or the uncovering of additional semantic 
meaning), brought about by the curative process represents a 
suitable object for IP protection. 
At this point a legal challenge arises. On the one hand, an 
intellectual and/or technical investment made in curating the 
data and generating new data outcomes may justify an interest 
of the investors in monopolizing the resulting data as their IP. 
On the other hand, the data used in medical research originally 
comes from the patient, which renders such data a potential 
candidate for protection as personal data. That is so, if the 
medical data contain personally identifiable information, i.e., 
it may by some or the other characteristics be linked to the 
data subject.  
Against this background, both the economic value of the 
derived data and the tentative quality of the data as personal 
data make the data generated in medical research a complex 
object of legal protection and dictate the type of protection 
applicable.   
III. COMPLEXITY OF MEDICAL DATA IN TERMS OF LAW 
The legal complexity of the data generated in medical 
research is one of the major factors, which determine the type 
of protection applicable and the rules governing the use of 
such data. The medical research data may qualify both as 
personal data and intellectual property.  
Indeed, out of scientific disciplines, medical research 
(both as sociological research) tends to share significantly less 
data than others (65% in comparison to 90% in biology or 
85% in climatology) [12].  Frequently, this “low data sharing 
culture” is justified by the legal and ethical requirement to 
protect the privacy of individuals, that is to say data protection 
[12].  
On the other hand, as noted, even where medical data is 
void of indices, which would render such data personal data 
in the meaning of data protection law, the aspects of 
intellectual property also need to be taken into account. If the 
researcher or research institution, who holds such data in its 
legitimate possession, considers such data as its “intellectual 
property” and has an economic interest in exploiting such data 
for individual gain (e.g., reputation, scientific publication), 
such qualification of the data may also affect data sharing and 
determine the circumstances for such data to be shared. It is 
common in the scientific world that “Data that a researcher 
feels could still be exploited for future publications are usually 
not shared” [13]. Another practice usual for medical sciences 
is that the data is no longer protected after the appearance of 
publications [14]. The legitimate interests of the data holder 
may also affect the terms and circumstances for such data to 
be shared. For instance, such data may only be made available 
to the circles, which may prove a justified scientific interest in 
the data (e.g., data sharing upon certain conditions inside a 
research consortium or a limited medical community) [14].  
What may also play a role is whether a medical project 
relates to Big Science, such as physics, Earth and climate 
science, or Small Science, in particular, small experiments, 
narrow disciplines [15]. For Big Science data there are 
“government controlled repositories”, which normally govern 
the use of data as a “public good” [15]. An example is Clinical 
Trials Registries and Databases, such as registries operated by 
the National Library of Medicine in the USA [16], the UK 
Current Controlled Trials [17] and the Japan Pharmaceutical 
Information Center [18]. However, for Small Science 
projects, which comprise the majority of data repositories, 
such pre-determined regulatory frameworks for the handling 
of data do not exist. The protection practices applied vary 
91
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

from discipline to discipline and have rather an informal 
character [15]. 
In the light of these considerations, for the purposes of 
choosing and applying adequate protection measures, it is 
relevant first to ascertain whether the data has a quality of 
personal data (and is subject to the requirements of the law on 
data protection); the next questions are whether it has an 
economic value for the data holder and may be treated as 
intellectual property (subject to the rules of IP law), or whether 
such data is considered as a “public good” and must be treated 
as such.   
IV. DATA PROTECTION 
For legal purposes, the first important question to decide 
is whether the medical research data contain personally 
identifiable information. In the meaning of European data 
protection law, it would be the case if by some or the other 
characteristics the data may be linked to the data subject. If so, 
the processing and sharing of such data would be subject to 
the law on data protection.  
Article 2 (a) of the EU Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC 
(DPD) [19] (which is to be superseded by the General Data 
Protection Regulation [20]  by 25 of May 2018) defines 
personal data as follows:  
“'personal data ' shall mean any information relating to 
an identified or identifiable natural person ('data subject'); an 
identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or 
indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification 
number or to one or more factors specific to his physical, 
physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social identity;”. 
As is apparent, this is a wide definition, and in principle it 
may certainly cover some medical data. An example may be 
a brain image that also shows some of the patient’s face; 
indeed, in the light of modern software, a set of cross-sectional 
brain images may also qualify – this is if it would be possible 
with the software to put such images together to reconstruct 
the face of the patient based on the image parameters. Since 
health data qualifies as sensitive data [21], the processing of 
such data is subject to stringent requirements of procession 
(Article 8 DPD) and must be explicitly legitimized, e.g., by 
informed consent of the patient (Article 8 (2) (a) DPD) or the 
national laws  that also provide for adequate privacy 
safeguards (Article 8 (4) DPD) [19].  
Medical research is usually conducted on the human body 
or with the use of clinical data. Blood samples, serum, tissue 
samples, cells usually constitute material for laboratory 
examinations, from which the data, used in medical research, 
is derived. When the laboratory tests are taken in course of 
medical treatment and/or diagnosis, the patient normally 
consents to the use of the excised material and data for the 
purposes of clinical care [9]. However, as a rule such consent 
does not extend and does not entitle the physician to use such 
clinical data for research [8]. The use of clinical data for 
research requires legal justification, which as a rule may be 
obtained either by informed consent of the data subject or by 
compatible use of data.  
The use of previously collected data for research 
constitutes secondary use of data. In principle, Article 6 (b) 
DPD allows secondary use of data subject to specific 
conditions: “personal data must be collected for 'specified, 
explicit and legitimate' purposes (purpose specification) and 
not be 'further processed in a way incompatible' with those 
purposes (compatible use).” [19].  
By implication, the compatibility assessment is to be made 
on a case-by-case basis and in consideration of all relevant 
circumstances. In particular, the following key factors shall be 
taken into account:  
• 
“the relationship between the purposes for which the 
personal data have been collected and the purposes of further 
processing;  
• 
the context in which the personal data have been 
collected and the reasonable expectations of the data subjects 
as to their further use;  
• 
the nature of the personal data and the impact of the 
further processing on the data subjects;  
• 
the safeguards adopted by the controller to ensure 
fair processing and to prevent any undue impact on the data 
subjects.” [22]. 
The use of data for scientific research withstands the 
compatibility assessment as long as the controller 
implements “appropriate safeguards” and by that ensures 
“that the data will not be used to support measures or 
decisions regarding any particular individuals” [22]. Such 
safeguards may be taken in the form of technical and/or 
organizational measures aimed to ensure functional 
separation (such as partial or full anonymisation, 
pseudonymisation, and aggregation of data), privacy 
enhancing technologies, as well as other measures to prevent 
the use of data to take decisions or other actions with respect 
to individuals [22].  
From these legal observations it follows that - in simple 
terms - the use of health data for research must be legitimized: 
either by the patient´s informed consent or by the law, 
allowing compatible use of data subject to compatibility 
assessment and application of appropriate de-identification 
and security measures. This is also likely to remain the 
position after the General Data Protection Regulation 
(replacing the DPD) comes into effect in May 2018 [20]. In 
such cases, the research conducted subject to adoption of 
appropriate de-identification and security measures should 
not cause privacy implications.  
It is apparent that by imposing these requirements, the law 
on data protection aims to protect and safeguard privacy of 
the individual. “Data protection rules may be seen as 
embodying and safeguarding core ethical principles of 
autonomy, dignity and privacy; they are about making sure 
that persons remain able to decide how their data will be used 
and are not exploited or instrumentalised through opaque 
data processing practices;” [23]. These matters are essential 
in order for patients to have trust in medical research and 
innovative eHealth applications [23].  
However, when talking about protecting medical research 
data it is essential to distinguish the primary goal of such 
protection. In this respect it must be noted that the purpose 
and meaning of the law on data protection is to protect 
92
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

privacy of the individual, and not to do with the economic or 
exploitation interests in the data itself.  Therefore, when legal 
protection is sought to protect economic interests of the data 
holder, the law on data protection would not fulfill that 
objective. The requirements of the law on data protection 
must rather be taken into account as a necessary means of 
protecting privacy and rights of the data subjects.     
V. POTENTIAL IP PROTECTION 
In contrast to the law on data protection, which serves to 
protect privacy rights of the individuals, the IP law aims to 
reward and protect the creators - either authors or inventors – 
for their intellectual or economic input into society.    
A. Data as Protectable Subject Matter 
When we consider the data produced in medical research, 
such as measurements, experiments, outcomes of data 
analytics, etc., in the context of IP law, we can observe that, 
as a rule, such data do not automatically fall into the category 
of IP protected objects. In the absence of legal protection 
applicable directly, alternative protection mechanisms are 
frequently sought, such as: copyrights, sui generis database 
rights under IP law; or through the application of the legal 
regime of undisclosed information, an aspect of competition 
law.  In addition, contractual mechanisms may be used to 
address proprietary interests in data. However, the 
application of these forms of protection may often be 
problematic. For instance, copyright may not arise in the 
absence of creative input or proprietary claims in data may be 
challenged due to the questionable legal nature of property 
rights in data [24]. More generally, IP law would normally 
not protect the data as such. Instead, a requirement for IP 
protection is that added value produced from the data. 
Examples may be a creative scientific work covered by 
copyright, an industrially applicable invention in the patent 
law or commercial value of the information protectable as 
know-how by competition laws.  
This also fits with the underlying motivation for IP 
protection, which is to motivate an author or inventor, by 
rewarding them for their intellectual activity (here, in 
extracting value from the data). In contrast, raw data, which 
is void of such intellectual input does not constitute a 
protectable IP and as a matter of policy should be kept free 
for public use.  
The applicability of the IP laws in relation to medical 
research data is considered in more detail below.   
B. Copyright and Related Rights 
Clinical data comes for the most part from clinical trials, 
laboratory results, medical examinations, etc. An example of 
the clinical research data is shown in Figure 1 [25]. Such data 
is usually expressed in some numeric parameters, figures, 
words, combinations of such items. The representation of 
clinical data in this format is suitable and useful for digital 
data processing. However, the isolated items, be they words, 
keywords, syntax, figures or mathematical concepts as such, 
will not attract copyright. According to the Court of Justice 
of European Union (CJEU), items, “considered in isolation, 
are not as such an intellectual creation of the author who 
employs them.” [26]. In order to be protected by copyright, 
the data must constitute the expression of the original 
author´s creativity, which is only present when “through the 
choice, sequence and combination of those words that the 
author may express his creativity in an original manner and 
achieve a result which is an intellectual creation” [26].  
The protection of clinical data by copyright may under 
circumstances be acceptable for the medical reports, written 
by the physician or the patient, insofar as the expression of 
original creativity is achieved [10]. However, for isolated 
datasets, especially where (as is desirable) the curator follows 
a standardized procedure, it seems much less likely that 
sufficient originality exists for copyright purposes. 
 
 
Figure 1. DWI and ADC mapping of nephroblastoma from different patients 
before and after pre-operative chemotherapy. Presented at the annual 
meeting of the British Chapter of the ISMRM, September 2012, provided by 
Prof. Kathy Pritchard-Jones from UCL. Copied from CHIC Deliverable D2-
2 “Scenario based user needs and requirements” [25]. 
As may be seen from the image, some data is presented in 
visual form and is represented by images. However, medical 
images are normally produced by technical means (such as 
X-Ray, Ultrasound, etc.) and lack the creativity – an 
indispensable pre-requisite for copyright. A similar standard 
of copyright and requirement of original creativity applies to 
photographic works as well. According to Recital 16 
Directive 2006/116/EC [27], a photographic work is 
protected by copyright, if it is original. A work “is to be 
considered original if it is the author's own intellectual 
creation reflecting his personality”. Other criteria such as 
merit or purpose are not relevant for copyright. According to 
the CJEU decision in the case C 145/10 REC of Eva-Maria 
Painer [28], copyright protects pictures taken by an 
individual, exercising free and creative choices, thus 
stamping a picture with his personal touch. It follows that 
93
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

only pictures taken by an individual expressing some level of 
the author´s personality and creativity may be protected by 
copyright. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
images, 
generated 
automatically, will lack the necessary creativity. Since the 
images, produced in medical domain, are normally taken 
automatically and the process of recording is mostly 
completely managed by technical means, such images 
normally do not express creativity and do not attract the 
protection by copyright, respectively. 
Apart from the rights considered so far, in the field of 
copyright senso strictu, there are a number of other emerging 
rights granted as a response to relevant investment. These 
rights are normally provided to the person, who invests in 
producing the protectable information. Such rights are 
referred to as related rights. Protection by related rights does 
not necessarily link to the intellectual creation (as the case is 
with traditional copyright), but rather to the economic 
investment.  
The major rationale for protection by related rights tends 
to shift between intellectual creation and the investment of 
resources required [29]. A mixture of artistic creation and 
investment attracts exclusive rights to performers in fixations 
of their performances. The economic investment constitutes 
a major factor, which renders exclusive rights to phonogram 
producers in their phonograms, to the film producers in 
respect of first fixations of their films, to broadcasting 
organizations in fixations of their broadcasts [30].  
However, the number of related rights as of now is rather 
limited (mostly to those, indicated above). Therefore, 
attaching added value to the data enriching, post-processing, 
modification, etc., does not constitute the kind of investment 
protectable by related rights.  
C. Sui Generis Database Right 
As a rule, clinical institutions, participating in medical 
research, manage and maintain their clinical data in clinical 
data repositories. Some clinical institutions manage their 
clinical information and store the results of clinical trials 
using project-tailored data management systems. For 
example, the CHIC project utilises an Ontology-based 
Clinical Trial Management Application (ObTiMA) [31]. 
Other institutions prefer data management systems specific 
to their medical activities. Against this background, an option 
of protecting the clinical data under the umbrella of sui 
generis database rights comes into consideration first.  
The legal protection of databases is provided for by the 
Directive 96/9/EC of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection 
of databases (the Database Directive) [32]. Such protection is 
granted in recognition of the fact that constructing a database 
requires “investment of considerable human, technical and 
financial resources" [32]. The Directive 96/9/EC aims to 
reward and protect such investment by providing the maker 
of a database with a sui generis data base right that places him 
in a position to prevent unauthorized access and copying of 
the database contents, which he compiled. In this regard, 
Article 7 Database Directive states: 
“Member States shall provide for a right for the maker of 
a database which shows that there has been qualitatively 
and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in either the 
obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to 
prevent extraction and/or re-utilization of the whole or of a 
substantial 
part, 
evaluated 
qualitatively 
and/or 
quantitatively, of the contents of that database.” The object 
of protection in terms of the Database Directive is a 
‘database’ meaning “a collection of independent works, data 
or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodical 
way and individually accessible by electronic or other 
means” [32]. 
Databases are given their own sui generis right of 
protection for the “blood, sweat and tears that go into 
producing a database” [33]. Consequently, as we have just 
seen, the Database Directive demands that “there has been 
qualitatively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in 
either the obtaining, verification or presentation of the 
contents” [32]. The type of investment required can be time, 
financial resources, personnel, or technical means invested, 
or indeed any other “sweat of the brow”-type resource, as 
distinct from creative, intellectual efforts. 
The CJEU is very strict in its understanding that the 
investment must be made to obtain the contents. A database 
that 
is 
a 
mere 
spinoff/by-product 
from 
another 
investment/activity (such as scientific data resulting from 
research) does not typically qualify for protection under the 
Database Directive’s sui generis regime. There must 
additionally be a further substantial investment in obtaining, 
verifying or presenting the data [34]. 
In other words, the CJEU demands that the investment be 
made specifically to “seek out existing independent materials 
and collect them in the database” [35]. An investment in “the 
creation of materials which make up the contents of a 
database” [35] is deemed insufficient. As a result, creators of 
data rarely enjoy a sui generis right of protection for any non-
original database constructed out of that data – so-called 
“single source databases” [36] – unless there is also a 
substantial investment in the verification or presentation of 
the contents.  
 “Verification” is understood to mean steps taken to 
ensure the information is reliable. As with the requirement of 
“obtaining” data, an investment in verifying information 
during the information’s creation is excluded [34]. 
“Presentation” is defined as the way data is structured and 
made accessible to others, so that the creation of an index or 
the design of a user interface can all be seen to fulfill the 
requirements of an investment in the presentation of the 
contents [34]. 
Finally, the investment must also be of a “qualitatively 
and/or quantitatively” substantial nature [32]. The Database 
Directive does not define “substantial” and neither has the 
ECJ ruled on the matter. However, the Preamble of the 
Directive indicates that, “as a rule, the compilation of several 
recordings of musical performances on a CD (...) does not 
represent a substantial enough investment to be eligible 
94
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

under the sui generis right” [32]. Member States generally 
adopt a low level approach to the requirement, and the 
Advocate General has taken the same stance [34]. 
As 
regards 
the 
quantitative 
and/or 
qualitative 
qualification, these are understood to mean investments 
quantifiable and not-quantifiable, respectively, such as 
money on the one hand and intellectual effort on the other 
[37].  
In fact, additional substantial investment is often present 
in the case of data resulting from clinical trials. Such data 
must first undergo an extensive verification process before it 
can be used in research and entered into a database. 
Importantly, the data verification process is subsequent and 
separate from the obtaining/creation of the original data, as 
otherwise it would be excluded from protection. 
Accordingly, protection by the sui generis right can be 
considered as a plausible option for clinical data repositories, 
provided the given repository satisfies the above criteria. As 
regards the scope of the database right, it would protect the 
collected data from being copied as a whole or in substantial 
part, evaluated “qualitatively and/or quantitatively” and 
either copied in one action or step by step [32]. 
Provided the clinical data repository qualifies as a 
database in the meaning of Database Directive and the 
clinical institution holds the sui generis database rights, the 
institution may stipulate the terms of using the repository 
contents as a whole, grant the rights of use under contractual 
license, 
prevent 
and 
enforce 
the 
unauthorized 
extraction/reutilization of the repository contents as a whole 
or in substantial part. The rights holder may thereby leverage 
how the contents of its repository may be used, whether the 
data items may be extracted (downloaded) and in what form 
or quantity, whether the data may be transferred to external 
parties or whether the data processing may only be done on 
its premises.  
At the same time, this sui generis protection applies to the 
contents of the repository as a whole or in substantial part and 
may apply separately and irrespective of protectability of data 
items by other rights, such as copyrights. Article 7 (4) makes 
this explicit, saying that the database right: “shall apply 
irrespective of eligibility of the contents of that database for 
protection by copyright or by other rights. Protection of 
databases [….] shall be without prejudice to rights existing 
in respect of their contents”. 
Thus, the holder of the repository may manage the use of 
the repository contents as a whole. However, the use of 
separate data items in the repository may remain governed by 
the terms, stipulated by the data providers and/or holders of 
rights in such items. For instance, the access rights to the 
datasets, handled as confidential, may require signing of non-
disclosure agreement (NDA) and the use of such data may be 
limited and be subject to technical protection measures, etc. 
In this regard, we consider further the options of 
protection, which potentially may apply to separate datasets, 
next. 
D. Know-how 
Because of the high sensitivity of health related data (and 
the potential harm to the patient’s interests in privacy, dignity 
and autonomy from disclosure), clinical data in the medical 
treatment domain is managed under the rules of professional 
medical secrecy and subject to fiduciary duties. Similarly, as 
was discussed in Section IV, the data, so far as individual 
patients may be identified from it, will be subject to data 
protection rules. In this regard, a plausible option (fitting well 
with such privacy-based considerations) for protecting the 
research investment made in collecting or curating clinical 
data may be to invoke the legal regime of know-how (or 
undisclosed information). This is, especially so after such 
data leaves the medical domain and enters the domain of 
clinical research (where not necessarily all parties are bound 
by the rules of professional secrecy).   
Protection of undisclosed information is provided by 
Section 7, Article 39 et seq. TRIPS Agreement [38] and the 
Directive 2016/943 on the protection of undisclosed know-
how (the Trade Secret Directive) [39]. The legal regime of 
know-how enables natural and legal persons, who are in 
legitimate possession of valuable information, to prevent 
such information “from being disclosed to, acquired by, or 
used by others without their consent in a manner contrary to 
honest commercial practices.” [38]. Unfair practices for 
these purposes would include the acquisition of information 
via “unauthorised access to, appropriation of, or copying of 
any documents, objects, materials, substances or electronic 
files…. containing the trade secret or from which the trade 
secret can be deduced” [39]; violation of contractual duties, 
breach of confidentiality obligations, inducement to breach, 
etc. [38].  
In order to be protectable, the relevant information should 
have the quality of protectable subject matter. The Trade 
Secret Directive, both as Article 39 TRIPS Agreement accord 
protection to information, which:  
“(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the 
precise configuration and assembly of its components, 
generally known among or readily accessible to persons 
within the circles that normally deal with the kind of 
information in question; 
(b) has commercial value because it is secret; and 
(c) has been subject to reasonable steps under the 
circumstances, by the person lawfully in control of the 
information, to keep it secret.” [39]. 
At the same time, one weak point of protecting clinical 
data as know-how is that the know-how protection across 
Europe is not that well harmonized with varying data objects 
considered as protectable know-how and the laws, which 
accord such protection, ranging from IP laws to competition 
laws [40].  
The newly adopted Trade Secret Directive is intended to 
harmonize the national laws in relation to know-how 
protection and in many aspects repeats the provisions of the 
TRIPS Agreement: in particular, it relates to the protectable 
subject matter and requirements for protection (Article 2), 
95
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

acts of unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure of 
information (Article 4), availability of legal remedies against 
the unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure of trade secrets  
(Article 6 et seq), etc. With respect to protection of medical 
research data as know-how, it may also be queried how far 
the Trade Secret  Directive would improve the protection for 
data, the preparation of which consumed much effort, but 
which for one or another reason may not reach the level of 
protectable know-how. Here the key obstacles in applying 
know-how protection to the clinical data, processed for 
research, relate to the need (in order to be protected) for such 
data to be secret, subject to confidentiality measures and have 
economic value.  
First, to satisfy the criterion of secrecy, the information, 
sought to be protected, must be accessible to a limited number 
of persons only. The use of such information must be subject 
to 
confidentiality 
measures. 
 
The 
application 
of 
confidentiality measures means that the data must be stamped 
as “Confidential” and the sharing of such data must be 
contingent upon non-disclosure obligation and observation of 
the confidentiality measures. Disclosure of such datasets 
without due confidentiality measures might compromise the 
regime of secrecy so that protection would be forfeited. As 
regards the requirement of economic value of know-how, this 
will be considered to be present if through publication, the 
research investment and competitive standing of the entity 
doing the work would be undermined [41]. 
In relation to the volumes of clinical data made available 
for research, this requirement, besides being at odds with the 
underlying data sharing culture of academic research, would 
create further workload. The data, subject to the regime of 
confidentiality, must first be strictly identified. The 
confidentiality mark would need to be attached to individual 
data items and any use and disclosure of such data to any third 
party must be subject to the latter signing a non-disclosure 
agreement (NDA). This preservation of the confidentiality 
mark, conclusion of NDA and control over handling such 
data as confidential would present another challenge. 
Against these considerations, the protection of clinical 
data under the legal regime of know-how might, in principle, 
be possible in relation to some defined amount of data, but 
hardly offers a feasible solution, when protection of large 
amounts of data, processed in medical research is sought. It 
also may operate against the ethos of openness, if optimal use 
is to be made of the data by the research community, 
exploiting the full potential of available datasets. 
VI. APPLICATION OF IP REGIMES TO DATA CURATION IN 
CHIC 
A. Background 
The research project “Computational Horizons In Cancer 
(CHIC): Developing Meta- and Hyper-Multiscale Models 
and Repositories for In Silico Oncology”, is an ICT research 
project in the clinical domain [42]. CHIC develops clinical 
trial driven tools and services within a secure infrastructure, 
which facilitate the creation of multiscale cancer hyper-
models (integrative models) by technical means. These 
composite multiscale constructs of models (hyper-models or 
integrative models) are intended to synthesize and imitate the 
biological processes, which occur in course of tumor 
progression, at several temporal and spatial levels 
(molecular, cellular, etc.) at once.  
In this context too, the study of how individual cancer 
components interact with each other has led to the generation 
of different types of data, such as: molecular data, epigenetic 
data, clinical data, imaging data, pathology data and other 
laboratory data [43]. These different data types are assembled 
in order to systematically explore and formalize them in 
mathematical models.  
Subsequently, the models are developed and validated 
against clinical data either taken from the literature or 
provided by the clinical partners [44]. The data management 
systems, used by the clinical partners, differ. Whereas the 
integration of data from data management system ObTiMA 
is harmonized, the data from individual clinical data 
repositories need to be adapted to the requirements of the 
project. The use of divergent data management systems by 
the clinical institutions leads to the situation that the data, 
collected from different sources, is not inter-operable with 
each other and mostly cannot be used for research as such. 
The clinical data also needs to be post-processed by the 
modelers so that it fits into the set of parameters, which the 
models recognize and can utilize as an input for running the 
simulations. Such data curation is a very important step 
because the inputs, outputs and descriptions of processes, 
simulated by the models, need to be standardized into the set 
of parameters, acceptable and usable by all cancer models.  
B. Applicability of IP Regimes to Project Data Curation 
The clinical data, which after the necessary de-
identification enters the domain of CHIC, is placed and stored 
in the CHIC clinical data repository. The CHIC data 
repository hosts data categorized per data type: imaging data 
(DICOM etc.), descriptive/structural data (age, sex, etc.), 
other files (histological reports), links (to other data 
repositories) etc. The datasets for each type are accessible 
individually so that the data corresponding to the model 
parameters may be chosen. The fact that the repository is built 
“based on the experience already accumulated during the 
implementation of other data repositories” should be 
sufficient to prove the requisite investment in “either the 
obtaining, verification or presentation” of its contents [32]. 
Against this background, the database right in the CHIC 
clinical data repository is likely to be granted.  
Protection of the CHIC data repository by the sui generis 
database rights would be accorded to the maker of the 
database. In the meaning of the Database Directive, the maker 
of a database is seen as “the person who takes the initiative 
and the risk of investing”, but excluding subcontractors [32]. 
Thus, the party, who constructed the CHIC repository, would 
be in a position to manage the use of the repository, such as 
96
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by allocating the access rights to the project parties or 
external parties, to define the rights of use (access only, 
modification, download, etc.), to divide the repository into 
sections and define different regimes of uses depending on 
the data stored therein, etc. Grant of the sui generis protection 
would also entitle the right holder to enforce his rights, once 
unauthorized copying of the repository contents on the large 
scale has occurred.  
Apart from the protection of the repository contents as a 
whole by sui generis database rights, the items in the 
repository may also enjoy protection in their own right.  Since 
the clinical data repository deals with highly sensitive 
information (meaning that already for that reason, access to 
the data is strictly limited), application of the legal regime of 
know-how to some data items at least may be an option. As 
we saw above, for this, the data items selected for know-how 
protection, must be identified, the access and use of such data 
be limited to a defined number of people only, and the 
management of such data be subject to confidentiality 
measures. In the case of CHIC, the regime of secrecy may be 
applied to the data by marking it as “Confidential” and 
making the disclosure of such data subject to the non-
disclosure obligation. From the technical perspective, the 
confidentiality mark would then need to be placed and borne 
by the data throughout the whole research process so that the 
data marked as “confidential” at the time of input comes out 
marked “confidential” at output. This would present an 
additional workload, but is implementable. Also, disclosure 
of such data items to the CHIC parties subject to the non-
disclosure obligation would not present a significant obstacle, 
because the project parties are bound by the contractual 
relations within the project. The factual use of data within the 
project may also be managed by technical measures, such as 
granting or denying access rights, rights of use and extraction, 
and limiting the data processing to within the technical 
infrastructure of CHIC. Whereas the application of such 
contractual and technical confidentiality measures to the 
clinical data in CHIC may be feasible, in how far such 
technical and confidentiality measures may be implemented 
in other medical research projects may be questionable.    
By contrast, copyrights and related rights offer less 
plausible options for protecting the clinical data in CHIC. As 
noted above, the clinical data in CHIC is represented by 
technical data from clinical trials, which is composed from 
different parameters. As observed in Section III, isolated 
items are not protectable by copyright. Copyright will fail for 
lack of creativity expressed in such data. Equally, the 
investment, deployed in curating the data for CHIC, does not 
qualify as investment protectable by related rights.  
However, in the case of CHIC, the exploitability of 
clinical data under the umbrella of IP rights is limited by the 
restraints of data protection and research ethics. Whereas for 
the lifetime of the CHIC project, the de-identification of 
clinical data was ensured and clinical research ethically 
approved, the exploitation of the data beyond the scope of the 
project might be possible, if the adequate legal and security 
framework would be set up.   
C. Related Studies 
Indeed, the legal mechanisms offered by IP rights are 
widely used now by the players in the healthcare sector to 
support the claims and protect the investment they might have 
in the data. The database rights and the legal regime of know-
how are the tools that suit these interests best and are used by 
the holders of clinical data most.  
One example is deCODE. In the case of deCODE, a 
Health Sector Database, initially built to hold centralized 
health records of the population of Iceland [45], migrated into 
the genetics research database. By application of modern 
genomics techniques to the data (120,000 research 
participants), it allowed to find genetic sequences associated 
with diseases [7]. In consideration of the relatively small 
population of Iceland, access to a large amount of data 
allowed deCODE to find itself in a position to be able to 
predict the genetic dispositions to diseases of about 200,000 
living and 80,000 deceased Icelanders, who have not 
consented to participate in the research [7]. Apart from the 
privacy considerations (which go beyond the scope of legal 
analysis presented in this paper), the case of deCODE allows 
us to infer that centralization of a large amount of clinical data 
in one database combined with modern IT solutions allows to 
retrieve new correlations and exploit the added value under 
the coverage of database rights (which may not always be in 
compliance with the principles of data protection law). 
A similar example is the case of NIVEL. NIVEL, the 
Netherlands institute or health services research, has built a 
primary care database, which “uses routinely recorded data 
from health care providers to monitor health and utilisation 
of health services in a representative sample of the Dutch 
population.” [46]. NIVEL obtains the data under contractual 
arrangements 
with 
general practitioners. Under the 
application of double de-identification measures [47] and 
giving the patients the possibility to opt-out, NIVEL uses 
itself and allows the use of data for clinical research.   
The legal regime of confidentiality is another legal 
measure, which is often applied to preserve the secrecy of 
clinical data. Where the use of data in the domain of 
healthcare services is subject to the obligation of professional 
secrecy [19] [20]), the secrecy of data, or certain datasets, 
may be maintained by contractual mechanisms for the data to 
leave the healthcare sector (and enter the research domain). 
The application of confidentiality measures is typical for the 
data derived in clinical trials. Article 39 (3) TRIPS calls for 
protecting the data collected in clinical trials for the 
pharmaceutical products “which utilize new chemical 
entities, the submission of undisclosed test or other data, the 
origination of which involves a considerable effort” [38]. For 
the purposes of making the results of clinical trials public 
(either in scientific literature or clinical trial registries and 
databases), the legal regime of undisclosed information and 
contractual arrangements are often applied to preserve the 
97
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

secrecy of certain datasets against undesirable disclosure 
[48]. This approach is often used by the pharmaceutical 
industry.         
VII. CONTRACTUAL APPROACHES 
A. Contractual Approaches 
Insofar as the IP regimes for protecting the data, produced 
in medical research projects fail, one further method for 
regulating rights in data may be by contractual relations.  
Such relations exist at different levels. Thus, research 
projects are normally conducted by educational or research 
institutions and the research is typically done by research 
associates. Usually, the researchers do their work on the 
materials of the institution and achievement of scientific 
results in dependent position belongs to their employment 
obligations. In such circumstances, the researcher receives 
remuneration for the work he does, the institution acquires 
the ownership and also the exploitation rights over the 
achieved results, provided the agreement does not foresee 
otherwise [9].   
Students or PhD students, who produce some research 
results under a membership relation to the university, do not 
have an obligation to create scientific works and are not 
obliged to pass ownership in their results to the university. In 
this constellation, the respective student owns the results of 
his work. In contrast, the PhD students, who are bound to the 
university by employment relations and do the research by 
order of the university, fall under the regulation of ownership 
in employment, considered above. Thus, the ownership over 
research results, achieved by a PhD student in an employee 
position, would normally pass to the institution [9]. 
In other cases, where the researchers perform some work 
as freelancers or sub-contractors, the question who acquires 
what rights in the results of the performed work depends on 
the contract [49].   
Secondly, at an institutional level, third party funded 
projects and the rights in research results are typically 
governed by a contract between the sponsor and relevant 
project partner institution(s). The sponsor is typically 
interested to exploit the project results and grants the funding 
in exchange for acquisition of the ownership and exploitation 
rights over the research results. This model normally does not 
cause problems in practice [9]. The research institutions are 
bound by these contractual relations and it is their obligation 
to procure the ownership over the research results from the 
personnel, whom they engage into the project, and to ensure 
that the rights in research results are passed to the sponsor 
free from third party claims.  
However, some research agreements are formulated in 
another way. For example, an agreement may provide that 
research results shall be the ownership of the party “carrying 
out the work generating such results”. The like provision 
may cause legal problems in practice. Let us consider the 
application of this rule in relation to the results of simulations 
done in a research project such as CHIC.  
As we saw, in the context of that project, the simulations, 
which produce the data outputs, are executed by the models, 
developed by the modeling parties. Based on this provision, 
(a) the modeling parties, who developed the simulation 
software and (b) the clinical parties, who provided the clinical 
data for running the simulations may each claim rights in data 
outputs.    
a) Modeling parties: by interpreting the above contract 
rule broadly, the modeling parties, who have developed the 
simulation software, may argue that they carried out the work 
generating the model, which produces the data, and shall own 
the rights in data, generated by the model, respectively. 
However, on a narrow interpretation, the modelers carried out 
the work generating the model, and not the data, calculated 
by the model, and shall own copyrights in the model code, 
and not in the data outputs from the model, respectively. 
b) Clinical parties: may also claim rights in the results 
of simulations, since they provided the data, which the 
models used as an input to compute the data outputs. The 
counter-argument of the clinical parties may be that software 
models are used as a tool for data processing and do not give 
the modelers any rights in the data outputs themselves. An 
analogy with the use of Microsoft word for writing a PhD 
thesis, which does not confer on Microsoft any rights in the 
PhD thesis itself may support this argument.   
This example shows that such contractual formulation 
may create legal uncertainty: first, with respect to qualifying 
simulation outputs as research results and, second, with 
respect to identifying the project party, who owns or holds 
the exploitation rights over such results. Unclear contractual 
formulations may give rise to potential legal disputes if the 
one or the other party would like to appropriate the data, 
achieved in the result of simulations for itself, and would seek 
to interpret the agreement in its favor.  
A successful example showing how the contractual 
mechanism can be used to balance the rights of research 
participants against researchers´ rights is the case of PXE 
International (Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (PXE)). PXE 
International is a research foundation, which represents the 
interests of individuals and families living with PXE, 
promotes and invests into PXE research [50]. When engaged 
into genetics research and the gene associated with the PXE 
disease was discovered and patented, PXE International 
managed to negotiate economic rights in the patent (i.e., 
deciding on the licensing strategy, sharing royalties, co-
defining the prices) in exchange for the contribution of tissue 
and data that it made into the research [7] [51].   
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
As we have seen, there are various ways in which the 
activity of curating clinical datasets could benefit from IP 
protection. Thus, collecting, arranging the data into a 
repository and making it suitable for use may render the 
investment, deployed in collecting and presenting the data, 
protectable by sui generis database rights. Similarly, the 
98
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

generation of research data and adoption of additional 
confidentiality and security measures to keep this data secret 
to the broader community may render such data protectable 
as know-how. 
However, the present approach that seeks to maintain 
(commercial) data confidentiality by keeping data secret 
leads to a fragmented research environment, and reduces the 
chances for greater data interoperability to be achieved. Here 
the law - aided by technology should aim to encourage 
greater openness, while assuring appropriate incentives and 
rewards for skilled curation. This could, e.g., take the form of 
an officially endorsed mechanism or system for measuring 
and tagging changes produced in a given data set (or the 
merging of several data sets) resulting from curation efforts, 
as the reward-trigger. At the same time, as another crucial 
policy element, the law needs – especially in the case of the 
curation of sensitive health data – to ensure that privacy and 
other interests of patients and research subjects are and 
remain adequately protected.  
In particular, it will here be necessary to take account of 
(and compensate for) the knock-on effects of IP changes, 
where data-holders are no longer (also) motivated by 
commercial considerations to keep their data secure and 
confidential. This concern is all the greater here since the 
activities of data sharing and curation being encouraged, also 
by their nature present enhanced risks to personal privacy. 
The point of curation is precisely to uncover new connections 
and patterns in data that help generate robust inferences 
(usable – for good or ill) about the relevant data subjects. 
Accordingly, it is submitted that any system for rewarding 
investment in data curation should also require (as a condition 
for such rewards) that the data curator takes every appropriate 
measure to counterbalance the associated enhanced risks to 
privacy.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme 
FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement No 600841. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Lishchuk and M. Stauch, “Options for Protecting Medical 
Data by IP Rights,” in Proc. GLOBAL HEALTH 2016, The 
Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges, 
Venice, 2016, pp. 29-34. 
[2] J. Eils, “Strategy of sequencing the whole genome in clinical 
practice,” presented at The Eighth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine eTELEMED 
2016, April 24 - 28, 2016 - Venice, Italy.  
[3] A. Popel and P. Hunter, “Systems biology and physiome 
projects,” Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med.1:153–58, 
2009. 
[4] T. Deisboeck, M. Berens, A. Kansal, S. Torquato, A. Stemmer-
Rachamimov, and E. Chiocca, “Pattern of self-organization in 
tumour systems: complex growth dynamics in a novel brain 
tumour spheroid model. Cell Prolif.” 34:115–34, 2001.  
[5] Children’s Cancer Research Fund, Types of Childhood Cancer, 
Nephroblastoma 
<http://www.childrenscancer.org/main/wilms_tumor_nephrob
lastoma/> 02.05.2017. 
[6] CHIC Deliverable No. D2.2 Scenario based user needs and 
requirements 
<http://chic-vph.eu/uploads/media/D2-
2_Scenario-based_user_needs_and_requirements.pdf> 
02.05.2017. 
[7] D. M. Gitter, “Informed Consent and Privacy of De-Identified 
Information and Estimated Data, Lessons from Iceland and the 
United States in an Era of Computational Genomics,” 
(Published Conference Proceedings style), in Proc. ALLDATA 
2016, The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small 
Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016), 
Lissabon, 2016, pp. 7-12.  
[8] Moore v. Regents of University of California, Supreme Court 
of California, July 9, 1990, 51 Cal. 3d 120. 
[9] H.-D. Lippert, „Wem gehören Daten, die im Rahmen von 
Forschungsprojekten gewonnen werden?“/“To whom belongs 
the data generated in research projects?“ in: Geistiges 
Eigentum: Schutzrecht oder Ausbeutungstitel?/in: Intellectual 
Property: Protection right or title to exploit, Springer, Volume 
5, 2008, pp. 359-369.  
[10] Haimo Schack, “Zur Rechtfertigung des Urheberrechts als 
Ausschliesslichkeitsrecht“/“On justification of copyright as 
exclusive right,“ in: Geistiges Eigentum: Schutzrecht oder 
Ausbeutungstitel?/in: Intellectual Property: Protection right or 
title to exploit, Springer, Volume 5, 2008, pp. 124-140. 
[11] European Commission, “E-Health Task Force Report – 
Redesigning  health in Europe for 2020,” Luxembourg 2012, 
ISBN 978-92-79-23542-9 
[12] C. Tenopir, et al, “Data Sharing by Scientists: Practices and 
Perceptions,” 2001, in: PLoS ONE, Vol. 6, No. 6, S. 1-21.  
[13] KE (Knowledge Exchange), “Sowing the Seed: Incentives and 
Motivations for Sharing Research Data,” a Researcher’s 
Perspective, 
2014<www.knowledge-
exchange.info/Default.aspx?ID=733> 02.05.2017. 
[14] J. Ludwig, „Zusammenfassung und Interpretation/Summary 
and Interpretation,“ Publ. in: Heike Neuroth, Stefan 
Strathmann, Achim Oßwald, Regine Scheffel, Jens Klump, 
Jens 
Ludwig 
(Hg.): 
Langzeitarchivierung 
von 
Forschungsdaten. 
Eine 
Bestandsaufnahme. 
Boizenburg: 
Werner Hülsbusch, 2012, pp.295-310. 
[15] J. Reichman and P.F. Uhlir, “A Contractually Reconstructed 
Research Commons for Scientific Data in a Highly 
Protectionist Intellectual Property Environment,” 2013 
<http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
1283&context=lcp> 02.05.2017. 
[16] U.S. National Institutes of Health, registry and results database 
of publicly and privately supported clinical studies of human 
participants 
conducted 
around 
the 
world 
<www.clinicaltrials.gov> 03.05.2017. 
[17] BioMed Central Ltd, ISRCTN registry: a primary clinical trial 
registry recognised by WHO and ICMJE that accepts all 
clinical 
research 
studies 
<www.controlled-trials.com> 
03.05.2017. 
[18] JAPIC Clinical Trials Information <www.clinicaltrials.jp> 
03.05.2017. 
[19] Directive 95/46/EC of 24 October 1995 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and 
on the free movement of such data, OJEU No L 281 /31, 
23.11.95.  
[20] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural 
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and 
on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 
95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), OJEU, 
Volume 59 4 May 2016. 
99
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[21] Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Advice paper on 
special 
categories 
of 
data 
(“sensitive 
data”), 
Ref. 
Ares(2011)444105 - 20/04/2011.  
[22] Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 03/2013 on 
purpose limitation, adopted on 2 April 2013, 00569/13/EN WP 
203. 
[23] CHIC Deliverable No. D4.4 Whitepaper - Recommendations 
for an amended European legal framework on patients' and 
researchers' rights and duties in E-health related research. 
[24] B. J. Evans, “Much Ado about Data Ownership”, Harvard 
Journal of Law & Technology, Vol.25, Number 1 Fall 2011. 
[25] CHIC, Deliverable D2-2 “Scenario based user needs and 
requirements”, 
<http://chic-vph.eu/uploads/media/D2-
2_Scenario-based_user_needs_and_requirements.pdf>  
03.05.2017.  
[26] CJEU, Judgment of 16 July 2009, Case C 5/08, Infopaq 
International A/S v Danske Dagblades Forening, Ref. 45. 
[27] Directive 2006/116/EC on the term of protection of copyright 
and certain related rights (codified version), OJEU, L 372/12, 
27 December 2006. 
[28] CJEU, Judgment of 7 March 2013, Case C 145/10 REC, Eva-
Maria Painer v. Standard VerlagsGmbH, Axel Springer AG, 
Süddeutsche Zeitung GmbH, Spiegel-Verlag Rudolf Augstein 
GmbH & Co. KG, Verlag M. DuMont Schauberg Expedition 
der Kölnischen Zeitung GmbH & Co. KG.  
[29] H. Zech, “Information als Schutzgegenstand,“ Tübingen, 2012, 
ISSN: 0940-9610 (Jus Privatum). 
[30] Directive 2001/29/EC of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of 
certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the 
information society, OJEU L 167/10 - L 167/19, 22.6.2001. 
[31] H. Stenzhorn, et al, “The ObTiMA system - ontology-based 
managing of clinical trials,” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
2010;160(Pt 2):1090-4. 
[32] Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases, 
OJEU, L 77/20 - L 77/28, 27.3.96. 
[33] J. A. Bovenberg, “Property Rights in Blood, Genes & Data: 
Naturally Yours?” p. 159, 2006. 
[34] E. Derclaye, “The Legal Protection of Databases,” pp. 92 et 
seq, 2008. 
[35] CJEU, Case C-203/02 The British Horseracing Board Ltd and 
Others v William Hill Organization Ltd., para 42. 
[36] European Commission, DG Internal Market and Services 
Working Paper – First evaluation of Directive 96/9/EC on the 
legal 
protection 
of 
databases, 
2005, 
p. 
14<http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/databa
ses/evaluation_report_en.pdf> 03.02.2017. 
[37] CJEU, Case C-338/02 Fixtures Marketing Ltd v Svenska Spel 
AB, para 28. 
[38] Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights, the TRIPS Agreement, Annex 1C of the Marrakesh 
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, 
Marrakesh, Morocco, 15 April 1994. 
[39] Directrive (EU) 2016/943 of 8 June 2016 on the protection of 
undisclosed know-how and business information (trade 
secrets) against their unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure, 
OJEU L157/1, 15.06.2016. 
[40] Hogan Lovells International LLP, “Report on Trade Secrets for 
the European Commission – Study on Trade Secrets and 
Parasitic Copying (Look-alikes), MARKT/2010/20/D,” 2011. 
[41] K. Lodigkeit, Intellectual Property Rights in Computer 
Programs in the USA and Germany, Peter Lang GmbH, 2006, 
pp. 98-101. 
[42] Computational Horizons In Cancer (CHIC): Developing Meta- 
and Hyper-Multiscale Models and Repositories for In Silico 
Oncology <http://chic-vph.eu/project/> 03.02.2017. 
[43] C. Coveney, J. Gabe, and S. Williams, “The sociology of 
cognitive enhancement: medicalisation and beyond,” Health 
Sociol. Rev., 20 (2011), pp. 381–393. 
[44] J. Dejaegher, L. Solie, S. De Vleeschouwer, and S. W. Van 
Gool, 
“Dendritic 
Cell 
Vaccination 
for 
Glioblastoma 
Multiforme: Clinical Experience and Future Directions,” In G. 
Stamatakos and D. Dionysiou (Eds): Proc. 2014 6th Int. Adv. 
Res. Workshop on In Silico Oncology and Cancer 
Investigation – The CHIC Project Workshop (IARWISOCI), 
Athens, 
Greece, 
Nov.3-4, 
2014 
(www.6thiarwisoci.iccs.ntua.gr), 
pp.14-18. 
(open-access 
version), ISBN: 978-618-80348-1-5. 
[45] A. Abbott, “Icelandic database shelved as court judges privacy 
in peril,” Nature, vol. 429, p. 118, May 13, 2004, 
doi:10.1038/429118b. 
[46] NIVEL, 
databases 
and 
panels 
https://www.nivel.nl/en/databases-and-panels 30.05.2017. 
[47] S. Gutwirth, R. Leenes, P. De Hert, „Data Protection on the 
Move. Current Development in ICT and Privacy/Data 
Protection,” 2016, p.101 et seq. 
[48] Joint Position on the Disclosure of Clinical Trial Information 
via 
Clinical 
Trial 
Registries 
and 
Databases 
www.ifpma.org/clinicaltrials 30.05.2017. 
[49] C. Reed and J. Angel, “Computer Law: The Law and 
Regulation of Information Technology,” 6th ed, 2007, p. 352 
et seq.  
[50] PXE 
International 
https://www.pxe.org/about-pxe-
international 30.05.2017. 
[51] P. Smaglik, “Tissue donors use their influence in deal over 
gene patent terms,” NATURE, Vol. 407, 19,10, 2000, p. 821. 
100
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

