86
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Runtime Trustworthiness Evaluation of Evolving Cyber Physical Systems 
 
 
Rainer Falk and Steffen Fries 
Siemens AG  
Technology 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {rainer.falk|steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—The integrity of Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) needs 
to be protected to ensure a reliable, trustworthy operation. The 
hardware and software components of a CPS must be in a 
well-defined, approved configuration state. However, such 
system integrity protection becomes increasingly challenging 
with CPSs that are flexibly reconfigured to address evolving 
demands. An approach for integrity monitoring for such 
dynamic CPSs is described. Instead of preventing changes to a 
CPS, the focus is on detecting changes and on analyzing and 
checking whether the detected changes are in-line with a policy 
defining permitted changes. A key element is a reliable device 
lifecycle state attestation, so that a CPS integrity monitoring 
system can determine the current configuration state of CPS 
components and the way in which it was changed. 
Keywords–system integrity; trustworthiness; device integrity; 
attestation; lifecycle; resilience; cyber physical systems; Internet 
of Things; cyber security. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The integrity and resilience of Cyber Physical Systems 
(CPS), e.g., technical automation and control systems, are 
highly relevant security objectives [1]. Unauthorized changes 
the configuration of a CPS have to be prevented as well as 
detected. Related security requirements are defined by the 
industrial security standard IEC62443 [2]. Such security 
objectives could even be pushed by related regulative 
requirements, as can be seen, e.g., in the proposed update to 
the EU Network Information Security (NIS) directive [3].  
A concept for enhanced integrity monitoring of overall 
industrial automation and control systems, combining 
integrity monitoring from physical processes up to its control 
and support systems, has been described in [4]. Enhanced 
attack resilience allows an operator to keep the CPS 
operational, possibly with some limitations, even during an 
ongoing attack [5]. Particularly challenging are CPSs with a 
dynamically changing configuration as driven by the 
flexibility of IIoT and Industry 4.0. Cyber systems will 
become more open and dynamic to support flexible 
production down to “lot size 1” by supporting plug-and-work 
reconfiguration of manufacturing equipment and flexible 
adaptation of production systems to changing needs, and by 
increasingly adopting software-based automation and control 
functions. This implies that also security has to support such 
dynamically CPSs that are evolving over time in a practical 
way.  
In the past, CPS have been often rather static. After being 
put into operation, changes to the configuration happen only 
rarely, e.g., to replace a defect component, or to install 
smaller upgrades during a planned maintenance window. To 
cope with increasing demands for flexible production and 
increased productivity, CPS will also increasingly become 
more dynamic, allowing for reconfiguration during regular 
operation. Such scenarios for highly adaptive production 
system that can be adapted flexibly to changing production 
needs have been described in the context of Industry 4.0 [6]. 
The flexibility starts at the device level, where smart devices 
allow for upgrading and enhancing the device functionality 
by user-downloadable apps, and by the increasing software-
based realization of automation and control functions. 
Besides the device level, also the system of interconnected 
machines is reconfigured according to changing needs. 
Examples are Software Defined Networks (SDN) enabling a 
fast reconfiguration of the communication infrastructure to 
adapt flexibly to the communication needs and the use of 
wireless communications as wireless LAN of private 5G 
networks. Another example relates to manufacturing systems 
(e.g., robots) in industrial automation systems, where smart 
tools are attached to a robot that in turn feature also a local 
communication network connecting to the robot’s network.  
The focus of cyber security is protection against cyber 
attacks, their detection, and the recovery from successful 
cyber attacks. An increasingly important further aspect is 
trustworthiness, where automated checks verify whether the 
overall systems and the used components meet the explicitly 
defined trustworthiness criteria. However, the concept of 
trustworthiness is subjective. The presented approach checks 
for changes within a CPS to determine whether the CPS 
configuration is in a permitted, trustworthy state. 
Section II gives an overview on related work. After 
describing shortly industrial CPS in Section III, previous 
work on protecting integrity of cyber physical systems and 
their components is summarized in in Section IV. The 
monitoring of reliable device lifecycle information based on 
lifecycle state attestations is described in Sections V and VI, 
extending CPS integrity monitoring information. Approaches 
for analyzing detected lifecycle state attestations are 
described Section VII. Section VIII evaluates the presented 
approach. Section IX concludes the paper and gives an 
outlook towards future research. 

87
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The objective of CPS system integrity and CPS resilience 
is to support the trustworthiness of CPS. While not new, the 
concept of trustworthiness is gaining increasing interest in 
ongoing research and standardization: The standard ISO/IEC 
TS 5723 [7] published in 2022 defines trustworthiness of 
systems and the characteristics of trustworthiness, addressing 
products, 
services, 
technologies 
as 
well 
as 
the 
trustworthiness of organizations that are providing these. A 
common understanding and description of trustworthiness 
characteristics allows stakeholders to judge whether their 
trustworthiness expectations are met. Mohammadi describes 
in [8] a trustworthiness framework for CPS that covers 
development phases like requirements engineering and 
system design, but also run-time maintenance, and evidence-
based assurance. Also, evaluation of trustworthiness during 
CPS runtime is covered by monitoring its trustworthiness 
properties. Jiang proposed a data-driven vulnerability 
analysis for CPS using machine learning [9]. Northern, 
Burks, Hatcher, Rogers, and Ulybyshev described a 
methodology to determine a hardened CPS configuration by 
analyzing cyber vulnerabilities [10]. Cyber risk scores for 
different CPS configurations are compared, and vulnerable 
CPS components are replaced or reconfigured. Malik and 
Tosh described a framework for the dynamic risk assessment 
and analysis of CPS using multi-formatted knowledge bases 
derived from open-source vulnerability databases [11]. 
M. Tapia, P. Thier, S. Gößling-Reisemann performed an 
empirical study on the vulnerability and resilience of cyber-
physical power systems [12]. A resilience management 
approach is proposed that targets a better handling of CPS 
failures. The proposed resiliency measures address the 
categories technology, organizational security policies and 
procedures, human factor, and regulations. Akbarzadeh and 
Katsikas described a cybersecurity risk assessment method 
that addresses the interactions and interdependencies 
between the cyber and the physical components using a 
model of the CPS and its components [13]. 
Requirements related to resilience on device level have 
been addressed in different standards. The Trusted 
Computing Group (TCG) specified requirements for cyber 
resilient modules and building blocks [14]. It describes 
architectural elements on device level for resilience 
(resilience target, resilience engine, resilience authority), as 
well as building blocks as, e.g., storage protection and 
attention signal generators. Recommendations for resiliency 
of platform firmware and data have been described by [15], 
supporting a rapid and secure recovery from attacks on 
platform firmware of computer devices. Also, the standard 
ETSI EN303 645 on baseline security requirements for 
consumer IoT includes resilience-related requirements [23].  
Segovia, 
Rubio-Hernan, 
Cavalli 
and 
Garcia-
Alfarometrics define a metric based on control theory to 
quantify the cyber-resilience level of a CPS based on the 
design, structure, stability, and performance under attack 
[16]. The metric is related to the mathematically modelled 
control function of a CPS. Khazraei. Hallyburton, Gao, 
Wang and Pajic describe how deep learning can be applied 
for vulnerability analysis of CPS control mechanisms [17]. 
III. 
INDUSTRIAL CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 
A CPS, e.g., an industrial automation and control system, 
monitors and controls a technical system. Examples are 
process automation, machine control, energy automation, 
and cloud robotics. Figure 1 shows an example of an 
industrial automation and control system, comprising 
Control Network
Plant Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
GW
IoT 
Gateway
GW
Control Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
IoT Backend
Remote IO
S
S
A
A
Remote IO
S
S
A
A
SCADA
Log 
Server
Edge Cloud
 
Figure 1. Example CPS System 

88
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
different control networks connected to a plant network and 
a cloud backend system. Automation control equipment with 
sensors (S) and actuators (A) is connected directly with 
automation components, or via remote input/output modules. 
The technical process is controlled by measuring its current 
state 
using 
the 
sensors, 
and 
by 
determining 
the 
corresponding actuator signals. Separation of the network is 
typically used to realize distinct control networks with strict 
real-time requirements for the interaction between sensors 
and actuators of a production cell, or to enforce a specific 
security policy within a production cell. Such an industrial 
automation and control system is an example of a CPS. 
Industrial automation and control systems are utilized in 
various automation domains, including discrete automation 
(factory 
automation), 
process 
automation, 
railway 
automation, energy automation, and building automation. 
Automation Component / Remote IO
RAM
Flash
NW 
IF
CPU
A
S
A
S
IO
 
Figure 2. Automation Component 
Figure 2 shows the typical structure of automation 
components of a CPS that monitor and control the physical 
world using sensors (S) and actuators (A). The monitoring 
and control functionality is defined by its firmware/software 
that is executed on a central processing unit (CPU) and the 
corresponding configuration data, both stored in non-volatile 
memory (Flash). A network interface (NW IF) allows 
communication with other devices, e.g., via Ethernet or via 
wireless communications as wireless local area network 
(WLAN) or a private 5th generation (5G) mobile 
communication system. 
In cyber physical systems, the impact of a vulnerability 
in the OT system may not only affect data and data 
processing as in classical IT, but it may have an effect also 
on the physical world. For example, production equipment 
could be damaged, or the physical process may operate 
outside the designed physical boundaries, so that the 
produced goods may not have the expected quality, or even 
safety-related requirements could be affected. 
IV. 
CPS SYSTEM INTEGRITY PROTECTION  
Information Technology (IT) security mechanisms have 
been known for many years and are applied in smart devices 
(Internet of Things, Cyber Physical Systems, industrial and 
energy automation systems, operation technology). Such 
mechanisms target source authentication, system and 
communication integrity, and confidentiality of data in 
transit or at rest. System integrity takes a broader approach 
where not only the integrity of individual components 
(device integrity) and of network communications are 
addressed, but where integrity shall be ensured at the overall 
system level of multiple interconnected devices.  
A. Industrial Security  
Protecting industrial automation and control systems 
against intentional attacks is increasingly demanded by 
operators to ensure a reliable operation, and also by 
regulation. The main relevant industrial security standard 
that describes security from a holistic view is IEC 62443 [2]. 
Security requirements defined by the industrial security 
standard IEC 62443 range from security processes during 
development and operation of devices and systems, personal 
and physical security, device security, network security, and 
application security, addressing the device manufacturer, the 
integrator as well as the operator of the industrial automation 
and control system.   
Industrial security is also called Operation Technology 
(OT) security, to distinguish it from general IT security. 
Industrial systems have different security priorities and 
requirements compared to common IT systems. Typically, 
availability and integrity of an automation system have 
higher priority than confidentiality.  
Specific requirements and side conditions of industrial 
automation 
systems 
like 
high 
availability, 
planned 
configuration (engineering info), scheduled maintenance 
windows, long life cycles, unattended operation, real-time 
operation, 
and 
communication, 
as 
well 
as 
safety 
requirements have to be considered when designing an OT 
security solution.  
 
Figure 3. Prevent Detect React Cycle 
Overall, security has to address the areas prevent, detect, 
and react, see Figure 3. It is not sufficient to only define 
security measures to protect against attacks. The cycle shows 
also the need for detecting attacks, and to define measures to 
react adequately once an attack has been detected. The 
approach describes in this paper puts more effort on the 
“detect” and “react” phases than on the “prevent” phase with 
the intention to supported increased CPS productivity by 
allowing for high flexibility of CPS reconfigurations. 
B. Device Integrity 
The objective of device integrity is to ensure that a single 
device is not manipulated in an unauthorized way, ensuring 
that it operates as genuine device. Integrity protection 
includes the integrity of the device firmware, the integrity of 

89
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
the device configuration, but also its physical integrity. The 
main technologies to protect device integrity are: 
− 
Secure boot: A device loads at start-up only 
unmodified, authorized firmware.  
− 
Measured boot: The loaded software modules are 
checked at the time they are loaded. Usually, a 
cryptographic hash value is recorded in a platform 
configuration register of a hardware of firmware 
Trusted Platform Module (TPM). The configuration 
information can be used to grant access to keys, or it 
can be attested towards third parties.  
− 
Protected firmware update: When the firmware of a 
device is updated, the integrity and authenticity of the 
firmware update is checked. The firmware update 
image can be digitally signed.  
− 
Application 
whitelisting: 
Only 
allowed, 
known 
applications can be started on a device. A whitelist 
defines which application binaries can be started.  
− 
Runtime integrity checks: During operation, the device 
performs a self-test of security functionality and 
integrity checks to verify whether it is operating as 
expected. Integrity checks can verify the integrity of 
files, configuration data, software modules, and runtime 
data as the process list, i.e., the list of currently 
executed processes.  
− 
Process isolation, kernel-based Mandatory Access 
Control (MAC): Hypervisors or kernel-based MAC 
systems can be used to isolate different classes of 
software (security domains). An attack or malfunction 
of one security domain does not affect other security 
domains on the same device.  
− 
Tamper evidence, tamper protection: The physical 
integrity of a device can be protected, e.g., by security 
seals or by tamper sensors that detect opening or 
manipulation of the housing. 
− 
Device integrity self-test: A device performs a self-test 
to detect failures. The self-test is performed typically 
during startup and is repeated regularly during 
operation.  
− 
Operation integrity checks: measurements on the device 
can be compared with the expected behavior in the 
operative environment. An example is the measurement 
of connection attempts to/from the device, based on 
parameters of a Management Information Base (MIB).  
The established approaches to protect device integrity focus 
on its IT-related functionality of a device. The main 
protection objective for device integrity is to ensure that the 
device’s 
control 
functionality 
operates 
as 
designed. 
However, the integrity of input/output interfaces, sensors, 
and actuators are typically out of scope. In typical industrial 
environments, applying a strong tamper protection to each 
control device, sensor, and actuator would not be 
economically feasible. A strong physical tamper protection is 
not common at device level, as it would complicate not only 
the production of a devices, but also the test, service, and 
repair. Therefore, protecting device integrity of used devices 
alone would be too limited to achieve the goal of protection 
the integrity of an overall CPS.  
C. Cyber Physical System Integrity Monitoring 
Classical approaches for protecting device and system 
integrity target at preventing any changes and compare the 
current configuration to a fixed reference policy. More 
flexible approaches are needed to protect integrity for 
flexibly reconfigurable and self-adapting CPSs. In previous 
work [4], we described an integrated, holistic approach for 
ensuring CPS integrity as an extensible framework to include 
integrity information from IT-based functions and the 
physical world of a CPS. This allows integrating integrity 
information from the digital and the physical world. Trusted 
physical integrity sensors can be installed as add-on to 
existing automation and control systems. One-way gateways 
can be used to extract integrity monitoring information from 
closed control networks, while ensuring freedom from 
interference for the control function.  
Integrity does not only affect single devices, but also the 
overall system level comprising a set of interconnected 
devices. The main approaches to protect system integrity are 
collecting and analyzing information at system level [4]: 
− 
Device inventory: Complete and up-to-date list of 
installed devices (including manufacturer, model, serial 
number 
version, 
firmware 
version, 
current 
configuration, installed software components, location) 
− 
Centralized Logging: Devices provide log data, e.g., 
using 
Open 
Platform 
Communication 
Unified 
Architecture (OPC UA) protocol, Simple Network 
Management Protocol (SNMP), or syslog protocol, to a 
centralized logging system for further analysis. This 
may be done in a Security Information and Event 
Management (SIEM) System and lead to reactions on 
identified cybersecurity events. 
− 
Runtime device integrity measurements: A device 
integrity agent provides information gathered during the 
operation of the device (see also subsection B above). It 
collects integrity information on the device and 
provides it for further analysis. Basic integrity 
information includes the results of a device self-test, 
and information on the current device configuration 
(firmware version, patches, installed applications, 
configuration). Furthermore, runtime information can 
be gathered and provided for analysis (e.g., process list, 
file system integrity check values, partial copy of 
memory). 
− 
Network monitoring: The network communication is 
intercepted, e.g., using a network tap or a mirror port of 
a network switch. A challenge is the fact that network 
communication is increasingly encrypted. 
− 
Physical Automation process monitoring: Trusted 
sensors provide information on the physical world that 
can be used to cross-check the view of the control 

90
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
system on the physical world. Adding trusted sensors to 
existing installation allows for a smooth migration from 
legacy systems to systems providing integrated sensors 
as they can be used for plausibility checks. 
− 
Physical world integrity: Trusted sensors (of physical 
world), integrated monitoring of embedded devices and 
IT-based control systems, and of the technical process 
allow now quality of integrity monitoring as physical 
world and IT world are checked together.    
The captured integrity information can be used for 
system runtime integrity monitoring to detect integrity 
violations in real-time. Operators can be informed, or actions 
can be triggered automatically. Furthermore, the information 
is archived for later investigations. This allows that integrity 
violations can be detected also later with a high probability, 
so that corresponding countermeasures can be initiated (e.g., 
plan for an additional quality check of produced goods). The 
integrity information can be integrated in or linked to data of 
a production management system, so that it can be 
investigated under which integrity conditions certain 
production steps have been performed. Product data is 
enhanced with integrity monitoring data related to the 
production of the product. Moreover, the data may also be 
used in the context of supply chain security to support 
trustworthiness claims.  
An intelligent analysis platform performs data analysis 
(e.g., statistical analysis, big data analysis, artificial 
intelligence) and triggers suitable respondence actions (e.g., 
alarm, remote wipe of a device, revocation of a device, stop 
of a production site, planning for additional test of 
manufactured goods). The analysis can combine monitoring 
information originating from IT-related control functions, 
from physical security systems, as well as from the operation 
of the actual technical process.  
Open Network 
(Office/Internet)
Automation 
Network
IoT Backend Platform:
System Integrity Monitoring Data
ID1 SD
ID2 SD
ID3 SD
ID4 SD
ID5 SD
System Integrity  
Validation Service
System Integrity 
Respondence
Validation
Policy
Device 
wipe
alarm
ID1
ID3
ID2
GW
ID4
ID5
 
Figure 4. CPS Integrity Monitoring System [4] 
Figure 4 shows an example for an IoT system with IoT 
devices (ID1, ID2, etc.) that communicate with an IoT 
backend platform. The devices provide current integrity 
monitoring information to the backend platform. The devices 
can 
be 
automation 
devices 
that 
include 
integrity 
measurement functionality, or dedicated integrity sensor 
devices. The device monitoring system itself has to be 
protected against attacks, following the industrial security 
standard IEC 62443.  
An integrity data validation service checks the obtained 
integrity measurement data for validity using a configurable 
validation policy. If a policy violation is detected, a 
corrective action is triggered. For example, an alarm message 
can be displayed on a dashboard. Furthermore, an alarm 
message can be sent to the IoT backend platform to 
terminate the communication session of the affected IoT 
device. Moreover, the device security service can be 
informed so that it can revoke the devices access permissions 
or revoke the device authentication credential. 
The integrity monitoring events are analyzed using 
known data analysis tools. As stated before, in industrial 
environments, it is also important to have reliable 
information about the system integrity of a production 
system for the time period during which a certain production 
batch 
was performed. 
This allows performing the 
verification also afterwards to check whether during a past 
production batch integrity-violations occurred.   
The final decision whether a certain configuration is 
accepted as correct is up to human operators. After 
reconfiguration, or for a production step, the configuration is 
to be approved. The approval decision can be automated 
according to previously accepted decisions, or preconfigured 
good configurations.  
D. Resilience Under Attack 
Being resilient means to be able to withstand or recover 
quickly from difficult conditions [18]. It shifts the focus of 
“classical” IT and OT security, which put the focus on 
preventing, detecting, and reacting to cyber-security attacks, 
to the aspect to continue to deliver an intended outcome 
despite an adverse cyber attack taking place, and to recover 
quickly back to regular operation. More specifically, 
resilience of a system is the property to be resistant to a 
range of threats and withstand the effects of a partial loss of 
capability, and to recover and resume its provision of service 
with the minimum reasonable loss of performance [19]. 
Risk management, the established approach to cyber 
security, identifies threats and determines the risk depending 
on probability and impact of a potential attack. The objective 
is to put the focus of defined security measures on the most 
relevant risks, reducing the probability that a successful 
attack takes place, and reducing the impact of successful 
attacks, e.g., by detect successful attacks by security 
monitoring allowing to react, e.g., by shutting down a CPS. 
Resilience, however, puts the focus on a reduction of the 
impact of successful attacks, where the system can stay 
operational with a degraded performance or functionality, 
and to recover quickly from a successful attack. Robustness 
is a further related approach that tries to keep the system 
operational without a reduction of the system performance, 
i.e., to withstand attacks. 
Figure 5 illustrates the concept of cyber resilience: Even 
if an attack is carried out, the impact on the system 
operation, i.e., the performance or functionality of the 

91
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
system, is limited [5]. The effects of an attack are 
“absorbed”, so that the system stays operational, but with 
limited performance or functionality. A recovery takes place 
to bring the system up to the regular operation. 
t
Absorb
Recover
Plan/Prepare
Adapt
Attack
System 
Performance / 
Functionality
 
Figure 5. Concept of Cyber Resilience [5] 
In adaptation of resilience, the system might be enhanced 
to better prepare for future attacks leading to a sort of self-
healing functionality. In a cyber physical environment, a 
main objective is that the CPS stays operational and that its 
integrity is ensured. In the context of an industrial 
automation and control system, that means that intended 
actions of the system in the physical world continue to take 
place even when the automation and control system of the 
CPS should be attacked successfully. 
V. 
LIFECYCLE CONFIGURATION CHANGE MONITORING 
A main concept presented in this paper is an 
enhancement to the system-level integrity monitoring 
system, described in Section IV.C. Instead of comparing 
integrity measurements describing the current configuration 
status to a fixed reference policy, the changes to the CPS 
components and to their configuration are validated during 
CPS operation. An integrity violation is detected if changes 
are detected that are not in-line with a policy on what and 
how changes are applied and when. The changing 
configuration of CPS components along their lifecycle in the 
operation of a dynamically evolving CPS is validated to 
determine whether the CPS is in a trustworthy, authorized 
state (CPS system integrity). 
Lifecycle state agents on the CPS components act as 
integrity sensors that collect lifecycle state information of a 
device and provide it in the form of a lifecycle state 
attestation to the system integrity monitoring system.  
Figure 6 shows the basic concept of a CPS lifecycle-
change integrity monitoring system. Devices (D) provide 
Life Cycle State Attestations (LCSA) to a CPS lifecycle-
change integrity monitoring system. The CPS lifecycle-
change integrity monitoring system determines changes on 
device lifecycle states based on the provided LCSA 
attestations, and it validates whether the detected changes are 
in-line with a lifecycle change validation policy. 
CPS Lifecycle-Change Integrity Monitoring 
D
LCSA
D
LCSA
D
LCSA
Change 
Detection
Lifecycle Change 
Validation
Validation
Policy
Respondence
Production 
plan 
adaptation
alarm
Validation 
Engine
Change 
Monitor
History
DB
 
Figure 6. CPS Lifecycle Change Monitoring 
The lifecycle change validation policy defines which 
changes are permitted so that the CPS is considered to be 
still in a trustworthy configuration state. If the lifecycle 
change validation policy is violated, e.g., an alarm can be 
generated, or the CPS operation of the production plan can 
be adapted accordingly. 
VI. 
DEVICE LIFECYCLE STATE ATTESTATION 
Different lifecycle states of industrial IoT devices can be 
distinguished, including factory default state, commissioned, 
operational, failure, network connected, provisioned, repair, 
service, or being put out of service. The current lifecycle 
state of a device can be determined based on its current 
configuration data. Some security standards, e.g., ETSI 
EN 303645 on Consumer IoT Security includes an example 
of a device life cycle model [23]. Besides the life cycle phase 
information, also the parts of the specific configuration can 
be provided as part of the life cycle attestation and analyzed. 
It is not assumed that a common life-cycle model is 
explicitly supported by the devices, as in a real-world CPS, 
different 
device 
types 
originating 
from 
various 
manufacturers are used. Instead, the available information of 
the device configuration is taken as basis to derive/estimate 
the related life-cycle phase, at least if it is not provided 
explicitly. 
 
Device
LCSA
Device 
Configuration 
Manager
Lifecycle State 
Determination and 
Attestation Unit
Device 
Config
Control 
Function
IO
A
A
S
S
 
Figure 7. Control Device with Lifecycle State Attestation 
A device can determine its own lifecycle state and 
confirm it externally by a device lifecycle state attestation. 
Figure 7 shows a device, e.g., a control device for monitoring 
and controlling a technical process via sensors (S) and 
actuators (A) by a control function that interacts via an input-
output unit (IO) with the sensors and actuators, according to 
the 
device 
configuration 
established 
by 
a 
device 
configuration manager. The lifecycle state attestation unit 
determines the device lifecycle state based on the current 

92
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
device configuration and creates a cryptographically 
protected LCSA. Besides the current lifecycle state, also 
previous lifecycle states can be kept and attested, providing a 
more comprehensive information on the device lifecycle 
history. Alternatively, the lifecycle state may be determined 
and attested by an external add-on component, allowing that 
a LCSA can be provided also for legacy devices that do not 
have an integrated functionality for determining and attesting 
the device lifecycle state. 
The LCSA can be provided in a dedicated attestation data 
structure, i.e., a data structure that describes the current 
lifecycle state of the device, and that is protected by a 
cryptographic checksum, i.e., a digital signature or a message 
authentication code. However, it is also possible to encode 
the life cycle information in a device credential, e.g., a 
device 
authentication 
certificate, 
a 
device 
attribute 
certificate, a device authentication token, or a verifiable 
credential.  
VII. DEVICE LIFECYCLE STATE ANALYSIS 
A simple approach for validating CPS configuration 
changes would be the manual analysis of detected 
configuration changes and a manual approval of detected 
changes by OT personnel. Manual checking and approval 
would however not scale well for larger CPS that are 
frequently reconfigured. Therefore, an automatic validation 
of detected configuration changes is needed. The CPS 
Lifecycle-change Integrity Monitoring system determines the 
changes to the CPS configuration based on the obtained 
device lifecycle state attestations. It validates whether 
changes are in-line with a lifecycle change validation policy 
that defines the permitted types of changes to the CPS 
configuration. If the lifecycle change validation policy is 
violated, e.g., an alarm can be generated, or the CPS 
operation or a production plan can be adapted accordingly. 
The lifecycle change validation policy defining permitted 
changes of lifecycle states can be preconfigured. However, 
this would require significant effort for explicitly defining 
rules for permitted configuration changes. Therefore, an 
automated learning system, based on artificial intelligence, is 
proposed that learns from good examples of permitted 
changes. In an initial introduction phase, good changes 
(allowed changes from a system operation level) have to be 
marked by the OT personnel. Over time, the system learns 
from these good examples. This approach is conceptually 
similar to a network firewall for which the filter policy is 
determined automatically during a learning phase.  
Such a self-learning of permitted changes leads to an 
automated learning of what changes lead to a trustworthy 
CPS. It is in real-world practice often not easy to determine 
explicit rules on which specific properties make a component 
or a change being considered as trustworthy. By learning 
from good and bad examples, the attributes that are relevant 
for the trustworthiness evaluation can also be determined 
over time automatically. The system learns which attributes 
of a lifecycle state attestation are relevant for determining 
which changes are permitted. This self-learning approach 
allows also for subjective trust policies: Different users, i.e., 
operators of similar CPSs, can give examples of what they 
consider to be trustworthy or not so trustworthy. Depending 
on these examples, a trustworthiness evaluation policy is 
derived. In contrast to conceptually similar approaches like 
the example of firewalls in learning mode, this approach is 
more open as even the attributes (criteria) that are relevant 
for making trust decisions do not have to be predefined. It 
allows also to distinguish varying operational concepts for 
CPSs that are operated by different OT operators. 
VIII. EVALUATION 
From the perspective of a real-world CPS, the approach 
presented in Sections V, VI and VII is not self-contained, but 
is an extension to other, well-established security measures 
to protect a CPS. The main advantage comes by the support 
for increasingly dynamic, evolving CPS. To ensure that a 
CPS and its components are in a trustworthy state, it is not 
ensured that the configuration corresponds to a fixed 
reference, but to check whether the detected changes are 
acceptable. This approach can compensate when classical, 
rather strict security controls preventing heavy changes to a 
CPS cannot be applied anymore in the same way as for static 
CPS deployments.  
The security of a cyber system can be evaluated in 
practice in various approaches and stages of the system’s 
lifecycle: 
− 
Threat and Risk Analysis (TRA) of cyber system 
− 
Checks during operation to determine key performance 
indicators (e.g., check for compliance of device 
configurations). 
− 
Security testing (penetration testing) 
During the design phase of a cyber system, the security 
demand is determined, and the appropriateness of a security 
design is validated using a TRA. Assets to be protected and 
possible threats are identified, and the risk is evaluated in a 
qualitative way depending on probability and impact of 
threats. The effectiveness of the proposed enhanced device 
authentication means can be reflected in a system TRA.  
The main evaluation using security tools is performed 
during secure operation, when as part of an overall 
operational security management appropriate technologies 
are deployed that, in combination, reduce the risk to an 
acceptable level. The new approach presented in this paper 
provides an additional element, integrated into the overall 
system security architecture that is used to reduce the risk of 
integrity violations, despite a dynamically changing CPS 
configuration.  
For the applicability to real-world CPS environments, the 
approach allows for: 
− 
Flexibility for updates: The device life cycle integrity 
monitoring system can be updated independently from 
the actual CPS. Therefore, updates can be installed also 
outside the scheduled maintenance windows of the 
CPS. 
− 
It can be installed as add-on to existing automation 
systems (brownfield). It can be introduced stepwise, 
starting with lifecycle monitoring for most relevant 
devices. 

93
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
− 
It can be installed as an add-on system that does not 
endanger the reliable operation of a CPS or invalidate 
its certifications.  
Such non-technical properties simplify the adoption in 
real-world CPS, and they are often important factors for 
acceptance by OT operators.  
As long as the technology proposed in the paper has not 
been proven in a real-world operational setting, it can be 
evaluated conceptually by analyzing the impact that the 
additional security measure would have on the identified 
residual risks as determined by a TRA, and on key 
performance indicators (KPI) of automation and production 
systems like uptime, availability, output. Actually, the 
approach of evaluation the impact of different approaches to 
handle security on KPIs that are not directly security-related 
is typically not done systematically in the security 
community. The motivation of the lifecycle security 
monitoring intends to give high flexibility to reconfigure 
industrial CPS to changing needs, while still ensuring the 
required level of security.  
It is also an open point how to balance security controls 
addressing different phases (prevent, detect, react) in an 
optimized way. The approach described in this paper puts 
less emphasis on restrictive security measures on the 
“protect” phase but rather intends to compensate that by 
automated monitoring of configuration changes (“detect") 
and to use the high flexibility for CPS reconfiguration to 
flexibly react also to detected security problems (“react"), 
improving thereby also the resiliency. Putting these 
considerations in the context of a TRA, means shifting the 
focus for reducing identified risks to an acceptable level 
from reducing the likelihood of a threat occurrence 
(“prevent”) to reducing its impact (“detect” and “react”).  
 
moderate
moderate
moderate
major
likely
possible
minor
unlikely
unlikely
Device communication 
intercepted
Device communication 
manipulated
Vulnerability in unpatched 
device exploited 
Device replaced by fake 
device
Likelihood
moderate
Impact
Risk
Threat
critical
critical
 
Figure 8. Example Threats of a Threat and Risk Analysis 
Figure 8 shows a simplified table as used typically in a 
threat and risk analysis to collect and evaluate relevant treats 
to a technical system or component. Some threats are shown 
as examples. Actual TRAs for real-world systems and 
components include usually a much longer list of threats. 
The likelihood and the impact of the threat is determined by 
judgement of competent personal, usually in a team 
including 
technical 
experts, 
developers, 
and 
people 
responsible for the product or system. The corresponding 
risk is determined based on likelihood and impact. It has 
shown to be useful to define and document explicitly the 
criteria leading to the categorization of likelihood and 
impact, including also the assumptions made on the 
operational environment. The TRA with prioritized risks is 
the basis for security design decisions, focusing on the most 
critical risks. It is the basis to define a security concept that 
defines suitable measures for reducing the risk to an 
acceptable level.  
moderate
moderate
signifi cant
signifi cant
Impact
mi nor
mi nor
maj or
moderate
mi nor
negligable
moderate
cri tical
Likelihood
unlikely
possibl e
likely
 
Figure 9. Risk Mapping 
Figure 9 shows how the mapping of likelihood and 
impact to the corresponding risk value. In the example, the 
three categories unlikely, possible, and likely are used to 
describe the likelihood. For the impact, the three categories 
negligible, moderate, and critical are used. In practice, also 
more fine-granular rankings can be used, distinguishing, e.g., 
four or five different categories. Also, the risk evaluation can 
in general include further categories, e.g., disastrous. It can 
be seen that a reduction of the risk can be achieved by both, 
by reducing the likelihood as well as by reducing the impact.  
 
Impact
negligable
moderate
cri tical
Likelihood
unlikely
possibl e
likely
 
Figure 10. Risk Reporting for the Example Threats 
An overview on the determined risks can be shown in a 
risk reporting as shown in Figure 10. It gives an easily 
understandable graphical representation on the distribution of 
risks. This representation can be useful if many risks have 
been identified. In particular, the example also shows one 
major threat as well as a moderate threat with critical impact.  
The effect of reducing the risk by limiting the impact is 
illustrated in Figure 11. As, shown in the example, the 
impact of the two risks with critical impact reduces from 
critical to moderate, the risk is reduced correspondingly. 
Thereby, also the overall risk situation of the overall CPS in 
which the considered device is used, is improved.  

94
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Impact
negligable
moderate
cri tical
Likelihood
unlikely
possibl e
likely
 
Figure 11. Reducing risk be limiting the impact 
As the evaluation in a real-world CPS requires significant 
effort, and as attack scenarios cannot be tested that could 
really have a (severe) impact on the physical world, a 
simulation-based approach or using specific testbeds are 
possible approaches, allowing to simulate or evaluate in a 
protected testbed the effect on the physical world of certain 
attack scenarios with compromised components. The 
simulation would have to include not only the IT-based 
control function, but also the physical world impact of an 
attack. Using physical-world simulation and test beds to 
evaluate the impact of attacks have been described by 
Urbina, Giraldo et al. [24]. However, we are not aware of 
research work that analyzes systematically the impact of 
different security approaches on operational KPIs of a CPS, 
e.g., based on simulations or by analyzing data or operational 
real-world CPSs.  
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
Ensuring device and system integrity is an essential 
security feature for cyber physical systems and the 
(industrial) Internet of Things. This must be ensured from the 
beginning using the security design principle of “defense in 
depth”. It allows to support system integrity based on the 
information provided from single components or devices that 
build the CPS.  
This paper proposed a framework for ensuring system 
integrity in flexibly adaptable cyber physical systems. With 
new concepts for flexible automation systems coming with 
Industrial IoT / Industry 4.0, the focus of system integrity 
clearly has to move from preventing changes to device and 
system configuration to having transparency on the device 
and system configuration and checking it for compliance.  
The approaches for integrity monitoring in industrial 
automation and control systems described in this paper 
focuses on the operational phase by relying on lifecycle 
attestations for single components building a CPS. This 
approach enhances the existing systems, with an attestation 
about a specific state in the lifecycle, which allows an 
industrial monitoring system to evaluate the current life cycle 
state with the expected one. This can be done in addition to 
classical system monitoring, which verifies configuration 
and system behavior against expected patterns.  
Integrity in a broader sense has to cover the whole life 
cycle, from development, secure procurement, secure 
manufacturing, and supply chain security up to the 
commissioning phase in the operational environment. This 
lifecycle information can then be used to enhance the current 
system state information. Due to the life cycle information 
available on the device or its associated management system, 
feedback to manufacturer can be provided in case of failure, 
in which the problem may be traced back to a specific 
production step. This also allows the manufacturer to better 
react in future versions of a device. It also allows for 
informing other users of the same component or systems 
about potential failure scenarios or situations. 
Security-critical operations of a device, e.g., use for 
control operations, provisioning operational keys, or 
providing sensitive commissioning data is performed only 
for devices being in an expected state. A device can be used 
for regular operational purposes only if, according to its 
lifecycle, it is in a valid lifecycle state, and if this lifecycle 
state has been established in a permitted way. 
A main objective of the described approach is to support 
the increase of CPS productivity that is coming with the 
flexible production of industry 4.0, supporting “lot size 1”. 
The described security approach supports a high flexibility of 
CPS reconfigurations while still ensuring an appropriate 
security level. Integrity of the CPS is not ensured by 
preventing changes to the CPS configuration, but by reliably 
determining performed configuration changes and by 
validating whether they are permitted.  
Possible future research could analyze systematically the 
impact of different security approaches on operational KPIs 
as productivity, defective goods, or whether tight production 
schedules are met by simulating complete CPS systems 
under different usage situations and under different attack 
scenarios. A further approach may be the integration of 
simulation into existing production environments using a 
digital twin. This digital twin would then be operated under 
the same conditions as the physical devices with the option 
to virtually manipulate parameters of the operational 
environment to stipulate extreme cases and thus better 
prepare for timely reactions to potential real events. While 
such analysis is considered to require some effort, it could 
provide the bases to come up with security designs for 
complex CPS that optimize operational KPIs while still 
reliably ensuring the targeted level of security.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Dynamic Trust Evaluation of Evolving 
Cyber Physical Systems”, CYBER 2022, The Seventh 
International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-
Systems, 
pp.19-24, 
2022, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=cyber
_2022_1_30_80022 [retrieved January, 2023] 
[2] IEC 62443, “Industrial Automation and Control System 
Security” 
(formerly 
ISA99), 
available 
from: 
http://isa99.isa.org/Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx 
[retrieved January, 2023] 
[3] European Commission, “Proposal for a directive of the 
European parliament and of the council on measures for a 
high common level of cybersecurity across the Union, 
repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148”, COM(2020) 823 final. 
2020/0359(COD), Dec. 2020, [Online]. Available from 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-

95
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2020: 
\ 
823:FIN 
[retrieved 
January, 2023] 
[4] R. Falk and S. Fries, “System Integrity Monitoring for 
Industrial Cyber Physical Systems”, International Journal On 
Advances in Security, volume 11, numbers 1&2, pp. 170-179, 
2018, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid
=sec_v11_n12_2018_14 [retrieved January, 2023]  
[5] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Enhancing the Resilience of Cyber-
Physical 
Systems 
by 
Protecting 
the 
Physical-World 
Interface”, International Journal On Advances in Security, 
volume 13, numbers 1 and 2, pp. 54-65, 2020, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
sec_v13_n12_2020_5 [retrieved January, 2023]  
[6] Plattform Industrie 4.0, “Industrie 4.0 Plug-and-produce for 
adaptable factories: example use case definition, models, and 
implementation”, Plattform Industrie 4.0 working paper, June 
2017, [Online]. Available from: https://www.plattform-
i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Publikation/Industrie-
40-Plug-and-Produce.pdf [retrieved January, 2023]  
[7] ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022 “Trustworthiness – vocabulary”, July 
2022. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/81608.html [retrieved January, 
2023] 
[8] N. G. Mohammadi, “Trustworthy cyber-physical systems: a 
systematic framework towards design and evaluation of trust 
and trustworthiness”, Springer, January 2019. 
[9] Y. Jiang, “Vulnerability analysis of critical infrastructures”, 
PhD thesis, University of Skövde, 2022, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Yuning-Jiang-
7/publication/363174252_PhD_Thesis_-
_Vulnerability_Analysis_for_Critical_Infrastructures/links/63
1467bd61e4553b9564e7ff/PhD-Thesis-Vulnerability-
Analysis-for-Critical-Infrastructures.pdf  
[retrieved January, 2023] 
[10] B. Northern, T. Burks, M. Hatcher, M. Rogers, and D. 
Ulybyshev, “VERCASM-CPS: vulnerability analysis and 
cyber 
risk 
assessment 
for 
cyber-physical 
systems”, 
Information 2021, 12(10), 408, MDPI, 2021 [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/12/10/408 
[retrieved January, 2023] 
[11] A. A. Malik and D. K. Tosh, “Dynamic risk assessment and 
analysis framework for large-scale cyber-physical systems”, 
SESA  22(30):1, EAI, 2022, [Online]. Available from: 
https://eudl.eu/doi/10.4108/eai.25-1-2022.172997 
[retrieved 
January, 2023]  
[12] M. 
Tapia, 
P. 
 
Thier, 
and 
S. 
Gößling-Reisemann, 
“Vulnerability and resilience of cyberphysical power systems 
– results from an empirical-based study”, artex paper 222, 
Univ. of Bremen, April 2020, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.uni-
bremen.de/fileadmin/user_upload/sites/artec/Publikationen/art
ec_Paper/222_paper.pdf  [retrieved January, 2023] 
[13] A. Akbarzadeh and S. K. Katsikas, “Dependency-based 
security risk assessment for cyber-physical systems”, 
International Journal of Information Security, Springer, 
August 
2022, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10207-022-00608-4 
[retrieved January, 2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[14] Trusted Computing Group, “Cyber resilient module and 
building block requirements”, Version 1.0 Revision 0.2, June 
2022, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/resource/cyber-resilient-
module-and-building-block-requirements/ [retrieved January, 
2023] 
[15] A. R. Regenscheid, "Platform firmware resiliency guidelines", 
SP800-193, NIST, May 2018, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.nist.gov/publications/platform-firmware-
resiliency-guidelines [retrieved January, 2023] 
[16] M. Segovia, J. Rubio-Hernan, A. R. Cavalli, and J. Garcia-
Alfaro, 
"Cyber-resilience 
evaluation 
of 
cyber-physical 
systems," 2020 IEEE 19th International Symposium on 
Network Computing and Applications (NCA), 2020, pp. 1-8. 
Available from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9306741 
[retrieved January, 2023] 
[17] A. Khazraei. S. Hallyburton, Q. Gao, Y. Wang, and M. Pajic, 
"Learning-based vulnerability analysis of cyber-physical 
systems", ACM/IEEE 13th International Conference on 
Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2022. Available from: 
https://cpsl.pratt.duke.edu/sites/cpsl.pratt.duke.edu/files/docs/
khazraei_iccps22.pdf [retrieved January, 2023] 
[18] P. England, R. Aigner, A. Marochko, D. Mattoon, R. Spiger, 
and S. Thom, “Cyber resilient platforms”, Microsoft 
Technical Report MSR-TR-2017-40, Sep. 2017, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/publication/cyber-resilient-platforms-overview/ 
[retrieved January, 2023]  
[19] Electronic Communications Resilience&Response Group, 
“EC-RRG resilience guidelines for providers of critical 
national telecommunications infrastructure”, version 0.7, 
March 
2008, 
available 
from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/62281/telecoms-ecrrg-
resilience-guidelines.pdf [retrieved January, 2023]  
[20] ISO/IEC 
27001, 
“Information 
technology 
– 
Security 
techniques – Information security management systems – 
Requirements”, 
October 
2013, 
available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/54534.html [retrieved January, 
2023]  
[21] IEC 62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
Network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels”, Edition 1.0, August 2013. 
Available 
from: 
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/7033 
[retrieved January, 2023] 
[22] IEC 62443-4.2:2019, “Security for industrial automation and 
control systems - Part 4-2: Technical security requirements 
for IACS components”, Feb. 2019. Available from: 
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/34421 [retrieved January, 
2023] 
[23] EN 303 645, “Cyber Security for Consumer Internet of 
Things: Baseline Requirements”, ETSI, V2.1.1 (2020-06), 
June 
2020. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/303600_303699/303645/
02.01.01_60/en_303645v020101p.pdf 
[retrieved 
January, 
2023] 
[24] D. Urbina, J. Giraldo, N. O. Tippenhauer, and A. Cardenas, 
“Attacking fieldbus communications in ICS: applications to 
the SWaT testbed”, Singapore Cyber-Security Conference 
(SG-CRC), IOS press, pp. 75–89, 2016, [Online]. Available 
from: http://ebooks.iospress.nl/volumearticle/42054 [retrieved 
January, 2023] 

