122
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Risk Assessment of Logical Attacks  
on a CEN/XFS-based ATM Platform 
 
Johannes Braeuer 
Dept. of Information Systems 
Johannes Kepler University Linz  
Linz, Austria 
email: johannes.braeuer@jku.at 
Bernadette Gmeiner 
Banking Automation 
KEBA AG 
Linz, Austria 
email: b.gmeiner@outlook.com 
Johannes Sametinger 
Dept. of Information Systems 
Johannes Kepler University Linz 
Linz, Austria 
email: johannes.sametinger@jku.at  
 
 
Abstract— Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) contain con-
siderable amounts of cash and process sensitive customer data 
to perform cash transactions and banking operations. In the 
past, criminals mainly focused on physical attacks to gain ac-
cess to cash inside an ATM’s safe. For example, they captured 
customer data on the magnetic strip of an ATM card with 
skimming devices during insertion of the card. These days, 
criminals increasingly use logical attacks to manipulate an 
ATM’s software in order to withdraw cash or to capture cus-
tomer data. To understand the risks that arise from such logi-
cal attacks, we have conducted a risk assessment of an ATM 
platform. This ATM platform is running in a real bank envi-
ronment and is built on the CEN/XFS specification. The result 
of this assessment has revealed the main issues that are respon-
sible for vulnerabilities of an ATM platform. The risk assess-
ment has identified effective countermeasures and has addi-
tionally provided a prioritization of activities for ATM manu-
facturers.  
Keywords— ATM security; logical ATM attacks; XFS; 
embedded system security; risk assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper represents an extended version of a previously 
published article [1]. It provides more details about the risk 
assessment and discusses the findings in a broader sense. 
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) have their roots 
back in the late 1930s, but they began to revolutionize the 
banking environment in the 1960s [2]. With the integration 
of real-time terminals, ATMs have been developed to data 
processing units that contained commercially available com-
puters. Today, almost all three million ATMs around the 
world are running on the operating system (OS) Windows 
[3]. On top of Windows, an ATM platform controls all pe-
ripheral devices and uses the OS to communicate with device 
drivers. The ATM platform also provides an interface to 
multi-vendor ATM software, i.e., bank applications that uti-
lize the functionality of the platform. Besides Windows, 
ATMs use the Internet Protocol (IP) for communication in 
the banking network [4]. Consequently, the ATM network is 
part of the banking network, which in turn is part of the In-
ternet. All in all, ATMs have developed from stand-alone 
equipment with simple cash dispensing capabilities to a net-
work of connected devices for bank transactions.  
ATMs contain a remarkable amount of cash for their dai-
ly operation. Moreover, they are available around the clock 
and often located off-premises [5]. They have always been 
an attractive target for thieves and fraudsters [6]. Fraudulent 
activities are not only attracted by cash, but also by data that 
is required to conduct bank transactions. A further type of 
ATM attacks addresses malicious activities that impair the 
computer or the network of ATMs. Known as logical attacks, 
there is the common opinion that they are becoming more 
sophisticated and based on a well-organized execution. For 
example, representatives of malware, such as Skimer, Plou-
tus, or Stuxnet are indicators that these attacks bring up new 
challenges in securing ATMs and for providing secure bank-
ing environments. Furthermore, the XFS specification – see 
Section V – that represents the main reference for ATM en-
gineers, is out-of-date and missing two-factor authentication 
for bank applications [7]. 
We will show an approach for the above mentioned prob-
lems and present additional details for implementing a risk 
assessment at an ATM. This risk assessment aims at provid-
ing information to select adequate countermeasures and con-
trols for mitigating the likelihood or impact of risks. We 
have conducted the risk assessment concentrating on logical 
risks of an existing ATM platform. While the scope of the 
assessment is limited to logical risks, the used approach can 
easily be extended to physical risks and risks resulting from 
card and currency fraud. Early results of the risk assessment 
presented in this paper have been published previously at a 
conference [1]. Here, we provide a more detailed view on the 
conducted risk assessment including a broader discussion of 
the identified countermeasures. Besides, we use more recent-
ly published information on problems of the specification 
that is used by ATM manufactures.  
In this paper, we will first provide an overview of attacks 
to ATMs as well as their countermeasures. We will then 
evaluate the countermeasures for logical attacks by a risk 
assessment. As a result, we can confirm that suggested coun-
termeasures work for the identified risks. Additionally, we 
prioritize these countermeasures and provide a guideline for 
those responsible for ATM security.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion II provides an overview of criminal activities in context 
of ATMs and discusses traditional attacks and counter-
measures. Section III concentrates on logical ATM security. 
In Section IV, the used risk assessment approach is present-
ed, which is then applied in Section V to determine the risks 
of an ATM platform. Findings are discussed in Section VI. 
Related work and a conclusion follow in Sections VII and 
VIII, respectively. 

123
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. 
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES  
An ATM is a cash dispensing machine with the capabil-
ity to credit or debit a customer account without human in-
tervention [2]. The term ATM has been used synonymously 
for cash machines, cash dispensers or cash recyclers. How-
ever, the designation ATM is inappropriate when a machine 
cannot perform a complete financial transaction initiated by 
the customer. In other words, an ATM has to support syn-
chronous or asynchronous electronic data processing opera-
tions in an online and real-time manner [2]. With these capa-
bilities in place, ATMs have revolutionized the way of bank-
ing. Their widespread dissemination has grown to a world-
wide use of around 2.8 million ATMs. This number is ex-
pected to reach 3.7 million by 2018 [8].  
ATMs have always been an attractive target for thieves. 
This problem is reinforced by the fact that ATMs are typical-
ly available 24/7, often located off-premises, and vulnerable 
to cash thefts [5]. However, ATM crime, including ATM 
fraud, goes beyond stealing cash inside the safe. Illegally 
obtaining personal information of customers, such as bank 
account data, card number, or PIN is an additional security 
issue related to ATMs [5][7]. While these digital assets do 
not provide an immediate profit, they can be sold on illegal 
credit card data markets [10]. From a general viewpoint, 
there are three different types of attacks: card and currency 
fraud, physical attacks and logical attacks [11]. Various In-
formation Technology (IT) security standards have been 
developed and vendors have recommended security concepts 
pertaining to ATMs [12]. The goal is to secure an entire 
ATM and its environment. Similar to ATM crime, ATM 
security can be divided into the three different core areas: 
namely, card and currency protection, physical security, and 
logical security. The former two are briefly addressed in the 
next subsections. Logical ATM security is more important to 
the context of our work and follows in Section III.  
A. Card and Currency Fraud 
Card and currency frauds include direct attacks to steal 
cash or cards as well as indirect attacks to steal sensitive 
cardholder data that is later used to create fake cards for 
fraudulent withdrawals [10]. The target of these attacks is a 
single ATM, which may be physically manipulated for 
skimming, card fishing and currency trapping. Skimming is 
the approach to install an additional device, called a card 
skimmer, to capture the card’s information on the magnetic 
strip. Lower tech card fishing and currency trapping focus on 
either card or cash capturing, typically using thin plates, thin 
metallic stripes, transparent plastic film, wires and hooks [5]. 
There are several security methods that deal with this threat 
category. Jitters, for example, vary speed and movement of 
cards or introduce motion. In other words, it distorts the 
magnetic stripe details and makes it difficult for the skimmer 
to read data while the card reader pulls the card into the 
ATM [13]. A further approach of an anti-skimming module 
is a jammer with the aim to disrupt a skimmer attached to the 
ATM dashboard. Instead of working on a mechanical level, a 
jammer uses an electromagnetic field to protect the cards’ 
magnetic strips. Hence, the card reader can generate an error 
code that can be traced by remote monitoring tools [5]. 
B. Physical Attacks 
Attacks that result in the physical damage of the entire 
ATM or a component thereof primarily focus on stealing 
cash from the safe [11]. But, some of these attacks are also 
conducted to prepare a further malicious activity on a single 
ATM. Vulnerable and easy targets for such attacks are off-
site ATMs that are open to the public, less protected and 
lighter compared to bank-located machines [14]. Physical 
security guidelines recommend seismic detectors, magnetic 
contacts, alarm control panels, access control and heat sen-
sors as alarm equipment [15]. Seismic detectors indicate 
abnormal vibrations and can cry havoc if an ATM is about to 
be raided. Heat sensors detect any form of unnatural temper-
ature rise. Volumetric detectors on the wall can detect 
movements in the ATM's surrounding area. Intelligent bank 
note neutralization or degradation systems use bank note 
staining. A trigger becomes activated in case an inapprop-
riate movement of the cassettes takes place. As a result, sto-
len banknotes get marked with a degradation agent or a dye. 
III. 
LOGICAL ATM SECURITY 
Logical attacks have become more sophisticated and their 
execution has typically been well organized [5][7][8]. Recent 
examples, such as Skimer [16], Ploutus [17], Stuxnet [18] 
and a logical attack demonstrated at the chaos computing 
club congress [19] are indicators that these attacks bring up 
new methods and approaches to ATM crime.  
ATM malware is designed to steal cardholder data and 
PINs or to withdraw cash [13][15]. Typically, malware hides 
in the system to remain undetected as long as possible. It 
impairs confidentiality, integrity and authenticity of transac-
tion data for its particular intention [5][10]. ATM networks 
are based on the Internet protocol and face the same attacks 
as other IP-related networks, e.g., denial of service (DoS), 
sniffing, man-in-the-middle attacks, or eavesdropping 
[3][10]. Communication between ATM and host can be used 
as entry point to launch remote attacks [5]. Even network 
devices like routers and switches can be targeted [4]. Logical 
security focuses on maintaining a secure network, protecting 
the OS and designing a system so that intruders cannot 
threaten cardholder's data and software components [5][10]. 
Subsequent subsections describe such measures. 
A. Cardholder Data Protection 
Sensitive data is the main target of logical attacks [22]. 
The Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard 
(DSS) is for the protection of sensitive cardholder and au-
thentication data. It proposes a set of twelve requirements 
divided into six areas [22]. Based on these requirements we 
have identified four security controls, which are needed to 
protect cardholder data:  
 
 
Change control - to guarantee that necessary and 
wanted changes are made only 
 
Data masking - to disguise cardholder data 
 
User access control - to restrict permsissions 
 
Password policy - to hamper password guessing 

124
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Host-based Firewall 
To operate a secure ATM network, logical ATM security 
systems must be in place [5]. A firewall and a monitoring 
system to analyze and authenticate connection attempts are 
recommended in order to build such a layer of defense [5]. 
Instead of installing a central firewall, an integrated firewall 
on the ATM is feasible, controlling network communications 
on the processes, protocols and ports level [10]. 
C. Application Control 
Traditional security software like antivirus software is 
used on desktop PCs to prevent unauthorized software exe-
cution. But, antivirus software requires processing power 
that often goes beyond the capabilities of an ATM and relies 
on a signature database that needs periodic updates. These 
updates can only provide protection against known malware. 
Consequently, malware prevention must operate within the 
limited resources and with a minimal “footprint” to avoid 
complications with ATM software [10]. Whitelisting restricts 
software running on an ATM to a known set of applications 
[10] that are tested and approved for execution. Unapproved 
software outside the list and malware are prohibited. 
D. Full Hard Disk Encryption 
Some logical attacks bypass security protection by boot-
ing the ATM from an alternative medium, such as a USB 
stick or CD-ROM. This circumvention provides the possibil-
ity to manipulate configurations or to put malware in place 
[23]. As a countermeasure, the ATM hard disk can be pro-
tected with full hard disk encryption [23]. In addition, it is 
recommended to encrypt data on an ATM's hard disk to 
make it unreadable in case of theft or unauthorized access 
[11]. Physically protecting the hard disk is an additional 
safeguard, because data access becomes more difficult.  
E. Patch Management 
Logical security includes the handling of software vul-
nerabilities by patch management to ensure the efficiency 
and security of ATMs in a timely and efficient manner. Con-
tinuous patch management provides protection against virus-
es, worms and known vulnerabilities within an OS [24]. An 
example in this context is the Slammer virus, which was 
responsible for network outages of different systems, such as 
ATMs with Windows [24]. The incident could have been 
prevented because Microsoft had provided a patch covering 
the exploited vulnerability six month before the virus spread 
out [24]. Needless to say, precautions have to be taken to 
avoid malicious misuse of update mechanisms. 
F. Device-specific Requirements 
Depending on the actual installation of ATMs, additional 
security controls are required for a higher level of defense. 
Examples of countermeasures include secure test utilities and 
device controls. Test utilities that are built in an ATM plat-
form must be protected via access control mechanisms. Ex-
ternally available devices, especially USB ports, must be 
controlled on BIOS or on OS level. 
IV. 
RISK ASSESSMENT 
Risks must be controlled by countermeasures or safe-
guards [25]. Risk management is an important part of an 
organization’s security program. It provides support in man-
aging information security risks associated with an 
organization's overall mission [26]. Risk management must 
repeatedly be conducted in periodical time spans [27]. Each 
iteration begins with risk assessment, which is initiated at a 
predefined time, e.g., once a year or after a major IT 
transformation [28]. It results in the identification, estimation 
and prioritization of IT risks based on the security goals of 
confidentiality, integrity and availability [25]. The result 
represents a temporary view that will be used for further risk 
management decisions [27]. 
A. Risk Model 
The risk model specifies key terms and assessable risk 
factors including their relationships [25]. It defines all factors 
that directly or indirectly determine the severity and level of 
a particular risk, such as assets, threat source, threat event, 
likelihood, impact and countermeasure. Assets represent 
resources of value that need to be protected [29]. A person, 
physical object, organizational process or implemented tech-
nology can represent an asset. A threat is the potential for a 
malicious or non-malicious event that will damage or com-
promise an asset [29], e.g., unauthorized modification, dis-
closure or destruction of system components and infor-
mation. Depending on the degree of detail and complexity, it 
is possible to specify a threat as a single event, action or cir-
cumstance; or as a set of these entities [25]. A vulnerability 
is a weakness in the defense mechanism that can be exploit-
ed by a threat to cause harm to an asset [27][29]. This weak-
ness can be related to security controls that either are missing 
or have been put in place but are somehow inefficient [25]. 
The likelihood of a risk consists of two aspects, i.e., the 
likelihood of occurrence (initiation of an attack) and the like-
lihood of success [25]. The likelihood of occurrence demon-
strates the probability of a threat to exploit a vulnerability or 
a set of vulnerabilities [25]. Factors that determine this like-
lihood value are predisposing conditions, the presence and 
effectiveness of deployed countermeasures and the consider-
ation of how certain the threat event is to occur. The likeli-
hood of success expresses the chance that an initiated threat 
event will cause an adverse impact without considering the 
magnitude of the harm [25].  
The impact describes the magnitude of expected harm on 
an organization [29]. To determine the impact, it is important 
to understand the value of the asset and the value of an un-
damaged system. Besides, it is advisable to consider an im-
pact not only as a one-time loss because it can have relation-
ships to other factors that cause consequential damage [25]. 
A risk is a combination of the likelihood that an identified 
threat will occur and the impact the threat will have on the 
assets under review [25]. Risk factors, such as threat, vulner-
ability, likelihood and impact determine the overall risk. Im-
pact and likelihood are used to define the risk level [28]. 

125
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Risk Assessment Process 
Different risk assessment processes, frameworks and 
methodologies build on the same underlying process 
structure, which may vary in abstraction level and granu-
larity [26]. These steps, which are listeted below, do not have 
to be strictly adhered to in sequential order. For example, it 
is useful to perform threat and vulnerability identification 
side by side to cover all risk possibilities. Also, some step 
iterations are necessary to get representative results [25]. 
1) Definition of Assets 
No action can be taken unless it is clarified what the as-
sets are. Asset definition seeks to identify the processes, 
applications and systems that are highly important and 
critical to the daily operation of an organization [29]. 
2) Identification of Threat Sources and Events 
Threat sources can be characterized based on their 
capability, intent and target to perform a malicious activity 
[25]. Once the list of sources is complete, threat events must 
be identified that can be initiated by a threat source. 
Predefined checklists are an easy way to verify whether the 
listed threat events can occur in the context of the 
assessment. But, an exclusive use of checklists can 
negatively influence the outcome because it may impair the 
free flow of creative thinking and discussing. An important 
step is the determination of the relevance of each threat 
event. If considered relevant, an event will be paired with all 
possible threat sources that can initiate it. 
3) Identification of Vulnerabilities and Predisposing 
Conditions 
Next, we have to identify vulnerabilities that can be 
exploited as well as the conditions that may increase or 
mitigate susceptibility. Tool support is feasible for this task. 
For example, vulnerability scanners automatically test inter-
nal and external system interfaces in order to find known and 
obvious weaknesses. 
4) Determination of Overall Likelihood 
The overall likelihood represents the probability that the 
threat exploits vulnerabilities against an asset [29]. To get an 
adequate value and to keep focused on specific aspects, the 
overall value is divided into likelihood of initiation/oc-
currence and likelihood of success. These are an assessment 
of the probability that a non-adversarial threat happens or an 
adversarial threat source launches an attack [25]. In contrast, 
the likelihood of success is the probability that an initiated 
threat event results in an adverse impact [25].  
5) Determination of Magnitude of Impact 
It is necessary to determine the impact the event will 
have on the organization [29]. For this task, the values of 
reviewed assets are an important input because they show the 
potential harm and the severity of the impact in case of a full 
or partial loss. The harm can be expressed in terms of 
monetary, technical, operational or human impact criteria 
[28]. 
6) Determination of Risk 
The risk level is determined by combing impact and 
overall likelihood [27]. It shows the degree to which an 
organization is threatened [25]. Formulas, matrices or meth-
ods that are used for merging likelihood and impact must be 
consistent and precisely defined. 
V. 
CASE STUDY 
The aim of this case study is a risk assessment to 
establish a baseline of risks faced by an ATM platform of a 
specific manufacturer. The applied approach identifies all 
threats, vulnerabilities and impacts that cause a potential risk 
to an ATM asset. The focus on the ATM platform limits our 
investigation to software aspects only. This is why the case 
study mainly concentrates on logical risks. We have to 
mention at this point that we refrain from describing attacks 
in too much detail because this would provide valuable 
information to potential attackers. However, the given 
information is sufficient for readers to follow the 
conclusions. 
A. System Characterization  
From a general point of view, the logical system structure 
of an ATM consists of three layers as shown in Figure 1. On 
the bottom end of the structure is the operating system, 
which builds the base of all layers above. Hence, the ATM 
platform uses the functionalities of the operating system in 
order to communicate with the hardware components. To 
utilize the features that are implemented in the ATM 
platform, the ATM platform provides a public interface to 
multi-vendor ATM software and bank applications. 
For providing a standardized interface to the layer above, 
the platform implements the eXtension for Financial 
Services (XFS) interface specification defined in CEN [31]. 
This programming specification has been published by the 
European Committee for Standardization (CEN) and is 
designed to control all peripheral devices of an ATM. XFS 
does not differ between a multi-vendor ATM software and a 
bank application, but considers both forms of an ATM 
software as a Windows-based XFS application. 
Figure 2 shows the XFS architecture that builds the 
foundation of the ATM platform. With reference to this 
illustration, the key element of XFS is the definition of a set 
of Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) and a 
 
Figure 1. Logical System Structures of an ATM. 
 

126
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
corresponding set of Service Provider Interfaces (SPIs). The 
API provides access to financial services for Windows-based 
XFS applications. The SPI is similar to the API, even though 
it is utilized for the direct communication of vendor-specific 
service providers. Each of the service providers represents a 
peripheral device of the ATM.  
1) XFS Manager 
The heart of the XFS architecture is the XFS manager 
that handles the overall management of the XFS subsystem. 
This component is responsible for establishing and mapping 
the communication between API and SPI. In addition, the 
XFS manager is concerned about synchronously or 
asynchronously calling the appropriate service provider. For 
this task, a service provider is identified by a logical name 
parameter, which is unique within each workstation. As 
support, the XFS manager uses the configuration information 
component. This component stores the logical name 
parameter and defines the relationships between the 
Windows-based XFS application and service providers. 
2) Service Providers 
Either a vendor of a peripheral device or the ATM 
manufacturer has to implement the service provider in order 
to translate the device features into XFS services. Due to the 
fact that the peripheral devices differ in their capabilities and 
applications, service providers are grouped according to 
device classes. For example, the two service providers, Card 
Reader and Cash Dispenser represented in Figure 2, belong 
to the device class Identification Card Device (IDC) and 
Cash Dispenser Module (CDM). Regardless of the device 
class, a service provider is responsible for the functionality 
of translating the generic XFS request to commands that are 
native to the used device. 
The main benefit of the XFS architecture is the fact that 
the XFS manager and the XFS applications are isolated from 
the communication between service providers and peripheral 
devices. As a result, vendors can individually develop their 
service providers, which are tailored to the devices and 
accessible through the XFS-API. Conversely, the XFS 
application that is using the ATM platform can be exchanged 
without changing the underlying implementation. While it 
would be desirable to not touch the ATM platform when 
changing the XFS application on the top, customizations are 
usually required due to some vague definitions in the XFS 
standard and different interpretations thereof. 
B. Logical Risk Assessment 
The risk assessment conducted in this case study is based 
on the risk assessment published in [25]. As defined in this 
document, the frst step focuses on the preparation of the 
assessment in order to establish the context. This includes the 
identification and definition of the purpose, scope, 
assumptions and the risk assessment methodology mentioned 
below. 
1) Purpose 
The purpose of this risk assessment is an implementation 
of an initial assessment to establish a baseline assessment of 
risks for the ATM platform. At the moment, the ATM 
manufacturer faces no security issues. This work is 
considered as preventive measure. In view of ensuring 
confidentiality, integrity and availability, the risk assessment 
identifies all logical threats, vulnerabilities and impacts to 
organizational operations, products and assets. This 
guarantees that the ATM manufacturer can offer a high level 
of software security. Additionally, the risk assessment must 
be reproducible, repeatable and extensible. 
2) Scope 
The ATM manufacturer sells its banking products in a 
business area that underlies different regulations designed to 
protect cash and sensitive data. Equivalent to these 
regulations, the scope of this risk assessment focuses on the 
protection of the same assets including the reputation of the 
company. Latter is part of the risk assessment because 
security issues are highly correlated to the public image of 
the ATM manufacturer and its products. 
3) Assumptions and Constraints 
The risk assessment ignores countermeasures, security 
solutions and security processes a financial institute or an 
independent ATM deployer has in place. Moreover, when 
evaluating risk factors such as threat sources, threat events, 
likelihood or impact, decisions are based on the worst case 
scenario. 
4) Information Sources 
Within the scope of the risk assessment, the ATM 
manufacturer provides security-related documents. These 
documents describe the platform architecture, planned and 
already implemented security mechanisms and possible 
threat scenarios. We use additional sources like ATM 
security guidelines [12] and best practice approaches for 
ATM security [30]. Besides this kind of explicit knowledge, 
the risk assessment is supported by expert interviews. The 
experts are employed at the ATM manufacturer and are 
divided into two groups. The first group contains technical 
staff with knowledge in developing the ATM platform. The 
second group has a deep understanding in operating the 
ATM platform for a financial institute or an independent 
ATM deployer. 
 
Figure 2. CEN/XFS Architecture. 
 

127
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3. Snippet from Threat Diagram: Sensitive Data Disclosure. 
5) Risk Assessment Process  
The utilized risk assessment process takes its cue from 
the process recommended by NIST. A difference to the 
proposed process is that the definition of assets is in front of 
the threat source and threat event identification. Although 
NIST defines asset identification as part of the preparation, 
this task is added as an additional step in order to point out 
the assets that are worthy to protect. Consequently, the 
applied risk assessment process consists of the following six 
steps: 
a) Definition of Assets 
The main assets are sensitive data, cash and the compa-
ny's reputation. Cash can be more precisely defined as real 
cash represented by bills and coins as well as book money 
transferred from one bank account to another. The general 
term of sensitive data summarizes data and information that 
refers to an individual or is required to secure the system. For 
instance, card data, personal identification number (PIN), 
account data or secret keys belong to this category. 
b) Identification of Threat Sources and Events 
We have derived threat sources by interviewing ATM 
platform engineers and customer solutions employees. The 
resulting sources are: attacker (or hacker), thief, cash in 
transit (CIT) employee, IT specialist (in data center), bank 
clerk, helpdesk employee, service technician and employee 
of ATM manufacturer. Threat events were identified in form 
of brainstorming sessions. Threats were grouped to catego-
ries, which were derived from the primary objective of the 
threat events or an important key passage in an entire sce-
nario:  
 Denial of Service, making the ATM platform una-
vailable to a customer by dominating some of its 
resources. 
 Malicious Software Injection, injecting malicious 
software, such as Trojan horses, viruses or worms 
at the OS level or the ATM platform level.  
 Sensitive Data Disclosure, gathering unprotected 
cardholder data.  
 Configuration File Modification, changing configu-
ration files of the ATM platform. 
 Privilege Settings Modification, modifying configu-
ration files, focusing on the change of the user ac-
cess control model to gain more privileges.  
 Software Component Modification, modifying an 
executable or an assembly of the ATM platform, 
assuming the adversary can decompile the target 
file. 
 Test Utility Exploitation, exploiting test utilities 
used by service technicians, IT specialists and ATM 
platform engineers for maintenance.  
 
 Eventually, the events were connected to threat sources 
and logically ordered to create entire scenarios. As a result, 
we have designed a directed graph for each threat group. For 
the graphical representation of the threat events, CORAS, a 
model-based method for security risk analysis [31], is used. 
By using this graphical approach, the risk assessment bene-
fits from several advantages.  
 For instance, CORAS improves the communication and 
interaction between the involved parties. Therefore, it pro-
vides a precise description of the system including its securi-
ty features in a simple format. Additionally, CORAS pro-
vides a tool to support the risk assessment team in document-
ing, maintaining and reporting the assessment result and as-
sumptions [31]. Figure 3 shows a snippet of the graph re-
garding the disclosure of sensitive data. With this graphical 
visualization on the table, the relevance of all threat scenari-
os was assessed and classified as either confirmed, likely, 
unlikely or not applicable. This is shown in Figure 3 by a 
label next to the threat source. 
c) Identification of Vulnerabilities 
In order to disclose vulnerabilities in the ATM platform, 
we have analyzed the threat scenarios based on countermea-
sures recommended in Section III. For instance, as is shown 
in Figure 3 by the second of the two lock symbols, missing 
hard disk encryption may allow a thief or service technician 
to access and read data on an ATM’s hard disk. 
d) e) Determination of Overall Likelihood and Magni-
tude of Impact 
 
We have derived the likelihood of occurrence from the 
characteristics of particular threat sources. These characteris-
tics had been determined in discussions with employees from 

128
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. DISTRIBUTION OF RISKS. 
Threat Group 
Risk Level 
very 
high 
high 
mod-
erate 
low 
very 
low 
Denial of Service 
- 
- 
- 
2 
- 
Malicious Software  
Injection 
- 
7 
40 
19 
- 
Sensitive Data Disclosure 
2 
8 
13 
- 
- 
Configuration File  
Modification 
1 
7 
13 
7 
- 
Privilege Settings  
Modification 
- 
1 
15 
14 
- 
Software Component 
Modification 
1 
7 
37 
- 
- 
Test Utility Exploitation 
- 
6 
12 
- 
- 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Likelihood Impact Diagram. 
the ATM manufacturer and included capabilities of threat 
sources as well as intent and targeting, see (24). The likeli-
hood of success has been determined by the vulnerabilities of 
the ATM platform. After the identification of both likelihood 
aspects (i.e., occurrence and success) they were combined to 
the overall likelihood of the threat scenario.  
The magnitude of impact is expressed by the final result 
of a threat scenario. Scenarios that were linked to the three 
assets of the ATM have been assessed as very high (10) or 
high (8) since they caused an immediate loss when they get 
stolen or damaged. Harm to the ATM manufacturer is evalu-
ated as high (8) and the impact of indirect harm is considered 
as moderate (5). The latter is weighted as moderate because a 
further threat scenario is necessary to actually cause damage. 
f) Determination of Risk 
Finally, the last step of the risk assessment is the risk de-
termination. The risk determination has the aim to aggregate 
all assessed aspects of the risk factors to a single value. 
Therefore, we have used a likelihood impact combination 
matrix as proposed by NIST; see in [25] on page I-1 of the 
appendix. According to this matrix the level of impact is 
heavier weighted than the likelihood. This idea is also ap-
plied in this case study because interview partners considered 
the impact as dominant determinant of the risk level.  
Based on the previous assessments of the overall likeli-
hood and magnitude of impact for each threat scenario, both 
determinants have been combined according to the matrix. 
As a result, a likelihood impact diagram illustrates the risks 
of each category, as shown by the example in Figure 4. The 
coloring of the diagram is based on the likelihood impact 
combination matrix and represents the five areas in which a 
risk can fall. For clarification, the ten-step scale on both axes 
is divided by five with the consequence that two steps count 
for one qualitative value. In the diagram a risk (caused by a 
single threat scenario) is indicated through a dot. The posi-
tion of this dot is horizontally defined by the estimation of its 
likelihood and vertically by its impact. 
The determination of the risk has been conducted for all 
seven threat groups by simply combining likelihood and im-
pact. As a result, Table I shows the distribution of risks 
across the seven threat groups. The numbers do not represent 
individual scenarios, but threat sources of such scenarios. For 
example, in Figure 3 we have one threat scenario with two 
different threat sources, i.e., thief and service technician. 
Table II changes the perspective and shows how counter-
measures affect risks of different risk levels. The letters A to 
F on the left correspond to Sections III.A through III.F as 
well as to Sections VI.A through VI.F. This table helps in 
identifying security controls that are useful to mitigate multi-
ple risks at once. Similar to Table I, the numbers do not rep-
resent single threat scenarios but threat sources. 
TABLE II. DISTRIBUTION OF COUNTERMEASURES. 
Countermeasure 
Risk Level 
very 
high 
high 
mod-
erate 
low 
very 
low 
A 
Change Control 
1 
7 
13 
7 
- 
Data Masking 
- 
1 
3 
- 
- 
User Access Con-
trol 
- 
1 
15 
14 
- 
Password Policy 
- 
1 
3 
- 
- 
B 
Host-based Fire-
wall 
2 
6 
4 
1 
- 
C 
Application Con-
trol 
1 
9 
38 
- 
- 
D 
Full Hard Disk  
Encryption 
- 
9 
55 
19 
- 
E 
Patch Management 
- 
2 
9 
7 
- 
F 
Securing Test  
Utilities 
- 
4 
8 
- 
- 
Device Control  
(for USB Port) 
- 
2 
1 
6 
- 
 

129
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The discussion about countermeasures in the literature 
reflects the result of the assessment in our case study. The 
case study additionally highlights security approaches and 
technologies, which were identified as most appropriate for 
dealing with logical ATM risks. 
A. Cardholder Data Protection 
We have identified change control and efficient user 
access control as most appropriate for protecting cardholder 
data and also for threat scenarios that focus on settings 
changes or software components of a running ATM plat-
form. The main purpose is to guarantee that neither unneces-
sary nor unwanted changes are made. A change control sys-
tem also supports the documentation of modifications, en-
sures that resources are used efficiently and services are not 
unnecessarily disrupted. With reference to ATMs, it can be 
additionally applied for ensuring PCI compliance because 
the change control system provides an overview of software 
that is deployed within the ATM environment. Although data 
masking is activated by default by the investigated ATM 
platform, there are threat sources capable to disable this fea-
ture. Consequently, the approach of obfuscating data be-
comes inadequate if user access control is not in place. The 
most efficient way of implementing a user access control 
mechanism is by applying the user management that comes 
with the OS. Not a technical but an organizational counter-
measure is the implementation of a password policy, which 
enforces a periodical change of passwords that are either 
used for locking user accounts or for switching to the 
maintenance mode of the ATM platform. 
B. Host-based Firewall 
Malicious use of the network interface can be mitigated 
through a host-based firewall. Such a firewall should work 
on the level of protocols, ports and processes. In other words, 
the configuration of the firewall must specify the protocol 
and port that can be used by a particular process for estab-
lishing an outgoing connection. The same applies for pro-
cesses that are receiving incoming traffic. All ports and pro-
tocols that are not in use must be blocked by default. 
By configuring the firewall for each process and closing 
all other connections, it is unlikely that an adversary can dis-
cover an unauthorized port or protocol. Moreover, it is not 
possible to open a connection to transmit sensitive data over 
the network. So, malware that collects data on an ATM plat-
form cannot communicate with a receiving service due to the 
exclusive utilization of open ports and protocols. 
C. Application Control 
 Other threat events are focused on installing malicious 
code on the ATM platform. After the infection of the target, 
this malware hides in the system and can be activated 
through an adversary. Examples of such malware are 
discussed in Section III. In order to deal with this type of 
threat, a countermeasure must be in place that detects and 
avoids the execution of unauthorized software. In a 
workstation environment an antivirus solution should be 
utilized for this purpose. At these endpoints normally an 
Internet connection is available for regularly updating the 
signature database or transferring behavior-based malware 
data to an Internet service for further investigation. However, 
at an ATM the concept of a blacklist is inappropriate as 
mentioned in  Section III. Consequently, the protection 
against unauthorized software on an ATM must change the 
perspective and should focus on whitelisting.  
When establishing a whitelisting solution on an ATM, 
the execution of applications and executables is limited to a 
known set. This set includes files that are required to run the 
operating system and ATM platform. All other executable 
files that are not within the whitelist, even though they are 
not malicious, cannot be started. As a consequence, threat 
scenarios that install known or tailored malware on the ATM 
platform fail in the execution of the malicious software. In 
more detail, an adversary can apply different approaches to 
store the malicious file on the system without facing a 
restriction from the control of a whitelisting solution. 
However, the security protection raises an alert and stops the 
execution process when calling the executable.  
Additionally, threat scenarios with the attempt to use a 
modified software component of the ATM platform fail to 
execute the prepared file. The reason is that almost all 
whitelisting solutions calculate and store the hash value of a 
whitelisted executable in order to ensure integrity of the file. 
Hence, a slight modification can be detected because the 
difference in one bit results in another hash value. In case the 
hash values do not match, the executable is considered as 
untrusted and is prevented from running on the system. As 
an add-on to hash values, solutions make use of software 
certificates, trusted publisher or trusted directories. Latter can 
be a security weakness when a user has write permission on 
the directory. 
D. Full Hard Disk Encryption 
Hard disk encryption is a powerful countermeasure 
against alternatively booting the system for malicious activi-
ties. Several threat events require access to an ATM's com-
puter to boot the system from an alternative medium. Al-
though launching an alternative OS would work because the 
environment is running in the RAM, access to the encrypted 
hard disk fails. As a result, an adversary is not able to search 
for sensitive data, to drop malicious files, to collect executa-
bles and dynamic link libraries from the ATM platform or to 
change the privileges of restricted objects.  
Furthermore, hard disk encryption tones down threat sce-
narios that concentrate on stealing or exchanging a hard disk 
inasmuch as an encrypted hard disk is linked to the computer 
and cannot be used on another system. A Trusted Platform 
Module (TPM) chip, which is mounted on the main board of 
the computer, can be used to establish this connection. Other 
approaches do not require additional hardware, but can com-
pute the encryption key based on unique characteristics of 
installed hardware components or network location of the 
ATM. Consequently, exchanging the hard disk is useless as 
long as the surrounding environment cannot be made availa-
ble. 

130
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Patch Management 
A fundamental base for an effective patch management is 
appropriate hardening of a system. Compared to a firewall 
that works at the network side, system hardening focuses on 
the OS level and removes or disables all unnecessary appli-
cations, users, logins and services. For instance, non-
essential applications, which may offer useful features to a 
user at a workstation, must be removed because they could 
provide a backdoor to an ATM environment. Next to harden-
ing, a rule policy with defined user privileges must be in 
place. The reason is that managing a distributed system like 
an ATM network still provides a vector for the installation of 
malware by maintenance staff. Based on that groundwork, a 
continuous patch management allows a financial institute to 
provide protection against known viruses, worms and vul-
nerabilities within an OS.  
F. Device-specific Requirements 
For dealing with the potential danger arising from test 
tools used by ATM platform engineers, service technicians 
and IT specialists, it is important that these tools function 
only under certain circumstances. Especially, when the ATM 
is in maintenance mode, the tools should support the activi-
ties on the ATM. But, in all other cases they must be disa-
bled. Device control comes into play when the USB ports of 
an ATM represent possible entry points for a malicious ac-
tivity. Similar to the concept of application control, device 
control can be implemented by whitelisting solutions too. 
Instead of blocking an application, a whitelisting solution 
can block the USB driver resulting in disabled USB ports.  
VII. RELATED WORK 
This section highlights related work in the area of ATM 
security. Financial institutions argue that releasing any tech-
nical information about the implementation of an ATM 
would threaten the security of the devices. Consequently, it 
is difficult to find work that deals with the risk assessment of 
ATMs. Notwithstanding, some publications discuss security 
challenges in operating an ATM.  
A. Card and Currency Fraud 
In the summary of an ATM risk assessment, DeSomer 
demonstrates card skimming as the highest ATM risk [32]. 
In order to detect a card skimming device or the installation 
of a camera for PIN capturing, the author highlights risk mit-
igation measures, such as jitter devices, lighting improve-
ments or fraudulent device inhibitors. Furthermore, the arti-
cle provides recommendations for choosing a nonmanipulat-
ed ATM and for using the ATM card in a secure manner. 
With focus on installed ATMs in Minna, Nigeria, 
Adepoju and Alhassan show the result of their empirical 
research, which analyzes the ATM usage in combination 
with fraudulent activities in this area [33]. The authors come 
to the conclusion that most of the fraudulent activities are 
skimming attacks and PIN thefts by various means. Moreo-
ver, they point out that fraudsters are able to keep on track 
with the further development of ATMs, but banks do not 
install adequate countermeasures to deal with these types of 
threats.  
By conducting an additional survey about ATM security 
in Nigeria, Adesuyi et al. derive a similar result like Adepoju 
and Alhassan [34]. They highlight that some of the security 
measures of an ATM are obsolete and inadequate. Fraudu-
lent activities on can be easily performed on an ATM. In 
order to overcome this problem, the work proposes im-
provements in the authentication process by installing a fin-
ger vein technology or a facial recognition system. 
B. Logical ATM Attacks 
A work that investigates the security of ATMs from a 
logical viewpoint has been conducted by Bradbury in 2010 
[21]. According to this study, logical fraud activities on 
ATMs are increasing and executed as organized and highly 
sophisticated attack. Besides, adversaries are capable to ma-
nipulate the software inside of ATM to directly withdraw 
money. The severity of this issue is underlined by the fact 
that both banks and customers are facing heavy losses. 
C. ATM Risk Management 
In the article titled ATM Risk Management and Controls, 
Rasiah discusses the topic of an ATM risk assessment like 
this paper. But in contrast to our technical perspective, Ra-
siah adapts a non-technical approach and investigates the risk 
management and controls by defining general ATM security 
goals [35]. At the beginning, the work highlights the main 
points of ATM crime and ATM security as mentioned in 
Sections II and III, respectively. Without going into details, 
the work provides a general overview on ATM risk related 
topics. For instance, it provides recommendations for han-
dling stolen cards and for mailing the PIN to the customer. 
As a conclusion, the author points out that these issues have 
become a nationwide problem and banks must meet certain 
standards to guarantee a secure banking environment. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Automated teller machines have become indispensable in 
today's banking environment. Although customers primarily 
use ATMs for withdrawing money, the further development 
in this area has integrated additional features for other bank-
ing activities. This further development is the reason that an 
ATM is widely accepted and considered secure. However, it 
is also an attractive target for criminals especially because it 
processes financial customer transactions and contains real 
cash. In order to protect the money and customer data inside 
an ATM, it is essential to understand the threats and their 
risks. 
In this paper, we have discussed various aspects of ATM 
security, i.e., card and currency fraud, physical attacks as 
well as logical attacks. Logical risks of a specific ATM have 
been assessed in a case study to evaluate and prioritize ap-
propriate countermeasures. The risk assessment has provided 
information about countermeasures in general and their im-
portance in particular. This allows the ATM manufacturer to 
better plan resources for security and concentrate on the most 
important countermeasures first. Also, we have found out 
that countermeasures suggested in the literature are effective 
for the identified risks. By multiplying risk levels and the 
number of threat sources of Table II, we have identified ap-

131
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
plication control, full hard disk encryption, and user access 
control to be most effective, as they provide protection to 
most identified risks. A host-based firewall is also a must for 
ATM security, as it protects against very high risks.  
Future work should focus on the consideration of addi-
tional adversarial threat sources, such as cyber criminals or 
cyber terrorists. Compared to the threat sources discussed in 
this work, these groups represent structured organizations 
with advanced skills for conducting sophisticated attacks. In 
the subject area of ATM security it is commonly accepted 
that these groups are gaining power. Another category of 
threat sources, which we did not consider in this paper, is the 
group of competitors in the field of ATM development. 
Threats outgoing from competitors are interesting for inves-
tigation because they would primarily focus on disturbing 
the availability of the targeted ATM in order to damage the 
manufacturer's reputation. Furthermore, this risk assessment 
is limited to the operating system and ATM platform. Con-
sequently, future work could consider the entire software 
stack including multi-vendor ATM software or a bank appli-
cation on the top of the ATM platform. When a risk assess-
ment contains multi-vendor ATM software, the main atten-
tion should concentrate on the interface to the ATM plat-
form. The reason is that the interface can contain an unclosed 
entry point for malicious software. This vulnerability can be 
unknowingly exploited, even though both the ATM platform 
and multi-vendor ATM software are functioning correctly.  
ATM frauds not only cause financial loss to financial in-
stitutes or independent ATM providers, but they also under-
mine customers' confidence in the use of ATMs. In order to 
deal with this issue and to provide a secure environment for 
the installed ATMs, it is important to understand the associ-
ated risks. A contribution to this challenge is made by this 
work, which emphasizes the consideration of ATM fraud 
from a logical perspective. This should help to integrate ade-
quate countermeasures in order to make it difficult to con-
duct and successfully complete an attack. 
REFERENCE 
[1] 
J. Braeuer, B. Gmeiner, and J. Sametinger, “ATM 
Security: A Case Study of a Logical Risk Assess-
ment,” ICSEA 2015, Tenth International Conference 
on Software Engineering Advances, 2015, pp. 355–
362. 
[2] 
B. Batiz-Lazo and R. Reid, “The Development of 
Cash-Dispensing Technology in the UK,” IEEE Ann. 
Hist. Comput., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 32–45, 2011. 
[3] 
T. Kaltschmid, “95 Prozent aller Geldautomaten lau-
fen mit Windows XP,” heise online. Available: 
http://www.heise.de/newsticker/meldung/95-Prozent-
aller-Geldautomaten-laufen-mit-Windows-XP-
2088583.html. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[4] 
C. Benecke and U. Ellermann, "Securing Classical IP 
over ATM Networks," in Proceedings of the 7th con-
ference on usenix security symposium (SSYM ’98), 
Berkeley, CA, US, 1998, pp. 1–11. 
[5] 
Diebold, “ATM Fraud and Security,” Diebold, 2012. 
Available: http://securens.in/pdfs/KnowledgeCenter/
5_ATM%20Fraud%20and%20Security.pdf. 
[Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[6] 
R. T. Guerette and R. V. Clarke, “Product Life Cycles 
and Crime: Automated Teller Machines and Rob-
bery,” Secur. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 7–18, 2003. 
[7] 
Kasperksy Lab, “Jackpot am Geldautomaten: Wie 
man mit oder ohne Malware zu Bargeld kommen 
kann - Securelist,” SecureList, 07-Feb-2016. Availa-
ble: 
https://de.securelist.com/analysis/veroffentlich
ungen/71316/malware-and-non-malware-ways-for-
atm-jackpotting-extended-cut/. [Accessed: 14-Nov-
2016]. 
[8] 
RBR, “Global ATM Market and Forecasts to 2018,” 
Retail Bank. Res., vol. 2013. 
[9] 
ENISA, “ATM Crime: Overview of the European 
situation and golden rules on how to avoid it,” 2009. 
[10] GMV, “Protect your automatic teller machines 
against logical fraud,” 2011. Available: http://www.
gmv.com/export/sites/gmv/DocumentosPDF/checker/ 
WhitePaper_checker.pdf. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[11] S. Chafai, “Bank Fraud & ATM Security,” InfoSec 
Institute, 2012. Available: http://resources.infosec
institute.com/bank-fraud-atm-security/. 
[Accessed: 
14-Nov-2016]. 
[12] PCI, “Information Supplement PCI PTS ATM Securi-
ty Guidelines,” PCI Security Standards Council, 
2013. Available: https://www.pcisecuritystandards.
org/pdfs/PCI_ATM_Security_Guidelines_Info_Suppl
ement.pdf. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[13] F. Lowe, “ATM community promotes jitter technolo-
gy to combat ATM skimming,” ATMMarketplace, 
2010. Available: http://www.atmmarketplace.com/
article/178496/ATMcommunity-promotes-jitter-tech
nology-to-combat-ATM-skimming. [Accessed: 14-
Nov-2016]. 
[14] T. Kitten, “ATM Attacks Buck the Trend,” BankIn-
foSecurity, 2010. Available: http://www.bankinfo
security.com/atm-attacks-buck-trend-a-2786. 
[Ac-
cessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[15] ATMSWG, “Best Practice For Physical ATM Securi-
ty,” ATM Security Working Group, 2009. Available: 
http://www.link.co.uk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Best
_practice_for_physical_ATM_security.pdf. 
[Ac-
cessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[16] DrWeb, “Trojan.Skimer.18 infects ATMs,” Doctor 
Web. 
Available: 
http://news.drweb.com/?i=4167. 
[Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[17] J. Leyden, “Easily picked CD-ROM drive locks let 
Mexican banditos nick ATM cash,” BusinessWeek: 
Technology. Available: http://www.theregister.co.uk/
2013/10/11/mexico_atm_malware_scam/. [Accessed: 
14-Nov-2016]. 
[18] Metro, “Stuxnet worm ‘could be used to hit ATMs 
and power plants,’” Metro. Available:  
http://metro.co.uk/2010/11/25/stuxnet-worm-could-

132
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be-used-to-hit-atms-and-power-plants-591077/.  
[Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[19] 30C3, “Electronic Bank Robberies - Stealing Money 
from ATMs with Malware,” presented at the 30th 
Chaos Communication Congress (30C3), 2013. 
[20] R. Munro, “Malware steals ATM accounts and PIN 
codes,” theInquirer, 2009. Available: http://www.
theinquirer.net/inquirer/news/1184568/malware-
steals-atm-accounts-pin-codes. [Accessed: 14-Nov-
2016]. 
[21] D. Bradbury, “A hole in the security wall: ATM hack-
ing,” Netw. Secur., vol. 2010, no. 6, pp. 12–15, 2010. 
[22] PCI, “PCI DSS - Requirements and Security Assess-
ment Procedures,” PCI Security Standards Council, 
2013. Available: http://de.pcisecuritystandards.org/
_onelink_/pcisecurity/en2de/minisite/en/docs/PCI_DS
S_v3.pdf. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[23] J. J. Leon, “The case of ATM Hard Disk Encryption,” 
RBR Bank. Autom. Bull., vol. 318, pp. 11–11, 2013. 
[24] H. Cavusoglu, H. Cavusoglu, and J. Zhang, “Econom-
ics Of Security Patch Management,” in Proceedings 
of the The Fifth Workshop on the Economics of In-
formation Security (WEIS 2006), Cambridge, UK, 
2006. 
[25] “NIST Special Publication 800-30 Revision 1, Guide 
for Conducting Risk Assessments,” National Institute 
of Standards and Technology, 2012. Available: 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecial
publication800-30r1.pdf.  [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[26] G. Stoneburner, A. Y. Goguen, and A. Feringa, “SP 
800-30. Risk Management Guide for Information 
Technology Systems,” National Institute of Standards 
& Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, US, 2002. 
[27] R. K. Rainer, C. A. Snyder, and H. H. Carr, “Risk 
Analysis for Information Technology,” J. Manag. Inf. 
Syst., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 129–147, 1991. 
[28] ENISA, “Risk Management: Implementation princi-
ples and Inventories for Risk Management/Risk As-
sessment methods and tools.,” 2006. Available: 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/risk-manageme
nt/current-risk/risk-management-inventory/files/deli
verables/risk-management-principles-and-inventories-
for-risk-management-risk-assessment-methods-and-
tools. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016]. 
[29] T. R. Peltier, Information Security Fundamentals, Se-
cond Edition. Boca Raton, FL, US: CRC Press, 2013. 
[30] “Best Practices for ATM Security,” GRGBanking, 
May 2011. 
[31] F. Braber, I. Hogganvik, M. S. Lund, K. Stølen, and 
F. Vraalsen, “Model-based Security Analysis in Sev-
en Steps — a Guided Tour to the CORAS Method,” 
BT Technol. J., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 101–117, Jan. 2007. 
[32] F. DeSomer, “ATM Threat and Risk Mitigation,” 
Thai-American Business, vol. 2, pp. 28–29, 2008. 
[33] A. S. Adepoju and M. E. Alhassan, “Challenges of 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Usage and Fraud 
Occurrences in Nigeria - A Case Study of Selected 
Banks in Minna Metropolis,” J. Internet Bank. Com-
mer., vol. 15, no. 2, 2010. 
[34] F. A. Adesuyi, A. A. Solomon, Y. D. Robert, and O. 
I. Alabi, “A Survey of ATM Security Implementation 
within the Nigerian Banking Environment,” J. Inter-
net Bank. Commer., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–16. 
[35] D. Rasiah, “ATM Risk Management and Controls,” 
Eur. J. Econ. Finance Adm. Sci., vol. 21, pp. 161–
171. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

