Secure Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Communication:
Secure Roadside Stations, Key Management, and
Crypto Agility
Markus Ullmann∗ †, Christian Wieschebrink∗, Thomas Strubbe∗, and Dennis K¨ugler∗
∗ Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security
D-53133 Bonn, Germany
Email: {markus.ullmann christian.wieschebrink thomas.strubbe dennis.kuegler}@bsi.bund.de
† University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhine-Sieg
Institute for Security Research
D-53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Email: markus.ullmann@h-brs.de
Abstract—With the rising interest in vehicular communication
systems many proposals for secure vehicle-to-vehicle commu-
nication were made in recent years. Also, several standard-
ization activities concerning the security and privacy measures
in these communication systems were initiated in Europe and
in US. Here, we discuss some limitations for secure vehicle-
to-infrastructure communication in the existing standards of
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute. Next, a
vulnerability analysis for roadside stations on one side and
security and privacy requirements for roadside stations on the
other side are given. Afterwards, a proposal for a multi-domain
public key architecture for intelligent transport systems, which
considers the necessities of road infrastructure authorities and
vehicle manufacturers, is introduced. The domains of the public
key infrastructure are cryptographically linked based on local
trust lists. In addition, a crypto agility concept is suggested, which
takes adaptation of key length and cryptographic algorithms
during PKI operation into account.
Keywords–Vehicular Ad hoc Networks; Vehicle-to-Vehicle Com-
munication; Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Communication; Intelligent
Transport System; Public Key Infrastructure
I.
INTRODUCTION
Vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V)
and
vehicle-to-infrastructure
communication (V2I) (consolidated V2X) has been discussed
intensively in recent years. To specify use cases and prepare
the necessary standardizations for the V2X communication,
the Car2Car Communication Consortium was initiated by
European vehicle manufacturers, equipment suppliers, research
organisations and other partners.
The wireless communication technology for cooperative
V2X communication is based on the IEEE 802.11p standard. A
frequency spectrum in the 5.9 GHz range has been allocated on
a harmonized basis in Europe in line with similar allocations
in US. The neccessary speciﬁcation and standardization in Eu-
rope is done by the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI). This includes the security standardization as
well.
The ETSI standards for intelligent transport systems (ITS)
specify a basis set of applications, like emergency vehicle
warning, trafﬁc light optimal speed advisory or co-operative
local services (e.g., automatic access control and parking
management). Different types of messages are deﬁned for
information exchange to support these use cases (see Section
III). According the ETSI speciﬁcations messages shall be
digitally signed by the sender (vehicles or roadside stations)
to guarantee message integrity and authenticity. In order to
issue and authenticate the corresponding cryptographic keys a
suitable public key infrastructure (PKI) has to be established.
A ﬁrst analysis of the current ETSI speciﬁcations and a
proposal for a PKI, which regards the needs of infrastructure
authorities and vehicle manufacturer was given in [1].
The ﬁrst milestone in applying this technology in a realistic
setting was the SimTD project with more than 100 vehicles
equipped with V2V communication technology in the Frank-
furt area in Germany in 2012 and 2013, see [2]. In a next step,
the V2X technology will be deployed in large scale intelligent
mobility infrastructure projects, for example, SCOOP@F [3]
in France and the C-ITS corridor Rotterdam-Frankfurt-Vienna
[4]. The main objective of the C-ITS corridor project is to
increase road safety and provide the basis for an improved
trafﬁc ﬂow.
In the C-ITS project roads work warning trailers are
equipped with a digital gateway (RWWG) to communicate
with the bypassing vehicles.
Two services are planned in the C-ITS corridor project:
•
Send warning information via the road works warning
gateway to the vehicles within the radio range. This
message can be displayed in the infotainment device
of the vehicle to inform the driver about the existing
road works. So, the driver will be informed about the
existing road works much earlier than today.
•
Collect short range messages of bypassing vehicles by
the RWWG to establish a trafﬁc situation overview.
The purpose of the SCOOP@F project is to enhance the
road safety and the travel quality. Therefore, ﬁve tests sites are
established (e.g., Paris-Strasbourg highway, Bordeaux and its
by-pass road) to examine V2X communication and to evaluate
new services. In this project 3000 vehicles and 2000 km of
streets will be equipped with ITS communication technology.
This communication infrastructure facilitates the communi-
cation between vehicles and roadside stations to exchange
80
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Road works warning trailer with digital road works warning
gateway to communicate with the bypassing vehicles within the motorway
C-ITS corridor Rotterdam-Frankfurt-Vienna
information. Vehicles communicate their geographic position,
speed, obstacles, etc. while ITS roadside stations broadcast
information concerning trafﬁc conditions, works, speed limit,
etc.
These projects mark only the very beginning of ITS tech-
nology deployment in Europe. Further plans like the integra-
tion of V2X gateways in roadside emergency telephones, sign
gantries, etc. are already made.
The establishment of exhaustive V2X communication re-
quires that existing physical infrastructure components (road
works warning, road signs, lights, emergy telephones, etc.) are
replaced by digitalized versions or upgraded with ITS commu-
nication gateways. However, ITS roadside stations (IRS) are
often located in untrusted environments. If no effective security
measures are taken physical manipulation of IRS in order to
distribute false messages is easy. Therefore, the question arises
which attacks are conceivable and which security measures has
to be chosen so that vehicles can trust messages originating
from ITS roadside stations. The importance of trust in V2X
messages of ITS roadside stations will increase over time espe-
cially if automated vehicles will use the electronic information
for vehicle control (e.g., adapt vehicle speed according to
trafﬁc light state).
In this paper, we regard the secure V2X communication
especially from an infrastructure perspective. We identify
measures that are needed so that a vehicle can trust V2X
messages sent by ITS roadside stations. Therefore, we present
results of a risk analysis for ITS roadside stations and derive
security requirements. The security requirements adress the
architecture of an IRS as well as the key management. Due
to the speciﬁed usage of asymmetric cryptography (digital
signature algorithms) a public key infrastructure is required. A
number of practical considerations has to be taken into account
when designing such a PKI.
•
Many different stakeholders like vehicle manufac-
turers, transportation infrastructure authorities, etc.
participate in ITS, especially in multi-national (e.g.,
European) systems. The PKI should provide ﬂexibility
to support different operators managing the vehicles
and ITS roadside stations in their respective responsi-
bilities.
•
Requirements on cryptographic algorithms, domain
parameters, key lengths, etc. may change over time
due to new weaknesses and attacks or the increase
of computer performance. In general, this means that
a PKI needs a crypto agility concept to switch to a
new cryptographic setting during its (possibly long)
lifetime.
•
Revocation of certiﬁcates and distribution of certiﬁcate
revocation lists in time to all entities may turn out to
be challenging in complex ITS scenarios. A simple
alternative should be used to avoid distribution of
certiﬁcate revocation lists.
Moreover, we introduce a multi-domain PKI for intelligent
transport systems based on Local Trust Lists (LTL). This con-
cept considers a PKI domain for vehicles (ITS vehicle stations)
and different PKI domains for infrastructure components (ITS
roadside stations). A PKI domain for ITS roadside stations
is slightly different from the PKI concept proposed by [5].
Our approach guarantees that the infrastructure components
remain under control of the particular infrastructure authority.
In the ITS literature certiﬁcation authorities are termed very
different. Due to ongoing and trend-setting work of the security
working group of the C-ITS platform we will use the naming
conventions of this group. Certiﬁcation authorities, which issue
long term valid certiﬁcates are termed Enrolement Authority
(EA). Certiﬁcation authorities, which issue credential - or
pseudonymous certiﬁcates are termed Authorization Authority
(AA).
The PKI for ITS roadside stations (IRS PKI) is interop-
erable with the PKI for vehicles (IVS PKI). The IRS PKI
for ITS roadside stations consists of two parts: an Enrolement
Authority (EA) for issuing certiﬁcates for the identiﬁcation
of IRS gateways and an Authorization Authority (AA) for
issuing authorization certiﬁcates to IRS gateways. With the
81
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

AA we take the hostile environment of IRS gateways into
account. Although a PKI alone can not prevent local attacks on
ITS roadside stations, it can mitigate their effects to a certain
degree.
Our PKI proposal for ITS roadside stations supports crypto-
graphic agility in the sense that modiﬁcations of cryptographic
keys and algorithms during lifetime of the PKI are possible.
Finally, we derive necessary modiﬁcations of the existing
ETSI certiﬁcate format [6] to be compatible to our concept
because mechanisms for the delegation of rights and a crypto
agility approach are missing to date. Here, we address only
modiﬁcations to the ETSI certiﬁcate format, which are moti-
vated from an infrastructure perspective.
The following sections are organized as follows: Section
II is a description of related work. Section III provides a
brief overview of the secure V2V communication speciﬁed
in the according ETSI standards. Also, the suggested PKI
architecture for ITS vehicle stations (IVS PKI), speciﬁed in
[5], is described. Here, we state the problems if this IVS
PKI is used for issuing certiﬁcates for IRS gateways, too.
Security and privacy requirements for ITS roadside stations
are given in Section IV. In the next Section V, the multi-
domain PKI approach, the PKI concept for IRS gateways and
the crypto agility proposal are introduced. Finally, in Section
VI we summarize our results.
II.
RELATED WORK
Security and privacy issues in vehicular ad-hoc networks
(VANETs) are addressed in many research papers. A detailed
overview of attacks in VANETs is given by Ghassan Samara
et al. in [7]. A security and privacy architecture for pseudony-
mous message signing is described in [8]. Here, a public
key infrastructure is regarded, too. In [9], Julien Freudiger
et al. suggested mix zones for location privacy in vehicular
networks. Giorgio Calandriello et al. propose on-board, on-
the-ﬂy pseudonym certiﬁcate generation and self-certiﬁcation.
The authors developed this approach to alleviate one of the
most signiﬁcant limitations of the pseudonym-based approach:
the need for complex management. To achieve this, the use of
group signatures is proposed. Panagiotis Papadimitratos reports
the research status of secure vehicular communication in the
year 2008 [10]. Ma Di and Gene Tsusik give an overview about
security and privacy in emerging wireless networks including
VANETs [11]. Overall, a good overview concerning security
and privacy in V2X communication can be found in [12].
More technical research results are archieved in public
co-founded research projects. Here, we mention EVIVA [13]
and OVERSEE [14], both co-founded by the european union.
EVIVA addresses secure in-vehicle communication whereas
the main objectives of the OVERSEE platform are techniques
for strong isolation between independent applications to ensure
that vehicle functionality and safety cannot be harmed by any
other application.
A detailed analysis of privacy requirements and a compari-
son with the security requirements in VANETs is given in [15].
Further security and privacy concepts are presented in [16],
[17], [18], [19], and [20]. Wiedersheim et al. [21] analyzed
the location privacy in a speciﬁc communication scenario.
Vehicles send beacon messages periodically. The beacons only
carry the geographic position and an identiﬁer. To support
location privacy, the vehicles use pseudonymous identiﬁer that
are changed regularly. Assuming a passive attacker who is
able to eavesdrop the communication in a speciﬁc region the
attacker is able to track the vehicles with an accuracy of almost
100% if he uses the approach in [21].
A ﬁrst analysis of vehicular data in cooperative awareness
messages (CAM) and dezentralized environmental notiﬁcation
messages (DENM) messages like geographic position, speed,
etc. from a data protection perspective is given in [22]. In this
report CAM and DENM messages are regarded as personal
data.
Different trust models for multi-domain PKIs on a generic
level are described in [23], [24]. Here, we will follow the nam-
ing convention of [24]. It distinguishes between end entities
(EE), that are subject of a certiﬁcate, Certiﬁcation Authorities
(CAs), that issue certiﬁcates, and root CAs, which are on
top of a hierarchy of CAs. In [5] Norbert Bissmeyer et al.
suggest a PKI for securing V2X communication. The Car2Car
communication consortium adopted this proposal. We outline
this IVS PKI in the following section.
III.
BRIEF OVERVIEW ON SECURE V2X
COMMUNICATION
A. Communication
First, the ETSI speciﬁcations deﬁne a basic set of applica-
tions for ITS, like
•
Active road safety (e.g., emergency vehicle warning,
slow vehicle indication),
•
Co-operative trafﬁc efﬁency (e.g., regular speed, limits
notiﬁcation),
•
Co-operative local services (e.g., automatic access
control and parking management), and
•
Global internet services (e.g., ﬂeet management, load-
ing zone management).
ITS applications are distributed among ITS stations that
can be equipped with multiple communication capabilities. To
date for V2X only broadcast communication based on IEEE
802.11p is provided. So, V2X is a short range communication
technology with a communication range of about 600 m in
open space.
The ETSI ITS architecture [25] distinguishes 4 different
ITS roles termed ITS station types:
•
ITS roadside stations, typically termed road side unit
(RSU),
•
ITS vehicle stations,
•
ITS central stations, e.g., trafﬁc operator or service
provider, and
•
ITS personal stations, e.g., a handheld device of a
cyclist or pedestrian such as a smart phone.
The ITS stations exchange information mainly based on
two different speciﬁed message types:
•
Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM), and
•
Dezentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Message
(DENM).
CAMs are comparable with beacon messages. They are
broadcasted periodically with a packet generation rate of 1 to
82
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Complete Message
Header
Signer_Info
Generation_Time
its_aid ITS-AID for CAM
Basis Container
ITS-Station Type
Last Geographic Position
Speed
Driving Direction
Longitudinal Acceleration
Curvature
Vehicle Length
Vehicle Width
Steering Angle
Lane Number
…
Vehicle Role
Lights
Trajectory
Emergency
Police
Fire Service
Road Works
Dangerous Goods
Safety Car
…
Signature
ECDSA Signature of this Message
Certificate
According Certificate for Signature Verification
CAM 
Information
High Frequency 
Container
Low Frequency 
Container
Special 
Container
Figure 2. Examplary message format of a CAM. The CAM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the basis container, a signature and the
appropriate certiﬁcate
10 Hz. Based on received CAM messages, ITS vehicle stations
can calculate a local dynamic trafﬁc map of their environment.
It is not planned to forward CAM messages hop-to-hop. Figure
2 illustrates the structure of a CAM. The CAM is speciﬁed in
detail in [26].
In contrast, the second message type, DENM, is event-
driven and indicate a speciﬁc safety situation, e.g., road works
warning (from an ITS roadside station) or a damaged vehicle
warning (from an ITS vehicle station). The DENM message
format is speciﬁed in detail in [27]. DENM messages can be
transmitted hop-by-hop. RWWGs in the C-ITS project transmit
DENM messages. Figure 3 illustrates the structure of a DENM.
B. Security and Privacy Architecture for Secure V2V Commu-
nication
1) Security: The designed security architecture [5] fulﬁlls
following security requirements:
1)
Entity authentication: For entity authentication, each
vehicular gateway has to be equipped with a long
term valid key pair (secret key and corresponding
public key EP K) and a corresponding long term valid
certiﬁcate Ecert. The key pair is generated at the
gateway and the long term valid certiﬁcate Ecert
is issued to a vehicle by the so called Enrolement
Authority (EA) at the beginning of the vehicle’s
lifetime. The EA is part of the PKI described below.
For the signatures ECDSA based on the NIST P-
256 elliptic curve is applied. Certiﬁcates have to be
structured according the deﬁned ETSI format, see [6].
The validity period of a Ecert is not speciﬁed to
date. That is to be speciﬁed within the common ITS
Figure 3. Examplary message format of a DENM. The DENM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the management container, a signature
and the appropriate certiﬁcate.
PKI policy, which is in progress. Its ﬁnal version is
planned for publication in autumn 2016.
2)
Message integrity and authentication: To realize mes-
sage integrity and authentication the CAMs and
DENMs are digitally signed using ECDSA, see Fig-
ures 2 and 3.
3)
Message freshness and location protection: Assuming
that ITS stations know their genuine geographic posi-
tion and genuine current time they can detect replayed
messages, because the geographic position and the
transmission time are part of CAMs and DENMs.
Long term certiﬁcates and pseudonymous certiﬁcates are
implemented based on the ETSI certiﬁcate format [6]. This
certiﬁcate format was designed for the automotive domain
and is still not widely applied yet. Primary design principle
is shortness of the certiﬁcate format due to the necessary
transmission over the wireless IEEE 802.11p channel.
2) Privacy: CAMs and DENMs should not reveal the
identity of the vehicle (sender anonymity). Furthermore, it
should not be possible to link messages of a vehicle (message
unlinkability) over a longer period of time. Both requirements
shall be sufﬁcient to assure location privacy of the vehicle
and his driver. Due to these privacy requirements, CAMs and
DENMs are signed using pseudonymous certiﬁcates, which
are not linked to an ITS vehicle station. Moreover, the used
key and the according certiﬁcates are changed periodically.
Therefore, an ITS vehicle station needs a set of pseudonymous
certiﬁcates valid for some period of time. The set size and the
pseudonym change frequency are not speciﬁed in [5] and will
also be speciﬁed within the common ITS PKI policy.
An Authorization Authority (AA) is responsible for the
83
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

issuing of pseudonymous certiﬁcates (Acert1, ..., AcertN ) to
the vehicles. Pseudonymous certiﬁcates will only be issued to
authenticated vehicles.
AA and EA operate under a root CA called ITS vehicle
station root CA (IVS-RCA). To date, following revocation
operations are provided: revocation of an EA and AA au-
thorization certiﬁcate and revocation of vehicular long term
certiﬁcates Ecert. The architecture of the IVS PKI domain is
shown in Figure 4.
3) Shortcomings of this approach: As mentioned above
the ETSI certiﬁcate format provides only elliptic curve cryp-
tography based on the NIST prime curve P-256, [28]. No
mechanism is provided to securely adapt key length or ECC
domain parameter or cryptographic algorithms if necessary. In
the meantime, the US National Security Agency (NSA) does
not recommend to use this elliptic curve any more, [29].
Unfortunately, no detailed argumentation on this issue, only
a hint of needed quantum resistant algorithms in a not too
distant future, is given by NSA. N. Koblitz and A. Menezes
attempt an evaluation of the various theories, speculations, and
interpretations that have been proposed for this sudden change
of course by the NSA [30].
The discussion shows that a crypto agility concept also for
V2X communication is required.
In the ﬁnal report of the C-ITS platform of the European
Commission the data elements of CAM and DENM messages
are rated as personal data, see [22]. This means, each vehicle
broadcasts periodically with its CAMs digitally signed private
data. Shortly spoken, each vehicle leaves a signed location
trace. Every entity within the communication range can receive
the data.
From our point of view, the pseudonym concept does not
solve the vehicular privacy requirements. However, a detailed
description of the V2V privacy problem is outside of the scope
of this paper.
C. Using the IVS PKI for IRS Roadside Stations
The IVS PKI domain shown in Figure 4 has been proposed
for issuing certiﬁcates to IRS gateways as well [5]. However,
security and privacy requirements for vehicles and infras-
tructure components are not necessarily identical. In contrast
to ITS vehicle stations, ITS roadside stations (road works
warning, trafﬁc lights, etc.) do not involve persons during
operation comparable to a motorist. Usually, they operate
without any human supervision. That is the reason that from
our point of view, IRS gateways do not have to regard any
privacy concerns. More details are given to this issue in Section
IV-C. As consequence, IRS gateways do not really need a
set of valid pseudonymous certiﬁcates at each time as it is
designed for vehicles. Instead, we propose that IRS gateways
need only one Authorization Certiﬁcate with a speciﬁc subject
name identifying the IRS for each time frame. Due to the
security considerations for IRS gateways, see Section IV-B,
the validity period of authorization certiﬁcates for ITS roadside
stations should be rather short. This means the requirements
for certiﬁcates for vehicles and roadside stations are different.
Moreover, arising security weaknesses of the used security
technology may be asessed differently by vehicle manufactur-
ers on one side and infrastructure authorities on the other side.
However, the rules of operation for a PKI domain are deﬁned
Acert_N
Acert_1
EA
AA
IVS-RCA
Ecert
...
IVS Domain
Figure 4. IVS PKI architecture promoted by the car2car communication
consortium for ITS vehicle stations. This PKI consists of the Root
Certiﬁcation Authority (IVS-RCA), the Enrolement Authority (EA) and the
Authorization Authority (AA)
in a single PKI policy, which will be speciﬁed by the root
certiﬁcation authority. For this reason, we propose a multi-
domain PKI architecture: individual ITS PKIs under control
of infrastructure autorities and an IVS PKI under control of
the vehicle manufacturers, which are cryptographically linked
to each other based on local trust lists (LTLs). The purpose of
local trust lists is described in Section V-D.
So, each individual PKI domain can specify its own PKI
policy for their speciﬁc needs. In addition, this multi-domain
PKI architecture ensures that IRS unit gateways remain under
control of the particular infrastructure authority. The idea of the
common ITS PKI policy in progress in the security working
group of the C-ITS platform of the EC DG MOVE is that
individual PKI requirements can be speciﬁed in Certiﬁcate
Practise Statements.
The concept of a multi-domain PKI architecture without
any superior root CA is not new and already mentioned in [24].
It has been applied globally for electronic passports for many
years. Here, each country operates its own root certiﬁcation
authority and has its own local trust list. The different national
root certiﬁcation authorities are cryptographically linked based
on local trust lists. This concept works quite well and seems
to be a good architecture approach for intelligent transport
systems, too. The beneﬁt of this approach is the possibility to
conﬁgure PKI domains as needed. A drawback of the multi-
domain PKI concept based on local trust lists is that each
84
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

PKI domain has to securely mange is own LTL. More details
concerning this issue can be found in Section V-C.
IV.
SECURITY - AND PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS FOR ITS
ROADSIDE STATIONS
A. Vulnerability Analysis
In this section, we give a brief vulnerability analysis
and formulate some security requirements for ITS roadside
stations. When analysing possible threats to an IRS the opera-
tional environment has to be taken into account. Different types
of ITS roadside stations operate in different environments with
different degrees of trustworthiness. For example, one may
assume that when a roadworks warning gateway is deployed
at a construction site it is more or less under constant super-
vision of the (trustworthy) roadworks personnel. On the other
hand, an IRS attached to trafﬁc lights may be located in an
unsupervised environment. In consequence, a trafﬁc lights IRS
may be subject to stronger attacks like hardware manipulation
and thereby must match stronger security requirements. In the
following, we take the conservative viewpoint and consider a
hostile environment.
In [31], several threats towards vehicles and ITS roadside
stations are analysed and corresponding (abstract) countermea-
sures are proposed. Summarizing the most important points of
[31] (and somewhat extending the analysis), starting from the
generic security goals availability, authenticity, integrity and
conﬁdentiality the following threats targeted at ITS roadside
stations can be identiﬁed. The security goals may refer to
incoming or outgoing messages.
•
Threats to availability
◦
jamming,
◦
injection of a large number of forged or re-
played messages.
•
Threats to authenticity
◦
masquerading (for example, as an legitimate
IRS),
◦
injection of forged messages or other data.
•
Threats to integrity
◦
injection of forged messages or other data,
◦
altering of messages previously sent by vehi-
cles,
◦
replay of messages,
◦
spooﬁng of GNSS information (or other sensor
data),
◦
spooﬁng time information.
•
Threats to conﬁdentiality
◦
extraction of sensitive information (for exam-
ple, cryptographic keys or other management
data).
Attacks can either be facilitated locally or remotely. For
example, forged messages can be either be transmitted via the
wireless interface or they can be injected via some hardware
interface at the IRS. Depending on the operational environment
of the IRS both attack locations have to be accounted for.
In the setting of ITS applications the data sent out by an
IRS is generally not considered conﬁdential since it is intended
to be used by any trafﬁc participant. (As seen above from the
perspective of data protection however the identity of vehicles
or at least motorist is considered sensitive information.) On
the other hand some cryptographic key material like signature
keys stored on an IRS must remain conﬁdential.
When implementing cryptographic mechanisms, these have
to protected themselves in particular when considering a local
attacker. For example, the keys for signing outgoing messages
have to be stored in such a manner that they cannot be extracted
since otherwise it can used by an attacker to masquerade as a
legitimate IRS and to forge outgoing messages. Furthermore, it
should not be possible to circumvent integrity and authenticity
checks on an IRS.
More generally, an important factor to ensure the above
security requirements is correct implementation. It should not
be possible to introduce false trafﬁc data or extract secret
keys by exploiting weaknesses in the software (including the
operating system) or hardware. In particular, it has to prevented
that malicious software is installed on an IRS (for example,
by an unprotected update procedure).
Cryptographic mechanisms themselves can be abused to
facilitate denial of service attacks. For example, digital signa-
tures require considerable computational effort for veriﬁcation.
An attacker (without the signing key) could produce and send
out a large number of correctly formatted messages containing
incorrect signatures. While checking these signatures the IRS
may be unable to verify messages from legitimate senders.
As shown in [32], with some effort it is possible to simulate
the signal of a Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS)
such that a wrong location is determined. This threatens the
integrity of the data transmitted by an IRS. A wrong location
of a roadworks site may be announced for example. It the
GNSS signal is used to adjust the internal clock wrong time
information may also be introduced. This can be possibly used
by an attacker to mount replay attacks where old (already sent)
messages are then accepted by the IRS.
B. Security Requirements
In addition to the security requirements in Section III-B
the following security requirements are derived from the above
vulnerability analysis.
•
Since IRS possibly are located in hostile environments
they should be equipped only with time restricted au-
thorization to limit the timeframe for possible misuse.
•
In order to protect secret key material the use of
a secure hardware element is proposed. This secure
element is hardened against side-channel and invasive
attacks so that key extraction becomes very difﬁcult.
Secret key material is generated on this device.
•
Only authentic and integrity protected (i.e., signed)
software or ﬁrmware updates shall be accepted by the
IRS.
Of course the connection of the IRS to the back-end system
also has to be protected in particular regarding authenticity and
integrity.
Attacks on the availability can be mitigated to some
extent by non-cryptographic means. For example, jamming
can be impeded by spread spectrum techniques like frequency
hopping [33]. In order to mitigate attacks exploiting the
computational overhead of cryptographics mechanisms fast
85
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

implementations in particular of the signature veriﬁcation
algorithm are required.
To counter GNSS attacks on ITS roadside stations the
geographic location of IRS with a ﬁxed geographic location
should be statically coded. Also, for time synchronization a
secure alternative to GNSS time synchronization should be
used.
The analysis given here should only be considered as
a starting point for more detailed security assessments for
different types of ITS roadside stations. Security requirements
for IRS gateways should be carefully speciﬁed in depth, e.g.,
in form of a Protection Proﬁle (PP) according to Common
Criteria.
If IRS gateways are veriﬁably resistant to active attacks
they can play an import role as separate trust anchors in a
cooperative ITS system, e.g., for implementing secure time
synchronization, distribution of CRLs, etc.
C. Privacy Requirements
Current vehicles are controlled by the driver. Due to this
issue, privacy concerns have to be regarded by the vehicular
broadcast communication. In contrast to vehicles, ITS roadside
stations are not directly controlled by a user. They operate
without any direct personal reference. So, during the sending
of messages of an IRS no personal data is revealed. Therefore,
no privacy requirements are needed.
But if ITS roadside stations receive and process vehicular
CAMs and DENMs privacy requirements may have to be
fulﬁlled because vehicular CAMs and DENMs are regarded
as personal data, see [22].
The main privacy requirement is to erase the personal
reference of the data on the ITS roadside station immediately
after the reception of it. If some use cases have to transmit
data from ITS roadside stations to trafﬁc control center,
only anonymized data should be send, e.g., realized by data
aggregation. Following this main requirement, we can isolate
the privacy problem on ITS roadside stations and do not
regard backend systems as well. If some use cases require
the storage of CAM respective DENM messages on an IRS,
e.g., to calculate a trafﬁc situation overview, the stored data
should be erased immediately after the processing of the data.
V.
IRS PKI CONCEPT
A. Role of Authorization Certiﬁcates for ITS Roadside Stations
The primary use case for IRS gateways is the transmission
of local trafﬁc information. Due to integrity and authenticity
reasons, these messages have to be signed. Therefore, the
IRS gateways need signature keys and according certiﬁcates.
ITS roadside stations do not have to regard any privacy
concerns, as explained in Section IV-C. Technically, this means
that IRS gateways do not have to have pseudonymous keys
and certiﬁcates. Instead, we propose that IRS gateways have
only one valid authorization key pair and one corresponding
authorization certiﬁcate at a time. Only in the transition phase
between two certiﬁcate validity periods an IRS gateway two
valid authorization certiﬁcates CcertN−1 and CcertN may be
necessary.
The IRS gateway should be implemented in such a way that
it acts in his designated role and transmits DENM messages
only if it owns a valid authorization certiﬁcate. By this a
possible misuse of IRS gateways is made more difﬁcult.
B. IRS PKI Architecture
As mentioned above, we propose that ITS roadside stations
have only one authorization key pair and one corresponding
authorization certiﬁcate Acert at each time. The secret key
corresponding to such a Acert is used for signing outgo-
ing messages, e.g., DENM messages. For this reason, these
certiﬁcates have to be implemented according to the ETSI
certiﬁcate format. Since it is technically challenging to dis-
tribute certiﬁcate revocation lists (CRLs) to vehicles in time,
authorization certiﬁcates should have a short validity period,
for example, one day. Thereby implicit revocation of Acert
becomes possible by not issuing new authorization certiﬁcates
to IRS gateways. The exact validity period of authorization
certiﬁcates have to be speciﬁed according to a detailed risk
assessment concerning the addressed IRS type. For example,
RWWG are deployed for road works sites, which are usually
established for one or two days. It may be good practice then
to issue an authorization certiﬁcate with a maximal validity
period of two days to a RWWG shortly before it is deployed.
For authentication purposes, e.g., to obtain authorization
certiﬁcates (for example, on a daily basis) an infrastructure
component requires a long term identiﬁcation certiﬁcate Ecert.
These long term certiﬁcates Ecert are issued by an Enrolement
Authority (EA) during the enrolment of the IRS gateway. A
long term certiﬁcate Ecert is used within a certiﬁcate request
for authorization certiﬁcates towards the AA. We suggest
that the authorization key pair is generated within the secure
element of the IRS gateway and the authorization certiﬁcate
is only issued after mutual authentication of IRS gateway and
AA and only if the Ecert of the IRS gateway is not revoked.
Therefore, the EA has to maintain a CRL for revoked long
term certiﬁcates Ecert.
A long term identiﬁcation certiﬁcate Ecert is only visible
inside the IRS PKI and is not transmitted to vehicles. In
particular, it is not communicated over the IEEE 802.11p
channel. For this reason, we suggest to implement the long
term identiﬁcation certiﬁcates Ecert of ITS roadside stations
according to the X.509 v3 certiﬁcate proﬁle. This proﬁle is
widely applied and provides all necessary certiﬁcate services
like time stamping, issuing CRLs, etc. The validity period of a
Ecert should be at the order of years, e.g., ﬁve to six years for
IRS gateways like RWWGs. A timeframe of ﬁve to six years
seems to be reasonable considering progress in cryptanalysis
or hardware security vulnerabilities. Due to different certiﬁcate
issuing policies and certiﬁcate formats the EAs and the AAs
are attached to different root certiﬁcation authorities, which
are called E-RCA and A-RCA respectively here, see Figure 5.
Due to the long validity periods of long term certiﬁcates,
certiﬁcate revocation, implemented as a CRL according to
X.509 v3, is suggested. Once a long term certiﬁcate is revoked,
no authorization certiﬁcates are issued to the IRS gateway any
more.
Due to the short validity period of authorization certiﬁ-
cates of IRS gateways, the IRS gateways require an online
communication channel, e.g., via GSM, LTE, etc. to receive
new authorization certiﬁcates.
C. Crypto Agility
Figure 6 shows how the validity periods of the certiﬁcates
within the IRS PKI domain relate to each other. The validity
86
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Acert
Ecert
EA
AA
IRS-E-RCA
IRS-A-RCA
CRL
Ecert revoked ? 
Figure 5. IRS PKI domain architecture. An IRS PKI domain consists of an
EA for issuing long term certiﬁcates Ecert and an AA for issuing
authorization certiﬁcates Acert.
...
...
 IRS-E-RCA
     EA
time
RCA Ecert_2  
RCA Ecert_1
EA Ecert_2
EA Ecert_1
EA Ecert_3
EA Ecert_4
 0
 II
 I
Figure 6. Certiﬁcate shell model. The validity period of a certiﬁcate is
within the validity period of the issuing Certiﬁcation Authority. E.g., the
validity period of EAEcert 1 is within the validity period of RCAEcert 1
periods follow the shell model, i.e., the validity periods of
certiﬁcates are enclosed in the validity periods of superior
certiﬁcates.
1)
A certiﬁcate of a certiﬁcation authority (CA) is in
one of three states: active, passive or expired. After
generation of a key pair the according certiﬁcate is
in state active. Over time the certiﬁcate state changes
from active to passive to expired.
2)
A certiﬁcate in state active is used for issuing certiﬁ-
cates to subordinate CAs or IRS gateways.
•
Assume that an IRS-E-RCA root key pair (se-
cret key: RCAESK 1, public key: RCAEP K 1)
is generated at time 0 of Figure 6. The secret
key RCAESK 1 is used to sign and issue a
self-certiﬁed E-RCA certiﬁcate RCAEcert 1,
ﬁrst. The certiﬁcate RCAEcert 1 is in state
active.
•
The secret key RCAESK 1 is used to sign EA
certiﬁcates: EAEcert 1 and EAEcert 2.
•
The certiﬁcate RCAEcert 1 switches to state
passive at time point I when the next
root key pair (secret key: RCAESK 2, public
key:
RCAEP K 2) and according certiﬁcate
RCAEcert 2 are issued. Now, the certiﬁcate
RCAEcert 2 is in state active. A certiﬁcate in
state passive is not used to issue certiﬁcates
any longer. However, it is still needed to ver-
ify already issued subordinate certiﬁcates. At
time point II certiﬁcate RCAEcert 1 expires.
3)
Certiﬁcate
RCAEcert 2 is termed Link Certiﬁcate
because it is signed with the former IRS-E-RCA
secret key RCAESK 1.
Over long lifetimes the requirements for cryptographic
mechanisms are changing. This has implications for the cryp-
tographic mechanisms applied within the PKI domain, too.
The cryptographic setting of the PKI has to be adapted
according to current cryptographic requirements. All CAs in
an ITS PKI have to follow the common PKI policy and the
speciﬁc certiﬁcate practise statement of the root CA. Therefore,
changes of a cryptographic setting for a whole IRS PKI are
prescribed by the root certiﬁcation authority E-RCA or A-
RCA.
Changes to the following components due to newly dis-
covered weaknesses are conceivable:
1)
Elliptic curve domain parameters,
2)
Hash algorithm,
3)
Signature algorithm.
We suggest to implement a new PKI crypto setting by
means of a link certiﬁcate, assuming that the certiﬁcate format
allows the speciﬁcation of cryptographic parameters. Obvi-
ously, modiﬁcations can only be applied if the infrastructure
components are technically able to run the new algorithms.
The validity period of an Ecert and an Acert differ a
lot. An Ecert has a validity period of several years, whereas
an Acert has a validity period of few days at most. If the
issuing certiﬁcation authorities AA and IRS-A-RCA have
similar short validity periods with respect to the shell model,
the cryptographic settings between Ecert and Acert can differ.
In particular, shorter keys can be used for signing Acert
87
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

towards signing an Ecert. Today, the ETSI certiﬁcate format
only provides the NIST Elliptic Curve Domain Parameter P-
256 with 256 bits long secret keys, see [28]. This key length
is sufﬁcient for the very near future but other ECC domain
parameter should be used due to [29]. However, it is highly
probable that longer key length have to be used for long term
certiﬁcates Ecert in future.
D. Trust Establishment between PKI domains
An examplary architecture of a multi-domain PKI with
three PKI domains (IRS I, IVS and IRS II) is shown in Figure
7. In our example there is only one IVS domain with the IVS-
RCA to issue certiﬁcates for vehicles managed by the vehicle
manufacturers and two separate IRS domains IRS I and IRS II
with the root CAs A-RCA I and A-RCA II managed by dif-
ferent infrastructure authorities. These two IRS domains issue
authorization certiﬁcates to IRS gateways in their respective
domain. Now trust relations between the different PKI domains
have to be established somehow. This can be accomplished by
securely exchanging self-signed certiﬁcates of the respective
root CAs of the PKI domains. Each root CA maintains a LTL
containing the certiﬁcates of root CAs of other PKI domains it
trusts. The LTL of a PKI domain is signed (for authentication
reasons) and issued to all members of the domain by the root
CA, e.g., A-RCA I manages the LTL for the IRS I domain.
Each PKI domain can individually deﬁne the needed rules that
are sufﬁcient to trust a separate PKI domain.
To verify the authenticity of IRS gateway DENM messages
in our examplary architecture, the vehicles have to know
the root PKI certiﬁcates of the PKI domains IRS I and
IRS II: A−RCA IAcert 1 and A−RCA IIAcert 1. If the IVS
PKI domain trusts in the IRS I and IRS II PKI domains
the certiﬁcates
A−RCA IAcert 1 and
A−RCA IIAcert 1 are
elements of the LTL of the IVS PKI domain. Just after issuing
of a new certiﬁcate, e.g., A−RCA IAcert 2 for the infrastructure
PKI domain IRS I this certiﬁcate has to be appended to the
LTL of the IVS PKI domain. Dependent on the validity period
of the certiﬁcates A−RCA IAcert 1 and A−RCA IAcert 2 and
due to the chosen shell model both certiﬁcates are valid for a
deﬁned time frame, see Figure 6. If a LTL of a PKI domain is
changed all entities of the PKI domain (subordinate CAs and
EEs) have to know this information. A time-critical situation
arises when one speciﬁc PKI domain, e.g., the IRS I PKI
domain loses trust and has to be removed from the LTL of
the IVS PKI domain. In this case all affected entities in the
IVS PKI domain have to update their LTL as soon as possible.
Based on the currently discussed ITS applications, trust
relations between the different ITS domains, here IRS I and
IRS II, are not really required since no messages are ex-
changed between these domains. In our example the LTL of
the two IRS domains just contain the current root certiﬁcate
of the IVS PKI domain RCAEcert 1.
E. Necessary ETSI Certiﬁcate Format Adaptations
In our paper, a multi-domain PKI based on LTLs and an
according crypto agility concept is presented. The described
mechanisms require some adaptation of the current ETSI
certiﬁcate format.
A-RCA_I Acert_1
AA
A-RCA_I
AA
A-RCA_II
EA
AA
IVS-RCA
A-RCA_II Acert_1
RCA Ecert_1
IRS_I Domain             IVS Domain           IRS_II Domain
Figure 7. Examplary multi-domain PKI architecture with one IVS domain
and two IRS domains: IRS I and IRS II.
a) Elliptic curve cryptography: The ETSI certiﬁcate
format regards only Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) per-
formed on NIST domain parameters P-256. These domain
parameters have a speciﬁc structure to perform ECC calcu-
lations very fast. But this structure opens speciﬁc side channel
attacks. For example, even effective countermeasurements like
point blinding and scalar blinding of ECC implementations
are not sufﬁcient to resist side channel attacks on NIST ECC
implementations, see [34]. Therefore, further cryptographic
ECC domain parameters (e.g., brainpool curves) should be
added [35].
b) Rights management: Fire trucks and police vehicles
need speciﬁc rights during action. These rights have to be
coded within certiﬁcates, too. But only qualiﬁed CAs may
issue these kind of certiﬁcates. The ETSI rights management
concept should be enhanced in a sense that a subordinate CA
can only assign restricted rights to issued certiﬁcates.
c) Link certiﬁcate: The ETSI certiﬁcate has to support
link certiﬁcates to allow change of the root CA key and crypto
agility as suggested in Section V-C.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, a secure vehicle-to-infrastructure communi-
cation is discussed based on the existing ETSI standards. We
constitute that the existing ETSI security speciﬁcations have
some limitations. Especially, the missing crypto agility concept
and adaptations on the ETSI certiﬁcate format are needed.
Moreover, the proposed PKI of the Car2Car Communication
Consortium for ITS vehicle stations (IVS PKI) does not regard
all needs of ITS roadside stations. For this reason, we suggest
a multi-domain PKI to adequately address the requirements
of vehicle manufacturers and infrastructure authorities. The
different PKI domains are cryptographically linked based on
LTLs. In addition, a brief vulnerability analysis of ITS roadside
stations is given.
88
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As a next step, the IRS PKI architecture will be sub-
stantiated und implemented as a pilot system in the C-ITS
corridor project to gather experiences. Beside that a common
PKI policy is prepared within the security working group of
the C-ITS platform of the EC DG MOVE for intelligent trans-
portation systems in Europe. Important is that these common
PKI policy enables speciﬁc requirement distinctions of PKI
domains based on certiﬁcate practise statements to consider
necessary differences between ITS vehicle stations and ITS
roadside stations as shown in this paper.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Sandro Berndt and Arno
Spinner from the Federal Highway Research Institute (BASt),
our colleagues Nicolas Then´ee and Hans-Peter Wagner and the
anonymous referees for valuable remarks. Moreover, thanks
to Hessen Mobile and the C-ITS Corridor project ofﬁce for
providing us with photo material.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Ullmann, C. Wieschebrink, and D. K¨ugler, “Public key infrastruc-
ture and crypto agility concept for intelligent transport systems,” in
Proceedings VEHICULAR 2015: The Fourth International Conference
on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications.
IARIA, 2015, pp. 14–19.
[2]
SimTD,
“Secure
intelligent
mobility,”
2008-2013,
http://www.simtd.de/index.dhtml/deDE/index.html.
[3]
European
Commission,
“SCOOP@F,”
2013,
http://inea.ec.europa.eu/en/ten-t.
[4]
BMVI, “Cooperative its corridor rotterdam-franfurt-vienna joint deploy-
ment,” 2014, http://www.bmvi.de.
[5]
N. Bissmeyer, H. Stubing, E. Schoch, S. Gotz, J. P. Stotz, and B. Lonc,
“A generic public key infrastructure for securing car-to-x communica-
tion,” in 18th ITS World Congress, 2011.
[6]
ETSI,
“Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);Security;
Security
header and certiﬁcate formats, ETSI TS 103 097 V1.2.1,” 2015,
http://www.etsi.org/.
[7]
G. Samara, W. A. Al-Salihy, and R. Sures, “Security analysis of
vehicular ad hoc nerworks (vanet),” in Network Applications Protocols
and Services (NETAPPS), 2010 Second International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 55–60.
[8]
P. Papadimitratos, L. Buttyan, J.-P. Hubaux, F. Kargl, A. Kung, and
M. Raya, “Architecture for secure and private vehicular communica-
tions,” in Telecommunications, 2007. ITST’07. 7th International Con-
ference on ITS.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[9]
J. Freudiger, M. Raya, M. F´elegyh´azi, P. Papadimitratos et al., “Mix-
zones for location privacy in vehicular networks,” in Proceedings of
the ﬁrst international workshop on wireless networking for intelligent
transportation systems (Win-ITS), 2007.
[10]
P. Papadimitratos and J.-P. Hubaux, “Report on the secure vehicular
communications: results and challenges ahead workshop,” ACM SIG-
MOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 12,
no. 2, 2008, pp. 53–64.
[11]
M. DI and G. Tsudik, “Security and privacy in emerging wireless
networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 2010, p. 13.
[12]
Hagen St¨ubing, Multilayered Security and Privacy Protection in Car-
to-X Networks - Solutions from Application down to Physical Layer.
Springer Vieweg, 2013.
[13]
E-safety Vehicle Intrusion proTection Applications, “Scientiﬁc publica-
tions,” 2009-2011, http://www.evita-project.org/publications.html/.
[14]
Open Vehicular Secure Platform, “Scientiﬁc publications,” 2010-2012,
https://www.oversee-project.com/.
[15]
F. Schaub, Z. Ma, and F. Kargl, “Privacy requirements in vehicular
communication systems,” in Computational Science and Engineering,
2009. CSE’09. International Conference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2009, pp.
139–145.
[16]
M. Raya and J.-P. Hubaux, “Securing vehicular ad hoc networks,”
Journal of Computer Security, vol. 15, no. 1, 2007, pp. 39–68.
[17]
J. Camenisch, S. Hohenberger, and M. Ø. Pedersen, “Batch veriﬁcation
of short signatures,” in Advances in Cryptology-EUROCRYPT 2007.
Springer, 2007, pp. 246–263.
[18]
R. Lu, X. Lin, H. Zhu, P.-H. Ho, and X. Shen, “Ecpp: Efﬁcient
conditional privacy preservation protocol for secure vehicular commu-
nications,” in INFOCOM 2008. The 27th Conference on Computer
Communications.
IEEE, 2008.
[19]
F. Armknecht, A. Festag, D. Westhoff, and K. Zeng, “Cross-layer
privacy enhancement and non-repudiation in vehicular communication,”
in Communication in Distributed Systems (KiVS), 2007 ITG-GI Con-
ference.
VDE, 2007, pp. 1–12.
[20]
K. Pl¨oßl and H. Federrath, “A privacy aware and efﬁcient security
infrastructure for vehicular ad hoc networks,” Computer Standards &
Interfaces, vol. 30, no. 6, 2008, pp. 390–397.
[21]
B. Wiedersheim, Z. Ma, F. Kargl, and P. Papadimitratos, “Privacy
in inter-vehicular networks: Why simple pseudonym change is not
enough,” in Wireless On-demand Network Systems and Services
(WONS), 2010 Seventh International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010,
pp. 176–183.
[22]
C-ITS Platform of the EC DG MOVE, “Final Report,” 2016,
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/its/doc/c-its-platform-ﬁnal-report-
january-2016.pdf.
[23]
J. Linn, “Trust models and management in public-key infrastructures,”
RSA laboratories, vol. 12, 2000.
[24]
R. Nielsen, “Memorandum for multi-domain public key infrastructure
interoperability, rfc 5217,” Tech. Rep., 2008.
[25]
ETSI, “ETSI EN 302 665 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
- Communications Architecture,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org/.
[26]
——, “ETSI EN 302 637-2 V1.3.2: Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part
2: Speciﬁcation of Cooperative Awareness Basic Service,” 2015,
http://www.etsi.org/.
[27]
——, “ETSI TS 102 637-3 V1.2.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS);
Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part 3: Speci-
ﬁcations of Decentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Basic Service,”
2013, http://www.etsi.org/.
[28]
Recommended Elliptic Curves For Federal Government Use, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, July 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/toolkit/documents/dss/NISTReCur.pdf
[29]
National
Security
Agency,
“Cryptography
today,”
2015,
https://www.nsa.gov/ia/programs/suiteb cryptography.
[30]
N. Koblitz and A. Menezes, “A riddle wrapped in an enigma,” Cryp-
tology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/1018, 2015, http://eprint.iacr.org/.
[31]
ETSI, “ETSI TR 102 893 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS);
Security; Threat, Vulnerability and Risk Analysis (TVRA). Technical
Report,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org/.
[32]
N. O. Tippenhauer, C. P¨opper, K. B. Rasmussen, and S. Capkun, “On
the requirements for successful gps spooﬁng attacks,” in Proceedings of
the 18th ACM conference on Computer and communications security.
ACM, 2011, pp. 75–86.
[33]
B. Sklar, Digital Communications, Second Edition. Prentice Hall PTR,
2001.
[34]
B. Feix, M. Roussellet, and A. Venelli, “Side-channel analysis on
blinded regular scalar multiplications,” in Progress in Cryptology–
INDOCRYPT 2014.
Springer, 2014, pp. 3–20.
[35]
Brainpool, “ECC Brainpool Standard Curves and Curve Genera-
tion, Version 1.0, available online at http://www.ecc-brainpool.org/ecc-
standard.htm,” 2005.
89
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

