Security Hardening of Automotive Networks Through the Implementation of
Attribute-Based Plausibility Checks
Marcel Rumez, J¨urgen D¨urrwang, Johannes Braun and Reiner Kriesten
Institute of Energy Efﬁcient Mobility
University of Applied Sciences Karlsruhe
Germany, International University Campus 3, 76646 Bruchsal
Email: {ruma0003, duju0001, brjo0002, krre0001}@hs-karlsruhe.de
Abstract—Future vehicles will be more and more part of the
Internet of Things (IoT), providing enhanced functionalities such
as autonomous driving, cloud-based functions or car-sharing fe-
atures to their customers. However, this change has fundamental
consequences for automotive networks and their safeguarding
against unauthorized access. Based on our own research results
regarding vulnerabilities in a Pyrotechnic Control Unit (PCU)
and upcoming changes in automotive network architecture, we
combined plausibility checks with an access control mechanism
to restrict network requests in different vehicle states to prevent
the exploitation of safety-critical functions. In this publication,
we present our enhanced plausibility checks, which are based on
vehicle attributes and trustworthy sensors. To do so, we propose
moving the checks to powerful domain controllers in future auto-
motive network architectures. Moreover, we adapt a vulnerability
scoring metric from traditional Information Technology (IT) to
determine the originality of the sensor values. As a result, we are
hardening the security against unauthorized access. [1]
Keywords–Automotive Safety and Security; Vehicular Attacks;
Plausibility Checks; Vehicle Networks
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modern automobiles consist of more than 50 Electronic
Control Units (ECUs), which contain a total of up to 100
million lines of code to control safety-critical functionality.
This fact combined with the close interconnectivity of auto-
motive ECUs and an increasing number of interfaces to the
vehicle’s surroundings, broadens the attack surface of modern
vehicles. The feasibility of such attacks has been investigated
and already demonstrated by several groups of researchers [2]
[3]. Additionally, attacks via access to the internal vehicle
network that can cause life-threatening injuries have also been
demonstrated in the past [4] [5].
Furthermore, car manufacturers tend to equip their cars
with more entertainment and comfort features using wireless
connectivity. One example is the detection of trafﬁc obstructi-
ons by using Car-2-X communication to process trafﬁc or
general environmental information provided by an ad-hoc
network. In the same way, providers of car-sharing, car-rental
and other ﬂeet based services use cellular networks for the
communication with their backbone [6]. Additionally, manu-
facturers implement the ability to execute software updates
outside of car workshops, in order to ﬁx problems within a
short time [7]. These interfaces potentially provide means to
remotely exploit vulnerabilities, obtain access to the in-vehicle
network and control critical systems from a distance [8] [9].
Especially, with the remote exploitation of the Jeep Chero-
kee [8], Miller and Valasek showed that physical access
through an On-Board Diagnostics (OBD)-Connector is not
mandatory any more. One year after the remote exploitation
of the Jeep they provided an update on what is possible in
car hacking. Having already proven the remote exploitability
of a vehicle, they used a direct connection to the internal car
network via the OBD-connector. The fundamental approach
was to stop an ECU, which is connected to the Controller
Area Network (CAN), from broadcasting its own messages
on the bus. This was done to enable them to send their
own spoofed messages to another in-vehicular subscriber. As
a result, they were able to execute different functions, e.g.,
deceleration of the vehicle or activating the parking assistant
in an inappropriate driving condition. To prevent such misuses,
ECUs typically use plausibility checks to validate the reque-
sted function with the state of the vehicle. For this purpose
ECUs mostly use bus messages to derive the current state of
the vehicle. Unfortunately, these messages are typically not
protected from malicious modiﬁcations.
Our research has discovered a weakness in a safety critical
component due to the fact that this component provides
diagnostic functions for a special use case. The safety critical
unit is a Pyrotechnic Control Unit (PCU), which offers the
functionality to deploy attached airbags via vehicle diagnostics.
This special use case scenario arises from the necessity of
deploying airbags before a car can be crushed during its End
of Life (EOL) recycling process. Unfortunately, these functions
are available during the regular operation of the vehicle,
potentially leading to life-threatening injuries. The discovered
weakness is based on a requirement inside a standard [10],
suggesting a weak algorithm to ensure authentication. Furt-
hermore, no fundamental plausibility checks with available
hard-wired sensors have been used, which we recommended
in an earlier paper [1] and expand upon in this paper so that
they can be used for future automotive architectures. Thus, we
consider it as reasonable that this weakness scales over several
manufacturers. This vulnerability has since been submitted to
the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures database and can
now be accessed under its identiﬁer CVE-2017-14937 [11].
To determine the existence of the vulnerability in vehicles a
Metasploit Hardware Bridge module was created [12]. The mo-
dule can check the availability of the functionality combined
with the weak algorithm in a PCU.
To prevent such issues, authenticity and integrity of bus
52
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

messages have to be ensured and therefore cryptographic
methods can be applied. The AUTomotive Open System AR-
chitecture (AUTOSAR) members have already recognized the
necessity of the mentioned security goals for future on-board
communication. For this reason, they have standardized the
Secure Onboard Communication (SecOC) module [13], which
includes authentication mechanisms on the level of Protocol
Data Units (PDUs). The speciﬁcation does not recommend a
speciﬁc method for creating a Message Authentication Code
(MAC), but rather deﬁnes the payload of a secured PDU with
a freshness value and an authenticator for protecting against
replay attacks and unauthorized manipulation of the message.
A typical approach for this is the application of a Keyed-
Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) on salted mes-
sages. This type of cryptographic measure ensures the desired
protection goals, with an acceptable need of computational
performance, which is a fundamental constraint in the au-
tomotive domain. Nevertheless, there are existing drawbacks
when using HMACs. In particular, the increasing bus load
when attaching an HMAC on each message. Furthermore,
it requires an extensive key management. According to the
constraints in the automotive domain like restricted bandwidth
and power, a trade-off between protection level and required
resources is necessary. Unfortunately, this often leads to a non-
implementation of necessary security measures. In this paper,
we propose an approach of using local ECU signals, in addition
to the information which the ECU receives from bus systems,
to perform plausibility checks. In detail, the contributions of
this paper are the following:
Problem: Spooﬁng and tampering of bus messages in
vehicular networks can lead to safety critical situations. To
prevent these threat scenarios, the message authenticity and
integrity have to be ensured. However, channel protection alone
is not sufﬁcient if an ECU has been compromised. In this case,
it is conceivable that an attacker would be able to transmit
malicious payload with a valid message authenticity and inte-
grity. Without additional checks, the receiver wouldn’t be able
to identify the tampered signal values of the message payload.
Solution: Apply plausibility checks with trustworthy sensor
signals as an additional security measure for cryptographic
approaches to identify manipulations of received messages
on ECU or domain controller level. Our Contribution: We
present an enhanced network-based approach of attribute-based
plausibility checks for future automotive networks based on
our local approach for plausibility checks [1] and provide
application examples to prevent two known attacks.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II summarizes
the related work in the area of automotive security measures,
followed by our approach in Section III, which is divided in
methodology and its applicability. Furthermore, we propose a
way to locate suitable signal sources inside vehicles that are
necessary for our approach. This is followed by an application
example that should be able to prevent the published exploi-
tation of a passenger vehicle. In Section IV we give a short
summary of our work and present an outlook for our future
work in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
Automotive manufacturers, suppliers and other organiza-
tions have already recognized the necessity for security me-
chanisms in the automotive domain. For this reason, a cyber
security alliance was founded in the USA. The major objective
of the Automotive Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(AUTO-ISAC) [14] is to enhance cyber security awareness
and the coordination for the automotive domain. Moreover,
the alliance is providing best practices for organizational and
technical security issues to support the developing process
of their members. An additional effort was initialized by
the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) with the J3061
guidebook [15], summarizing recommended security practices
that can be applied in the automotive domain. Unfortunately,
the guidebook gives no concrete reference implementations for
possible measures.
A more comprehensive approach for security in vehicles
is presented by Gerlach et al. [16]. They propose a multi-
layer security architecture for vehicular communication, which
implements different measures. In particular, they propose
digital signatures with certiﬁcates as methods for providing
authentication, integrity, and non-repudiation of the received
messages. Due to the underlying asymmetric cryptography,
high-performance ECUs or ECUs with additional Hardware
Security Modules (HSMs) are needed. They further consider
an application of cross-layer plausibility checks [16] as me-
aningful. Therefore, they establish a single instance in the
vehicle which collects information from any existent source
in the vehicle. The instance is called plausibility checking
module and creates its own independent view of the current
vehicle state. If deviations from normal operation are detected,
the instance reacts by triggering a warning. Unfortunately, the
proposed instance is not implemented in each ECU, hence
triggered counteractions or warnings have to be transferred
over the unsecured bus again.
An additional approach is presented by Dhurandher et
al. [17]. They propose an application of reputation and plau-
sibility checks for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs).
In particular, their proposed algorithm is able to detect and
isolate malicious nodes by the use of sensors. Although they
present an efﬁcient and effective algorithm, the approach is
designed for wireless nodes and their unique characteristics.
Unfortunately, a concept for adaptation to in-vehicle networks
is not given.
III.
APPROACH
We consider an application of plausibility checks as ad-
ditional protection mechanism as meaningful, if the relevant
functions are able to change the physical state of the vehi-
cle. This is partly explained by the fact that for these type
of functions sensor values already exist. As a result, our
approach is applicable for a great set of functions and in
particular for safety-related functions. To decide if a function
can be protected by our approach, some requirements have
to be met. We deﬁne these requirements in the following
and we further present an application example. Therefore, we
divide our approach into two logical steps: First, it has to
be determined if the selected function can be protected by
a plausibility check (see Figure 1). This is followed by a
method for implementing plausibility checks depending on the
vehicle’s network architecture. Finally, we give two application
examples, which are explained in Section III-D).
A. Applicability of Plausibility Checks
To validate if plausibility checks are applicable, a few
requirements have to be checked beforehand. For this purpose,
53
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

we deﬁne and highlight them as selection steps in Figure 1.
Standard controls
e.g. HMAC
Apply signal based
plausibility checks
b) Function depends
on the state of the
vehicle
End
a) Function is rated
with severity value
S ≥ 1
Start
Yes
Yes
No
No
Figure 1. Methodology for applying signal based plausibility checks.
Figure 1 shows the required steps to identify functions that
are applicable for plausibility checks. Before we can validate
Step a) a hazard and risk analysis must be performed. This is
a demand of the functional safety standard ISO 26262 [18].
The aim of the analysis is to identify potential hazards of a
function. Furthermore, a so-called Automotive Safety Integrity
Level (ASIL) is calculated for each hazard based on three
values. One of these values is deﬁned as severity, describing
the possible impact of the malfunction related to the selected
function. Thus, we consider a selection of functions able to
cause hazards with a severity value S greater or equal to 1 as
meaningful. In particular, a severity value of S ≥ 1 implies
injuries of vehicle occupants [18] and must be prevented. If
the function is rated with S ≥ 1, the next step is to check,
if the selected function has dependencies on the vehicle state
(moving or standing still, etc.) as shown by Step b) in Figure 1.
If plausibility checks are not applicable, but the function is
rated with S ≥ 1, we deem an application of standard security
controls to be mandatory.
B. Plausibility Checks with Local ECU Signals
To guarantee that signals used for plausibility checks can
not be maliciously modiﬁed or sent, we have to implement
protection mechanisms. In particular, we have to ensure the
authenticity and integrity of the used signals. Therefore, we
could apply the already mentioned cryptographic methods with
all their drawbacks, e.g., computing power, higher memory
consumption, additional bus load, key management and testing
of the implemented algorithms. Instead, we chose another way
to check the originality of the signals indirectly without the
afore mentioned drawbacks. To explain the approach, we take a
closer look into automotive architectures like the one presented
in Figure 2.
<<Gateway>>
Radio
<<ECU>>
ABS 
<<ECU>>
ACC
<<ECU>>
EPS
<<ECU>>
EPB
<<ECU>>
SCM
Chassis CAN (CAN-C)
<<ECU>>
SCLM
<<ECU>>
ESCL
<<Gateway>>
BCM
<<ECU>>
 .
Interior CAN 
(CAN-IHS)
= Wireless interface
= Internal bus connection
= Hard-wired connection
GSM/4G, BT
<<ECU>>
 .
<<ECU>>
 .
<<Sensor>>
Torque
<<Sensor>>
Wheel speed 
<<Port>>
OBD
LIN
CAN-Diagnostic 
Figure 2. Part of the electrical architecture of a Jeep Cherokee 2014, based
on the work of Valasek et al. [8]. As diagram notation we use the UML4PF
proﬁle extension [19].
Figure 2 represents a part of the E/E architecture of a Jeep
Cherokee 2014, which was the attack target of the resear-
chers [8] [20] mentioned in the beginning. The architecture
shows different ECUs and gateways interconnected by three
CAN-Bus systems (CAN-C, CAN-IHS, CAN-Diagnostic) as
well as one LIN-Bus. Furthermore, each wheel has a sen-
sor measuring the wheel speed, which is hard-wired to the
Antilock Braking System (ABS), respectively the Electronic
Stability Control (ESC). This information can be used to derive
local ECU signals for plausibility checks without the need for
cryptographic algorithms. In particular, these sensor values can
indirectly describe the state of the vehicle. With the wheel
speed sensor shown in Figure 2, we can derive whether the
vehicle is moving or not. If the vehicle is at a standstill, all
sensor values of the wheels have to be zero or vary signiﬁcantly
due to a spinning wheel. This hard-wired sensor type is only
an example. Additionally, we can combine two or more sensor
values to derive more precise information about the state of
the vehicle. The important point in our approach is that an
ECU with hard-wired sensors can operate as a guardian against
spoofed or tampered signals on the bus. In general, it is
important that a safety critical function can be additionally
protected by one or more hard-wired sensor values. By adding
this requirement, an attacker would no longer be able to spoof
sensor values over bus messages, because ECUs could verify
the plausibility of the received values.
To be precise, authenticity and integrity are only ensured,
if the attacker is not capable of getting access to the sensors
themselves, which would require him to be in the vicinity
of the vehicle. We assume that the possibility of an attacker
accessing sensors is unlikely in comparison to his ability to
send spoofed messages via CAN [8]. This is reasonable due
to the fact that an attacker would have to overcome several
54
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

physical barriers, e.g., opening the hood, ECU housing or
removing the wire insulation.
C. Plausibility Checks for Future Architectures
The next generation of E/E architectures (see Figure 3)
in passenger vehicles will be modiﬁed in their structure. In
the future, the ECUs will be divided in different domains like
powertrain, chassis or driver assistance systems. This change
provides more ﬂexibility and scalability for the manufacturers.
Moreover this opens up new ways for increasing the security
level. The new domain controllers are powerful with regard
to their clock-rate and memory, so that Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs) move computing-intensive applications
from legacy ECUs to the enhanced domain controllers.
CAN
LIN
GW
Central Gateway
Diagnostic Tester
Body 
domain
Dynamics 
domain
Powertrain 
domain
ECU
Key Less Entry 
ECU
Instrument Cluster
ECU
Tire Pressure Control
ECU
Headlight
ECU
Engine Start Button
CAN
ECU
Headlight Leveling
ECU
ESCL
ECU
Terminal Control
ECU
Parking Aid
ECU
Rear Camera
GW
CANtoLIN
ECU
ESP 
ECU
Damping Control
ECU
Air Ride Suspension
ECU
Airbag
ECU
Belt Tensioners
ECU
ACC
ECU
Nightview
ECU
EBS
ECU
ABS
ECU
TCS
ECU
Engine control
ECU
Transmission Control
ECU
Exhaust Aftertreament
ECU
Fuel Tank Control
GW
Telematics 
Flexray
CAN
= Wireless Interface
= Internal Connection
= External Connection
ECU
Door Control
GSM/4G, 802.1x
Proprietary
TPMS
Ultrasonic
RADAR
Domain Gateway
Domain Gateway
Domain Gateway
Ethernet
Ethernet
Ethernet
Figure 3. The next generation of E/E architectures (exemplary).
In this section we want to introduce our enhanced plausibi-
lity checks adapted to the new domain structure. Furthermore
we have analyzed the latest Jeep hack [20] again and assigned
the different attacks into two categories, whether the exploited
function is based on diagnostic functionalities or not. The
investigation has shown that ﬁve out of the seven performed
attacks are based on the same approach, which sets the target
ECU in Bootrom mode. This mode represents an extended
diagnostic session for ﬂash applications and requires authenti-
cation via the Security Access (SA) service. However, various
research publications [21] have shown that implemented SA
algorithms are often insecure. If an ECU is in Bootrom mode,
it will exit the normal operation mode, e.g., stop sending CAN
messages until the new ﬁrmware is successfully ﬂashed. They
exploited this functionality by setting the ECU in Bootrom
mode without supplying a suitable ﬁrmware ﬁle. Therefore,
the ECU is stuck in a loop and remains in this state even
when the vehicle speeds up. The researcher used this attack
technique for avoiding message conﬂiction on the bus. Usu-
ally, additional injected messages typically lead to message
conﬂiction because the receiving ECU detects this anomaly
and acts differently depending on the type of ECU.
Due to the fact that manufacturers move functions from
single ECUs to the more powerful domain controller, we also
follow this approach with our proposed plausibility checks.
Furthermore, we are able to assess the trustworthiness of the
request by comparing the current vehicles attributes to our
security policy. In traditional IT exists a similar approach for
authorization, which is called Attribute-Based-Access-Control
(ABAC) [22] based on security policies in combination with
different types of attributes (subject, object and environment).
Generally in ABAC, the access control engine makes a deci-
sion to grant or deny any access request of a subject (entities
that can perform actions on the system) to an object (function,
ﬁle, variable, method) by interpreting the predeﬁned security
policy. Additionally, this model supports checks with boolean
logic, e.g., ”IF, THEN” statements and allows dynamic ﬁltering
due to the combination of subject attributes with environmental
conditions (physical location, time, etc.).
We deem that ABAC can be adapted for an automo-
tive Network Access Control (NAC) in combination with
plausibility checks based on speciﬁc attributes, e.g., message
type, signals, device type, timing speciﬁcations, because a lot
of functions are only safety-critical when they are triggered
during critical driving situations. Therefore, due to domain
separation in the vehicle, we can use plausibility checks as
an environmental attribute for granting access to network
requests. As a result of domain controllers being connected
to different networks by design, they are a prime candidate
for implementing plausibility checks. For this reason, our
approach is based on leveraging the most trustworthy sensor
values to achieve a secure and reliable vehicle state information
as an environmental attribute. To ﬁnd suitable sensor values,
we ﬁrst have to identify all available sources, i.e., sensors in
the vehicle. However, sensor sources vary wildly regarding the
trustworthiness of their supplied signals.
Hence, we have decided to classify the sensor sources ba-
sed on the CVSS, because this open industry standard is widely
used for assessing the severity of information systems security
vulnerabilities. The severity scores are based on criteria of
three different metric groups [23]. We used the Base Metrics
because their characteristics matched to the sensor sources
the best. The base metric group is subdivided in Exploita-
bility metrics and Impact metrics. For a better comprehension
regarding to our sensor classiﬁcation approach, we want to
explain the different sub metric characteristics consecutively.
The Attack Vector (AV) includes values how an attacker can
exploit a vulnerability, e.g., is the attack target reachable
via network or if physical access is needed. Furthermore,
the Attack Complexity (AC) represents preconditions, e.g., the
attacker must be man in the middle, which have to be fulﬁlled
before an successful attack can be performed. The metric also
includes the level of Privileges Required (PR) and whether
a User Interaction (UI) besides an attacker is mandatory to
exploit the vulnerability. The last item in this subgroup is
the Scope (S), which represents the ability of a vulnerability
to impact other resources. The other subgroup includes the
Impact Metrics whether an exploited vulnerability of the target
component has an impact on the information assets, which are
55
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. Sensor Classiﬁcation based on CVSS Base Metrics speciﬁcation
Sensor
AV
AC
PR
UI
S
C
I
A
Score
Severity
Wheel speed
Physical
Low
High
None
Changed
None
High
High
6.5
medium
Acceleration
Adjacent
Low
High
None
Changed
None
High
High
8.1
high
Seat occupancy
Physical
Low
High
None
Changed
None
High
High
6.8
medium
ACC Radar
Network
Low
None
None
Changed
None
High
High
10
critical
speciﬁed with Conﬁdentiality Impact (C), Integrity Impact (I)
and Availability Impact (A).
We have applied the CVSS metric to some sensors of
modern vehicles (see Table I) to identify the best suitable
signal source for determining the current vehicle state. For
our classiﬁcation, we have set the scope of our investigation
to determine the overall difﬁculty to manipulate the raw data of
relevant sensors. However, as the CVSS originally comes from
traditional IT some metrics have to be seen from another point
of view for the automotive domain. That means, the metric PR
is mapped to the required accessibility for tampering with raw
sensor data from an attacker’s point of view. The easiest way
to manipulate raw sensor data is without any physical access or
connections. In that case no speciﬁc privileges are required and
the PR would be assigned with the value None. Furthermore,
a higher degree of privileges would be, if an attacker needs
any access to an physical interface, e.g., the OBD connector
with partly standardized protocols, the associated PR value
would be Low. The most difﬁcult case from the point of view
of the attacker is to manipulate raw data of in-vehicle sensors,
because the protocols are mostly proprietary and the mounting
position is often difﬁcult to access. Hence, we are rating this
case with the highest value (High). An example that some
sensors can be easily manipulated from the outside has been
shown in recent research with a camera mounted behind the
windscreen of a car by displaying a speciﬁc graphic pattern in
front of it [24]. However, to manipulate a sensor in the engine
compartment an attacker would have to illegally unlock the
car in order to unlock the hood latch.
To clarify the adaptation of the aforementioned metrics,
the following section contains an example rating for the radar
sensor of an Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) system. We have
assigned the value Network for the attack vector, because
the sensor can be manipulated from the outside without any
physical access. The attack complexity is low, because with
no additional security measures, a manipulation of the sensor
values can be performed very easily. Furthermore, no speciﬁc
privileges or additional user interactions are required so that
both metrics are rated with the value None. Due to the fact that
an attack would have an impact on all distributed functions in
the network, which are using these sensor values, we classiﬁed
the scope with Changed. Looking now at the information
assets, which are also included in the classiﬁcation scheme, we
deem that a successfully performed attack leads to a complete
loss of the integrity as well as the availability. However, the
conﬁdentiality remains unaffected, because current in-vehicle
communication is not encrypted.
The ﬁnal score of the CVSS serves the purpose of compa-
ring different signal sources that provide the same information.
Furthermore, the metric provides a textual rating of the numeri-
cal score (see Table II). Based on this we have decided to set a
rating limit for selecting a suitable sensor to a maximum value
of 8.9 (High). For example, the score for the ACC radar sensor
with the highest CVSS rating of 10.0 would be out of range to
be used for sensor-based plausibility checks. Furthermore, it
is recommended to select sensors with the lowest rating score,
if more than one sensor for determining the same physical
vehicle state is available.
In addition to ﬁnding suitable sensors for plausibility
checks in domain controllers the CVSS supports another im-
portant feature in terms of rating trustworthiness in raw sensor
data. A lot of research activities are focused on transmission
security, e.g., protection of CAN messages. But what happens
when an attacker manipulates the raw data of the correspon-
ding sensors? Applying cryptographic measures afterwards,
e.g., for the on-board communication are unable to detect this
type of modiﬁed values discretely. At this time, the data is
already manipulated. Before implementing complex protection
mechanisms for network data, we should verify the raw sensor
data ﬁrst by applying plausibility checks in the ﬁrst step of
sensor data processing, e.g., through sensor fusion. To ﬁnd
which sensor should be additionally secured, the performed
rating of the CVSS can be reused.
TABLE II. Qualitative Severity Rating Scale [23]
Rating
CVSS Score
None
0.0
Low
0.1 - 3.9
Medium
4.0 - 6.9
High
7.0 - 8.9
Critical
9.0 - 10.0
D. Application Example
1) Local-based Plausibility Checks: As an example, we
want to discuss the latest Jeep hack [20], as well as the attack
on the steering system which have been performed. Generally,
the vulnerabilities in diagnostic mode, which the researchers
used for disabling the Jeep’s brakes among other things, are
only working if the car is in reverse and slower than 5 mph.
How can we make sure that the values received for plausibility
checks are valid and not tampered with? We want to answer
this question by the following examples, which explain how
our approach would prevent these hacks in the future.
In the ﬁrst example, the researchers set the real ECU in
Bootrom Mode, causing it to stop sending messages on the
bus. This step enabled them to send their own messages in
the name of the jammed ECU. Electric Power Steering (EPS),
which can be integrated in modern vehicles, e.g., the hacked
Jeep series, requires various input parameters for calculating
the electric steering support. One of these control values is
56
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. Extract of a Security Policy and corresponding Filtering rules for Domain Gateways
No.
Security Policy
Filtering rule
1
No driving operation, e.g., if an ECU is in Bootrom-Mode
Block all driving relevant requests
2
No extended diagnostic session while vehicle is moving
Block all diagnostic requests with SID 10 Sub-Function 02, if vehicle
speed >= 6 mph
3
No diagnostic requests regarding End-of-life activation of pyrotechnic
devices, while vehicle is moving
Block all diagnostic requests with SID 10 Sub-Function 04, if seat
occupancy ! = 0 or vehicle speed >= 6 mph or seat buckle ! = 0
the velocity of the vehicle. Depending on the current speed
and other parameters, the Steering Control Module (SCM)
calculates the necessary steering torque. Basically, the steering
torque support is decreasing by the SCM, when the velocity is
increasing. Applied to the example of the Jeep hack, we want
to show the determination of the steering torque threshold,
which was one of the conditions the Jeep had to meet, in
order to execute the steering angle change. A request for a high
torque support in vehicle speeds of 30 mph or higher is not
legitimate. However, we have to ensure that the integrity of the
velocity value is given, for example by a hard-wired connection
of the wheel speed sensors to the SCM. For instance, by
implementing our approach, we deem that the execution of the
function as done in the hack would have been refused during
the plausibility check.
Another attack presented by Valasek and Miller [20] was
the application of the car’s brakes. The exploited function
is normally used to activate the electronic parking brake for
emergency braking by pressing the parking switch for a longer
amount of time. Thereupon the pump for the ABS and ESC
system gets activated and provides the necessary pressure to
engage the brakes of the car. In this case, our approach is
not applicable because of the missing hard-wired signals. In
particular, an implemented plausibility check would not be
possible, because of the lack of hard-wired signals. Therefore,
it can not be differentiated between unintended or intended
emergency braking, because we only have the information
from the bus. In a case like this, where no hard-wired signal
sources are available, we propose to check the feasibility of
adding a hard-wired connection. The feasibility is given if the
implementation effort of additional hard-wired connections is
less than the implementation effort of a comparable crypto-
graphic measure. Considering the mass-production of sensors
in contrast to the effort of the selection, implementation, and
testing of cryptographic measures, we consider additional hard-
wired connections as less costly.
Our own attempts have shown that the related safety
relevant ECU mentioned in the introduction has already
connected hard-wired signals. However, the existent checks
do not analyze the use-case correctly. Thus, it would have
been possible to increase the security level simply by using
enhanced software prompts, e.g., logical and/or conjunctions.
2) Network-based Plausibility Checks: Due to the change
in future automotive architectures, we want to present an
enhanced approach, how local plausibility checks can be
adapted in future domain controllers to harden the security
at the network level. In the redesigned methodology (see Fi-
gure 4), we have created several steps to achieve sensor-based
plausibility checks that could be used in this new architecture.
First we have to deﬁne insecure and prohibited vehicle states
for different use cases and deﬁne a security policy based
on those. The policy is generally written from the point of
view of the object, which conditions have to be fulﬁlled for
granting or denying access to a subject. Table III shows such
an exemplary security policy, which includes several rules
depending on different vehicle state attributes. After deﬁning
the policy, it is necessary to analyze the vehicle architecture
to identify possible sensors for subsequent plausibility checks.
The following step of sensor classiﬁcation by applying the
CVSS metric is mandatory to ensure the highest resilience
against tampering of the sensor values. As we have already
mentioned before, we recommend to select sensors based
on the rating results. Moreover, it is recommended to select
sensors of different domains to increase the trustworthiness
even more. The next step should also be done carefully,
because the transmitted sensor data within the network, e.g.,
via CAN, constitutes the trust anchor for the plausibility checks
and therefore must not be manipulated during the transmission
between sensor source and domain controllers. In detail, the
authenticity and integrity of the selected sensor values must be
ensured, e.g., by using the SecOC Module of the AUTOSAR
standard. By securing only the speciﬁc information that is used
in the plausibility checks later on, the approach tries to be as
lightweight as possible.
After these steps, the preconditions for the sensor-based
plausibility checks are complete. They can be used for speciﬁc
message ﬁltering in the domain controllers by deriving ﬁne-
grained ﬁltering rules with boolean logic from the deﬁned se-
curity policy in combination with the selected sensor attribute
values. The rules should include more than one sensor value
for determining a precise vehicle state. The best-case scenario
would be the integration of the two of three principle referred
to the sensor sources. However, it will not always be possible
to ﬁnd more than one sensor source for each deﬁned vehicle
state.
At this point, we want to depict an example, how these
enhanced plausibility checks can be used to complicate speciﬁc
attack techniques. In the mentioned Jeep hack, Miller and
Valasek have often applied the same trick by setting a speciﬁc
ECU in Bootrom Mode. After that, they were able to send their
own spoofed CAN messages to alter the vehicle movement.
By applying our approach this method would not have been
possible, because the domain controllers are able to check
the actual vehicle state via a state table, e.g., if an ECU
is currently in a diagnostic session, before they route inter-
domain messages. As a consequence, the domain controllers
block all messages for triggering driving relevant functions.
Furthermore, the domain controllers are also able to verify,
if speciﬁc sensor values match to the current vehicle state.
Besides blocking the relevant functions we suggest to record
this event for a forensic process and we further suggest to
place the vehicle in fail-safe mode if the requested function
is rated with a severity value ≥
2. This is reasonable due
57
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to the fact that an attack could be started with the intent to
injure the passengers. The fail-safe mode allows the driver to
continue using the vehicle, but encourages him to visit the
workshop. The workshop is then able to search for the source
of the malicious request, e.g., attached OBD devices.
Start
Choose the sensors that are best suited
to securely determine the vehicle state
of interest by CVSS rating
Deﬁne insecure/prohibited vehicle
attributes for use cases
Identify the sensors installed in the
vehicle
Rank the different sensors based on
CVSS base metrics (see Table I)
Secure the transmission of the
choosen sensor values
Deﬁne ﬁne-grained ﬁltering rules
based on the security policy
End
Figure 4. Process for deriving ﬁltering rules based on trustworthy sensors
and the deﬁned security policy.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this publication, we proposed a new way to implement
plausibility checks for automotive ECUs as well as a new ap-
proach to increase the security level in future architectures by
enhanced network-based plausibility checks. Both approaches
are capable to ensure that signals used for plausibility checks
are resilient against replay and tampering. Based on the two
approaches, we also want to divide the conclusion into two
sections:
1) Local-based Plausibility Checks: The local approach
uses already available information, like sensor signals, to verify
function requests with the actual state of the vehicle. Due to the
fact that our local approach uses no cryptography and existent
information is reused, our approach tries to be as lightweight
as possible to keep additional busload to a minimum. However,
the approach is not suitable to secure all functions on ECUs,
because at least one hard-wired sensor source should be
available. Furthermore, we showed an example implementation
of our plausibility approach, which is able to prevent a known
attack. For this case we used hard-wired sensor signals like
wheel speed sensors of the ABS to ensure the integrity of the
velocity signal. The other example was focused on the electric
power steering ECU.
2) Network-based Plausibility Checks: In our enhanced
network-based approach for future architectures, we moved lo-
cal plausibility checks to the more powerful domain controller
for ﬁltering inter-domain network trafﬁc based on the actual
vehicle state. In order to determine the actual vehicle state,
we need trustworthy sensor information. For this reason, we
presented a methodology to select suitable sensors by adap-
ting the CVSS metric for an automotive severity assessment.
Furthermore, we adapted a NAC approach from traditional IT,
which allows dynamic and context-aware access control with
security policies based on speciﬁc attributes, e.g., vehicle speed
or diagnostic session. By analyzing the mentioned Jeep hack
again, we examined and explained the Bootrom vulnerability,
which enabled the involved researchers to exploit several
functions. With the recommended state table and proposed
enhanced plausibility approach, this kind of attack would
not have been possible. Moreover, the vulnerability found
during our own research activity, present in different ECUs
that can lead to the detonation of pyrotechnic charges, would
be blocked by checking the security policy in the domain
controller. Due to the fact that in future architectures a variety
of sensor signals will be protected by default, this leads to
the assumption that the overhead for the network remains
unchanged as well as that no additional wiring is required.
We are currently working on evaluating the whole network
trafﬁc with respect to latencies and memory requirements to
address this open gap.
After doing our own research we can conﬁrm that replay
attacks can be performed with minimal effort, if bus systems
like CAN are used. In combination with our ﬁndings based
on a safety critical function in a PCU, which is rated with
a severity value of 3, we recommend that such functions
should only be executable by bus messages as long as the
plausibility of the request can be veriﬁed. Therefore, our
approach recommends using at least two values received from
different sources. In the best case scenario, one source is a
hard-wired connection.
V.
FUTURE WORK
The mentioned vulnerabilities show us the necessity of
additional safeguards for upcoming vehicles. In the future the
amount of interconnected services will continue to increase
and the vehicle can be seen as a part of the IoT. That means
current network design paradigms will also change from static
signal-oriented approaches to service-oriented communication
for achieving more ﬂexibility regarding to software updates
and upgrades during the whole vehicle life-cycle. This will
also allow to swap out functions in the cloud for reducing the
computing power requirements in vehicle ECUs or for provi-
ding more customer functionalities and creates new business
cases for OEMs as well as third-party providers due to the
introduction of vehicle Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs). This creates new challenges for the whole automotive
domain with focus on communication security. Due to this fact
we are working on dynamic, distributed and scalable ﬁrewall
techniques to address authorization regarding service-oriented
architectures. In detail we want to enhance the presented
sensor-based approach with focus on an ABAC automotive
58
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

policy framework and their evaluation in respect to timing and
safety constraints.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been developed in the projects SAFE ME
ASAP (reference number: 03FH011IX5) and AUTO-SIMA
(reference number: 13FH006IX6) which are partly funded by
the German ministry of education and research (BMBF) within
the research programme ICT 2020.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. D¨urrwang, M. Rumez, J. Braun, and R. Kriesten, “Security Hardening
with Plausibility Checks for Automotive ECUs,” in VEHICULAR
2017, 2017, vol. 6, pp. 38–41. [Online]. Available: http://www.
thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=vehicular 2017 2 40 30053
[2]
S. Checkoway, D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham,
S. Savage, K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, T. Kohno et al.,
“Comprehensive experimental analyses of automotive attack surfaces,”
2011.
[3]
C.
Miller
and
C.
Valasek,
“A
survey
of
remote
automotive
attack
surfaces,”
black
hat
USA,
2014,
last
checked
on
09.05.2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://sm.asisonline.org/ASIS%
20SM%20Documents/remote%20attack%20surfaces.pdf
[4]
K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. Checkoway,
D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham et al., “Experimental
security analysis of a modern automobile,” Symposium on Security and
Privacy, 2010.
[5]
C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Adventures in automotive networks and
control units,” DEF CON, vol. 21, 2013, pp. 260–264.
[6]
J. C. Norte, “Hacking industrial vehicles from the internet,” last
checked on 12.02.2018. [Online]. Available: http://jcarlosnorte.com/
security/2016/03/06/hacking-tachographs-from-the-internets.html
[7]
M. S. Idrees, H. Schweppe, Y. Roudier, M. Wolf, D. Scheuermann,
and O. Henninger, “Secure automotive on-board protocols: A case of
over-the-air ﬁrmware updates,” Nets4Cars/Nets4Trains 2011, 2011, pp.
224–238.
[8]
C. Valasek and C. Miller, “Remote exploitation of an unaltered
passenger vehicle,” last checked on 09.05.2017. [Online]. Available:
http://illmatics.com/Remote%20Car%20Hacking.pdf
[9]
A.
Greenberg,
“Tesla
Responds
to
Chinese
Hack
With
a
Major
Security
Upgrade,”
last
checked
on
23.03.2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.wired.com/2016/09/
tesla-responds-chinese-hack-major-security-upgrade/
[10]
ISO, “ISO 26021 Road vehicles – End-of-life activation of on-board
pyrotechnic devices,” 2009.
[11]
“CVE-2017-14937,” last checked on 10.01.2018. [Online]. Available:
https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2017-14937
[12]
Rapid7, “Tesla Responds to Chinese Hack With a Major Security
Upgrade,” last checked on 07.02.2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.rapid7.com/db/modules/post/hardware/automotive/pdt
[13]
AUTOSAR, “AUTOSAR 4.3.0 – Speciﬁcation of Module Secure On-
board Communication,” 2016.
[14]
AUTO-ISAC, “Automotive information sharing and analysis center,”
https://www.automotiveisac.com/index.php, last checked on 09.05.2017.
[15]
SAE, “Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems,”
01.2016, last checked on 12.04.2016. [Online]. Available: http:
//standards.sae.org/wip/j3061/
[16]
M. Gerlach, A. Festag, T. Leinmuller, G. Goldacker, and C. Harsch,
“Security architecture for vehicular communication,” in Workshop on
Intelligent Transportation, 2007.
[17]
S. K. Dhurandher, M. S. Obaidat, A. Jaiswal, A. Tiwari, and A. Ty-
agi, “Vehicular Security Through Reputation and Plausibility Checks,”
Systems Journal, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 2, 2014, pp. 384–394.
[18]
ISO, “ISO 26262 – Road Vehicles – Functional Safety,” 2011.
[19]
D. Hatebur and M. Heisel, “A uml proﬁle for requirements analysis of
dependable software,” in International Conference on Computer Safety,
Reliability, and Security.
Springer, 2010, pp. 317–331.
[20]
C. Valasek and C. Miller, “CAN Message Injection: OG Dynamite
Edition,” last checked on 05.04.2017. [Online]. Available: http:
//illmatics.com/can%20message%20injection.pdf
[21]
M. Ring, T. Rensen, and R. Kriesten, “Evaluation of Vehicle Diag-
nostics Security: Implementation of a Reproducible Security Access,”
Secureware, vol. 2014, 2014.
[22]
V. C. Hu, D. Ferraiolo, R. Kuhn, A. Schnitzer, K. Sandlin, R. Miller, and
K. Scarfone, “Guide to Attribute Based Access Control – Deﬁnition
and Considerations,” 2014, last checked on 12.01.2018. [Online].
Available: http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/specialpublications/NIST.sp.
800-162.pdf
[23]
CVSS Special Interest Group, “Common Vulnerability Scoring Group
v3.0 - Speciﬁcation Document,” last checked on 08.01.2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/cvss-v30-speciﬁcation-v1.8.pdf
[24]
C. Sitawarin, A. N. Bhagoji, A. Mosenia, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal,
“Deceiving Autonomous Cars with Toxic Signs,” last checked on
21.02.2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.06430.pdf
59
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

