Enhancing the Resilience of Cyber-Physical Systems 
by Protecting the Physical-World Interface  
 
 
 
Rainer Falk, Steffen Fries 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {rainer.falk|steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Cyber physical systems operate and supervise 
physical, 
technical 
systems 
using 
information 
and 
communication technology, also called Operation Technology 
(OT). Cyber security solutions focus on the OT part, i.e., on the 
information and communication technology. The focus of cyber 
security is protection, detection, and respondence to cyber 
attacks. Cyber resilience aims at delivering an intended outcome 
despite attacks and adverse cyber events and even failures not 
directly caused by attacks. Protecting the link between the 
control systems and the physical world has been addressed only 
in some very specific cases, e.g., charging of electric vehicles. We 
propose a physical-world firewall that limits the impact on the 
physical world of a successful attack of automation systems, 
thereby enhancing the resilience of cyber-physical system 
against successful attacks against software-based functionality 
of its OT systems.  
Keywords—cyber security; cyber resilience; system integrity; 
cyber physical systems; industrial automation and control system; 
Internet of Things. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The common focus of IT security relates to IT-based 
control equipment and data communication, using e.g., 
Ethernet, wireless LAN (WLAN), and Internet protocol (IP) 
communication. In addition to this, in OT systems, also the 
field level comprising sensors and actuators connected to the 
Operation Technology (OT) automation and control system 
has to be considered down to the interface between the control 
system and the physical world via sensors and actuators.  
Traditionally, IT security has been focusing on 
information security, protecting confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability of data at rest and data in transit, and sometimes 
also protecting data in use by confidential computation. In 
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), major protection goals are 
availability, 
meaning 
that 
automation 
systems 
stay 
productive, and system integrity, ensuring that it is operating 
as intended. Typical application domains are factory 
automation, process automation, building automation, railway 
signaling systems, and power system management. Cyber 
security is covering different phases during operation as there 
are protect, detect, and react: Protecting against threats, 
detecting when an attack has occurred, and recovering from 
attacks.  
We see resilience of cyber-physical systems as an 
important further protection goal, to limit the effect of 
potential successful attacks on a cyber-physical system in the 
physical world. In addition, resilience also addresses system 
stability to cope with failure scenarios not caused by a 
successful attack. It can be rather seen as a strategy than a 
specific technology. Our objective is to increase the 
robustness with respect to intentional attacks, although 
resilience in general would consider also accidental failures. 
This paper, being an extended version of [1], puts the focus on 
the interface between the OT system, i.e., the automation and 
control system, and the physical world, proposing an 
additional layer of defense for cyber physical systems. It can 
be considered as “physical world firewall”, limiting the access 
to the physical world by the OT system. 
After giving an overview on cyber physical systems and 
on industrial cyber security in Sections II and III, a new 
approach on protecting the interface of a CPS between the 
cyber-world and the physical world is described in Section IV. 
It is a concept to increase the resilience of a CPS when being 
under attack. Aspects to evaluate the new approach are 
discussed in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 
A cyber-physical system, e.g., an industrial automation 
and control system, monitors and controls a technical system. 
Examples are process automation, machine control, energy 
automation, and cloud robotics. Automation control 
equipment with sensors (S) and actuators (A) is connected 
directly with automation components, or via remote 
input/output modules. The technical process is controlled by 
measuring its current state using the sensors, and by 
determining the corresponding actuator signals.  
Figure 1 shows an example of an industrial automation and 
control system, comprising different control networks 
connected to a plant network and a cloud backend system. 
Separation of the network is typically used to realize distinct 
control networks with strict real-time requirements for the 
interaction between sensors and actuators of a production cell, 
or to enforce a specific security policy within a production 
cell.  
54
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Such an industrial automation and control system is an 
example of a cyber-physical system and are utilized in various 
automation domains, including discrete automation (factory 
automation), process automation, railway automation, energy 
automation, and building automation. 
Figure 2 shows the typical structure of automation 
components. The functionality realized by an automation 
component is largely defined by the firmware/software and 
the configuration data stored in its flash memory. 
 
Automation Component / Remote IO
CPU
NW 
IF
RAM
IO
S
S
A
A
FW 
Flash
 
Figure 2. Automation Component 
In practice, it has to be assumed that each software 
component may comprise vulnerabilities, independent of the 
effort spend to ensure high software quality. This is a reason 
why automation systems are usually organized in separate 
security zones. Network traffic can be filtered using network 
firewalls between different zones, limiting the impact of an 
impact in one security zone on other connected security zones. 
In addition, it is often not possible to fix known vulnerabilities 
immediately by installing a software update, as updates have 
to be tested thoroughly in a test system before being installed 
in an operational system, and as an installation  is often 
possible only during a scheduled maintenance window. Also, 
the priorities of security objectives in different security zones 
are often different. 
In cyber physical systems, the impact of a vulnerability in 
the OT system may not only affect data and data processing 
as in classical IT, but it may have an effect also on the physical 
world. For example, production equipment could be damaged, 
or the physical process may operate outside the designed 
physical boundaries, so that the produced goods may not have 
the expected quality.  
III. 
INDUSTRIAL CYBER SECURITY 
Protecting industrial automation control systems against 
intentional attacks is increasingly demanded by operators to 
ensure a reliable operation, and meanwhile also by regulation. 
Control Network
SCADA
Log 
Server
Plant Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
GW
IoT 
Gateway
GW
Control Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Edge Cloud
Automation 
Component
Remote IO
S
S
A
A
Remote IO
S
S
A
A
IoT Backend
 
Figure 1. Example CPS System 
 
55
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This section gives an overview on industrial security, and on 
the main relevant industrial security standard IEC 62443 [11] 
and integrity security requirements.   
A. Industrial CPS Security Requirements 
Industrial security is called also Operation Technology 
security (OT security), to distinguish it from general 
Information Technology (IT) security. Industrial systems have 
not only different security requirements compared to general 
IT systems, but come also with specific side conditions that 
prevent that security concepts established in the IT domain 
can be directly applied in an OT environment. For example, 
availability and integrity of an automation system often have 
a higher priority than confidentiality. As an example, high 
availability requirements, different organization processes 
(e.g., 
yearly 
maintenance 
windows), 
and 
required 
certifications may prevent the immediate installations of 
updates. 
 
Availability
Priority
Integrity
Confidentiality
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Industrial Automation 
and Control Systems
Office IT Systems
 
Figure 3. The CIA Pyramid [9] 
 
The three basic security requirements are confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability. They are also named “CIA” 
requirements. Figure 3 shows that in common IT systems, the 
priority is “CIA”. However, in automation systems or 
industrial IT, the priorities are commonly just the other way 
around: Availability has typically the highest priority, 
followed by integrity. Confidentiality is often no strong 
requirement for control communication, but may be needed to 
protect critical business know-how. As shown graphically, the 
CIA pyramid is inverted (turned upside down) in many 
automation systems.  
Specific requirements and side conditions of industrial 
automation 
systems 
like 
high 
availability, 
planned 
configuration (engineering info), long life cycles, unattended 
operation, real-time operation, and communication, as well as 
safety requirements have to be considered when designing a 
security solution. Note that safety addresses undesired 
impacts originating from a technical system to the 
environment, e.g., in the case of a malfunction, while security 
addresses intentional attacks on the technical system. Often, 
an important aspect is that the applied security measures do 
not put availability and integrity of the automation system at 
risk. Depending on the considered industry (vertical), they 
may also be part of the critical infrastructure domain, for 
which security requirements are also imposed for instance by 
the European Network and Information Systems (NIS) 
directive [10] or country specific realizations of the directive. 
Further security requirements are provided by applying 
standards defining functional requirements, for instance 
defined in IEC 62443. The defined security requirements can 
be mapped to different automation domains, including energy 
automation, railway automation, building automation, process 
automation.  
Security measures to address these requirements range 
from security processes, personal and physical security, 
device security, network security, and application security. No 
single security technology alone is adequate, but a 
combination of security measures addressing prevention, 
detection, and reaction to incidents is required (“defense in 
depth”).  
 
Detect
React
Prevent
 
Figure 4. Prevent Detect React Cycle 
 
Also, overall security has to address the areas prevent, 
detect, and react, see Figure 4. It is not sufficient to only define 
measures to protect against attacks. The capability has also 
foreseen to detect attacks, and to define measures to react 
adequately once an attack has been detected. The physical 
world firewall described in this paper is targeting the “react” 
phase, limiting the impact of a successful attack.  
 
B. Overview IEC 62443 Industrial Security Standard 
The international industrial security standard IEC 62443 
[11] is a security requirements framework defined by the 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). It addresses 
the need to design cybersecurity robustness and resilience into 
industrial automation and control systems, covering both 
organizational and technical aspects of security over the life 
cycle. Specific parts of this framework are applied 
successfully in different automation domains, including 
factory and process automation, railway automation, energy 
automation, and building automation. The standard specifies 
security for industrial automation and control systems (IACS) 
and covers both, organizational and technical aspects of 
security. Specifically addressed for the industrial domain is 
56
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the setup of a security organization and the definition of 
security processes as part of an information security 
management system (ISMS) based on already existing 
standards like ISO 27001 [12] or the NIST cyber security 
framework. Furthermore, technical security requirements are 
specified distinguishing different security levels for industrial 
automation and control systems, and also for the used 
components. The standard has been created to address the 
specific requirements of industrial automation and control 
systems.  
As shown in Figure 5, different parts of the IEC62443 
standard are grouped into four clusters, covering:  
− 
common definitions and metrics; 
− 
requirements on setup of a security organization (ISMS 
related, comparable to ISO 27001 [12]), as well as 
solution supplier and service provider processes;  
− 
technical requirements and methodology for security on 
system-wide level, and  
− 
requirements on the secure development lifecycle of 
system components, and security requirements to such 
components at a technical level.  
The framework parts address different roles over different 
phases of the (system) lifecycle: The operator of an 
automation system operates the automation and control 
system that has been integrated by the system integrator, using 
components of product suppliers. In the set of corresponding 
documents, security requirements are defined, which target 
the solution operator and the integrator but also the product 
manufacturer.  
According to the methodology described in IEC 62443 
part 3-2, a complex automation system is structured into 
security zones that are connected by and communicate 
through so-called “conduits” that map for example to the 
logical network protocol communication between two 
security zones, see Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Zones and Conduits 
 
Moreover, this document defines Security Levels (SL) that 
correlate with the strength of a potential adversary as shown 
in Figure 7. To achieve a dedicated SL, the defined 
requirements have to be fulfilled. IEC 62443 part 3-3 defines 
system security requirements. It supports focusing only on 
certain facets of security. The security requirements defined 
by IEC 62443 helps to ensure that all relevant aspects are 
addressed. 
Part 3-3 of IEC 62443 [14], addressing an overall 
automation system, is in particular relevant for the system 
integrator. It defines seven foundational requirements that 
group specific requirements of a certain category: 
− 
FR 1 Identification and authentication control 
− 
FR 2 Use control 
− 
FR 3 System integrity  
− 
FR 4 Data confidentiality  
− 
FR 5 Restricted data flow 
− 
FR 6 Timely response to events  
− 
FR 7 Resource availability 
For each of the foundational requirements, there exist 
several concrete technical security requirements (SR) and 
requirement enhancements (RE) to address a specific security 
level. In the context of communication security, these security 
levels are specifically interesting for the conduits connecting 
different zones. Related security requirements are defined for 
the components of an industrial automation and control 
Component
System
Policies and procedures
General
1-1 Terminology, concepts and 
models
1-2 Master glossary of terms and 
abbreviations
3-3 System security requirements 
and security assurance levels
3-2 Security assurance levels for 
zones and conduits
3-1 Security technologies for IACS
2-3 Patch management in the IACS 
environment
2-2 Operating an IACS security 
program
2-1 Establishing an IACS security 
program
1-3 System security compliance 
metrics
4-2 Technical security requirements 
for IACS products
4-1 Product development 
requirements
IEC 62443 (ISA-99)
Definitions
Metrics
Requirements to the security 
organization and processes of the 
plant owner and suppliers
Requirements to a secure system
Requirements to secure system 
components
2-4 Certification of IACS supplier 
security policies
1-5 IACS Protection Levels
 
Figure 5. IEC 62443 Industrial Security Standard – Overview 
 
57
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

system in IEC 62443 part 4-2 [15], addressing in particular 
component manufacturers. The definition of security 
requirements 
distinguishes 
different 
categories 
of 
components, which are “software application”, “embedded 
device”, “host device”, and “network device”.  
Four Security Levels (SL1, SL2, SL3, SL4) are defined 
that correlate with the strength of a potential attacker as shown 
in Figure 7. The targeted security level of a zone of the 
industrial automation and control system is determined based 
on the identified risk. This allows to tailor the security 
requirements to the specific needs of an industrial automation 
and control system.  
To reach a dedicated security level, the System 
Requirements (SR) and potential Requirement Enhancements 
(RE) defined for that security level have to be fulfilled. The 
standard foresees that a security requirement can be addressed 
either directly, or by a compensating countermeasure. 
 
 
Figure 7. IEC 62443 defined Security Level [9] 
 
The concept of compensating countermeasures allows to 
reach a certain security level even if some requirements 
cannot be implemented directly, e.g., as some components do 
not support the required technical features. This approach is 
in particular important for existing industrial automation and 
control systems, so called “brown-field installations”, as 
existing equipment can be continued to be used.  
The security level of a zone or a conduit (a conduit 
connects zones) is more precisely a security level vector with 
seven elements. The elements of the vector designate the 
security level for each foundational requirement. This allows 
defining the security level specific for each foundational 
requirement. If, e.g., confidentiality is no security objective 
within a zone, the security level element corresponding to FR4 
“Data confidentiality” can be defined to be SL1 or even none, 
although SL3 may be required for other foundational 
requirements (e.g., for FR1, FR2, and FR3). So, the resulting 
security level vector for a zone could be SL=(3,3,3,1,2,1,3) or 
SL=(2,2,2,0,1,1,0). The seven elements of the SL-vector 
correspond to the seven foundational requirements, so that the 
security level SLFR(i) can be defined separately for each 
foundational requirement FR(i), i.e., SL = (slFR1, slFR2, slFR3, 
slFR4, slFR5, slFR6, slFR7). 
Different types of SL vectors are distinguished, depending 
on the purpose:  
− 
SL-T: A target security level vector is defined by the 
IACS operator based on his risk assessment, defining 
which security level shall be achieved by each zone and 
conduit.  
− 
SL-A: The achieved security level vector designates the 
current status, i.e., the security level that is actually 
achieved by each zone and conduit. In particular for 
brown-field installations, it is common that a targeted 
security level cannot be set-up immediately. The gap 
between the targeted and the actually achieved security 
level can be made transparent.  
− 
SL-C: The security level capability describes the 
reachable security level a component is capable of, if 
properly configured, without additional compensating 
counter measures employed. This also means that 
depending on the SL-T not all security features of a 
component may be used in certain installations. 
C. IEC 62443 Integrity Requirements 
One of the seven foundational security requirements 
defined in Part 3-3 of IEC 62443 [14], targets specifically 
integrity.  
Integrity requirements cover the following areas: 
− 
Overall system integrity 
− 
Communication integrity 
− 
Device integrity 
The following examples from IEC 62443-3-3 [14] 
illustrate some of the integrity-related requirements: 
− 
FR3, SR3.1 Communication integrity: “The control 
system shall provide the capability to protect the 
integrity of transmitted information”. 
− 
FR3, SR3.4 Software and information integrity: “The 
control system shall provide the capability to detect, 
record, report and protect against unauthorized changes 
to software and information at rest.”  
− 
FR3, SR3.8 Session integrity: “The control system shall 
provide the capability to protect the integrity of sessions. 
The control system shall reject any usage of invalid 
session IDs.”  
− 
FR5, SR 5.2 Zone boundary protection: “The control 
system shall provide the capability to monitor and 
control communications at zone boundaries to enforce 
the compartmentalization defined in the risk -based 
zones and conduits model.”  
D. Practical Application of IEC 62443  
The standard IEC 62443[11] is applied successfully by 
operators, integrators, and manufacturers in various projects. 
However, it is common that the security documentation and 
technical designs of real-world deployments are not made 
public or shared with competitors. Still, some examples for 
applying the IEC 62443 standards have been made available 
58
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

publicly: An example of a possible application of the IEC 
62443 standard to an Ukrainian power plant gives some 
insight concerning how the standard can be applied in a 
concrete setting [16]. In particular, it shows that a sound, 
comprehensive security concept is needed that covers security 
requirements broadly and at a consistent level addressing 
both, organizational/procedural and technical security 
requirements. 
The 
German 
industrial 
association 
“Zentralverband Elektrotechnik- und Elektronikindustrie 
e.V.” (ZVEI) published an overview document on IEC 62443 
that includes an example, showing the application to a 
simplified automation system [17]. A further example is 
provided by a blueprint for the design of secure substations in 
the power system domain [25]. This blueprint has been 
certified as IEC 62443-2-4 and IEC 62443-3-3 compliant [26]. 
E. Resilience 
Being resilient means to be able to withstand or recover 
quickly from difficult conditions [2]. It shifts the focus of 
“classical” IT/OT security, which puts the focus on 
preventing, detecting, and reacting on cyber-security attacks, 
to the aspect to continue to deliver an intended outcome 
despite an adverse cyber attack is taking place, and to recover 
quickly to regular operation. More specifically, resilience of a 
system is the property to be resistant to a range of threats and 
withstand the effects of a partial loss of capability, and to 
recover and resume its provision of service with the minimum 
reasonable loss of performance [3]. It has been addressed in 
telecommunications, ensuring that subscribers can continue to 
be served even when one line is out of service. Bodeau and 
Graubart [6] define resilience guidelines for providers of 
critical national telecommunications infrastructure in the UK. 
Kott and Linkov [7] have compiled a book of different 
contributions addressing various aspects of cyber resilience in 
networks and systems. Besides an overview on cyber security, 
metrics to quantify cyber resilience, approaches to assess, 
analyze and to enhance cyber resilience are described. The 
notion of resilience is related to risk management, and also to 
robustness. Risk management, the “classical” approach to 
cyber security, identifies threats and determines the risk 
depending on probability and impact of a potential attack. The 
objective is to put the focus of defined security measures on 
the most relevant risks. Resilience, however, puts the focus on 
a reduction of the impact, so that the system stays operational 
with a degraded performance or functionality even when it has 
been attacked successfully, and to recover quickly from a 
successful attack. Robustness is a further related approach that 
tries to keep the system operational without a reduction of the 
system performance [7], i.e., to withstand attacks. 
Figure 8 illustrates the concept of cyber resilience: Even if 
an attack is carried out, the impact on the system operation, 
i.e., the performance or functionality of the system, is limited. 
The effects of an attack are “absorbed”, so that the system 
stays operational, but with limited performance or 
functionality. A recovery takes place to bring the system up to 
the regular operation. In adaptation of resilience, the system 
might be enhanced to better prepare for future attacks. In a 
cyber-physical environment, a main objective is that the CPS 
stays operational and that its integrity is ensured. In the 
context of an industrial automation and control system, that 
means that (only) intended actions of the system in the 
physical world continue to take place even when the 
automation and control system of the CPS should be attacked. 
 
t
Absorb
Recover
Plan/Prepare
Adapt
Attack
System 
Performance / 
Functionality
 
Figure 8. Concept of Cyber Resilience 
 
IV. 
PROTECTING THE CPS PHYSICAL WORLD INTERFACE 
Well-known IT security technologies are encryption and 
access control, protecting data at rest, in transit, and partly 
even data in use. In cyber-physical systems, this is not enough. 
Also, the interface between the OT part (automation systems) 
and the physical world has to be protected, limiting the 
potential danger that an automation system can have on the 
physical world when it is attacked. A successful attack on the 
automation system or control network can have an impact on 
the physical world [4].  
This section describes the concept of a “physical world 
firewall” that limits the access to the physical world from OT 
automation systems. The objective is to increase the resilience 
of cyber-physical systems, by limiting the impact of an 
attacked automation system on the physical world. It can be 
seen as a specific approach for increasing cyber resilience, to 
design for reversibility. This approach means in general that a 
cyber physical system should be designed in a manner that 
allows to revert to a safe mode after components have failed 
or have been compromised [7]. The approach of a physical 
world firewall, described in the following section, can be both 
integrated in automation components, or realized as an add-on 
component to enhance resilience of existing cyber-physical 
systems (brown-field). It protects the interface between the 
control system and the physical world, limiting the possible 
impact of a successful attack on the physical world.  
A. Physical-World Firewall 
The main idea or the approach is to filter the 
communication between sensors and actuators on one side, 
and the control equipment on the other side. This can be called 
physical-world firewall. It limits in which way a control 
system, potentially under attack, can impact a physical system 
in the real world. The filtering takes place directly at the 
input/output interface, so that it is independent from the 
59
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

software-based functionality of the automation component. 
Conceptually, it can be considered as a physical world 
reference monitor to control access to the physical world 
based on a defined access control policy [8]. However, the 
physical world firewall described here would be realized 
independent of the software-based control functionality to 
ensure that is effective even if the software would be 
manipulated. 
Similar as a communication firewall for data traffic that 
analyzes and filters data packets (IP packets and IP-based 
communication, filtering based on network addresses and 
used protocols), here the actuator and sensor signals are 
filtered, so that only signals allowed by the signal filter policy 
are provided.  
The allowed signal ranges and dynamic parameters are 
monitored and limited. If the signal filtering policy is violated, 
the signal cannot be simply dropped like an IP packet. Instead, 
a replacement signal is provided. The replacement signal may 
be a fixed default value, or a clipped maximum/minimum 
value that is within the allowed value range, or it may be an 
out-of-range signal or a high-impedance signal that will be 
detected by an actuator as failure signal, so that the actor can 
react accordingly).  
Figure 9 shows an automation component with an 
integrated Cyber Physical Controlled Input / Output Interface 
(CPC IO) that realizes a physical-world firewall functionality. 
Each input/output channel is monitored separately by the 
“Value Check” component: It verifies whether the current 
sensor input value or the current actuator output values are 
within the given allowed range, and thus are compliant with 
the defined filtering policy Pol.  
Besides the value range, also further parameters can be 
calculated and checked against the defined filtering Policy 
Pol, e.g., statistical parameters as average and variation, and 
dynamic parameters as a first order or second order derivation, 
or a transformation as a Fourier transformation. Besides the 
actual input/output signals, also further data relating to the 
current operating state of the CPS can be used. 
 
Automation Component / Remote IO
CPU
RAM
CPC IO 
FW 
Flash
I2C
NW 
IF
Value Check
Pol
DV
Value Check
Pol
DV
Value Check
Pol
DV
Value Check
Pol
DV
AD
DA
AD
DA
S
A
S
A
 
Figure 9. Automation Component with Integrated Physical World Firewall 
 
If the policy is met, the value is allowed, i.e., the 
unmodified signal is forwarded. Otherwise, the configured 
default value (DV) is provided as replacement signal, ensuring 
the CPS system stays operational. It is possible to lock the 
input/output interface in the case of a detected policy 
violation. The lock may be permanent, but preferably it can be 
reset at a reboot of by a manual user interaction.  
It is possible that the CPU performs an integrity check as 
part of a secure boot process or during operation. The CPU 
subsystem can authenticate towards its CPC IO block after a 
successful self-integrity check. The CPC IO block can 
configure a policy depending on the integrity check status of 
the CPU, limiting the access to the physical world for a 
manipulated CPU subsystem.  
A variant is shown in Figure 10, where the signals of 
multiple input/output channels are checked in combination. 
This allows to perform cross-checks between sensor and 
actuator signals. Moreover, if this approach is applied in a 
distributed system, it allows to take certain properties of 
potentially different sensors/actuators into account.  
Specifically, if the sensors/actuators used are a mixture of 
standard (legacy) and specifically hardened, trusted sensors, a 
potential security assertion can be used in the evaluation of the 
signals, giving the trusted sensor a higher weight in the 
evaluation. This is especially advantageous if a larger number 
of legacy sensors/actuators is already deployed and secure 
siblings are installed as add-on in a stepwise manner. More 
information on the basic concept is described in [9]. 
 
Automation Component / Remote IO
CPU
NW 
IF
RAM
CPC IO
S
A
FW 
Flash
AD
I2C
DA
Pol
DV
S
AD
A
DA
Value Check
Pol
DV
DV
DV
DV
  
Figure 10. Automation Component with Integrated Physical World Firewall 
 
Both Figure 9 and Figure 10 showed the physical world 
firewall as an integrated functionality of an automation 
component. However, it is possible as well to realize the 
physical world firewall as an add-on component to an existing 
automation component. This add-on component monitors 
input/output signals of the automation component between the 
automation component and the actual sensor/actuator 
connected to the automation component. The signal is 
replaced with a replacement signal if the currently observed 
signal is not complaint with the defined policy Pol.  
A physical-world firewall realized as add-on component 
to already existing and deployed automation components can 
be used in particular within brownfield CPS. A stepwise 
migration of existing brownfield CPS towards systems with a 
higher resilience under attack is supported, as the already 
deployed components of the CPS have not to be replaced. 
60
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Dynamic Resilience Management 
The policy of the physical-world firewall can be adapted 
dynamically, depending on the current operating state of the 
CPS. This allows to restrict the possibility to influence the 
physical world even more strictly, as the current state of the 
production system and the currently performed production 
step, e.g., cooling or filtering a fluid, can be reflected in the 
current configuration of the physical-world firewalls.  
Resilience managers determine the physical-world 
firewall policy dynamically, depending on the current state 
and context of the CPS, see Figure 11.  
Resilience managers adapt during operation the current 
policy configuration of the physical-world firewalls.  
The policy adaptation performed by resilience managers 
can use in particular the following information: 
− 
The current state of the physical world, as obtained by 
trusted sensor nodes [9].  
− 
The current production batch, the current production 
step, operating state (e.g., standby, preparation, active, 
service, alarm). In real-world deployments, the 
information may be obtained from a Manufacturing 
Execution System (MES).  
− 
Cyber attacks detected by an integrity monitoring system 
or an intrusion detection system, supervising the CPS.  
The dynamic adaptation allows to enforce tight physical-
world firewall policies depending on the current system state 
and operation.  
C. Policy Adaptation for Dynamically Reconfigurable CPS 
Cyber-physical systems and industrial automation systems 
are often rather static. After being put into operation, changes 
to the configuration happen only rarely, e.g., to replace a 
defect component, or to install smaller upgrades during a 
planned maintenance window. To cope with increasing 
demands for flexible production and increased productivity, 
also CPS will become more dynamic, allowing for 
reconfiguration during regular operation. Such scenarios for 
adaptable, reconfigurable production have been described in 
the context of Industry 4.0 [19]. 
An integrity monitoring system for a reconfigurable CPS 
has to be adapted to the current configuration. Similar as for 
dynamic resilience management, the policies for physical 
world firewalls can be adapted depending on the current CPS 
configuration. The information of the current configuration is 
usually managed already as part of collecting, storing, and 
validating production data that describes the production 
Control Network 
(Zone1)
Log 
Server
Plant 
Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
GW
IoT 
Gateway
GW
Control Network
(Zone2)
Plant Automation 
System Resilience 
Manager
SCADA
Config 
Server
MES
DD
DD
SCADA
IoT Backend
Plant Automation System 
Resilience Manager
Zone Resilience 
Manager
SCADA
A
A-FW
A-FW
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
A
A-FW
A-FW
 
Figure 11. Dynamic Resilience Management 
61
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

process, so that the information for adapting the policies is 
available already. 
D. Physical World Integrity Monitoring 
A further source of information for adapting the filter 
policy is monitoring the automation site for physical security, 
using alarm systems, e.g., physical access control and closed-
circuit television (CCTV) cameras. If the alarm system detects 
some unexpected situation, e.g., an intruder, the filter policies 
of the physical world firewalls can be reconfigured to limit 
possible damages.  
Furthermore, the physical operational properties of 
automation machinery (e.g., drives, pumps) can be monitored. 
The acoustic emissions (vibrations) of machines as well as 
power consumption profile (power fingerprinting) can be 
monitored. Signal processing algorithms including machine 
learning (artificial intelligence) can be used to determine 
whether the machinery is in a normal or exceptional 
operational state. Also, specific actuations in the physical 
world can be performed that encode integrity measurements 
of software and data in control operations, realizing integrity 
attestation by physical-world actuation signals [18].  
If it is detected that the machinery is operating outside the 
expected operational boundaries, the filter policy of the 
physical world firewalls can be adapted to limit the impact of 
the automation system on the physical world accordingly. A 
restricted physical-world filter policy can be configured 
dynamically that is foreseen for detected integrity violations. 
E. Authenticating Physical Signals  
In data communication, the sender of a data packet can be 
identified by an identifier, e.g., an internet protocol (IP) 
address or a media access control (MAC) address. The sender 
may be authenticated cryptographically. A data firewall can 
filter data packets depending on address information and 
content. In the physical world, the source of a signal can in 
general not be identified by an explicit identifier included in 
the data communication. However, the source is implicitly 
based on the cabling.  
A higher level of confidence can be achieved by 
performing signal authentication. The sender of a signal can 
be identified by a sender-specific fingerprint information, e.g., 
a noise signal. Furthermore, it is possible to actively add a 
signal marker (signal watermarking), e.g., a coded spread-
spectrum signal [20][21][22]. This allows to identify the 
source of a signal by evaluation properties of the signal. The 
physical world firewall can identify signals not having the 
expected fingerprint and block them, i.e., substitute them with 
a replacement signal. A (physical) signal cannot simply be 
blocked by not forwarding it. The replacement signal may be 
a regular signal value, or a specific out-of-range signal value.  
The coded spread spectrum signal (signal watermark) can 
be added to the actual measurement signal close to the analog 
sensor by adding the watermarking noise signal. However, it 
is also possible to add actuators in the physical world of the 
CPS that imprint a watermarking noise signal in the physical 
world, e.g., by mechanical actuator. Thereby, already 
deployed sensors (brownfield installation) can capture the 
watermarking signal, and the sensor measurements can be 
verified. While having some similarities to the approach 
described by Ghaeini, Chan, et al. [18], here, the physical 
world 
watermarking 
ensures 
the 
reliable 
identification/authentication of physical signals.  
F. Defining Policies for Physical World Firewalls 
Even for conventional firewalls filtering network 
communication, the definition and testing of firewall policies 
is a huge challenge. The level of security of a network that is 
actually achieved depends heavily on the ability to manage the 
available security mechanisms effectively and consistently 
[23]. This is the case in particular when several firewalls are 
deployed that have to be configured consistently, and when 
involving 
multiple 
administrative 
domains. 
The 
administration has to be practical, i.e., both efficient and 
effective, also in such complex environments, with frequent 
changes and with the complexity of networks consisting of 
thousands of users and components. 
The same applies to policies for physical world firewalls. 
A further specific side condition is that properties of the 
physical world have to be understood to come-up with an 
appropriate policy. This requires a good understanding of the 
automation system and the physics of the controlled system. 
A manual configuration of such policies will hardly be 
practical in real-world deployments. As with other security 
mechanisms, also physical world firewalls will be introduced 
stepwise, starting with less critical parts of the CPS and with 
simple policies to avoid unexpected negative impacts on the 
regular operation.  
For the practical definition of the policies, two approaches 
seem promising: 
− 
CPS simulation: One important aspect of Industry 4.0 is 
a digital twin of the physical system that allows to 
perform simulations in the digital world. Here, the CPS 
can be simulated under all foreseen operational 
conditions to derive the filter policies permitting all 
signals that can be expected in foreseen operational 
conditions. Also, specific attack scenarios can be 
simulated.  
− 
Machine learning: The policies can be learnt, similar to 
network firewalls, where during a learning phase, the 
policy is automatically determined.  
These approaches for determining the filter policies 
automatically can be enhanced with hand-crafted, manually 
defined filter policies for interfaces to highly critical physical 
world components, or for highly critical automation steps.  
Those tight policies can be adapted specifically to the purpose 
and foreseen usage of the automation component. So, tight 
physical world firewall policies can be defined based on a risk 
assessment, protecting the most relevant components and 
automation steps.  
V. 
EVALUATION 
The security of a cyber system can be evaluated in practice 
in various approaches and stages of the system’s lifecycle: 
− 
Threat and Risk Analysis (TRA, also abbreviated as 
TARA) of a cyber physical system (for a system being 
62
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

under design or in operation). In a TRA, possible attacks 
(threats) on the system are identified. The impact that 
would be caused by a successful attack (threat) and the 
probability that the attack happens are evaluated to 
determine the risk of the identified threats. The risk 
evaluation allows to prioritize the threats, focusing on 
the highest, most relevant risks and to define 
corresponding security measures. Besides technical 
measures, also organizational and personal security 
measures can be defined.  
− 
Security checks can be performed during operation or 
during maintenance windows to determine key 
performance indicators (e.g., check compliance of 
device configurations). It can be verified that the defined 
security measures are in fact in place, and areas requiring 
increased attention can be identified.  
− 
Security testing (penetration testing, also called 
pentesting for short) can be performed for a system that 
has been built, but that is currently not in operation. A 
pentest can usually not be performed on an operational 
automation and control system, as the pentest could 
endanger the reliable operation of the system. Pentesting 
can be performed during a maintenance window when 
the physical system is in a safe state, or using a separate 
test system. The non-operational system is attacked by 
“white hat” hackers to identify vulnerabilities that need 
to be addressed.  
− 
Security testing can be performed also on a digital 
representation of a target system, e.g., a simulation in the 
easiest case. This digital representation is also called 
“digital twin”. This allows to perform security checks 
and pentesting for systems that are not existing yet 
physically (design phase), or to perform pentesting of 
operational systems in the digital world without the risk 
of disturbing the regular operation of the real-world 
system.  
A holistic protection concept has to address measures for 
all three discussed phases: protect, detect, and react. No single 
measure or security technology alone can result in an adequate 
security level. It is always a set of measures that, when used 
in combination, can reduce the overall risk to an acceptable 
level.   
The security measures presented in this paper, acting on 
the interface between the cyber world and the physical world, 
provide an additional security measure that can be used as part 
of a defense-in-depth security concept. The protection is 
complementary to well-known security measures that focus 
on the IT/cyber part, as it operates directly at the interface 
towards the physical world, not on computer-based control 
functions as conventional IT security technologies. Even if all 
security measures in the pure IT/cyber world fail, still the 
impact on the physical world can be controlled. It can serve as 
“last line of defense”, allowing to connect cyber systems from 
the physical world in a tightly controlled way.  
A limitation for all evaluations of the effectiveness of an 
overall security architectural design and of individual security 
measures is the fact that the threat landscape of attacks seen in 
practice continuously evolves. Therefore, it is required that a 
security design allows for being updated to address new 
attacks. This aspect is in particular important for CPS and 
automation and control systems having typically a long life-
time of typically 10 to 30 years. The defined concept of 
physical world firewalls supports an update not only to 
already existing brownfield installations, but also to enhance 
the security robustness of long-lived systems during operation 
without directly affecting the control functionality. As CPS 
are often subject to regulatory approvals, having security 
measures that can be updated and enhanced along the lifetime 
without directly affecting regulatory approvals of the control 
functions is advantageous. 
As long as the proposed technology has not been proven 
in a real-world operational setting, it can be evaluated 
conceptually by analyzing the impact that the additional 
security measure would have on the identified residual risks 
as determined by the TRA of the CPS. A  TRA identifies 
threats against a system, and determines the risk depending on 
probability and impact. The general effect of the presented 
security measure is that the impact of a threat, i.e., a successful 
attack, on the physical world controlled by the CPS is reduced. 
Whatever attack is ongoing on the IT-based automation and 
control system, still the possible impact on the real, physical 
world is limited. So, the measure helps to reduce the risk of 
threats having an impact on the physical world.  
However, TRAs for real-world CPS are not available 
publicly. Nevertheless, an illustrative example may be given 
by a chemical production plant performing a specific process 
like refinery, or a factory producing glue or cement. If the 
plant is attacked, the attack may target to destroy the 
production equipment by immediately stopping the process 
leading to physical hardening of the chemicals / consumables 
and thus to a permanent unavailability of the production 
equipment. In this case, trusted sensors could be used to detect 
a falsified sensor signal, and the physical-world firewall can 
be used to limit actions in the physical world. Thereby, a 
physical damage of the production equipment can be avoided. 
If needed, a controlled shutdown of the production site can be 
performed.  
As the evaluation in a real-world CPS requires significant 
effort, and as attack scenarios cannot be tested that could 
really have a (severe) impact on the physical world, a 
simulation-based approach or using specific test-beds are 
possible approaches, allowing to simulate or evaluate in a 
protected test-bed the effect on the physical world of certain 
attack scenarios with compromised components. The 
simulation would have to include not only the IT-based 
control function, but also the physical world impact of an 
attack. Using physical-world simulation and test beds to 
evaluate the impact of attacks have been described by Urbina, 
Giraldo et al. [24].  
A major advantage of the physical-world firewall is the 
property that it can be added to existing brownfield 
deployments. Legacy equipment, may be 10 or even 20 years 
in the field, not even been designed with security in mind, and 
without getting patches. In such cases, the physical-world 
firewall can be used as an “add-on” security measure for an 
63
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

existing CPS. It can be used as compensating countermeasure 
to address security requirements defined by industrial security 
standards like IEC 62443-3.3 [14], where conventional cyber 
security measures cannot be deployed. However, it can be 
used also as additional layer of defense in CPS having state-
of-the-art security measures integrated, thereby increasing the 
level of protection even further. The conceptual advantage 
that the protection acts on a different layer than conventional 
IT security mechanisms provides an additional, independent 
layer of defense. As for all security technologies, the 
confirmation for the actual effectiveness has to come from 
tests and experience real-world application, starting with 
smaller pilot tests in real deployments.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
With ubiquitous machine-oriented communication, e.g., 
the Internet of Things and interconnected cyber physical 
systems (CPS), the integrity of the operation of technical 
systems is becoming an increasingly important security 
objective. Protecting such systems against intentional attacks 
to ensure a reliable operation is demanded by operators, as 
well as by regulation. There is a need for enhanced protection 
that can be applied practically both to already deployed 
installations, where often IT-based functionality cannot be 
updated practically, as well as to new CPS, which are 
increasingly open and dynamic.  
A CPS comprises the operational cyber-technology and 
the physical world with which the system interacts. Both parts 
have to be covered by a security concept and solution. Cyber 
security puts the focus traditionally on the cyber-part, i.e., on 
the IT-based automation and control systems. The security of 
the physical part, like machinery, is protected often by 
physical and organizational security measures, only. This is 
challenging for dynamically changing cyber physical systems, 
that come with the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) and 
Industry 4.0. Cyber systems will become more and more open 
and dynamic to support flexible production down to lot size 1 
(plug-and-work 
reconfiguration 
of 
manufacturing 
equipment), and to support a flexible adaptation to changing 
needs like market demand and personalized products. 
This paper presented a concept for a new approach that 
enhances the achieved level of security by protecting the 
interface between the IT-based cyber-part and the physical 
world, thereby enhancing the resilience of a CPS being under 
attack. The CPS may even continue to operate under attack, 
as the possible negative impact on the physical world is 
restricted. This allows also to ensure a high availability of the 
automation system, even under attack, as the automation 
system has not to be shut down.  
The proposed new layer of protection can be applied to 
new installations (greenfield), e.g., to address the risk of 
installing malware during update of the software-based 
functionality. More importantly, it can as well be applied as 
add-on to already deployed installations (brownfield). It 
realizes an additional, independent level of protection that can 
be deployed and updated independently of the actual control 
systems of the legacy system. Therefore, it can also be applied 
when a legacy IT-based control system of a CPS cannot be 
updated with current cyber security technology. This is a 
demanding problem in many installed CPS, as they are often 
in use for several decades and are subject to regulations that 
make updates complicated or even impossible. The proposed 
solution can be introduced in a complex CPS in a stepwise 
way, starting with most critical physical world interfaces. 
Also, the filtering policies can be coarse in an initial usage 
phase, and it can be updated with increasing sophistication 
depending on observed attacks, and reflecting the intended 
operation of the specific CPS and its current operation mode.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Enhancing Resilience by Protecting the 
Physical-World Interface of Cyber-Physical Systems”, The 
Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and 
Cyber-Systems CYBER 2019, September 22, 2019 to 
September 26, 2019 - Porto, Portugal, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=cyber_
2019_1_20_80033 2020.05.13 
[2] P. England, R. Aigner, A. Marochko, D. Mattoon, R. Spiger, 
and S. Thom, “Cyber resilient platforms”, Microsoft Technical 
Report MSR-TR-2017-40, Sep. 2017, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/publication/cyber-resilient-platforms-overview/ 
2020.05.13 
[3] Electronic Communications Resilience&Response Group, 
“EC-RRG resilience guidelines for providers of critical 
national telecommunications infrastructure”, version 0.7, 
March 
2008, 
available 
from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/62281/telecoms-ecrrg-
resilience-guidelines.pdf 2020.05.13 
[4] D. Urbina, J. Giraldo, N. O. Tippenhauer, and A. Cardenas, 
“Attacking fieldbus communications in ICS: applications to the 
SWaT testbed”, Singapore Cyber-Security Conference (SG-
CRC), IOS press, pp. 75–89, 2016, [Online]. Available from: 
http://ebooks.iospress.nl/volumearticle/42054 2020.05.13 
[5] C. C. Davidson, T. R. Andel, M. Yampolskiy, J. T. McDonald, 
W. B. Glisson, and T. Thomas, “On SCADA PLC and fieldbus 
cyber security”, 13th International Conference on Cyber 
Warfare 
and 
Security, 
National 
Defense 
University, 
Washington, DC, pp. 140–148, 2018  
[6] D. Bodeau and R. Graubart, “Cyber resiliency design 
principles”, MITRE Technical Report, January 2017, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/publications/PR%201
7-
0103%20Cyber%20Resiliency%20Design%20Principles%20
MTR17001.pdf 2020.05.13 
[7] A. Kott and I. Linkov (Eds.), “Cyber Resilience of Systems and 
Networks”, Springer, 2019 
[8] E. B. Fernandez, M. VanHilst, D. laRed Martinez, and S. 
Mujica, An Extended Reference Monitor for Security and 
Safety, 5th Ibero-American Congress on Information Security, 
Montevideo, Uruguay, November 2009, [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.criptored.upm.es/cibsi/cibsi2009/docs/Papers/CIB
SI-Dia2-Sesion4(3).pdf 2020.05.13 
[9] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Enhancing integrity protection for 
industrial cyber physical systems”, The Second International 
Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems, 
CYBER 2017, pp. 35–40, November 12 - 16, 2017, Barcelona, 
Spain, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
cyber_2017_3_30_80031 2020.05.13 
64
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10] European Commission, “The directive on security of network 
and information systems (NIS Directive)”, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/network-
and-information-security-nis-directive 2020.05.13 
[11] IEC 62443, “Industrial automation and control system 
security” (formerly ISA99), [Online]. Available from: 
http://isa99.isa.org/Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx 
2020.05.13 
[12] ISO/IEC 27001, “Information technology – security techniques 
– Information security management systems – requirements”, 
October 
2013, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.iso.org/standard/54534.html 2020.05.13 
[13] NIST, “Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity”, Version 1.1, April 16, 2018, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ 
CSWP/NIST.CSWP.04162018.pdf 2020.05.13  
[14] IEC 62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels”, Edition 1.0, August 2013 
[15] IEC 62443-4.2, “Industrial communication networks - security 
for industrial automation and control systems - Part 4-2: 
technical security requirements for IACS components”, 
CDV:2017-05, May 2017 
[16] P. Bock, J.-P. Hauet, R. Françoise, and R. Foley, “Ukrainian 
power grids cyberattack - A forensic analysis based on 
ISA/IEC 62443”, ISA InTech magazine, 2017, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.isa.org/templates/news-
detail.aspx?id=152995 2020.05.13 
[17] ZVEI, ”Orientation guideline for manufacturers on IEC 
62443”, “Orientierungsleitfaden für Hersteller zur IEC 62443“ 
[German], ZVEI Whitepaper, 2017, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.zvei.org/presse-
medien/publikationen/orientierungsleitfaden-fuer-hersteller-
zur-iec-62443/ 2020.05.13 
[18] H.R. Ghaeini, M. Chan, R. Bahmani, F. Brasser, L. Garcia, J. 
Zhou, A.-R. Sadeghi, N. O. Tippenhauer, and S. Zonouz, 
“PAtt: Physics-based Attestation of Control Systems”, 22nd 
International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions 
and Defenses, USENIX, September 23-25, 2019,  [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.usenix.org/system/files/raid2019-ghaeini.pdf 
2020.05.13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[19] Plattform Industrie 4.0, “Industrie 4.0 Plug-and-produce for 
adaptable factories: example use case definition, models, and 
implementation”, Plattform Industrie 4.0 working paper, June 
2017, [Online]. Available from: https://www.plattform-
i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Publikation/Industrie-
40-Plug-and-Produce.pdf , 2020.05.13 
[20] T. Hupperich, H. Hosseini, and T. Holz, “Leveraging sensor 
fingerprinting for mobile device authentication”, International 
Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and 
Vulnerability Assessment, LNCS 9721, Springer, pp. 377–396, 
2016, [Online]. Available from: https://www.syssec.ruhr-uni-
bochum.de/media/emma/veroeffentlichungen/2016/09/28/pap
er.pdf 2020.05.13 
[21] H. Bojinov, D. Boneh, Y. Michalevsky, and G. Nakibly, 
“Mobile device identification via sensor fingerprinting”, 
arXiv:1408.1416, 
2016, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.1416 2020.05.13 
[22] P. Hao, “Wireless device authentication techniques using 
physical-layer device fingerprint”, PhD thesis, University of 
Western 
Ontario, 
Electronic 
Thesis 
and 
Dissertation 
Repository, 
3440, 
2015, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/3440 2020.05.13 
[23] R. Falk and M. Trommer, “Integrated Management of Network 
and Host Based Security Mechanisms,” 3rd Australasian 
Conference on Information Security and Privacy, ACISP98, 
pp. 36-47, July 13-15, 1998, LNCS 1438, Springer, 1998  
[24] D. Urbina, J. Giraldo, A. Cardenas, N. O. Tippenhauer, J. 
Valente, M. Faisal, J. Ruths, R. Candell, and H. Sandberg, 
“Limiting The Impact of Stealthy Attacks on Industrial Control 
Systems,” 
ACM 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
and 
Communications Security (CCS), Vienna, Austria, 2016 
[25] Siemens, “Secure Substation Manual”, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.siemens.com/download?DLA20_114 
2020.05.13  
[26] Siemens, “Digital Substation Cyber Security”, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.siemens.com/download?DLA13_3680 
2020.05.13 
65
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

