96
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Protected Establishment of a Secondary Network Access Channel 
 
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk  
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Several use cases demand for the setup of a 
separate, dedicated communication channel that provides a 
specific quality of service or that separates communications of 
different criticality. Different properties of communication 
channels are, for instance, performance, latency, but may be 
also security related. In several cases, a reliable association to an 
already established communication channel is required. 
Specifically, if a first communication channel has been securely 
established, a cryptographic binding of a second communication 
channel to this first communication channel is needed. One 
example use case is the charging of electric vehicles. Besides the 
charging control, also value-added services like software 
updates for the infotainment system or other parts of the electric 
vehicle or entertainment services may be provided. To avoid 
interfering with the charging-related control communications, a 
second, separate communication channel is established. The two 
communication channels may require different quality of 
service. The cryptographic binding allows to perform 
authorization checks to access value-added services and maybe 
also to associate the billing of consumed value-added services to 
the user that has been authenticated in the setup of the first 
communication channel. The paper provides an overview about 
existing solutions and proposes an alternative solution that 
allows establishing arbitrary communication channels of 
different nature and on different communication layers of the 
OSI protocol stack. The main example used is the interaction 
between an electric vehicle and a charging station, but the 
proposed solution is open to different applications. 
 
Keywords–communication security; cryptographic channel 
binding; quality of service; industrial automation and control 
system; Internet of Things. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In network communications, it is typically required to 
have distinct relations between communicating endpoints, 
which are defined by several parameters, like the addresses of 
the communicating endpoints, security credentials connected 
with the endpoints, but also by certain quality-of-service 
related features. Quality-of-service (QoS) features may relate 
to a specific throughput expected by the communication 
channel or a specific response time or latency of the 
communication, but also to specific security properties of the 
communication like integrity protection or combined integrity 
and confidentiality protection. These properties may be 
provided on different levels of the Open System 
Interconnection (OSI) protocol stack, like the utilized 
transport protocol or application protocol. Another option is 
to verify and enforce required properties already during 
network access. Network access may be achieved using 
different communication technologies such as wired access 
using a classic cable installation, but also using wireless 
access via wireless LAN (WLAN), 4G, or 5G mobile 
communications.  
Specific QoS features are required by a variety of 
applications. In [1], the emphasis was placed on electric 
vehicle charging as prominent example. Further applications 
with specific QoS requirements are also known from real-time 
applications like real-time control in industrial automation, 
voice-and-video conferences, or video streaming. Specific 
security applications may leverage a separate communication 
channel like the provisioning of credentials using a connection 
with limited access to the operational service providing 
network. If the setup of a communication channel with certain 
QoS features is based on a previously established 
communication relation, a binding of the two communication 
sessions can be leveraged in multiple ways.  
The aim of this paper, as extended version of [1], is to 
further elaborate the setup of a new secure secondary 
communication channel that utilizes properties of a previously 
established communication channel. Specifically, it will 
provide further insights into the electric vehicle charging use 
case and the correlation of charging related communication 
and value-added related communication. As outlined, value-
added services may relate to updates of the firmware, 
software, or map material for the infotainment system of an 
electric vehicle.  
This paper is structured in the following way. Section II 
provides an enhanced overview about electric vehicle 
charging as a potential target scenario. Section III investigates 
existing approaches to provide distinct communication 
channels with distinct properties. Section IV describes a new 
approach, and section V analyzes its advantages. Section VI 
concludes the paper and provides and outlook to future work. 
II. 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING  
The number of electric vehicles as bicycles, motorcycles, 
and cars has increased in the recent years significantly. They 
are connected to the Digital Smart Grid for charging. Besides 
basic charging, also the development of bidirectional charging 

97
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
is ongoing, which allows to utilize electric vehicles as energy 
storage system and to feedback energy to the power grid when 
necessary. Depending on the charging interface between the 
electric vehicle and the infrastructure, the charging may be 
accomplished within minutes, or it may need up to several 
hours. While connected to a charging station, the vehicle 
exchanges constantly control data with the charging station to 
provide data like locally measured energy consumption on the 
vehicle side or charging commands with parameter 
adaptations from the charging station. This connection time 
may also be used to provide value-added services by utilizing 
the connection already established between the electric 
vehicle and the charging station. 
As depicted in Figure 1, a multitude of potential 
communication options exists involving different actors 
within the charging system. The communication channel 
established between the electric vehicle and the charging 
station may be setup using different standards like ISO/IEC 
15118 [2] or CHaDemo [3]. The focus in this paper is placed 
on ISO/IEC 15118.  
The communication is accomplished using power line 
communication when the vehicle is connected via a wired 
interface. Alternatively, a wireless interface like WLAN is 
typically employed when inductive charging is performed. In 
this case, the charging station provides a WLAN access point 
to facilitate the communication. According to ISO/IEC 15118, 
access to the charging station is not protected on the WLAN 
access layer, but on higher communication layers. This avoids 
a specific WLAN access configuration of electrical vehicles 
for a specific charging station. The communication performed 
in the context of ISO/IEC 15118 allows to provide charging 
parameter information, billing relevant information. To do 
this in a secure manner, mutual authentication of the electric 
vehicle and the charging station can be performed at the 
beginning of a charging session. The security of ISO/IEC 
15118-2 has been studied from the early beginning of 
standardization (cf. for example [4]) of the vehicle to grid 
interface. Meanwhile, the standard has been completed, and a 
revision will be published soon as Edition 2.  
The communication channel between the electric vehicle 
and the charging station is part of the bigger Digital Grid 
picture as shown in Figure 1. Besides the pure charging 
relevant communication. Value-added service providers may 
utilize the communication channel as well but may be 
independent of the charging point operator.  
The energy distribution network as critical infrastructure 
relies on the availability of the information infrastructure. 
Therefore, the information infrastructure must be managed 
and operated according to the same level of reliability as 
required for the stability of the power system infrastructure to 
prevent any type of outage or disturbance. The immediately 
apparent security needs target the reliable operation of the 
power grid and prevention of financial fraud. Especially the 
interaction between new market participants and value-added 
services has been investigated and is also addressed in 
ISO/IEC 15118.  
 
 
Figure 1. Electric Vehicle Communication Connections 

98
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Common to both editions, 1 and 2, of the standard 
ISO/IEC 15118 is the security approach and specifically the 
security setup between the electric vehicle and the charging 
infrastructure. It relies on the establishment of a secured 
communication channel based on Transport Layer Security 
(TLS). TLS, version 1.2 specified in IETF RFC 5246 [5] is 
used in Edition 1 of ISO/IEC 15118-2, while TLS version 1.3 
specified as IETF RFC 8446 [6] is used in edition 2. During 
the communication establishment, it requires that the charging 
station authenticates towards the electric vehicle using an 
X.509 certificate as part of the TLS handshake. In turn, if the 
electric vehicle uses plug-and-charge, or if it wants to 
consume value-added services, it authenticates with an own 
X.509 certificate that is bound to the charging contract. This 
charging contract has been established between the electric 
vehicle owner and the mobility operator of his choice. It 
allows for a seamless charging experience for the vehicle 
owner, similar to roaming in the mobile communication 
domain. In addition, it allows to access value-added services 
after connecting to the charging station.  
The value-added service communication is performed 
separately from the control and measurement communication 
channel. This is to avoid any interference with the charging 
related control communication. ISO/IEC 15118 facilitates this 
by establishing a separate communication channel that is 
bound to the initial authentication of both peers and outlined 
in section III.D below.  
The following section Investigates different options of 
providing an authenticated channel that is bound to a mutual 
authentication between the electric vehicle and the charging 
station. 
III. 
EXISTING APPROACHES FOR COMMUNICATION 
CHANNEL PROTECTION AND CHANNEL BINDING  
Communication channel protection can be performed in 
different ways. The probably simplest way is the usage of a 
virtual private network (VPN) to protect arbitrary higher layer 
communication protocols in a transparent way. Transparent 
means here that the protected application (layer protocol) is 
not affected by the VPN. This may be achieved by approaches 
like a cryptographic VPN (see subsection III.A), SOCKS (see 
sub section III.B), or a virtual local area network (VLAN) (see 
subsection III.C). In contrast, an application may also be 
aware of the underlying security channel and signal it to the 
user as in case of, for instance, browser-based communication 
using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) over TLS 
resulting in HTTPS. The “S” indicates the establishment of a 
secure tunnel towards the user. The approach in TLS is 
described in subsections III.D and III.E. The latter also 
provides insights into the cryptographic binding of TLS 
sessions or TLS channels.  
The concept of cryptographic channel binding is described 
in IETF RFC 5056 [7] and relates to the binding of a lower 
layer communication to a higher layer communication. In the 
context of this document, channel binding is also used to refer 
to a binding between two network access sessions to ensure 
that they involve the same peers and also that they have been 
established in a specific order.  
The following subsections investigate into approaches for 
setting up a communication channel, which can be bound to 
another communication channel supporting certain security 
properties like the authentication of a single peer or of both 
peers.  
A. Cryptographic Virtual Private Networks–- VPN 
A 
cryptographic 
virtual 
private 
network 
is 
a 
communication connection that can be setup between a client 
(endpoint) and a service providing network, or between two 
networks. 
To 
ensure 
security 
properties 
like 
peer 
authentication, communication integrity and confidentiality 
(to ensure privacy of the communication), cryptographic 
protocols are used to setup and protect this connection.  
Cryptographic VPNs may be built on different layers of 
the OSI protocol stack. Typical are OSI Layer 3 VPNs. A 
prominent protocol supporting the establishment of such a 
VPN is the IP Security Protocol (IPSec, IETF RFC 4301 [9]. 
Alternatives are for instance OpenVPN [10] or the much 
younger WireGuard [11]. The latter bases on the noise 
protocol framework [12] and focuses on simplifications in the 
configuration and in a more restrictive definition of utilized 
cryptographic algorithms to offer a streamlined protection. 
Cryptographic VPNs may also be established on OSI layer 
2 and support the security of Virtual LANs (see subsection 
III.C below). Moreover, they may also use OSI layer 4 by 
utilizing TLS as security protocol. They are referred to as SSL 
VPNs or TLS-VPNs. In contrast to IPSec, the cryptographic 
protection is established per application connection and not 
resulting in a network coupling as in the case of IPSec. 
B. Socket Secure – SOCKS 
SOCKS [13] is an internet protocol that allows 
applications (client or server) to connect through proxies in an 
application layer independent way. This is done by using a 
SOCKS proxy that creates a TCP connection to the target 
server on behalf of the client. As SOCKS operates on layer 5, 
it can handle different application protocols like HTTP, the 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), or the File Transfer 
Protocol (FTP). It allows a client to open a connection from 
behind a firewall to an external server in an authenticated and 
authorized way. SOCKS5 allows for different authentication 
methods, in which the client authenticates towards the 
SOCKS server. It may also be used in conjunction with TLS. 
After authentication and authorization check by the SOCKS 
server, the application protocol is tunneled over the 
established connection and forwarded to the external target 
server.  
The authentication is done between the requesting client 
and the SOCKS server, and the tunneling of the application 
protocol binds to this authentication. However, the server is 
not aware of this authentication and needs to authenticate the 
client by other means. As the tunnel is provided on an 
application base, multiple tunnels for different applications 
are necessary, all with an own, independent security setup. 
C. Virtual LAN – VLAN 
VLAN or virtual local area networks are defined in IEEE 
802.1Q [14]. The standard defines a logical network and 

99
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
allows the separation of different communication channels on 
layer 2. Different properties may be assigned in addition to 
this virtual LAN like performance or throughput. To achieve 
this, infrastructure components like managed switches are 
used, supporting the differentiation of traffic according to 
VLANs. A peer sending information in this VLAN (unicast or 
multicast) will only reach other peers that are part of the same 
VLAN.  
Two basic approaches exist for VLANs. The first 
approach is a port-based VLAN in which the association to a 
logical LAN is done by attaching the client to a dedicated 
physical port of a managed switch. The second approach is a 
tagged VLAN, in which the Ethernet frames are tagged with 
a specific VLAN identifier (VLAN ID). Based on this VLAN 
tag, a switch can forward the Ethernet frame according to its 
configuration.  
With this, VLANs themselves provide a way to separate 
traffic, which is also a step towards improved security. The 
definition of this separation is not done on cryptographic 
means, as stated before. Therefore, it is recommended to 
provide additional protection of the communication. 
Examples are IEEE 802.1X [15], providing port-based access 
control. With this, a client authenticates to the infrastructure 
(typically a RADIUS or DIAMETER server) via the 
infrastructure access network switch using different means, 
e.g., based on the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) 
[16]. EAP allows for authentication with username and 
password, but also for a certificate-based authentication 
employing a client’s X.509 certificate. In addition, MAC 
security (MACSec), specified in IEEE 802.1AE [17], can be 
used to provide integrity and/or confidentiality protection for 
the traffic between the device and the network switch in a hop-
by-hop fashion.  
Security for VLAN can be provided using additional 
security means like IEEE 802.1X as outlined on OSI Layer 2. 
Another prominent protocol for securing VLANs is IPSec as 
described in subsection III.A. If associated to a dedicated 
VLAN, quality of service parameter may be assigned.  
D. Transport Layer Security Features 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a protocol defined in 
IETF RFC 5246 as version 1.2 [5]. Meanwhile, it evolved to 
version 1.3 in IETF RFC 8446 [6]. While version 1.3 is being 
increasingly adopted [21], version 1.2 is still widely used. TLS 
is probably the most commonly used security protocol to 
protect TCP-based communications. The most prominent 
application is the protection of web-based communication 
over http. Also, other TCP-based protocols leverage the bump 
in the wire properties of TLS, like ISO/IEC 15118. ISO/IEC 
15118-20 mandates the support of TLS v1.3, while TLSv1.2 
may still be used.  
TLSv1.3 features a re-designed handshake, which is not 
backward compatible to TLSv1.2. The version handling in 
TLS allows to fall back to TLSv1.2, if TLSv1.3 is not 
supported yet. The handshake is encrypted, except for the very 
first message, to better protect the privacy of client certificate 
information that is thereby already send encrypted. Moreover, 
the handshake may already transmit application data, which 
can accelerate the communication setup. This feature is called 
0-RTT (zero round-trip time), but the use requires careful 
review.  
 
 
Figure 2. TLS v1.3 Session Establishment with full handshake 

100
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The full handshake of TLSv1.3 is depicted in Figure 2. 
TLS supports different authentication options: 
- 
server-side authentication (mainly used in web traffic) 
using X.509 certificates; 
- 
mutual 
authentication 
involves 
the 
client 
to 
authenticate using an X.509 certificate in addition to 
server authentication;  
- 
authentication based on a pre-shared key, which is 
applied also within TLS as described below; 
- 
authentication based on raw public keys.  
Besides the peer authentication, the TLS handshake is 
used to negotiate further session parameters like the cipher 
suite 
for 
protecting 
communication 
integrity 
and 
confidentiality. A cipher suite is a statement regarding the 
utilized algorithms for the protection of the communication 
session. 
TLS 
with 
mutual 
authentication 
is 
applied 
in 
ISO/IEC 15118-20 for plug-and-charge and for access to 
value-added services. This ensures that billing-relevant 
charging and service consumption can be associated with a 
dedicated account.  
Besides the establishment of a protected channel, TLS 
defines further operations for the management of this secured 
channel, beyond them the update of session parameters during 
an ongoing session, like the utilized cryptographic key. One 
important functionality is the so-called session resumption. 
Session resumption allows a previously established and closed 
session to be resumed, based on the security parameters 
negotiated in the initial session. This saves the asymmetric 
cryptographic operations during the TLS handshake, and it 
utilizes a pre-shared key included in a ticket from the initial 
handshake. Note that there is a timely limitation how long a 
closed session may be resumed, depending on the TLS 
version. While TLSv1.2 recommends 24 hours, TLSv1.3 
limits the validity time in the tickets used for resumption to 
seven days.  
Besides the re-establishment of a closed connection, TLS 
session resumption may also be used to “clone” an existing 
session. This can be achieved by opening a TLS connection to 
a different port on the target host than the original one used 
and referencing the existing session. Using this, a separate 
TLS-protected TCP communication channel is established. 
As the second communication channel relies on the security 
parameters of the first one and thus is cryptographically bound 
to it, it implicitly provides the assurance of mutual 
authentication to both participants.  
ISO/IEC 15118 utilizes this feature to allow the 
establishment 
of 
value-added 
service 
communication 
channels. Note that these are currently restricted to TCP-based 
communications.  
In general. there also exists a protocol similar to TLS to 
protect UDP/IP traffic by the Datagram Transport Layer 
Security protocol (DTLS, IETF RFC 9147, [18]). It could be 
used to protect, e.g., media traffic, which is often transmitted 
via UDP. Note that interactions between both (TLS and 
DTLS) are not considered in ISO/IEC 15118, as the protection 
of the actual value-added service data is left to the value-added 
service itself. ISO/IEC 15118 mainly handles the secure 
establishment of a further communication session between the 
electric vehicle and the charging station to facilitate the value-
added service communication.  
As shown in Figure 3, a second session is opened between 
the electric vehicle and the charging station using TLS session 
resumption. This saves communication overhead and 
provides a cryptographic binding to the initial, authenticated 
TLS channel, which protects the charging control session. 
Note that while TLSv1.3 has specific optimizations like 
sending application data already in the resumed handshake 
(called 0-RTT), this feature is not allowed in ISO/IEC 15118-
20 to avoid replay attacks of application data. 
Port forwarding is used at the charging station to forward 
the traffic to the intended value-added service provider. The 
security of the communication channel to the value-added 
service provider is out of scope of ISO/IEC 15118 and needs 
to be defined and setup by the value-added service separately. 
For protecting UDP-based traffic between the electric vehicle 
and the charging station, OpenVPN is mentioned but nothing 
is specified. Note that this missing definition may have an 
influence on real-time services (like voice and video over IP 
or streaming services).  
 
 
Figure 3. TLS Session Resumption to establish second communication channel  

101
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
E. TLS Channel Binding  
IETF RFC 5929 [19] describes a binding of a higher layer 
communication protocol to a negotiated TLS channel. 
Different approaches are specified. The most versatile is the 
definition of the tls-unique value. The tls-unique value is 
essentially the first “Finish Message” sent in the latest TLS 
handshake. The finish message contains a hash over all 
messages exchanged during the handshake phase. 
This definition makes this parameter specific to a 
negotiated session. When a session is resumed or renegotiated 
(only for TLS 1.2), the tls-unique value will change 
accordingly. This has to be obeyed by the applying 
application. Using tls-unique in an application provides a 
direct linkage to the properties negotiated during the TLS 
handshake and applied in the ongoing TLS session.  
An example is the application in the context of Enrollment 
over Secure Transport (EST, IETF RFC 7030, [20]), a 
certificate enrollment protocol executed over TLS. In this 
protocol, the client sends a certification request object (here, a 
PKCS#10 request) to enroll a new X.509 client certificate. 
The certification request is signed with the private key of the 
freshly generated key pair. This provides a proof-of-
possession to the receiver, that the sender, i.e., the client, 
knows the private key corresponding to the contained public 
key. Part of the certification request can be a tls-unique value. 
As in case of EST, the TLS handshake may be performed with 
mutual authentication. Therefore, the receiver in addition gets 
the proof-of-identity of the client, due to the link to the utilized 
client certificate in the TLS handshake. This linkage is 
provided through the inclusion of the tls-unique value. 
IV. 
DEPENDENT SECURE COMMUNICATION CHANNELS 
As discussed in section I, the goal of this paper is to 
propose a solution for setting up an additional (wireless) 
communication channel or more specific an additional access 
path that utilizes security properties of a previously 
established communication channel to specifically gain and 
apply derivations of the original security parameters. The 
existing solutions discussed in section III provide elements 
that are partly used in the approach. The solution is described 
in the context of the initially provided example of electric 
vehicle charging and additionally as option in the context of 
dependent monitoring in the following subsections. 
A. Alternative Handling of Value-Added Services 
communication during electric vehicle charging  
The following description proceeds with the example of 
electric vehicle charging as in section II and provides an 
alternative solution. This described solution specifically 
allows for multiple connections between a value-added 
service provider and an electric vehicle, which are all bound 
to an existing charging session. These multiple channels may 
be of different nature like TCP/IP or UDP/IP traffic.  This 
enhances the currently provided functionality for securing 
TCP/IP 
based 
value-added 
service 
communication. 
Therefore, the alternative may also be used in situation in 
which, e.g., video streaming or conferencing is provided, 
typically relying on UDP/IP for the real-time part.  
Figure 4 provides an overview of the solution. According 
to ISO/IEC 15118-20, a TLS connection is established 
between the electric vehicle EV1 and the charging station CS1 
via a well-known service-set identifier (SSID) of the charging 
station. The well-known SSID may be either preconfigured, 
or it may be broadcasted using Bluetooth beacons in the 
vicinity of the charging station. The connection is established 
based on the authentication of CS1 as server towards EV1. 
The EV1 authentication can be carried out over the already 
TLS protected link to protect the identity information of EV1. 
The client-side authentication in the first communication 
channel may be done based on an X.509 certificate but also 
using other methods on application layer like HTTP digest 
authentication or based on a token, like for instance when 
using the OAuth 2.0 framework [22]. Specific for the electric 
vehicle charging, the owner of the EV may also authenticate 
directly towards the charging station, avoiding any 
information to be transmitted over the communication link. In 
each case, a binding to the originally established TLS 
connection is required.  
 
SSID: 
public
Charging Station (CS1)
Electric Vehicle (EV1)
Establishment of V2G 
Communication to well-
known port over TLS 1
Construction of temporary SSID: h(EV1EVSE1vas1), 
Extraction of tls_unique from TLS1, 
Derivation of password for WPA2 for EV1EVSE1vas1
SSID: 
h(EV1EVSE1VAS1)
Establishment of Communication to VAS Provider VAS1
Secure access to VAS provider 
(VAS1) depends on his security 
policy 
Value-Added Service 
Provider (VAS1)
 
Figure 4. Application of tls-unique to protect second WLAN establishment 

102
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
To achieve this, the tls-unique value is extracted, which is 
intended as means to provide the binding to the originally 
established TLS channel for further connections to be opened. 
This extraction equals to the TLS channel binding described 
in section III.E.  
Over the established TLS channel, an information is 
provided to the electric vehicle regarding available value-
added services offered by the charging station, which can be 
consumed during the charging period. These value-added 
services may be software updates for the infotainment system, 
normal web access, gaming, or videos to bridge the charging 
time. 
While in section II, the additional communication channel 
for value-added services in ISO/IEC 15118 is opened using 
TLS session resumption on a different port than the one for 
the charging communication, the following describes an 
alternative, which can be used more versatile for different 
types of data exchange. It essentially provides a second access 
point thus allowing to perform further connections on OSI 
layer 2.  
When the EV selects a value-added service, it will receive 
the additional configuration information for setting up a 
second, temporary WLAN access to the charging station for 
the electric vehicle. The configuration information shall be 
specific to the charging session between EV1 and CS1 and a 
specific value-added service provider VAS1. This allows for 
correct billing of consumed services (if necessary), based on 
the association. 
For setting up a temporary access point, a second network 
access policy needs to be provided, which may comprise 
information regarding protection means or quality of service 
parameter. In case of WLAN, a temporary network name 
(SSID) and a pre-shared key for access protection to the 
temporary WLAN are also required to utilize WPA2 or WPA3 
for access protection to the temporary WLAN.  
Instead of providing this information directly, it can be 
derived locally by the communication peers based on the 
already existing charging control communication session as 
following: 
Temporary SSID = Hash (EV ID | CS ID | VAS ID) 
In the example in Figure 4, this will result in the hashed 
value of “EV1CS1VAS1”. Depending on the utilized hash 
function, e.g., SHA-256, the result can be truncated to, e.g., 
20 Bytes. With the goal to bind the temporary WLAN to the 
already existing charging session, the temporary WLAN 
access credentials in terms of a shared secret are derived 
incorporating the tls-unique value of the initial TLS session as 
following: 
Temp. SSID PW = Hash (tls-unique | EV ID | VAS ID) 
The derivation may consist of further parameter besides 
the EV identifier and the VAS identifier. In addition to the 
VAS ID, the name of the value-added service may be 
provided, e.g., as fully-qualified domain name (FQDN).  
Depending on the security policy of the charging station 
operator, the temporary WLAN access for the value-added 
services may be terminated as soon as the charging session 
ends. There may be cases for leaving the session open for a 
grace period, e.g., for ending a specific transaction. This 
option may also be part of the contract a customer has with a 
specific charging station operator. 
As described, the approach can be generalized to provide 
the binding also to other network access methods like 4G or 
5G. It may also be leveraged to setup VLANs for separating 
the communication, utilizing derived parameters for VLAN 
name and access credentials.  
B. Utilizing dependent security channels for device 
monitoring 
In the previous section, the existence of an established 
secure session was used to open a second network path to 
provide value-added services during electric vehicle charging 
as example use case.  
The approach to have a specific network access for a 
function allows for better maintaining quality of service 
characteristics for this communication channel or for a 
dependent communication channel. This can also be 
leveraged and applied in other types of communication. A 
further example is provided in this subsection based on the 
monitoring of industrial device operation. 
In industrial use cases like process automation, factory 
automation, or also energy automation, there are often strict 
boundary conditions with respect to the expected real-time 
behavior. This relates to strict processing and transmission 
time specification in applications like protection in electrical 
networks. As the communication between protection devices 
has been changed from a per wire communication to Ethernet 
based communication, the timing of the direct wiring needs to 
be ensured also for the Ethernet-based communication to 
ensure reliability for the power provisioning but most 
importantly for safety. The protection device essentially 
resembles the same functionality as an electrical fuse, known 
from typical household applications. Protocols used in this 
context are defined for instance in IEC 61850 with Generic 
Object-Oriented Substation Events (GOOSE), and Sample 
Values (SV) using plain Ethernet-based communication in 
substation environments.  
Following mechanisms are used to ensure the specified 
transmission speed and reliability: 
— 
GOOSE data is directly embedded into Ethernet data 
packets and works on publisher-subscriber mechanism 
on multicast or broadcast MAC (Media Access Control) 
addresses 
— 
GOOSE uses VLAN and priority tagging as per IEEE 
802.1Q to have a separate virtual network within the 
same physical network and to set an appropriate message 
priority level 
— 
Enhanced retransmission mechanisms – the same 
GOOSE message is retransmitted with varying and 
increasing re-transmission intervals.  
IEC 61850-5 [24] defines message types and their 
performance classes as:  
— 
P1 applies typically to a distribution bay (or where low 
requirements can be accepted), 
— 
P2 applies typically to a transmission bay (or if not 
otherwise specified by the customer), 

103
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
— 
P3 applies typically to a top performance transmission 
bay.  
The following table shows the different message types and 
their timing requirements based on IEC 61850-5 [24].  
TABLE I.  
GOOSE TRANSFER TIMES 
Type 
Definition  
Timing Requirements 
1 
Fast messages contain a 
simple binary code 
containing data, command or 
simple message, examples 
are: “Trip”, “Close”, etc. 
See Type 1a and 1 b below 
1A 
TRIP – most important 
message 
- P1: Transfer time shall be 
in the order of half a cycle. 
→ 10 ms  
- P2/3: Transfer time shall 
be below the order of a 
quarter of a cycle. → 3 ms  
1B 
OTHER – Important for the 
interaction of the automation 
system with the process but 
have less demanding 
requirements than trip. 
- P1: Transfer time < 100ms  
- P2/3: Transfer time shall 
be below the order of one 
cycle. → 20 ms  
2 
Medium speed messages are 
messages where the time at 
which the message originated 
is important but where the 
transmission time is less 
critical. 
- Transfer time < 100ms 
3 
Low speed messages are 
used for slow speed auto-
control functions, 
transmission of event 
records, reading or changing 
set-point values and general 
presentation of system data. 
- Transfer time < 500ms 
 
The definition of transfer time, according to IEC 61850-5, 
is shown in Figure 5 below. The transfer time includes the 
complete transmission of a message including necessary 
handling at both ends.   
 
Figure 5. Transfer Time [24] 
The security for GOOSE and also SV communication is 
specified in IEC 62351-6 [25] and defines an extension 
applicable to both protocols to carry integrity information for 
the exchanged information based on independently negotiated 
security parameters. 
An alternative approach to protocol inherent security may 
be the setup of a dependent security association between the 
GOOSE and the SV communication. This on one hand 
supports the direct assignment of QoS parameters to the 
communication channel. In addition, if the communication is 
performed using different network technologies, a related 
security attack on one (physical or logical) network can be 
directly related to the communication on the other and 
appropriate measures can be derived.  
As described, the approach can be generalized to provide 
the binding also to other network access methods like 4G or 
5G. It may also be leveraged to setup VLANs for separating 
the communication, utilizing derived parameters for VLAN 
name and access credentials.  
V. 
EVALUATION 
The evaluation of the proposed solution is done based on 
the concept only, as it has not been implemented, yet. In 
general, the security of an industrial system can be evaluated 
in practice in various approaches and stages of the system’s 
lifecycle: 
− 
A Threat and Risk Analysis (TRA, also abbreviated as 
TARA) is typically conducted at the beginning of the 
concept definition, as for ISO/IEC 15118, product design 
or system development, and updated after major design 
changes, or to address a changed threat landscape. In a 
TRA, possible attacks (threats) on the system are 
identified. The impact that would be caused by a 
successful attack and the probability that the attack 
happens are evaluated to determine the risk of the 
identified threats. The risk evaluation allows to prioritize 
the threats, focusing on the most relevant risks and to 
define corresponding security measures. Security 
measures can target to reduce the probability of an attack 
by preventing it, or by reducing the impact.  
− 
Security checks can be performed during operation or 
during maintenance windows to determine key 
performance indicators (e.g., check compliance of 
device configurations) and to verified that the defined 
security measures are in fact in place.  
− 
Security testing (penetration testing, also called 
pentesting for short) can be performed for a system that 
has been built, but that is currently not in operation. A 
pentest can usually not be performed on an operational 
automation and control system, as the pentest could 
affect the reliable operation auf the system. Pentesting 
can be performed during a maintenance window when 
the physical system is in a safe state or using a separate 
test system.  
As long as the solution proposed in the paper has not been 
proven in a real-world operational setting, it can be evaluated 
conceptually by analyzing the impact that the additional 
security measure would have on the identified residual risks 
as determined by a TRA. The main objective is to determine 
the specific benefits that are relevant for the selection of a 
suitable protection approach. The main aspects relevant for 
the evaluation of the proposed solution are: 

104
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
a. 
the 
level 
of 
isolation 
of 
different 
types 
of 
communications (charging control communication; 
value added services communication); 
b. the scope of protection, i.e., what exactly is protected 
concerning integrity and or confidentiality, and  
c. 
the flexibility to use it for various protocols used by 
different value-added services.  
These aspects can be evaluated qualitatively as follows: 
a. 
The control communication for charging control and the 
communication of value-added services are taking place 
on separate layer 1 / layer 2 communication links. While 
a reliable traffic isolation can be implemented also on a 
logical level, the isolation realized by having separate 
layer 1 / layer 2 communication links ensures by design 
a strong isolation, avoiding logical interference between 
these different types of communications. Moreover, this 
separation offers the option to not only provide different 
protection options for the communication links, but also 
to assign different quality of services classes to ensure 
for instance a dedicated throughput or latency. 
b. The proposed solution protects all communications, 
including, e.g., dynamic host configuration by DHCP or 
iPv6 auto configuration, or DNS requests. Thereby, also 
user privacy protection is increased, as meta-data of 
communication as, e.g., network addresses, cannot be 
intercepted as all communication is protected on layer 2. 
Also, active manipulations by 3rd parties, e.g., injected 
false DNS responses, can be avoided.  
c. 
The solution can be used with any types of 
communication, 
including 
UDP 
datagram 
communication. So, it can be flexibly applied also for 
value-added services using UDP-based communications 
(e.g., multi-media communications based on RTP). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
This paper provides a new generic approach for setting up 
a temporary network access channel allowing to assign 
specific quality of service parameter to the new network 
access, which is cryptographically bound to an already 
established communication channel. The approach is 
discussed in the context of electric vehicle charging combined 
with value-added services. A further example from the power 
automation domain is described. The approach as such is not 
limited to these examples and may be applied also in other 
domains. 
The advantage of the proposed approach is the ability to 
be applied in an application layer protocol independent way. 
It preserves the privacy of user credentials for observers of the 
network applied on higher layers. This is especially important 
for wireless communication as the exchanged communication 
can be easily accessed. Note that in the design of TLS 1.3, the 
privacy requirements have already been considered in the 
redesign phase. In TLS 1.3, only the initial message is sent in 
clear, while the remaining part of the handshake, including the 
client-side authentication, is encrypted. Note that there are 
ongoing discussions in the IETF standardization on securing 
the initial TLS handshake message to further protect the 
privacy of the communication [26]. 
The proposed approach in this paper is available as 
concept and needs to be implemented a proof of concept, 
which would be a future intended step. Such a proof of 
concept can leverage already specified base mechanisms like 
tls-unique extraction. Moreover, 
in the context of 
ISO/IEC15118 it would align with the approach not sending 
the client authentication (here the client is the electric vehicle) 
in clear over the network.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Fries and R. Falk, “Secure and Flexible Establishment of 
Temporary WLAN Access”, Securware 2022, July 2022, 
https://www.thinkmind.org/articles/securware_2022_1_40_30
013.pdf, [retrieved: May, 2023]  
[2] ISO/IEC 15118-20: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid 
Communication Interface — Part 20: Network and application 
protocol requirements, Work in Progress 
[3] CHAdeMO, https://www.chademo.com/, [retrieved: May, 
2023]  
[4] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure 
– Security Considerations and Approaches”, Internet 2012, 
June 2012, ISBN: 978-1-61208-204-2, pp.58-64 
[5] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, IETF RFC 5246, “Transport Layer 
Security 
(TLS) 
 
Protocol 
v1.2, 
08/2008, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246, [retrieved: May, 2023] 
[6] E. Rescorla, IETF RFC 8446, “Transport Layer Security (TLS)  
Protocol v1.3”, 08/2018, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446, 
[retrieved: May, 2023] 
[7] N. Williams, IETF RFC 5056, “On the Use of Channel 
Bindings 
to 
Secure 
Channels”, 
11/2007, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5056, [retrieved: May, 2023] 
[8] ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994, Information technology — Open 
Systems Interconnection — Basic Reference Model: The Basic 
Model, 
November 
1994, 
https://www.iso.org/standard/20269.html, [retrieved: May, 
2023] 
[9] S. Kent and K. Seo, IETF RFC 4301, “Security Architecture 
for the Internet Protocol”, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4301, 
December 2005, [retrieved: May, 2023] 
[10] OpenVPN, https://openvpn.net/, [retrieved: May, 2023] 
[11] Wireguard, https://www.wireguard.com/, [retrieved: May, 
2023]  
[12] Noise Protocol Framework, http://www.noiseprotocol.org/, 
[retrieved: May, 2023]  
[13] M. Leech et al., IETF RFC 1928, „SOCKS Protocol Version 5, 
03/1996, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1928, [retrieved: May, 
2023] 
[14] IEEE 802.1Q, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks – Bridges and Bridged Networks”, 2018,  
https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/802.1Q/6844/, [retrieved: May, 
2023] 
[15] IEEE 802.1X, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks – Port-Based Access Control”, 2020,  
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9018454, 
[retrieved: 
May, 2023] 
[16] B. Aboba, L. Blunk, J. Vollbrecht, J. Carlson, and 
H.Levkowetz., IETF RFC 3748, “Extensible Authentication 
protocol (EAP)”, 06/2004, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3748, 
[retrieved: May, 2023] 
[17] IEEE 802.1AE “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks – Media Access Control (MAC) Security”, 

105
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
2018, 
 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8585421, 
[retrieved: May, 2023] 
[18] E. Rescorla, H. Tschofenig, and N. Modadugu, IETF RFC 
9147, “The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) 
Protocol 
Version 
1.3”, 
April 
2022 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9147, [retrieved: May, 
2023] 
[19] J. Altman and N. Williams, IETF RFC 5929, TLS channel 
binding, 
July 
2010, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5929, 
[retrieved: May, 2023] 
[20] M. Pritikin, P. Yee, and D. Harkins, IETF RFC 7030, 
“Enrollment 
over 
Secure 
Transport 
“, 
10/2013, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7030, [retrieved: May, 2023] 
[21] SSL 
Puls: 
TLS 
Dashboard, 
continuously 
updated,  
https://www.ssllabs.com/ssl-pulse/, [retrieved: May, 2023] 
[22] D. Hardt, IETF RFC 6749, “The OAuth 2.0 Authorization 
Framework”, 
October 
2012,  
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749, [retrieved: May, 2023]  
[23] D. Hardt, A.Parecki, and T. Lodderstedt, IETF Draft, “The 
OAuth 
2.1 
Authorization 
Framework”, 
March 
2023,  
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1/,  
[retrieved: May, 2023]  
[24] IEC 61850-5 – “Communication networks and systems for 
power 
utility 
automation 
- 
Part 
5: 
Communication 
requirements for functions and device models”, March 2022, 
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/64584, [retrieved: May, 
2023]  
[25] IEC 62351-6 – “Power systems management and associated 
information exchange - Data and communications security - 
Part 
6: 
Security 
for 
IEC 
61850”, 
October 
2020, 
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/63742, [retrieved: May, 
2023]  
[26] E. Rescorla, K. Oku, N. Sullivan, and C. A. Wood, IETF Draft 
“TLS 
Encrypted 
Client 
Hello”, 
April 
2023, 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-tls-esni/, 
[retrieved: 
May, 2023]  
 
 
 
 
 
 

