Security and Authentication Architecture Using
MPEG-21 for Wireless Patient Monitoring Systems
Wolfgang Leister and Truls Fretland
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
email: {wolfgang.leister, truls.fretland}@nr.no
Ilangko Balasingham
Interventional Center
Rikshospitalet University Hospital
Oslo, Norway
email: ilangkob@medisin.uio.no
Abstract—Privacy and security are two major concerns in the
ubiquitous deployment of wireless patient monitoring systems,
where wireless sensor networks become an integral part of the
monitoring process. To address and handle threats which arise
from the use of wireless sensors, we propose a framework using
MPEG-21. MPEG-21 is an architecture that can handle end-to-
end management of multimedia content in diverse networks. We
propose and evaluate a framework that is designed to protect
patient monitoring systems using resource-constrained wireless
sensor networks. The analyses show that security architectures
based on the MPEG-21 framework can handle a variety of
threats. We also present a test bed in which our framework
is about to be implemented.
Index Terms—MPEG-21, security, biomedical sensor networks,
medical digital item
I. INTRODUCTION
Patient monitoring systems are one of the major data sources
in a health care environment. These typically consist of sensors
which are connected to the patient, communicate by wire or
wirelessly to a bedside monitoring device. Furthermore, the
sensor data are stored in databases, which are connected to the
health care enterprise’s information infrastructure for storage,
maintenance and retrieval of data. Health Care information
systems can be interconnected in order to exchange data,
where patient monitoring systems become an integral part
of the networked infrastructure. This facilitate data to be
available to the different user terminals and systems both
inside and outside the enterprise. Therefore, an end-to-end
security mechanism is needed to protect the medical data, as
we presented recently [1].
Wireless technology is increasingly used in health care
enterprises to eliminate the use of cables in patient mon-
itoring systems, providing mobility advantages for patients
and medical personnel. In this case the sensors communicate
wirelessly with monitoring systems, which are located close
to the patient. However, wireless communication can be in-
tercepted easily. Threats to security goals like conﬁdentiality,
integrity, and availability of data still apply, and weaknesses
of the system treating health care data could be exploited by
attackers.
A biomedical sensor network (BSN) can be considered a
special case of a wireless sensor network (WSN). A WSN
often comprises tiny, low-cost wireless electronic devices,
capable of gathering vital signs and environmental information
and forwarding them to a base station. The limited compu-
tational and communication capabilities, their reduced cost,
and enforced size introduce resource-related challenges in their
function, efﬁciency, and security. Attacks can compromise sys-
tem security with negative consequences for both the patient,
the health care enterprise, and third parties. This exhibits that
the security requirements need careful consideration during de-
sign, development and deployment for the whole infrastructure
including the patient monitoring systems and BSN.
State-of-the-art systems in health care enterprises employ
technical approaches [2] such as service-oriented architectures
(SOA) [3], [4], in order to address re-usability, interoperability,
and portability. For some application areas standards such as
DICOM [5], [6] are used. However, none of these technologies
addresses content adaptation taking into account of character-
istics of end user terminals (screen size, resolution, real time
rendering capabilities, etc.), the user’s preferences (automatic
update, popup menu and functions, etc.), and wireless channel
conditions (bandwidth, data rate, packet loss, interference envi-
ronment, etc). However, MPEG-21 is one potential technology
which can support a set of quality of service metrics, security
features as well as the above mentioned adaptation features
to internal factors. Therefore MPEG-21 appears to be a far
better solution for wireless sensor networks than other above
mentioned standards and technologies.
MPEG-21 [7], [8] is an international standard on multi-
media services and provides a multimedia framework at the
application level to enable transparent and augmented use of
multimedia resources across a wide range of networks and
devices. MPEG-21 addresses sharing and transferring digital
media content, including management, adaptation of resources,
protection of privacy, integrity, and digital rights.
The contribution of this paper is a novel approach to protect
the application layer of medical data in patient monitoring
systems using BSN. The paper is organised as follows: Sec-
tion III gives an overview of security issues for wireless patient
monitoring systems and biomedical sensor networks, including
a generic system model. Section IV discusses the security
assumptions and requirements for such systems, which lead
to a short threat assessment in Section V. Section VI reviews
the relevant parts of MPEG-21 which are used in our proposed
16
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

architecture that is presented Section VII. In Section VIII we
discuss the employed security mechanisms and the suitability
before concluding the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Regulations for handling health care data are strict in most
parts of the world. This is manifested by the relevant legisla-
tion in Norway [9] and the European Union [10]. Especially
the issues of privacy and data integrity are stated in these
documents.
The security issues of wireless sensor networks (WSN) have
become an important research topic. We base our work on an
overview of security goals, threats, attacks and countermea-
sures on all communication layers [11] and perform analyses
on BSNs given their constraints using literature on security
issues in WSN [11], [12], [13]. There are still many unsolved
security issues, such as the integrity of the collected data and
the privacy of the patient [14], [15].
One of the ongoing works is the IEEE 802.15.6 standard
for body area sensor network [16]. The submitted proposals
so far on security provisions discuss issues related to outgoing
and incoming frame security procedures, higher layer security
functions in the medium access (MAC) layer, common and
different information elements across layers, encryption key
usage, handling and update, etc. Incorporation of parts of the
MPEG-21 in this proposed standard may become beneﬁcial to
handling security provisions as well as quality of services in
a single framework.
The recently approved standard IEEE 1451.5 [17] envisions
encryption and security functionalities in the presentation layer
of sensor networks. The framework proposed in this paper
uses MPEG-21, which also addresses issues in the presentation
layer. Therefore, a combination of MPEG-21 and IEEE 1451.5
can be interesting.
It will be a challenging task to design and deploy appro-
priate security mechanisms that take availability, user friend-
liness, high throughput of data, etc. into consideration. Early
work on using MPEG-21 as a framework in health care has
been conducted by Landén [18], which has been recently
extended [19] to include the hospital infrastructure. After a
threat analysis of patient monitoring systems [20] we extended
this architecture to include BSN [1].
Other approaches to use MPEG-21 in health care use the
IPMP part of MPEG-21 for patient records [21]. Recently, a
framework for using MPEG-21 IPMP components for a secu-
rity framework for pervasive health care architectures has been
presented [22], including wireless communication between
personal digital assistants (PDA). While this work introduces
MPEG-21 for medical applications, our work includes the use
of MPEG-21 for BSN and uses a generic model to analyse
the threats.
III. PATIENT MONITORING SYSTEMS
Patient monitoring systems and BSNs can be applied in a
variety of health care scenarios ranging from paramedic, di-
agnostic, surgical, to post-operative phases. In general, patient
monitoring systems comprise of different kinds of sensors,
data communication, storage, processing, and presentation of
medical data. In order to articulate the security requirements
we identify three important scenarios: (1) hospital scenario
(using an array of biomedical sensors for diagnostics, surgical,
and post operative phases), (2) nursing and citizen homes
(patients equipped with wireless biomedical sensors triggering
alarms; surveillance of patients after being discharged from
hospital), and (3) paramedic.
A. Biomedical Data
While a health care information system must handle all
types of medical data, we concentrate on biomedical sensor
data. The sensor nodes measure biomedical signals, process
them and transmit the results to a sink node. Typical biomed-
ical data measured by biomedical sensors can be electrocar-
diogram (ECG), electroencephalography (EEG), blood oxygen
saturation, blood pressure, temperature, and sound. They are
data samples at a given sampling resolution and sampling rate
with typical data rates from some few bits per second (bps) up
to 12000 bps. The sampling rate and resolution are examples
of biomedical metadata, that is, data that contain information
about the biomedical measurements. In the near future also
images and video, will emerge as data types from BSN.
Biomedical data can be described as streamed multimedia
data with corresponding requirements about conﬁdentiality,
integrity, availability, as well as data authenticity, service
quality and adaptation.
The biomedical sensor data consist of one or several tracks
of sampled measured values, supplemented with metadata,
e.g., a time-stamp and the identity of the sensor. The biomed-
ical data must be protected against modiﬁcation and deletion.
While it is necessary to implement a detection mechanism for
modiﬁcation and deletion, the reconstruction of data destroyed
by an attacker would be desirable, in order to provide the
availability of data.
B. A Model for Wireless Patient Monitoring Systems
A generic system model for the overall patient monitoring
system and threat analysis have been proposed [20], where the
components and communication channels have been identiﬁed.
The generic system model, shown in Fig. 1, illustrates that
patient data are generated by sensors attached to a patient. In a
concrete instance of this model, each abstract component can
be realised by means of several physical components, and a
physical component again can be realised as several abstract
(sub-)components. A biomedical sensor network consists of
several sensor nodes that measure biomedical data. These
data, accompanied by metadata, are transmitted by a wireless
network (Channel A) to the sink of the wireless network and
to the patient data collector (PDC). The PDC collects different
data streams for a patient and forwards data to the health
care information system at the hospital (Channel B), or to the
patient data accessing unit giving data access to the medical
staff on site (Channel E). The ID data mapper functionality
17
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

(Channel G) is necessary to handle patients, where the iden-
tity might not be known. To implement Channel G no real
communication needs to be involved while the system is in
use. Retrieval of patient data from the health care information
system involves Channel D.
The components of the generic system model are:
• Sources of patient data, e.g., sensors, storage units, or
user input devices. Each source is attached to only one
patient at a time. A source is assumed to have very limited
capabilities of protecting the communication.
• Patient Data Collectors (PDC) collect patient data from
one or more sources. A PDC is trusted to handle unen-
crypted, personally identiﬁable patient data.
• The Health Care Information System (HCIS) receives
patient data for processing or storage.
• The Patient Data Accessing Unit (PDAU) receives patient
data and presents these to the medical staff.
• The logical element ID-data mapper determines the iden-
tity of the patient to whom patient data pertains and
sends the identity to the PDC or the HCIS. The ID-data
mapper is usually implemented as an interface rather than
a separate entity.
The generic model model includes the following channels:
• Channel A between the source and the PDC, is based
on a short-range wired and/or wireless communication
links. The Channel A might be implemented by a wireless
biomedical sensor network.
• Channel B is a long-range wired or wireless communi-
cation link between the PDC and the HCIS. Channel B
can be implemented in a trusted environment or possibly
over untrusted public networks by external providers, e.g.,
GSM, GPRS, UMTS, WiMAX or PSTN networks.
• Channel D may be implemented as any type of commu-
nication link, possibly over a public network.
• Channel
E
may
be
an
internal
interface
or
a
wired/wireless short-range communication link. Long-
range communication between PDC and PDAU should
be provided via the HCIS.
• Channel G is implemented as an internal interface in one
of the components used to retrieve the patient identity.
C. Applying the Generic Model
The generic model is applied to the relevant scenarios in
various ways, where the components and channels of the
generic model can be implemented differently. Therefore, the
threats might be different depending on the chosen scenario.
The security requirements for Channel A are equal in all
scenarios, and are therefore treated separately in the course
of our work.
In a hospital scenario (Scenario 1) the PDC, PDAU, and
HCIS might be part of an approved protected infrastructure
and authenticated to each other, e.g., implemented by using
a virtual LAN. In such an environment, Channel A needs
speciﬁc attention regarding security. In different sub-scenarios
the PDC might be implemented as a bedside terminal serving
just one patient, or as a base station that might serve an entire
hospital corridor. The threats affecting the patient monitoring
system differ for these cases.
For a nursing and citizen homes scenario (Scenario 2)
most channels might be outside the protected infrastructure
of a hospital. Channels B, D, and E are implemented various
short- and long-range technologies, possibly using third party
providers like telecommunication providers. The PDC might
be implemented in connection with a set-top box in the
patient’s home.
For a paramedic scenario (Scenario 3) the PDC might be
implemented in an ambulance, serving one or several patients.
Channels B and D might be non-existent or implemented by
the means of a long distance communication possibly using
third party providers. Channel E is implemented in most cases
using a short-range scenario. The paramedic scenario has the
most stringent requirements, since emergency routines must
be available, e.g., in case a sensor must be replaced or moved
to another patient, or the patient’s identity might be unknown.
Common for all scenarios is that Channel A is implemented
by the means of a WSN, the placement of the sensors is
done under the responsibility of authorised personnel using
approved routines, and that channels which are not part of
a protected environment are secured properly. Whether the
PDC handles one or several patients might have an impact on
threats, but the architecture should be able to address these.
D. Implementation of Selected Communication Channels
The channels in the generic system model can be imple-
mented in a variety of communication technologies. When
not within a trusted infrastructure, these channels must be
protected. A threat analysis gives answers on what to protect,
and possible countermeasures to speciﬁc threats, for instance
by the use of virtual private networks (VPN). Since securing
the single technologies against these threats will not result in
a uniform architecture, we advocate for handling most threats
in the application layer.
For long-distance communication public networks based on
different technologies (GSM, SMS, GPRS, UMTS, WiMAX,
etc.) are used, which includes the transfer of data through
the networks of external providers. Since it is not allowed to
transfer medical and sensitive data unsecured, measures must
be taken to protect these data, e.g., by using a VPN, securing
the application layer, or other means [6]. Here, the Channels B
or D are considered as long-distance communication channels.
The Bluetooth technology is emerging as communication
technology for parts of the wireless infrastructure for short-
range communication, designed to facilitate communication
without the need of wires. In our scenarios (parts of) the
Channels A, B, D, and E can be implemented using Bluetooth,
using a point-to-point connection.
E. Biomedical Sensor Networks
Biomedical sensor networks [11], [20] can be a part of
a patient monitoring system, located as source, (parts of)
Channel A, and possibly the PDC. BSNs comprise of one
18
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

Fig. 1.
Generic system model with Channel A shown in detail.
or several sensor nodes, possibly several transfer nodes, and
one or more sink nodes which are attached to the PDC.
A biomedical sensor node is an electronic device which
performs the tasks of sensing, processing, sending, and/or
receiving biomedical data. The sensor node can be decom-
posed into four abstract parts: sensor, receiver, processing
unit, and transmitter. Technically, a sensor node is built up
of an MCU or CPU, memory, a wireless communication
device, biomedical sensors, and a power supply often based
on a battery. The functionality of a biomedical sensor node
is controlled by software, usually consisting of ﬁrmware,
operating system, and speciﬁc application software for treating
the biomedical signals and their transfer.
An extensive list of constraints that apply to sensor networks
have been given in a report by DARPA [23], classiﬁed as
(a) sensor node constraints and (b) networking constraints.
Many of these constraints, like small memory resources, im-
poses limitations to the implementation of traditional security
mechanisms on sensors. However, not all of these constraints
apply to the special case of a biomedical sensor network. In
particular the unattended operation constraint does usually not
apply, since the sensors will be attached to patients that are
conscious or supervised by health care personnel.
As shown in Fig. 1 a BSN also can contain transfer nodes
that forward the medical data from the source to the PDC.
These transfer nodes are used to enlarge the distance for
reaching the PDC even for sensor nodes that cannot reach the
PDC directly. This is especially important for devices that have
little battery capacity, and thus limited transmission power.
Despite of the scarce resources of the sensor nodes,
lightweight implementations for encryption of data have been
developed, e.g., Sizzle [24].
IV. SECURITY ASSUMPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Generally, from the requirements and the nature of the
application or system, an analysis results in a list of threats.
These threats are then analysed, and countermeasures and rec-
ommendations will then be used in the design, implementation,
and deployment of systems. For the various parts of a complex
system like a patient monitoring system we analyse the charac-
teristics of the components and channels in the generic system
model, before considering security aspects of the entire model.
Presenting the identiﬁcation of security aspects to wireless
patient monitoring systems, it is customary to take into account
the different abstraction levels [20], such as the stakeholder
level, the application level, the communication level, and the
technical level. While we recognise that it is important to
analyse all levels in a health care enterprise, we concentrate
on the technical aspects in the application and communication
levels.
A. Security Requirements for Patient Monitoring Systems
For a patient monitoring system the security goals are
(a) availability, the intended receiver are able to read the
data; (b) data conﬁdentiality, only the intended receiver are
able to read the data; (c) data integrity, the received data
has not been tampered with or destroyed, and violations of
this must be detectable; and (d) data authenticity, the sensor
data are linked to the correct patient. Note that linking data
to the wrong patient could lead to wrong diagnosis and
eventually mistreating the patient, and we do not consider
safety requirements, like radiation, or other physical effects
having an impact on the patient.
For those parts of a patient monitoring system that commu-
nicate within a trusted environment, we consider all technical
security requirements to be fulﬁlled, since the regulations for
the use of ICT systems in health care enterprises require
this to be approved. For channels or components outside a
trusted environment, we consider the Dolev-Yao threat model
[25], where the attacker can overhear, intercept, and synthesise
any message, and is only limited by the constraints of the
cryptographic methods used. For certain use cases we consider
a selection of components to be trusted, i.e., we assume that
such components are not compromised. Also certain channels,
e.g., those within a protected infrastructure within a health care
enterprise are considered to be secure.
For all channels, personally identiﬁable patient data shall be
protected from eavesdropping and unauthorised modiﬁcations
19
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

when transmitted across open networks, in order to provide
conﬁdentiality and integrity. Additionally, Channels D and
E shall authenticate the user; Channel D shall additionally
authenticate the HCIS, and Channel E shall authenticate the
PDC. All components that handle unencrypted data must deny
unauthorised access of any kind, such as viewing, insertion,
transformation, deletion of patient data.
The HCIS as a part of the hospital infrastructure shall (1)
verify the integrity of patient data, (2) authenticate the PDC,
(3) know the identity of the patient, (4) know to whom the
patient data pertain, and (5) know the type of source used
to produce the patient data. The PDAU shall in addition to
the requirements for all components verify the integrity of the
patient data.
For all components where emergency access functionality
is available, the invocation of emergency access shall override
the restriction on read access. For all components, except the
source, an emergency access shall trigger extended monitoring
of relevant events to enable the detection of unnecessary
access.
B. Security Requirements for BSN
Related to the generic system model the wireless BSN is a
speciﬁc implementation of Channel A. The characteristics of
Channel A include that the signals are not limited to a con-
trolled area or device, and hence are accessible to anybody in
the proximity with the appropriate equipment. Authentication
and measures against eavesdropping are therefore a necessity.
While security measures for BSN must be available at all
communication layers most of the security requirements can
be handled on the presentation layer. However, some issues,
e.g., tied to routing and consequently refer to the requirement
of availability, are better handled at the network layer. We
refer to the layer model shown in Fig. 2 where the security
measures are placed in the presentation layer.
Using the Dolev-Yao threat model [25] to analyse a BSN
we consider the source, and the sink to be trusted, while
Channel A, including possible transport nodes could be in the
control of the attacker. The possible intrusion by an Dolev-Yao
attacker implies that the existence of transfer nodes must be
considered, also in a one-hop environment. A potential attacker
could provide an extra node without anybody knowing about it,
often denoted as “man in the middle” or proxy attack. The use
of time and distance bounding protocols [26] on the network
level can counter such threats.
The existence of fake nodes must be considered, why
authentication of sensors must be mandatory, so that data sent
from a sensor are not disclosed, and fake data are recognised.
Since the data source has limited storage it shall not store
data longer than necessary. Due to limited battery capacity
unnecessary communication, both sending and receiving, shall
be avoided.
Even if the sensor data are encrypted, the sensor encryption
is lightweight and can be broken given sufﬁcient time and
resources. Hence, the data sent from the sensor to the PDC
should not contain person-identiﬁable data such as a social
security number. Instead, the sensor data should be linked
to the corresponding person in the PDC, by using the ID-
data mapper. Person-identiﬁable data may be included at
the PDC, since it has more resources available, and can
implement stronger encryption algorithms and longer keys
than an ordinary sensor node.
An adversary shall not be able to inject data packets without
these being detected. Re-played data packets must be detected
to ensure data freshness. Since characteristics of routing and
forwarding make it necessary to detect duplicate arriving
packets the the network layer or above must offer detection
mechanisms using counters or other identifying data.
On the network layer attacks to WSN, and BSN in par-
ticular, include attacks to routing and forwarding. On the
upper network layers such attacks are recognisable by missing,
defect, manipulated, duplicated, or delayed packets. While
these attacks can be detected they cannot be prevented on the
presentation layer.
We assume that deploying a sensor, key establishment,
assigning an identity to a sensor, and coupling the sensor node
to a patient identity is done in a routine ahead of the normal
operation of the sensor network; trusted medical personnel
performs this operation, e.g., by coupling the sink and the
sensor node.
The sink node has rather large computation and com-
munication properties in order to perform data aggregation,
validity check, identity assignment, etc. Transfer nodes are
not supposed to perform these tasks, and hence do not need
keys to decrypt sensor data.
Any form of data aggregation on transfer nodes should
be avoided by two reasons: (1) data aggregation on these
nodes would need extra resources; and (2) data aggregation
would make it necessary that data are decrypted unless privacy
transformations [27] are employed. For aggregation in the
transfer nodes the key distribution problem would be much
more complex. Therefore, we do not foresee data aggregation
mechanisms within Channel A.
In contrast to a general wireless sensor, the biomedical
sensors are in a rather controlled environment, so that we
do not consider destruction or tampering with the sensors.
Compromise of a sensors key does not affect the rest of the
network, since its key is shared only with the sink node.
Communication on Channel A shall be short-range, while
the transmitted data shall be protected from eavesdropping.
Integrity protection of the transmitted data is necessary, since
interferences from other medical instruments are possible.
Automatic roaming to other PDCs shall not be allowed.
The PDC shall in addition to the requirements for all
components: (1) verify the correct identity of the source, (2)
not modify the patient data, except for aggregation or other
deﬁned transformations, and (3) not store data longer than
necessary to ensure successful transmission of patient data to
the HCIS.
To provide ﬂexibility we must consider security chal-
lenges for software upgrades via the wireless network, re-
conﬁguration, self-organisation, and device-mobility (e.g.,
20
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

Fig. 2.
Layer model for BSN.
handovers on different layers). Conﬁguration control (e.g.,
check whether versions of hardware and software ﬁt together,
verify whether the patient is in the correct situation) shall be
employed.
Aspects of availability are often neglected, which include
scalability, quality of service (QoS), and power consumption.
A power outage of a sensor may compromise the availability
of data and thus threaten the patient. QoS includes mechanisms
to provide an agreed service level regarding parameters such as
network bandwidth, data throughput, signal quality, response
time, latency, packet delivery rate, jitter, and power consump-
tion. In complex communication environments, mechanisms
should be employed to mitigate interference from co-existing
wireless networks and various medical applications, which
requires robust error detection and correction algorithms in
packet transmission procedures.
V. THREAT ASSESSMENT OF PATIENT MONITORING
SYSTEMS
The general threats and attacks to these security objec-
tives are eavesdropping, denial of service, masquerading, and
disclosure. For the components the threats and associated
factors include (1) compromised or fake components (phys-
ical or logical attack), (2) destroyed, malfunctioning, lost,
or stolen component, (3) software errors (e.g., failure in
security mechanisms, routing, etc.), (4) misuse of emergency
access, and (5) denial of service attacks (physical or logical
attacks, bad quality, accidents, etc.). For the channels threats
include: (6) compromised or fake (components of) communi-
cation infrastructure (physical or logical attack), (7) unstable
communication infrastructure (physical or logical attack, bad
quality, accidents), and (8) eavesdropping of communication.
These threats and vulnerabilities may lead to the unwanted
consequences that information or equipment might be unavail-
able, incorrect information is received (medical data, patient
identity, sensor type, etc.), sensitive information is leaked, and
eventually damage to the patient, operators or equipment.
Many of the security mechanisms of the generic system
model employed as countermeasures are distributed over
several components. These components include (1) the key
generation service for session keys; (2) security protocols
that support authentication, conﬁdentiality, integrity, key es-
tablishment, and the associated cryptographic algorithms; (3)
signature generation and veriﬁcation services, along with a
local storage for credentials and keys; (4) access enforcement
services for both users and system components; (5) the log
collector to collect metadata about events; and (6) front-
ends for various services, such as security administration and
authentication.
An architecture for patient monitoring systems must address
patient identiﬁcation and identity management of patients,
devices and personnel. Other elements include device adminis-
tration (which requires key management), user administration,
authorisation policy, mandatory encryption for data stored on
mobile devices, communication encryption, communication
and data source authentication, data manipulation detection,
and logging of critical events [28].
A. Vulnerabilities in Communication Channels
For short- and long-range communication the channels not
residing in the secure enterprise infrastructure include wireless
short-range, wired and wireless long-range communication.
When security mechanisms are not offered, e.g., when using
a channel over a public network, presentation or application
layer mechanisms must be employed, e.g., using authentication
and encryption mechanisms offered by the protocols of the
appropriate layer.
Bluetooth, which often is used for short-range communica-
tion, employs rather weak encryption based on the assumption
that the communication is short-range. However, this argument
may be questionable since well equipped attackers using signal
ampliﬁcation and directional antennae can enlarge the commu-
nication range substantially. Also the fact that the Bluetooth
devices often are very mobile and can contact many other
Bluetooth devices short-range while passing by, is a substantial
threat.
The sole secret credential in a Bluetooth network is the PIN
code of the device. While weaknesses in the cryptographic
21
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

protocol can be neglected, there are different implementation
weaknesses for the equipment of some vendors. When these
are exploited, devices and sessions can be taken over by an
intruder [29].
Since communication over SMS is not reliable, the use
of IP over GPRS, EDGE, 3G, or similar technologies is
recommended. An encryption scheme and intruder detection
must be employed in order to provide privacy. Note that the
risks for attacks are different whether an attack affects one
patient or many patients. While there are several PKI solutions
available, the use of keys stored in the SIM cards reﬂects the
security needs for mobile patient monitoring systems.
B. Threats Affecting BSNs
The general threats for biomedical sensor networks can be
characterised into the following domains: (1) the entity do-
main, (2) the network domain, (3) the routing and forwarding
domain, and (4) the speciﬁc protocol domain.
Any adversary can eavesdrop on the trafﬁc, inject new
messages, replay or change previous messages. The biomed-
ical sensors do not trust each other; while each sensor node
trusts itself. Base stations (gateways) are assumed not to be
compromised. However, compromising them could render the
entire sensor network useless. Thus the base stations are a
necessary part of the trusted computing base, and all sensor
nodes trust the base station.
A sensor network should be both preventive and resilient
to severe types of attacks regarding both control trafﬁc and
data trafﬁc. Typical examples of control trafﬁc are routing,
monitoring whether a node is awake, asleep, or dead, topology
discovery, and distributed location determination. Control traf-
ﬁc attacks include blackhole attacks, wormhole attacks [30],
rushing attacks [31], sybil attacks and compromised sensors
[32], [33], sinkhole attacks [34], and HELLO ﬂood attacks
[34]. Control attacks are especially dangerous because they
can be used to subvert the functionality of the routing protocol
and create opportunities for a malicious node to launch data
trafﬁc attacks such as dropping all or a selective subset of
data packets. A sensor network should be both preventive and
resilient to severe type of attacks such as wormhole attack, the
Sybil attack, and compromised sensors [35].
While secure routing ensures that data are forwarded to
the correct recipient, it does not include conﬁdentiality and
protection against replay attacks. This is caused by underlying
spoofed, altered or replayed routing information, selective
forwarding, acknowledgement spooﬁng, and the attacks men-
tioned above.
At the sensor node domain, an attack could change settings
in a sensor or transmitter unit, its software or data, resulting
in a threat. Consequences might be exposure to increased
heating or radiation from the device. The general attacks
by a malicious entity can therefore be classiﬁed as fake
emergency warnings, prevention of legitimate warnings from
being reported, battery power depletion, excessive heating in
the tissue of the patient, and radiation from the entity.
Countermeasures to threats affecting a BSN are often spe-
ciﬁc to the employed communication technology, and thus se-
curity mechanisms should be implemented in communication
layers below the transport layer [20]. Since BSN use technolo-
gies that are introduced in the market, the implementation of
lower communication layer countermeasures are not always
viable in a health care enterprise. However, countermeasures
to avoid that attackers exploit weaknesses include link layer
encryption and authentication using symmetric keys, the use of
packet counters to avoid replay attacks, encryption, veriﬁcation
of identities, and various countermeasures on the link-layer
[34].
In order to meet the challenges that the threats impose
we propose that countermeasures are employed on the pre-
sentation layer, which are not speciﬁc to the underlying
communication technology. Since not all threats on the lower
layers can be prevented on the presentation layer, such as
attacks to routing or denial of service, inconsistencies should
be at least detectable at the application layers. Measures at
the application layer to be taken should include encryption,
measures for data integrity and authenticity.
For the sake of scalability, authorisation schemes must
be role-based (as opposed to being individual-based). The
authorisation database stores information about roles and their
assigned privileges, which might be constrained by contextual
information. Session keys are preferably generated during the
authentication protocol, while conﬁdentiality is established
through encryption, and integrity is established through a sig-
nature generation service. Since the HCIS cannot authenticate
all sources, such as biomedical sensors, these sources must be
authenticated by a proxy, i.e., the PDC identiﬁes the source,
and guarantees its authenticity towards the HCIS.
Since broadcast channels are used in BSNs and energy con-
sumption by the device is an issue, security mechanisms must
be carefully designed. Some security mechanisms, such as
encryption, use extra computing cycles and therefore consume
extra energy. The broadcast of unnecessary data consumes
extra energy at both the sender and the receiver nodes in a
BSN. Wherever a sufﬁcient security mechanism is offered
at lower layers in the communication stack, these should
be employed, since these are better ﬁtted to the employed
technology than higher level mechanisms. However, there
should be a minimal set of mechanisms in the application
level that protect the data.
While the relationship between the patient and the patient
data must be given at all times, it is not recommended that
data that identify the patient are transmitted over unsecured
channels. Instead, the relationship between patient and patient
data is achieved by authenticating the device or sensor.
VI. MPEG-21 IN PATIENT MONITORING SYSTEMS
MPEG-21 is a general framework for handling multimedia,
from the content provider to the end-user. It aspires to be a
unifying framework in the media industry facilitating multi-
media transactions, and to equip the content providers with a
tool to restrict illicit use of copyrighted material. Given the
22
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

recent battles between copyright holders and people illegally
sharing the copyrighted material, this is still an unresolved
issue. Despite this, MPEG-21 is not only suited for enforcing
copyright, it can also be used to protect the life cycle of patient
data.
The vision of MPEG-21, deﬁned in ISO/IEC 21000, is
to enable transparent and augmented use of multimedia re-
sources across a wide range of networks and devices [8].
Since medical data qualify as multimedia resources this vision
suits well within a patient monitoring system with its wired
and wireless networks, portable and stationary devices, and
a variety of multimedia resources. MPEG-21 also provides
means to protect the content, so that the desirable level of
privacy can be achieved. While not all of the eighteen parts of
MPEG-21 are suited for our purpose, the most relevant parts
will be presented brieﬂy in the following.
A. Relevant Parts of MPEG-21
The most fundamental concept in MPEG-21 is that of a dig-
ital item (DI), which is described in Part 2 of MPEG-21. The
DI is a structured object, represented as an XML-description,
that contains the multimedia resources (or references), and
metadata that describe these resources. Attempts have been
made to adapt the DI to the health care sector as medical
digital item (MDI) [18].
To identify a DI, Part 3, Digital Item Identiﬁcation (DII),
offers a shell where users can choose their own relevant iden-
tiﬁer regime, for example patient identity or sensor identity.
A protected form of the DI is provided by the intellectual
property management and protection (IPMP) components in
Part 4 of MPEG-21. Parts of a DI can be encrypted and
digitally signed, and hence conﬁdentiality, authenticity and
integrity of patient data can be provided assuming that the
system, including keys, protocols and algorithms, is secure.
However, the speciﬁc tools to encrypt and sign are not pro-
vided by the standard, and must therefore be implemented by
the application or middleware components.
Expressing the digital rights, i.e., the rights to access speciﬁc
data under given circumstances, is governed by Parts 5 and 6 of
MPEG-21, the rights expression language (REL) and the rights
data dictionary (RDD), respectively. Combined with IPMP the
usage of patient data can be restricted, e.g., by giving a speciﬁc
nurse the permission to view a speciﬁc patient’s blood pressure
during a speciﬁed time interval.
In order to make the DIs available on networks and devices
with different capabilities, and to users with different prefer-
ences in various environments, Part 7 of MPEG-21 deﬁnes
the digital item adaptation (DIA). In this context a user can
refer to a person, a group or an organisation. Adaptation can
be useful in a health care environment, e.g, to give different
views of the same data on terminals with different screen sizes
and network bandwidths [19].
Transmitting
the
DI
as
a
potentially
large
XML-
representation is not convenient on a resource and bandwidth
constrained network like BSN. To address this, MPEG-21
Part 16, entitled “MPEG-21 binary format”, describes how to
binary encode the XML representation in order to signiﬁcantly
reduce the bit rate [7], [36]. The technology for encoding the
XML representation is provided by ISO/IEC 23001 Part 1,
“Binary MPEG format for XML” or shortly BiM [37]. The
BiM encoding is standardised in MPEG-7 [38], [39] and
adapted for use in MPEG-21.
In general, MPEG-21 is agnostic to which concrete algo-
rithms are used; the digital items only refer to the algorithms,
and contain the respective payload. An evaluation of different
cryptographic algorithms for the use in WSN has been carried
out elsewhere [40].
B. Representing Medical Data with MPEG-21
The Digital Item deﬁned by MPEG-21 has previously been
adapted for use in the health care sector [19] as medical digital
item (MDI). The MDI can contain both the biomedical data
as deﬁned in Section III-A, and the metadata. The metadata
originating from the sensor node comprise of (1) the sensor id;
(2) the stream id; (3) time stamps; (4) sequence numbers; (5)
descriptive metadata, like sampling rates; and (6) encryption-
related data.
To keep the amount of data processed and sent from the
sensor nodes at a minimum we introduce the concept of the
lightweight MDI for the sensor (µMDI) that solely contains
the necessary biomedical data and corresponding metadata.
For privacy reasons data that can identify the patient are not
included in the µMDI. Except the sensor id, all these data
are represented encrypted, and packaged efﬁciently using BiM
before being sent to the PDC. An example of a very simple
µMDI is given in Fig. 3.
C. Efﬁcient Encoding of XML
As XML-representations of data are known to have a huge
overhead, the use of the Binary MPEG format for XML (BiM)
is a necessity for the resource constrained sensors, thus the
sensors will only have to process and transfer a binary encoded
version of the µMDI. The major properties of BiM include that
it represents a schema oriented encoding method using a pre-
parsed, typed binary format; it also allows different refresh
rates of sub-parts of the XML document. BiM uses a tree
representation of XML, where the tree nodes can be addressed,
and operations containing the payload can be applied. A BiM-
encoded template reduces the size of the XML-code by 90-
95% [36].
On the source node the data are encoded by an automaton,
which can be generated from the XML schema describing the
µMDI that is used on this sensor node. On the PDC, the code
to decode the µMDI is generated from the same XML schema.
Transfer nodes and other sensor nodes are not aware of the
MDI schema, since the content is not supposed to be processed
there.
To further reduce the amount of transmitted data, not all
metadata need to be included in every packet. This is possible
since BiM allows different refresh rates of the XML document.
Descriptive metadata, such as bitrate, could be sent out less
often than critical metadata like time stamps, and stream id.
23
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

<DIDL xmlns="urn:mpeg:mpeg21:2002:02
-DIDL-NS" xmlns:dii="urn:mpeg:mpeg21:
2002:01-DII-NS">
<Container id="test">
<Item id="myitem">
<Descriptor>
<Statement mimeType="text/xml">
<dii:Identifier>
urn:grid:a1-abcde-9873216540-f
</dii:Identifier>
</Statement>
</Descriptor>
<Descriptor>
<Statement mimeType="text/xml">
<dii:Type>
urn:sensor:bloodpressure
</dii:Type>
</Statement>
</Descriptor>
</Item>
<Item id="bloodpressure">
<Component id="systole">
<Resource mimeType="text/plain">
160
</Resource>
</Component>
<Component id="diastole">
<Resource mimeType="text/plain">
80
</Resource>
</Component>
</Item>
</Container>
</DIDL>
Fig. 3.
Example of a simple MDI for blood pressure in XML.
Fig. 4.
Lifecycle of a biomedical sensor node (adapted from [23]).
VII. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
Our architecture builds on the medical digital items (MDI)
introduced in a health care environment for patient monitoring
systems [18], and suggested for BSN [19]. Our architecture
envisages that all medical data use the MDI in the presentation
layer of all channels of the generic model. When used between
all components this enables security and adaptivity of health
Fig. 5.
Proposed architecture showing the initialisation and deployment
phases (green) and operation phase (blue).
care data, including medical data and metadata. Generally, all
medical data sent over the channels are encoded using the
MDI schema, while the components use the tools deﬁned by
MPEG-21 to handle the medical data.
As outlined previously the properties of Channel A of the
generic model require a reﬁnement of the general architecture
due to resource limitations and other properties of this channel.
We will elaborate on how to implement our architecture for
Channel A by the means of a BSN in the following.
Even though the BSN has limited resources we encode the
biomedical data and the relevant metadata into MDI containers
to transfer these from the sensor node to the PDC. Due to
the resource constraints in BSN we use additionally BiM to
reduce the data rate, and select carefully which portions of
the medical data to transfer at which rate, and which data to
protect.
Fig. 4 shows a diagram of the entire life cycle of a sensor
node [23], which we have adapted to the health care area. We
focus on the three phases that are numbered in this diagram,
namely the initialisation, the deployment, and the operation of
a sensor node.
For a more detailed view on these three phases, including
the overall architecture and data ﬂow, we refer to Fig. 5.
During the initialisation phase the sensor nodes receive the
appropriate software and keys in a secure manner shown in the
green elements of this diagram. The initialisation is facilitated
by installing software including the right credentials on the
sensor node. This software is compiled from the XML schema
to produce the µMDI efﬁciently. The sink-node receives the
credentials and decoding-software accordingly, while there is
no need to install extra software or credentials on the transfer
nodes. The relationship between patient and sensor node is
established in the deployment phase through the ID data
mapper.
During the operation phase, denoted as the blue elements in
24
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

Fig. 6.
Initialisation of a sensor node.
Fig. 5, the medical data and metadata are sent from the sensor
nodes to the PDC, and further to the other channels. The data
are produced in the sensor node and forwarded as µMDI to
the sink node. There, the µMDI is completed to form a full
MDI and forwarded to the HCIS and the PDAU.
A. Initialisation of Sensor Nodes
Prior to deployment of the sensor nodes, the initialisation
phase performs the following tasks: (a) key-establishment; (b)
installation of XML-generated code on the sensor nodes. Fig. 6
illustrates the initialisation.
Due to the limited computing resources on the sensors, we
avoid the usage of public key algorithms, which is reﬂected
also for the key-establishment [41]. We propose that each
sensor and the PDC share a long-term, pair-wise, symmetric
key that is used to establish session keys.
The long-term key has to be securely pre-distributed from
the hospital infrastructure. This provides a challenge, since,
on most sensors, the communication interface is wireless, and
the pre-distribution will be broadcast for everyone to listen.
As a countermeasure to eavesdropping, the key establishment
could be performed using a special device, e.g., installed in a
Faraday cage, which will shield the electromagnetic signals so
that a potential eavesdropper is unable to intercept the long-
term key. The long-term key is supposed to last the entire
lifetime of a sensor, or until it is compromised or exchanged
routinely to renew the keys. Hence the initialisation procedure
does not have to be performed every time a sensor is deployed
on a patient.
The pair-wise symmetric session key will then be estab-
lished by using a key establishment protocol that utilises
a pre-distributed symmetric key, such as Authenticated Key
Exchange Protocol 2 (AKEP2) [42], [43]. Thus, a node will
only be able to read messages encrypted by the PDC with their
shared key, and not messages encrypted by other nodes. The
PDC will be able to read messages encrypted by all nodes that
have their keys securely stored in the PDC.
Due to the limited capabilities of the sensor nodes these are
unsuited to handle the full complexity of encoding and parsing
Fig. 7.
Deployment of a sensor node.
XML-documents. A more viable approach for BSN is to
deploy software into the sensor nodes during the initialisation
phase that is able to produce a µMDI from a template. More
powerful devices without the constraints of sensor nodes, e.g.,
the PDC, will then receive and process these data using the
full capabilities of XML.
B. Deployment of Sensor Nodes
In the deployment phase all identities are linked together
within the ID data mapper. A schematic view on this phase
is given in Fig. 7. The dotted lines indicate that the ID of the
entity is sent to the ID data mapper. The PDC stores the sensor
and stream identities and links them to the patient identity
during deployment of the sensor. We distinguish between
stream ID and sensor ID to support multi-sensors capable of
handling several data streams simultaneously. Before attaching
a sensor to a patient a manually initiated procedure assigns
sensor and stream identities in order to identify each stream
uniquely. By also including an examination identity, the patient
identity and examination are linked to the sensor and streams.
This information is resident in the PDC, and is communicated
to the hospital infrastructure via an MDI.
C. Operation of Sensor Nodes
During the operation of a sensor node the following work-
ﬂow takes place: (1) Measurement, the sensor measures
biomedical data from a patient, (2) packaging, the biomedical
data and the associated metadata are encrypted, encoded,
packaged and signed in the µMDI template, and ﬁnally, (3)
sending, the µMDI is sent to the PDC.
Steps (2) and (3) are illustrated in Fig. 8. The encryption
in Step (2) uses a symmetric session-key that is shared only
between the originating sensor and the PDC. This secured
µMDI is then binary encoded using BiM. The sensor node
sends the encrypted, encoded and signed version to the PDC,
possibly via transfer nodes which will not be able to learn
any of the contents since these are not in the possession of
the decryption key.
25
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

Fig. 8.
Operational phase of the sensor node. Biomedical and metadata are
encrypted, encoded and packaged into a µMDI.
After the µMDI arrives at the PDC it is decoded, decrypted
and the signature is veriﬁed. The content of the µMDI, all
relevant context information, such as references to the XML-
schema in use, and patient data are then aggregated to produce
a full MDI. This MDI might also include data from other
sources about the same patient, before being sent further along
the channels described in the generic system model.
VIII. DISCUSSION
Our framework uses an international and open multimedia
standard for end-to-end content management to meet the
security goals of data conﬁdentiality and integrity of medical
data in patient monitoring systems using a BSN. An important
argument for our choices is to use MPEG-21 as a mechanism
in the entire work ﬂow of the health care information system.
However, due to the resource restrictions in BSN we need to
show that the use of MPEG-21 is viable, and to what extent our
architecture meets the security requirements stated previously.
A. Security
The security mechanisms proposed in our architecture are
applied on the presentation layer, and address integrity and
conﬁdentiality requirements. Threats on the network layer
or below, such as routing attacks, denial of service attacks
or hardware failures are not addressed, nor are attacks on
cryptographic primitives, since we assume the Dolev-Yao
attacker model. Further, we cannot exclude that an attacker
might receive a limited amount of information from the exis-
tence of messages and additional knowledge that the attacker
might have from the context or from access to the patient.
Additionally, message rate, message size and sensor frequency
might reveal conﬁdential information. Therefore, measures
to achieve ‘transactional conﬁdentiality’ [44] must also be
considered.
We claim that the use of MPEG-21 can protect against
conﬁdentiality threats, such as eavesdropping the original
medical data, by encryption using a symmetric key. Since
the key establishment is performed using physical security
measures the medical data and most of the metadata remain
as secure as the employed cryptographic method permits, and
the keys are not compromised.
Since the strength of the employed cryptographic methods
is limited due to the resource limitations of the sensor nodes,
the µMDI does not contain data which directly identify the
patient. Note that this is in contrast to frameworks that do not
consider the use of BSN explicitly [22], where the patient ID
is not even protected.
To address the integrity of the medical data and metadata
the MDI is protected by an encrypted hash value, as employed
in MPEG-21 IPMP. This and the use of sequence numbers
for packets enable the detection of injected, re-played, deleted
or modiﬁed data packets. Altering and injection of messages
would be detected since the Dolev-Yao-attacker would not be
able to correctly sign messages.
B. Encryption Scheme
The encryption methods as such are not part of MPEG-21.
In principle, all schemes and implementations can be used
in combination with MPEG-21. However, encryption schemes
are a vital part of the protection of medical data and metadata.
The use of symmetric keys, rather that public/private key pairs,
can inﬂict potential issues of authentication, key-distribution
and key-management [45]. However, we argue that our pro-
posed scheme resolves these issues since, in contrast to general
WSN, both initialisation and deployment are performed in a
physically controlled environment by humans.
Pair-wise symmetric key pairs allow data source authenti-
cation. Since each sensor only needs to store one key, the
memory requirements on the sensor are limited to the key-
size. On the PDC the memory requirements are proportional
to the number of sensors that are connected to it. Assuming
a symmetric key-size of 128 bits, 20 patients with 25 nodes
each, the key storage will require around 8 kB on the PDC.
Even if the pre-distributed keys might be used for a long time,
and be subject to cryptanalysis by an adversary, a brute-force
attack is considered to be infeasible on keys with 128 bits.
C. Suitability for BSN
Since the sensor nodes are resource restricted the use of
XML on the sensor nodes is not viable due to space con-
straints. Instead BiM-encoding is used. On the sensor nodes
parsing of message content is avoided. As a consequence,
XML is processed only outside the sensor nodes.
The software to BiM-encode the MDIs in the sensor node
is generated outside the sensor node from XML schemas, and
uploaded to the sensor node during the initialisation phase.
This software is typically implemented as a rather simple
automaton which has a small ﬁngerprint. Since the µMDI
structure is constant while operating a sensor node, a bitstream
binding language [36] which could provide a more ﬂexible
framework is not necessary.
Compared to sending the medical data and metadata in
a ﬁxed packet format with pre-deﬁned ﬁelds we gain much
ﬂexibility with MPEG-21 to the cost of an overhead. Addition-
ally to the payload the BiM-encoded messages contain path
information which increases the packet length. Benchmarks
show that we can expect a considerable overhead for the
26
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

Fig. 9.
Test bed for evaluating MPEG-21 for use in Patient Monitoring
Systems and BSN.
general case [38]. Therefore the layout of the XML-tree to
represent the µMDI has been carefully designed in order to
minimise the overhead in the BiM-encoding. Also the ratio
between payload, i.e., measured data, and the data necessary
to secure the µMDI must be balanced.
D. Trust
Sensor nodes can fail by other means than communication,
e.g., deliver bogus data, be misplaced on the body, etc. While
our proposed framework does not protect against these threats,
we recognise the importance of a sanity checks of data in
health care applications. For proofs and adequate evidence
about creator, creation, and historical process of data the
term evidential value [46] is used. Methods to maintain the
evidential value must be employed on devices that have
enough capabilities to perform these operations. Our archi-
tecture architecture contributes to trust by using the measures
of authentication, hash values and encryption as outlined in
Section VIII-A. Other elements of the evidential value can be
embedded in the µMDI when the sensor is able to provide
these.
E. Evaluation Test Bed
To evaluate the different aspects of MPEG-21 we have
developed a test bed shown in Fig. 9. This test bed consists
of one part for evaluating properties of data protection and
security, especially for Channel A; and of another part for
evaluating properties of adaptation which is most relevant for
presenting data at the PDAU. In Test Bed 1 we use parts of the
reference software for MPEG-21 [47], and reference software
for MPEG-7 [48] for BiM encoding running on PCs. In the
Test Bed 2 we also employ software from ADACTUS [49] to
evaluate adaptation issues which are beyond the scope of our
paper. Both parts together implement a test bed that represents
a patient monitoring system with all components and channels
of the generic system model.
During our experiments with the test bed the reference
software for MPEG-21 could be installed and used without
greater obstacles, while the reference software for MPEG-7
BiM needed several XML ﬁles which were no longer available
at their original locations. Both software packages use XML
code that is partially incompatible, leading to the need of
developing XML ﬁles that can be used in both reference
software packages. We succeeded in encoding and decoding
µMDI messages, and could conﬁrm the estimates for the
compression ratio using BiM as known from the literature [36].
Since the reference software for MPEG-7 BiM is demon-
stration software only, the production of a µMDI in our test
bed is done via XML, instead of directly encoding the sensor
data as outlined in Section VI-C.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We propose a framework for BSN that uses MPEG-21
for transmitting the biomedical data from sensor nodes to
the hospital infrastructure. The tools within MPEG-21 have
the capabilities of encrypting the patient data and assigning
detailed rights to them. In addition, it is suitable for handling
multimedia data on different devices and networks, which can
be used to enhance the perceived quality of service (QoS) for a
user. The proposed BiM-encoding technique facilitates a way
to incorporate MPEG-21 resources in a resource-constrained
BSN.
The scalability in terms of larger networks with many
sensor nodes and user terminals, denoted as clients, can
easily be handled in the application and presentation layers.
Furthermore, implementation of our framework in the test
bed and on real sensor nodes, with careful design of the
µMDI will provide an efﬁcient way of optimising wireless
data transmission, data processing, power consumption, and
memory usage in the sensor nodes with adequate security
mechanisms. Incorporating Part 7 of MPEG-21 (DIA) into our
security framework can be considered in future.
We anticipate a large scale testing of the proposed frame-
work using the test bed described in Section VIII-E. The
simulation of a BSN and evaluating packet size, overhead from
the BiM encoding, and resource consumption will be useful
prior to deploying such a system.
We also envisage the use of formal methods [50] as a proof
of the correctness of our framework, its implementation and
the employed security protocols. This includes the analysis of
attacks on the BiM-encoded packets under given assumptions,
authentication, and integrity of the medical data.
To study the impact of small footprint of the software to
be deployed in the initialisation phase, an implementation on
real sensor nodes (motes) can be considered. For generating
the software code for the sensor nodes, a framework for code
27
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

generation [51] that allows generation of code from an abstract
model to several potential sensor node types can be used.
We are conﬁdent that simulations in the test bed, and the
implementation of the framework on real BSN will open for
a secure deployment of wireless technologies in health care
applications.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is funded by the SAMPOS project in the VERDIKT
programme of the Norwegian Research Council. We appreciate the
help of Thomas Skjølberg and Peder Drege at ADACTUS. The
authors wish to thank Habtamu Abie, Arne-Kristian Groven, and
Lothar Fritsch for contributions and discussions in previous versions
of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Wolfgang Leister, Truls Fretland, and Ilangko Balasingham.
Use of
MPEG-21 for security and authentication in biomedical sensor networks.
Proc. ICSNC’08, International Conference on Systems and Networks
Communication, 0:151–156, 2008.
[2] Integrating Healthcare Enterprise. http://www.ihe.net. Last accessed:
May. 15, 2009.
[3] S.C. Chu. From component-based to service oriented software archi-
tecture for healthcare. In Proc. 7th Annual International Workshop on
Enterprise networking and Computing in Healthcare Industry, HEALTH-
COM 2005, pages 96–100, 2005.
[4] Eric Newcomer and Greg Lomow, editors.
Understanding SOA with
Web Services. Addison Wesley, 2005. ISBN 0-321-18086-0.
[5] Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM).
http://
medical.nema.org/dicom/, 2008. Last accessed May 15, 2009.
[6] Ilangko Balasingham, Halfdan Ihlen, Wolfgang Leister, Per Røe, and
Eigil Samset. Communication of medical images, text, and messages in
inter-enterprise systems: A case study in Norway. IEEE Transactions
on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 11(1):7–13, 2007.
[7] I. Burnett, F. Pereira, R. van de Walle, and R. Koenen, editors. The
MPEG-21 Book. John Wiley & Sons, 2006. ISBN 0-47001011-8.
[8] ISO/IEC TR 21000-1: 2004. information technology - multimedia frame-
work (MPEG-21) - part 1: Vision, technologies and strategy, November
2004.
[9] The Government of Norway. Act of 18 may 2001 no. 24 on personal
health data ﬁling systems and the processing of personal health data
(personal health data ﬁling system act). Stortinget, 2002.
[10] Article 29 Data Protecting Working Party of Directive 95/46/EC. Work-
ing document on the processing of personal data relating to health in
electronic health records (EHR), 2007. Adopted on 15 February 2007,
European Commission, Directorate General Justice.
[11] J.P. Walters, Z. Liang, W. Shi, and V. Chaudhary.
Wireless sensor
network security: A survey. In Yang Xiao, editor, Security in Distributed,
Grid, and Pervasive Computing, chapter 17. Auerbach Publications,
CRC Press, 2006.
[12] H. Yang, H. Luo, S. Ye, S. Lu, and L. Zhang. Security in mobile ad hoc
networks: Challenges and solutions. IEEE Wireless Communications,
11(1):38–47, 2004.
[13] R. Savola and J. Holappa. Self-measurements of the information security
level in a monitoring system based on mobile ad hoc networks. In Proc
of the 3rd International Workshop in Wireless Security Technologies
2005 (IWWSXT’05), 2005.
[14] R.S.H. Istepanian, E. Jovanov, and Y.T. Zhang. Guest editorial intro-
duction to the special section on m-health: Beyond seamless mobility
and global wireless health-care connectivity.
IEEE Transactions on
Information Technology in Biomedicine, 8(4):405–414, 2004.
[15] L Schwiebert, S.K.S. Gupta, and J. Weinmann. Research challenges in
wireless networks of biomedical sensors. In Seventh Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, 2001.
[16] IEEE 802.15.6 Body Area Network.
https://mentor.ieee.org/802.15/
documents, 2009. Last accessed May 15, 2009.
[17] IEEE 1451.5 draft standard for a smart transducer interface for sen-
sors and actuators - wireless communication protocols and transducer
electronic data sheets (TEDS) formats, 2006. March 26, 2007.
[18] M. Landén.
An MPEG-21 approach to creating the ﬁrst multimedia
electronic patient journal system. Master’s thesis, NTNU, 2003.
[19] Arne Lie, Knut Grythe, and Ilangko Balasingham.
On the use of
the MPEG-21 framework in medical wireless sensor networks.
In
Proc. of the IEEE 1st Int Symp on Applied Sciences in Biomedical
and Communication Technologies (ISABEL), Aalborg, Denmark, 25.-28.
October, 2008.
[20] W. Leister, H. Abie, A.-K. Groven, T. Fretland, and I. Balasingham.
Threat assessment of wireless patient monitoring systems.
In Proc.
ICTTA’08, Damascus, Syria, 2008.
[21] Georg A Brox. MPEG-21 as an access control tool for the national health
service care records service. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 11
Suppl 1:23–5, 2005.
[22] Anastasios Fragopoulos, John Gialelis, and Dimitrios Serpanos. Security
framework for pervasive healthcare architectures utilizing MPEG-21
IPMP components. International Journal of Telemedicine and Appli-
cations, 2009:1–9, 2009.
[23] D.W. Carman, P.S. Kruus, and B.J. Matt. Constraints and approaches
for distributed sensor network security (Final). DARPA Project report,
(Cryptographic Technologies Group, Trusted Information System, NAI
Labs), September, 1, 2000.
[24] V. Gupta, M. Millard, S. Fung, Zhu Yu, N. Gura, H. Eberle, and S.C.
Shantz. Sizzle: a standards-based end-to-end security architecture for
the embedded internet. In Third IEEE conf on Pervasive Computing
and Communications, PerCom 2005, pages 247–256, 2005.
[25] D. Dolev and A.C. Yao. On the security of public key protocols. In
Proc. of the IEEE 22nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, pages 350–357, 1981.
[26] Srdjan ˇCapkun, Jean-Pierre Hubaux, and Levente Buttyán.
Mobility
helps security in ad hoc networks. In MobiHoc ’03: Proceedings of
the 4th ACM international symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking &
computing, pages 46–56, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM.
[27] Stanley R. M. Oliveira and Osmar R. Zaïane. A privacy-preserving clus-
tering approach toward secure and effective data analysis for business
collaboration. Computers & Security, 26(1):81–93, 2007.
[28] R. Arnesen, J. Danielsson, J. Vestgården, and J. Ølnes. Wireless health
and care security requirements.
Research note DART/01/05, Norsk
Regnesentral, 2004.
[29] Hans Jakob Rivertz. Bluetooth security. Research note DART/05/05,
Norsk Regnesentral, 2005.
[30] Y. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. Johnson. Packet leashes: A defense against
wormhole attacks in wireless ad hoc networks.
In Proc. INFOCOM
2003, pages 1976–1986, 2003.
[31] Y. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. Johnson.
Rushing attacks and defense in
wireless ad hoc network routing protocols. In Proc. WISE 2003, pages
30–40, 2003.
[32] J. Newsome, E. Shi, D. Song, and A. Perrig. The sybil attack in sensor
networks: Analysis and defenses. In Proc. IPSN 2004, pages 259–268,
2004.
[33] J. Douceur. The sybil attack. In Proc. IPTPS 2002, LNCS Vol. 2429,
pages 251–260, 2002.
[34] C. Karlof and D. Wagner. Secure routing in sensor networks: Attacks
and countermeasures. In Proc. SNPA 2003, pages 113–127, 2003.
[35] L. Lazos and R. Poovendran. Serloc: Secure range-independent local-
ization for wireless sensor networks. In ACM Workshop on Wireless
Security, 2004.
[36] J. Thomas-Kerr, I. Burnett, and P. Ciufo. Bitstream binding language
- mapping XML multimedia containers into streams. In IEEE Interna-
tional conference on Multimedia and Expo, 2005, ICME 2005, pages
626–629, 2005.
[37] P. de Cuetos, C. Seyrat, and C. Thienot.
BiM white paper.
http:
//www.chiariglione.org/mpeg/technologies/mpb-bim/index.htm, January
2006. Last accessed May 15, 2009.
[38] U. Niedermeier, J. Heuer, A. Hutter, W. Stechele, and A. Kaup. An
MPEG-7 tool for compression and streaming of XML data. In Proc.
2002 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Multimedia and Expo, pages 521–524, 2002.
[39] S. Devillers, C. Timmerer, J. Heuer, and H. Hellwagner. Bitstream syntax
description-based adaptation in streaming and constrained environments.
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 7(3):463–470, June 2005.
[40] R. Roman, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez.
A survey of cryptographic
primitives and implementations for hardware-constrained sensor network
nodes. Mobile Networks and Applications, 12(4):231–244, 2007.
28
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

[41] A. Perrig, R. Szewczyk, J.D. Tygar, V. Wen, and D.E. Culler. Spins:
Security protocols for sensor networks. Wireless Networks, 8:521–534,
2002.
[42] Alfred J. Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot, and Scott A. Vanstone.
Handbook of Applied Cryptography. CRC Press, 2001.
[43] Mihir Bellare and Phillip Rogaway. Entity authentication and key distri-
bution. In CRYPTO ’93: Proceedings of the 13th annual international
cryptology conference on Advances in cryptology, pages 232–249, New
York, NY, USA, 1994. Springer-Verlag New York.
[44] S. Pai, S. Bermudez, S.B. Wicker, M. Meingast, T. Roosta, S. Sastry,
and D.K. Mulligan. Transactional conﬁdentiality in sensor networks.
Security & Privacy, IEEE, 6(4):28–35, 2008.
[45] Chieh-Yih Wan, Mark Yarvis, and Jens Mache. Lightweight key distri-
bution for sensor networks. http://www.freshpatents.com/Lightweight-
key-distribution-and-management-method-for-sensor-networks-
dt20081127ptan20080292105.php. Last accessed: May. 15, 2009.
[46] Jianquiang Ma, Habtamu Abie, and Torbjørn Skramstad. Preservation of
trust and security in long-term record management. In Proc. 6th Annual
Conference on Privacy, PST2008, Security and Trust, Graduate Student
Symposium, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, 2008.
[47] ISO/IEC 21000-8: 2008. information technology - multimedia frame-
work (MPEG-21) - part 8: Reference software, 2008.
[48] ISO/IEC 15938-6: 2003. information technology - multimedia content
description interface (MPEG-7) - part 8: Reference software, 2003.
[49] ADACTUS. http://adactus.no, 2009. Last accessed May 15, 2009.
[50] Anders Moen Hagalisletto, Lars Strand, Wolfgang Leister, and Arne-
Kristian Groven. Analysing protocol implementations. In Feng Bao, Hui
Li, and Guilin Wang, editors, ISPEC, volume 5451 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 171–182. Springer, 2009.
[51] M.M.R. Mozumdar, F. Gregoretti, L. Lavagno, L. Vanzago, and
S. Olivieri.
A framework for modeling, simulation and automatic
code generation of sensor network application.
In Proc. 5th Annual
IEEE Communication Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc
Communications and Networks, SECON’08, pages 515–522, 2008.
29
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/

