Terminology Management in Cybersecurity through Knowledge Organization
Systems: an Italian Use Case
Claudia Lanza∗, Elena Cardillo†, Maria Taverniti†, Roberto Guarasci∗
∗University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
Email: c.lanza@dimes.unical.it; roberto.guarasci@unical.it
†Institute of Informatics and Telematics, National Research Council, Rende, Italy
Email: {elena.cardillo;maria.taverniti}@iit.cnr.it
Abstract—Specialized
terminology
is
usually
managed
by
Knowledge Organization Systems (KOSs), which manipulate and
organize concepts and terms through standardized structured
techniques. In this paper, an approach to organize, manage, and
subsequently update specialized terminologies, speciﬁcally related
to the domain of Cybersecurity, is proposed. A preliminary
analysis and comparison between KOSs showing a higher level of
semantic representation, i.e., thesauri and ontologies, is presented
in the ﬁrst section with the objective of clarifying the conceptual
framework of these resources. A concrete use case in the domain
of Cybersecurity is then described to show the context of
application of these two semantic resources, i.e., a project funded
by the Institute of Informatics and Telematics of the National
Research Council aimed at providing terminology management
and representation in the frame of the Italian Cybersecurity
Observatory. A transaction between the thesaural and ontological
representation of the domain knowledge represents the core of
the approach showing the higher qualitative value that ontologies
are able to provide to represent the domain of interest, due to
the more precise formalization of semantic relationships existing
among concepts.
Keywords- Cybersecurity; KOS; Thesauri; Ontologies; Semantic
relations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Managing technical terms proper to specialized languages
represents one of the main tasks of Knowledge Organization
Systems (KOSs). In the context of KOSs, semantic resources,
as, for example, thesauri and ontologies, are useful tools to
organize domain speciﬁc knowledge and to support processes
like document indexing, information searching and retrieval
and, in some cases, automatic reasoning (e.g., for decision
making), above all in those specialized domains where seman-
tic ambiguity between terms represents a step to be avoided.
During the last few years some effort has been spent, as
shown in Section III, on the deﬁnition of ontological models,
used in the domain of Cybersecurity, aimed at supporting
systems to better identify vulnerabilities and, thus, supporting
decision making. Nevertheless, the speciﬁcity of the domain
and the constant updates of the related information and data,
the need for more appropriate semantic resources, based on
standards, and highly structured to better represent the domain
knowledge, is still evident. This is even more true in the
Italian context, where there is a lack of highly semantically
structured ways to manage the terminology of this ﬁeld of
study. Taking inspiration by this scenario, the present paper,
which is an invited extension of [1], is focused on present-
ing a preliminary analysis of the main differences existing
in the way of organizing and representing the information
related to highly specialized domains, targeting the analysis
on Cybersecurity. Amongst the KOSs [2] the comparison will
focus on two means of semantic knowledge conﬁguration:
thesauri and ontologies. The reason why these two types
of resources have been selected among others mainly relies
on one of the main objectives of the Italian OCS Project
coordinated by the Cyber Security Observatory of the Institute
of Informatics and Telematics, National Research Council (IIT-
CNR) [3], presented in detail in Section IV, which provides
the understanding of the technical domain of Cybersecurity for
a community of users demanding a guided orientation in this
ﬁeld of knowledge. The second purpose of the present work is
twofold: (i) to show the results of the above mentioned project,
whose main objectives are the development of an Italian and
standardized controlled vocabulary, in other words a thesaurus
[2] for the Cybersecurity domain, which can be considered
a reliable knowledge organization system that structures the
information related to specialized domains; (ii) to enhance
of its semantic relationships and representation by exploiting
a more formal language, i.e., the Web Ontology Language
(OWL) [4], the recommended Semantic Web language for
authoring ontologies.
The utility of this resource provided in the Italian scenario
(and for this reason in Italian language), is speciﬁcally ad-
dressed to Italian medium-sized companies, citizens, stake-
holders and scholars at different levels who need a key access
point to better understand and reduce ambiguity dealing with
Cybersecurity terminology. The vagueness of certain terms is
due to the fact that the majority of them, coming from a
domain, which, by essence, is characterized by a predominant
usage of English multi word units, are given in their original
English version to keep their meaning even when applied to
other language use cases and contexts. The present use case
implies the involvement of Italian Cybersecurity institutions
and training organizations, so the transfer learning process is
essential to guarantee the uniformity of key concepts in the
Cybersecurity domain either found in sector-oriented maga-
zines and laws or regulations (also in grey literature).
17
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 1. Thesaurus representation of Honeypot.
To give an example, the term Honeypot has no corresponding
term in Italian language; consequently, to maintain its practical
meaning, terminologists in the transfer learning operations
should leave the English form as to provide a strong homoge-
neous informative ﬂow within organizations that are supposed
to share common ofﬁcial knowledge (see Figure 1 above to see
the use of honeypot in a thesaurus structure). To enable users
to refer to a uniform resource that spreads specialized informa-
tion onto several technical databases in a unique modality, the
structure of the thesaurus allows the insertion of a Scope Note
(SN), that is a targeted deﬁnition of the terms. This deﬁnition
is taken from authoritative sources, such as sector-oriented
glossaries, standards, ofﬁcial guidelines, etc. This additional
feature provides a better uniﬁed structure between systems
shared under different languages. Moreover, one of the main
outcomes of this research activity is strictly linked to the
possibility of integrating the Italian thesaurus and the ontology
in an automatic threats recognition system, which is intended
to monitor terms and concepts and to detect the appearance
of new ones without much human effort.
Some of the considered resources to build the source corpus
useful to obtain a list of representative terms are hereafter
summarized. Representative terms synthesize the concepts be-
longing to a speciﬁc domain and provide the starting model to
realize, in a second step, an ontology for Cybersecurity, which
is, consequently, based on the structure created for the Italian
thesaurus. The ontology has been developed with the goal of
representing the classes linked to each other through more
precise properties that could, at times, specify the interconnec-
tions between them better than a ﬂat visualization that belongs
to a thesaural organization of terms. The paper is structured
as follows: Section II presents the theoretical background for
both thesauri and ontologies in order to highlight which are
their main characteristics and the advantages in using them for
organizing and representing highly technical domains. Section
III gives an overview of the state of the art, presenting related
works focused on Cybersecurity information management,
both in English and Italian, and on the construction of KOSs.
Section IV describes the construction of the Italian thesaurus
for Cybersecurity and its enhancement through an ontological
representation. Section V provides a discussion about the main
advantages derived from exploiting thesauri and ontologies in
the described Italian use case. Finally, Section VI sums up the
key issues underlined in the paper giving some overall remarks
and future perspectives.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, a theoretical background is presented to
describe and clarify characteristics, purposes, differences and
advantages of the two main structured KOSs, i.e., theusauri
and ontologies. This will introduce the reader to the approach
proposed in Section IV to build such terminological resources
for the Cybersecurity domain.
A. Thesauri
Thesauri’s main scope is that of structuring information and
organizing it in a layered network of semantic connections,
and its management and usability is piloted by KOSs
functionalities [5][6]. As Soergel afﬁrms in his work, “A
thesaurus is a structured collection of concepts and terms
for the purpose of improving the retrieval of information. A
thesaurus should help the searcher to ﬁnd good search terms,
whether they be descriptors from a controlled vocabulary
or the manifold terms needed for a comprehensive free-text
search — all the various terms that are used in texts to
express the search concept” [7]. The way thesauri are
structured follows standardized rules that should be respected,
as the ones included in the ISO standards 25964-1:2011
and 25964-2:2013 [8][9], and the objective of uniforming
a lexicon meant to be a reference for a community of
domain-oriented users is pursued. A thesaurus should provide
a reliable and a well structured semantic means to guide
the understanding of technical terms representing concepts
belonging to a speciﬁc ﬁeld of knowledge. Its indexing
function proves to be helpful in the way the users are able to
analyze documents according to an informative organization
of descriptors. In other words, the abstraction of knowledge
occurs indirectly by exploiting terminological units that take
on the status of descriptors or indexing units. The latter is the
element that language uses to describe, synthesize and extract
information from documents [10]. Thesauri’s terms undergo
both quantitative and quality control. Quantity control refers
to thesaurus’ terms selection among those that represent in
a better way the concepts of the domain of study. These
latter become descriptors of the thesaurus (i.e., preferred
terms) and usually are followed by the non-preferred terms
that act as synonym entries, e.g., Malicious software is the
preferred term instead of Malware in the Italian Cybersecurity
thesaurus. In detail, as suggested by the mentioned standard,
countable terms have to be expressed in plural form (trees
and not tree), and semantically the control is always granted
by the respect of the biunivocal relationship existing between
terms and concepts (only one concept corresponds to a term
and viceversa). That means that the ambiguity of the natural
language is controlled and reduced to zero through the use
of a limited set of terms (indexing terms) that represent
the concepts in a given domain. In this scenario the user
who selects a search term and the indexer who chooses
indexing terms are both guided to use the same term for the
same concept [8]. Thesauri present three main standardized
18
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

forms of connections that are generated for structuring the
information, and ﬁve abbreviation codes used to represent
such relationships within the controlled vocabulary:
1) Equivalence relation, with the tags Use (USE) and Used
For (UF), expresses the synonymy property:
• Usage:
Cyber minacce UF Cyber Threat Actors; Cy-
ber Threat Actors USE Cyber Minacce
• Acronyms:
Virtual Private Network UF VPN; VPN USE
Virtual Private Network
• Synonymy control:
Cyber attacks UF Cibernetic attacks; Ciber-
netic attacks; USE Cyber attacks
2) Hierarchical relation, with the tags Broader Term (BT)
and Narrower Term (NT), exists when having two
concepts and one of them is part, or is included in the
other:
• Whole/parts:
Vulnerabilities NT Software vulneabilities;
Software vulneabilities BT Vulnerabilities
• Class/member:
Logic bombs NT Elk Cloner;
Elk Cloner BT Logic bombs
3) Associative relation, with the tag Related Term (RT),
covers associations between pairs of concepts that are
not hierarchically related [8]:
Cyber war RT Cyber weapon.
The aforementioned standards also guide the way terms
should be deﬁned to indicate a unique and unambiguous
meaning. The use of a Scope Note is useful when an indexer
needs to ﬁx the boundaries of a concept within a domain.
Scope Note is marked with the tag SN. An example of SN
can be:
Phishing - SN: Tricking individuals into disclos-
ing sensitive personal information through deceptive
computer-based means.
The choice to privilege a thesaurus structure instead of other
semantic resources, such as glossaries or taxonomies, relies
on its peculiarity of managing the representative terms of a
speciﬁc domain as an entangled network of semantic relations
that guide the comprehension of a conceptual model proper of
a ﬁeld of knowledge to be studied [11].
B. Ontologies
The term ontology, which has been borrowed by the Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) community from phylosophy, gained new
deﬁnitions and found a broad spectrum of applications in
various branches of computer science [12]. In AI, an ontology
is considered to be an engineering artefact, which is constituted
by a speciﬁc vocabulary used to describe a certain reality, plus
a set of explicit assumptions regarding the intended meaning of
the vocabulary. Gruber deﬁnes it as “An explicit speciﬁcation
of a conceptualization” [13], so, in simple words, a formal
speciﬁcation of a domain of knowledge. In order to formally
represent a certain domain, ontologies use a set of constructs
describing the world in terms of classes, properties, and
individuals. To enrich the formalization, other constructs are
used for expressing complex descriptions in terms of relations
between classes, cardinality, equality, etc. Consequently, it is
possible to say that an ontology consists of a set of deﬁnitions
of classes, properties, and individuals, together with a set
of axioms (i.e., formal restrictions) expressing the relations
between classes and properties, and a set of facts about
particular individuals. Just like thesauri, ontologies deﬁne a
common vocabulary (for a speciﬁc domain) and a shared
understanding. We can have different ontologies according to
the used level of formalism: (i) light-weight ontologies (i.e.,
ontologies that represent only the hierarchical level of concepts
and relations in a domain, so, more commonly, taxonomies);
and (ii) heavy-weight ontologies (i.e., lightweight ontology
enriched with axioms used to ﬁx the semantic interpretation
of concepts and relations). Ontologies are used to share
knowledge between people, agents, and software thanks to
their characteristics of enabling the reuse of domain knowledge
and making domain assumptions explicit. Another important
feature is that through ontologies it is possible to represent
both domain knowledge and operational knowledge and reuse
them separately, enabling in any case automated reasoning.
The importance of an ontology as a means of structuring
knowledge is well recognized in different areas, such as,
knowledge representation, knowledge management, natural
language processing (NLP), multi-agent systems, database
integration, web services, and others. The literature is full
of signiﬁcant academic research devoted to the development
of a theoretical and practical basis of ontology technology.
Among others, the most notable developments have been
the world wide web consortium standardization of expressive
representational languages for publishing ontologies on the
web [14] [15]. From a practical point of view, the methods
followed for building ontologies observe basic principles that
can be found in guidelines like the one published by Noy and
Mcguinness [16] or Bourigault [17].
The OWL language helps in building formal, sound and
consistent domain-speciﬁc terminologies, and provides a stan-
dard web accessible medium for interoperability, access and
reuse. OWL uses RDF (Resource Description Framework)
for its syntax, the prescribed framework for representing
resources in a common format, describing information in
the form of subject-predicate-object triples, thus enabling to
represent them in the form of a graph. Three different OWL
sublanguages can be used according to the formalism we
want to give to our ontology and to the performances in
reasoning and inference we want to obtain: OWL Lite, OWL
DL, and OWL Full. The ﬁrst sublanguage is the least powerful
one, in fact it allows to represent taxonomies and uses less
19
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

constructs (it includes cardinality restrictions). For this reason
it has the lowest computational complexity among the OWL
sublanguages. The second one, OWL DL (i.e., Description
Logic) provides a more formal representation since it imposes
restrictions on the usage of OWL/RDF constructors. This
sublanguage is used when the maximum decidable expressivity
is required and is able to maintain computational completeness
(that means that all conclusions are computable). Finally, OWL
Full is the most expressive one, since it uses all the OWL
language primitives and all of the RDF Schemas (RDFS) and,
with respect to the other two sublanguages, it is undecideable,
semantically difﬁcult to understand and to work with, and,
as a result, standard automatic reasoning techniques cannot
be applied. Differently, because of its formalism, OWL DL
allows reasoning and inference. Reasoning is the act of making
implicit knowledge explicit. To infer knowledge from ontolo-
gies, reasoning engines are used, which allow determining
also subsumption, classiﬁcation, equivalence, and identifying
ontology inconsistencies [15].
Ontology similarities with thesauri can be easily identiﬁed
after this theoretical description. In particular, both describe
and organize a domain, include concepts and relations between
them; they use hierarchies, and describe instances belonging
to concepts. Both of them can be applied for information
management, for cataloguing and in search engines. However,
several differences must be considered. First of all, thesauri
had as their original purpose that of being used in librarian
contexts as indexing tools and controlled vocabularies. So, it
is understandable that they are thought to represent knowl-
edge in a less formal and comprehensive way with respect
to ontologies. On the contrary, because of their philosoph-
ical origin, ontologies are characterized by a high level of
conceptual abstraction, which is accepted, and formal ways
of describing domain knowledge. Regarding their structure,
as seen above, ontologies are characterized by the explicit
representation of the types of relationships and by the use of
powerful formalisms, which are not possible to deﬁne within
thesauri (e.g., axioms, relationships, cardinality). Therefore, to
represent hierarchical relations between classes and subclasses,
two declared relations are used, i.e., “is-a” and “kind-of”,
while, to represent meronymy relations between classes, the
“part-of” relation is employed. By contrast, in the thesaurus
those relationships are treated as hierarchical relationships.
Finally, the associative relations in an ontology are made
explicit according to the exact connection (predicate) that
exists between two classes. For example, taking up concepts
already used in Section II-A , cyber war RT cyber weapon,
is speciﬁed in an ontology as cyber war uses cyber weapon,
where “used” is the ObjectProperty.
The interoperability of semantic resources like thesauri and
ontologies, is given by the principle of linked open data
[18][19][20], which guarantees a shareable knowledge orga-
nization system that can facilitate the coordination among
several users for different terminological tasks. To generate
a language that can guarantee a higher form of interaction be-
tween informative systems, without losing the exact meaning
of the shared information, the ontology seems to route towards
a constant reuse of the managed information by providing
conceptual representations of a domain [21][22].
III. RELATED WORKS
When terminologists’ activity involves the construction of
knowledge organization and representation systems, the phase
of taking into account which could be conceived as gold
standards represents a key step in order to align the infor-
mation retrieved by source corpora to texts that represent
the reference standards [23]. The research activity presented
in this paper starts as a monolingual - Italian - study for
Cybersecurity terminology. Therefore, the starting point to
develop an Italian controlled vocabulary on Cybersecurity has
represented the census of the gold standards. Among the ex-
isting examples of Cybersecurity glossaries and vocabularies,
of great importance are: for English, the ones contained in
the NIST 7298 [24] and ISO 27000:2016 [25] standards for
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) security,
and, for Italian, the Italian book ”Libro Bianco” (White Book
for Cybersecurity) realized by the National Laboratory of
Cybersecurity of the Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale
per l’Informatica (CINI) [26], which thoroughly sheds light on
the key issues related to Cybersecurity guidelines and on the
latest related episodes that have changed the way to defend
informative systems and to conceive some speciﬁc concepts
proper to Cybersecurity. Another relevant existing resource for
Italian is the ”Glossario Intelligence” [27], a technical glossary
published by the Italian Presidency of the Council of Ministers,
which contains several terms belonging to the Cybersecurity
domain and which has been used as a basis for the creation of
the Italian thesaurus and the ontology for Cybersecurity under
investigation.
With respect to ontologies, it is worth mentioning the works
targeted at the creation of ontology models for Cybersecurity,
i.e., [28][29][30], and the studies focused on the approaches
for developing an architecture for Cybersecurity standards [31]
and enterprise’s Cybersecurity metrics [32]. In particular, in
[33] an ontology has been designed to integrate data from
different heterogeneous sources, in the absence of a common
terminology, offering a sufﬁciently complete knowledge on
the possible threats, thus allowing organizations to perform
reasoning and support decision-making processes related to
security. Another study proposed a reference ontology for
Cybersecurity operational information, developed, as in our
case, in collaboration with Cybersecurity organizations, and
which had the aim to review industry speciﬁcations. Here,
types of Cybersecurity information are deﬁned along with the
roles and operation domains (see [34] for details). Finally, a
more recent work describes the development of an ontology
of metrics for Cybersecurity assessment [35]. This ontology
is based on determining the concepts and relations between
primary features of initial security data and forming a set of
hierarchically interconnected security metrics. Application of
the approach is shown on a case study. The main feature of
this work is the representation of security metrics as separate
20
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

instances of the ontology, which allows using the relations
between the concepts of ontology for calculating integral
metrics reﬂecting the security state.
Processing the information belonging to speciﬁc domains of
interest involves the analysis of those documents which seman-
tically tend to represent concepts through a technical language
[36]. The creation of terminological databases follows some
given criteria linked to gathering the related documents that
have to constitute the reference corpus from which terms can
be retrieved [36]. To achieve this ﬁrst informative structure, the
corpus ﬁrstly aims at including documents that can represent
the domain in an ofﬁcial way [37], i.e., the gold standards [38],
collecting a terminological standardized repository made up of
terms that are meant to be closely speciﬁc to the technical ﬁeld
of knowledge under review [39].
To obtain a matching system between the terminology shared
by a community of experts from a particular domain and
the terms contained in a list derived from the processing
of a reference corpus, the documents gathered in the corpus
undergo a process of terminology extraction, which shall
compare the equivalence between the representative terms of
a domain with the ones of the gold standards [40].
This last step is usually implemented by exploiting semi-
automatic term extraction tools. Nazarenko et al. [41] and
Loginova [42] gave in their works detailed lists of several tools
for extracting terminologies from texts. With regards to the
Cybersecurity domain and the research activity treated in this
paper, various existing sources, both in English and in Italian,
have been analyzed in order to retrieve an accurate terminolog-
ical basis from which to build a more sophisticated semantic
resource to guide the knowledge representation process. The
intent of this project task, as aforementioned, is to provide an
Italian resource, ﬁrstly conceived as a thesaurus, to conﬁgure
the terminology of Cybersecurity in a network of semantic
relations that can better orientate to a lexical understanding
of specialized concepts represented by terms belonging to this
ﬁeld. The goal of this research activity is also based on the
reuse of the terms contained in the thesaurus to realize in a
consequential way an ontology system that could support the
inclusion of customized properties between classes and more
comprehensively clarify the associative relationships used in
the thesaurus [43][44][45]. This represents the reason why
ontologies can usually be considered as resources that can
provide a more exhaustive and explicit frame for knowledge
representation.
IV. THE OCS PROJECT
In this section, the project use case is presented. The ﬁrst
part is focused on the description of the Cybersecurity con-
text and the Italian Cybersecurity Observatory (OCS) scopes
and services. The second part presents the thesaurus itself
for managing the information about Cybersecurity and its
enhancement through its migration into an ontology system.
The main objective of the activity, as mentioned before, is
the creation of a thesaurus in Italian language to be used
as a semantic tool to organize the terminology related to
Cybersecurity, and to be inserted amongst the services of the
online platform of the Italian Cybersecurity Observatory [46].
The OCS online platform is a joint work with the experts of the
Cybersecurity domain that aims at gathering different services
to guide the comprehension of the phenomena occurring in
this ﬁeld of study. For instance, apart from the semantic tools
section, to which the Italian thesaurus and the ontology for
Cybersecurity belong, this web service includes the analysis
and detection of tweets, threats, vulnerabilities, exploits, spam
mails, attacks, malware, self-assessment.
The convergence of the semantic tasks with the experts of the
domain can be achieved in considering their documentation
collections, consisting, among others, of the lists derived from
the Common Vulnerabilities Exposure (CVE)1, or of internal
detections of the main cyber attacks, as sources to be used to
update the terminology of the domain to be represented.
Indeed, the list of vulnerabilities, the spam detections or
the analysis of the latest cyber threats, could represent, in
a future perspective, the meeting point between the goal, by
the OCS platform, of sharing technical information to defend
informative systems and, by terminologists, of providing extra
knowledge that can empower the terminological organization
of the domain. In this way, both the thesaurus and the ontology
can undergo a rethinking phase both on new highly technical
term inclusion level and, consequently, the relational one.
A. The Cybersecurity context
The Cybersecurity domain is mainly characterized by a
technical terminology. Given that Cybersecurity is a synergy
of different sub-ﬁelds, the schematization of this specialized
domain reﬂects this high level of heterogeneity. Cybersecurity
is permeated by: (i) its multidisciplinary nature that involves
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and its
sub-areas, such as, audiovisual techniques, computer soft-
ware, electronics; (ii) its speciﬁcity with respect to technical
and standardized terms; and (iii) its cross-ﬁelding thematic
coverage, i.e., computer science ﬁeld, legislative systems,
regulations. Given these premises, the treatment of its internal
language, which derives from the textual content extracted
from the source corpus documents, is meant to be managed
by formal semantic systems in order to obtain shareable stan-
dardized lists of the domain’s representative terms, organized
according to their semantic relations, which, in turn, will
orientate the understanding of the conceptual model of the
domain [47].
As can be observed by looking at Figure 2, the OCS website,
developed for the purposes of spreading the information about
Cybersecurity for the Italian community of experts and com-
mon users, registered many views on its overall level range.
This high number of users coming from several countries
denotes the signiﬁcant interest the organization of the platform
has. Nonetheless, the superior percentage of Italian users
shows how the target language played an important role in
orientating the ways in which the technical structuring of
1https://cve.mitre.org/
21
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

information about the domain has been set up. The thesaurus
and the ontology presented in this paper have been included
inside the OCS web page as two tools that provide a semantic
outline about the information meant to be structured on the
Cybersecurity domain. Even though the numbers reported are
not remarkably outstanding, it can be stated that both of them
have received attention especially during two Italian events
during which they have been presented to an audience.
Fig. 2. Statistics OCS website.
B. The Italian thesaurus for Cybersecurity
The main focus of this paper is the creation of the Italian
thesaurus on Cybersecurity for the OCS project [46], carried
out in collaboration with the Institute of Informatics and
Telematics of the National Research Council.
The methodology followed for the realization of the thesaurus
covered classical sequences. As primary step, the terminology
to be included in the thesaurus has been extracted from
reliable sources which made up the corpus characterized by
documents distinctively selected for their content oriented to
Cybersecurity issues [37]. This collection of texts made the
information retrieval highly oriented to the domain to be rep-
resented [48], and covered different types of documents, such
as, standards and laws [49], Cybersecurity-related magazines
or guidelines and certiﬁcations. The conceptual content of
these documents was meant to be processed to obtain lists
of terms (a glossary) sorted according to statistical measures
able to provide a ﬁrst semantic organization [50]. Indeed, the
second phase concerned the semi-automatic processing of the
information included in the source corpus by exploiting a
term extractor software [?] (more speciﬁcally the Italian native
tool, Text to Knowledge (T2K)) [51] that provided, as outputs,
lists of terms ranked according to their occurrence’s value in
the texts. Terms selection has been based on frequency, in
particular terms with the highest scores in TF-IDF values have
been considered as candidate terms to be part of the Italian
thesaurus for Cybersecurity. The list of the most representative
terms accompanied by their frequency scores has undergone an
evaluation process carried out by a group of domain experts.
Indeed, only once having received the validation by domain
experts,– the third phase of the methodology –, the terms
have been selected as candidate terms to be integrated in
the thesaurus and their semantic relations with other terms of
the domain, derived from the corpus, have been created. The
current Italian Cybersecurity thesaurus contains 246 candidate
terms, already validated by domain experts collaborating on
the project, and mapped to the taxonomies contained in the
main gold standards for Cybersecurity, i.e., NIST 7298 [24]
and ISO 27000:2016 [25]. The alignment with the terms
contained in the standards for ICT security granted a coor-
dination between the knowledge shared by an international
Cybersecurity community of experts and the one represented
in the structured thesaurus, which is composed of preferred
terms selected amongst those extracted by the T2K tool as
the most frequent inside the source documents. In order to
carry out a matching conﬁguration with the standards as
predictable and stable as possible, the terms included in the
standards, and selected with the support of domain experts as
key guidance representing the domain, have been translated
using the Interactive Terminology for Europe (IATE) term
banks [52]. This is considered an important step given the
instructive purpose of the application, i.e., the use of the
thesaurus in the web portal of the Cybersecurity Observatory.
The main entries in the Italian thesaurus for Cybersecurity are
the four macro categories ﬁnely selected from the extracted
glossary, also according to the frequency of terms, and from
the mapping with the standards alongside the approval by the
domain experts. These macro categories are:
• Cybersecurity;
• Cyberdefence;
• Cyberbullism;
• Cybercriminality.
Almost each of the candidate terms included in the thesaurus
network, generated by the semantic relations among the terms,
are accompanied by their deﬁnitions, i.e., Scope Note (SN),
which helps in understanding the terms in their speciﬁc con-
texts giving their deﬁnition taken from the source documents
[53].
For a better understanding of the actual size of the Italian
Thesaurus for Cybersecurity, Table I gives a metrics of the
numbers of terms, as well as of the semantic relations (Sem-
Rel).
TABLE I. Features of the Italian thesaurus for Cybersecurity.
Terms
SemRel
Non-preferred Terms
SN
Total
246
280
33
74
22
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. Cybersecurity ontology metrics.
Metric
Total
Axiom
640
Logical axiom count
316
Declaration axioms count
233
Class count
157
Object property count
37
Data property count
7
Individual count
31
Annotation Property count
5
CLASS AXIOMS
SubClassOf
58
EquivalentClasses
0
DisjointClasses
24
OBJECT PROPERTY AXIOMS
SubObjectPropertyOf
7
InverseObjectProperties
1
FunctionalObjectProperty
1
TransitiveObjectProperty
0
SymmetricObjectProperty
1
AsymmetricObjectProperty
0
ObjectPropertyDomain
40
ObjectPropertyRange
39
DATA PROPERTY AXIOMS
SubDataPropertyOf
1
DataPropertyDomain
8
DataPropertyRange
5
INDIVIDUAL AND ANNOTATION AXIOMS
ClassAssertion
31
AnnotationAssertion
89
C. Ontology enhancement
Another activity of the OCS project has also been focused
on the migration of the thesaurus elements into a more formal
semantic resource, i.e., an ontology, to better organize and
represent the information about Cybersecurity, addressed to
users who want to get closer to this ﬁeld of knowledge [54].
Details on the ontology structure are provided in Table II.
Among the main objectives in rengineering a thesaurus into
a system working with OWL language there is that referring
to the capture of signiﬁcant real time new terms occurrences
in the future, especially following the updates given by the
major ofﬁcial sources in the Cybersecurity domain. Indeed,
what ontologies allow more than a thesaurus is to exploit the
query system operations that enable users to activate reasoning
engine operations which are meant to infer semantic con-
nections from several resources given in input as conceptual
models. The formalization of a thesaurus into an ontology is
a task that has been attracting much interest. In fact, in the
literature, different approaches have been proposed for reusing
thesaurus semantic content to build ontology meta-models and
to populate knowledge bases in different domains, see for
example [43][55][56].
The need for migrating the content included in the thesaurus
into an ontology lies in the decision to better clarify the
associative relationships between the terms of the thesaurus
[57]. In particular, the ﬂat modality in which the associative
relationship between terms is represented in the thesaurus, i.e.,
via the RT relation, turned out to be not fully satisfactory
in the seek of getting a complete terminological outline for
Cybersecurity [58].
As shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, there is a clear distinction
between the two systems used to organize and represent the
terminology belonging to Cybersecurity. The example taken
into account to represent the differences is referred to the
semantic relationship linked to the idea of opposition, i.e.,
Spoof and Antispoof: in the thesaurus, even though a deﬁnition
is present (within the black square), which corresponds to the
Scope Note (SN), proper to thesauri, giving many details on
the context from which terms come from, the ”opposition”
is not so well represented because it is only shown through
the associative relation (RT) [8] between these aforementioned
terms without giving other explications on the way the two
terms are related as the OWL language does.
On the other hand, in the ontology, these two concepts are
connected through the ObjectProperty ”HasAsContrary” that
helps in considering the Domain and the Range as linked by
a precise relationship.
Fig. 3. Thesaurus representation of the semantic relationship that describes
opposition.
Fig. 4. Prot´eg´e representation of the semantic relationship that describes
opposition.
Another representative case is depicted by Figure 5 and
Figure 6, which show how a thesaurus sometimes provides a
weak visualization of some attributes associated to a concept.
In the following case, the relation that had to be demonstrated
was related to several attributes that security properties proper
to informative systems own. For this speciﬁc purpose, the
ontology resource gives more advantages in the visualization
of the informative structure allowing a higher accurate
organization and representation of the attributes related to the
concepts. In detail, the main difference that makes ontologies
23
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a good semantic means to represent the conceptual model
connected to certain semantic classes is related to the fact that,
in this case, the security properties, i.e., integrity, authenticity,
conﬁdentiality, availability, reliability, non-repudiation, and
privacy, are represented as Data Properties and are conceived
as attributes. In the thesaurus, as shown in Figure 6, they are
related to the hyperonym BT ”Data” and are represented as
its speciﬁc terms, i.e., the NT [9].
Fig. 5. Ontology representation of Security properties as Data Properties.
Fig. 6. Thesaurus representation of Security properties as hierarchical
relations.
As mentioned before, the ontology has been forged under
the basis of the thesaurus structure to organize the Italian
terminology about Cybersecurity. For this reason, and consid-
ering that the main purpose of the ontology is terminology
control and the appropriate semantic representation of the
domain concepts, the OWL sublanguage selected for this
scenario is OWL Lite. The connections between the terms
have been transposed to the ontology object properties, and
referred to the information contained in the source corpus
documents. To increase the level of accuracy and domain-
oriented information representation, the ontology has been
enhanced using pattern path-variables conﬁguration [59]. In
particular, after having collected a group of passive verb
pairs from the Italian Cybersecurity source corpus, a ﬁltering
procedure over the most technical ones related to the domain
has been launched. From a list of verbs that have been
considered domain-dependent, several queries in the source
corpus have been run and analysed in order to create the
associative connections among the concepts [60]. As Table III
shows, the relations that have been retrieved from the reference
corpus by using certain pattern paths are very detailed and
they are progressively being added to the existing ontology,
which has been developed by migrating the content of the
Italian Cybersecurity thesaurus. The aim is to guarantee a more
precise semantic system that can structure the interconnections
among Cybersecurity concepts with the help of interoperable
languages. In the case of ontologies, the Object Properties are
the ones to cover the purpose of providing a more targeted
form of associative relationships to represent the information
of the domain.
To give a clearer idea of how these associations have been
reported into the ontology so far, with the perspective of
continuously augmenting the range of relations, Figure 7
gives an highlight of how, for example, the concept Backdoor
has been connected with Malware and Cracker by using
complementary patterns conﬁgurations on Prot´eg´e console.
Up to now, 160 new associative relations referred to the
domain verbal constructions have been selected among the
semantic information contained in the texts making up the
source corpus, and they are currently being analysed from
a linguistic point of view in the co-occurrency level and
text scope to increase the semantic relationships meant to
be represented. This last passage assumes the activity by
terminologists to retrace the semantic entangled network in the
text correspondences, and doing so, isolating other constructs
as drills of new connections.
TABLE III. Associations retrieval in ontology by patterns conﬁgurations.
Associative relationships List
Aggirare
(by-
pass)
Attaccare (at-
tack)
Sfruttare
(exploit)
Attivare (acti-
vate)
worm→software
antivirus
exploit
sql
injection→web
applications
crackers
→
vulnerabilities
backdoor
←
malware
cracker → cy-
bersecurity
script
kiddies
→ DDoS
trojan
horses
→
vulnerabilities
trojan → cy-
ber attacks
virus→ cyber-
security
network
ﬁle
systems→
DNS spooﬁng
spam → bot-
net
payload←
virus/worm
Fig. 7. Additional Object Properties through patterns path-variables.
V. DISCUSSION
Across the phases that have characterized this research
activity towards the realization of two semantic sources to
24
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

monitor and manage the terminology of Cybersecurity in
Italian language, the conﬁguring procedure for the thesaurus
and ontology development proved to be different in their
application to the use case. By describing the steps carried out
to build the Italian Cybersecurity thesaurus, the importance of
providing a semantic structure that could be as much reliable
as possible with respect of the information about the domain
has been underlined. This reliability system mainly focuses
on the ways a thesaurus can guarantee a reﬂection of the
domain by using a semantic relationship network to connect
terms with each other and provide a guided orientation to
the organization of the domain knowledge. The connections
among the representative terms dependent from the domain
of study have been structured following the standard guide-
lines that give the basis for the arrangement of hierarchical,
equivalence and associative interrelations. Nonetheless, the
thesaurus outline at times proved to be less accurate in
the way it depicts the association among certain terms, in
particular for what concerns the usage of the Related Term
association, which shows some vagueness in how it matches
domain-oriented terms mainly because of its lack of deeper
semantic descriptions. Therefore, the research activity has been
ﬁnalized to create another semantic resource able to make
the semantic relations between the domain concepts, i.e., the
ontology, explicit. We observed that this latter knowledge
representation system allowed a more customized organization
of the concepts that facilitates the process of combining the
semantic links. The ontology has also been implemented, in
a latest phase, with the inputs resulted by the execution of
some pattern conﬁguration approaches. The use of recurrent
variables to be searched in the source corpus proved to be an
efﬁcient means through which concepts of the Cybersecurity
domain could have been correctly correlated. In fact, we used
different domain-oriented verb pairs to show how the structure
of the ontology, which has been built following the thesaurus’
outline, has been enhanced.
Although thesauri and ontologies belong to the same fam-
ily of knowledge organization systems and some of their
functionalities are the same (e.g., their use for improving
information retrieval and knowledge organization), they are
built for different purposes. In fact, it has been demonstrated in
this contribution that ontologies allow higher formal represen-
tation of knowledge for a given domain, by providing explicit
relationships between concepts, disjunctions, by applying data
properties for each concept or instance and by providing
restrictions that avoid ambiguity in the representation of the
meaning and the context of use of a concept and their terms in
the domain of reference. However, the two semantic resources
might be used together or, as widely demonstrated both in
this paper and in the literature, one can be reused to build or
populate the other, thus they prove to complement each other,
improving the end user’s search experience.
The natural structural rigidity of thesauri, given by the use of
a priori deﬁned semantic relationships (hierarchical, associa-
tive and equivalence), seems to be a point against these type
of controlled vocabularies; by contrast, such weakness seems
to be overcome by the ﬂexibility, scalability and reusability
of ontologies that, as stressed by the semantic staircase of
Blumauer and Pellegrini [61], compared to other KOSs, bring
to a highest level of semantic richness thanks to an internal
formal description of concepts. This latter combines a system
of relations and properties of the concepts themselves.
Despite this, one of the strengths of the thesaurus compared
to the ontology, when used in a specialized domain, is its
greater capacity to eliminate ambiguity between the terms
through the use of synonymy control [2] and the choice of pre-
ferred terms, compared to non-preferred terms for representing
the concepts. This guarantees a standardization of technical
terms in specialized domains, which can help in the process
of unifying, and, by consequence, sharing, a speciﬁc ﬁeld of
knowledge’s terminology.
VI. CONCLUSION
The objective of this paper concerned the presentation of
the main advantages that could be achieved by using two
different types of KOSs, i.e., thesauri and ontologies, to
organize and represent a technical domain of study. The ﬁeld
of knowledge on which this paper focuses on refers to that
of Cybersecurity, and the main task described is speciﬁcally
linked to its specialized terminology management.
At the beginning of this paper a general overview of
Knowledge organization and representation systems has been
provided, successively the analysis has been addressed to the
thesaurus organization system overview. In detail, the paper
underlined the way this semantic monitoring tool has proved
to be a reliable system to structure the information derived
from heterogenous sources belonging to the Cybersecurity
domain, which is widely characterized by technical terms.
Concurrently, attention has also been given to the comparison
between the modality of representing in the thesaurus some
of the relationships existing among terms, which represent
the relevant concepts of the domain, with the ones proper
to ontologies through OWL language. The perspective has
been oriented to provide a demonstrative outline of ontology
peculiarities and advantages when using an existing thesaurus,
like the one created in the Italian OCS project framework,
as a basis for building the meta-model and populating the
knowledge base. The perspective of the research activity both
for the thesaurus and the knowledge base in OWL is oriented
towards a terminological population extension, and this will
involve relationships and restrictions where needed, and new
evaluations to be executed. Starting from this objective, pattern
conﬁgurations have been added as means to retrieve additional
relations among domain-oriented concepts. Indeed, we have
observed that the use of recurrent linguistic structures helped
in trace back which could be considered as genre speciﬁc
relations. Another motivation that lies behind the choice of
taking into account pattern constructs is that of improving the
preciseness of the associative relationships proper to thesauri
that sometimes proved to be rather vague, i.e., RT relation. By
selecting some verb pairs targeted to the domain of study, is
possible, for instance, to create a new range of more accurate
25
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Object Properties in the ontology, and, consequently, enhance
the system that has been converted starting from a thesaurus.
This last step clearly implies a rearrangement of the source
thesaurus, which will continue to be updated in the source
texts to provide a representative set of terms that helps in
understanding the technical range of information.
Future works will include a translation in other languages
(ﬁrstly English) to allow, within the OCS project team, the
automatic recognition of cyber threats even from non-Italian
sources and improve the thesaurus/ontology usability and
sharing them also at an international level. Moreover, the
remainder of this work targets at taking into account the
insertion of several other types of documents to be part of
the source corpus. In particular, following the perspective of
getting updated on the changes related to the Cybersecurity
domain, documents shall be taken from the social media
world, adjusting all the analysis related to the processing of
information to the treatment of texts written in a specialized
form.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Lanza, E. Cardillo, M. Taverniti, and R. Guarasci, “Knowledge repre-
sentation frameworks for terminology management in cybersecurity: The
ocs project use case,” in SEMAPRO 2019, The Thirteenth International
Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing, U. o. A. S. G. P. L.
U. o. H. A. F. Michael Spranger, Hochschule Mittweida, Ed., Porto,
Portugal, September 2019.
[2] M. Zeng, “Knowledge organization systems (kos),” Knowledge Organi-
zation, vol. 35, pp. 160–182, 01 2008.
[3] Cybesecurity
osservatorio.
https://www.cybersecurityosservatorio.it\.
Accessed: 2019-08-08.
[4] W3C Web Ontology Language (OWL). https://www.w3.org/OWL/. Ac-
cessed: 2019-08-08.
[5] R. Davis, H. Shrobe, and P. Szolovits, “What is a knowledge represen-
tation?” AI Magazine, vol. 14, p. 17, 03 2002.
[6] A. Miles and S. Bechhofer, SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization
System Reference, ser. W3C Recommendation.
United States: World
Wide Web Consortium, 8 2009.
[7] D. Soergel, “The art and architecture thesaurus (aat): A critical ap-
praisal,” Visual Resources, vol. 10, pp. 369–400, 01 1995.
[8] ISO 25964-1:2011 Information and documentation — Thesauri and in-
teroperability with other vocabularies — Part 1: Thesauri for information
retrieval, International Organization for Standardization, August 2011.
[9] ISO 25964-2:2013 Information and documentation — Thesauri and
interoperability with other vocabularies — Part 2: Interoperability with
other vocabularies.
[10] M. Taverniti, “Tra terminologia e documentazione: estrazione automatica
di voci indice da corpora documentali della pubblica amministrazione,”
Ainformazioni, vol. 1-2/2018, pp. 227–238, 2008.
[11] V. Broughton, Essential Thesaurus Construction.
Facet, 2006.
[12] N. Guarino, “”formal ontology and information systems”,” in In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Formal Ontology in Infor-
mation Systems (FOIS-1998), 1998.
[13] T.
R.
Gruber,
“A
translation
approach
to
portable
ontology
speciﬁcations,” Knowledge Acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199 –
220, 1993. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1042814383710083
[14] A. G´omez-P´erez and O. Corcho, “Ontology speciﬁcation languages for
the semantic web,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 54–60,
Jan. 2002. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/5254.988453
[15] S. Staab and R. Studer, Handbook on Ontologies (International Hand-
books on Information Systems).
SpringerVerlag, 2004.
[16] N. F. Noy and D. L. Mcguinness, “Ontology development 101: A guide
to creating your ﬁrst ontology,” Tech. Rep., 2001.
[17] D. Bourigault and N. Aussenac-Gilles, “Construction d’ontologies ´a
partir de textes,” pp. 11–14, 01 2003.
[18] A. A. Shiri and C. Revie, “Thesauri on the web: current developments
and trends,” Online Information Review, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 273–280,
2000.
[19] D. Soergel, “The art and architecture thesaurus (aat): A critical ap-
praisal,” Visual Resources, vol. 10, pp. 369–400, 01 1995.
[20] M. van Assem, V. Malais´e, A. Miles, and G. Schreiber, “A method to
convert thesauri to skos,” 06 2006, pp. 95–109.
[21] N. Guarino, D. Oberle, and S. Staab, “What is an ontology?”
Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 05 2009, pp. 1–17.
[22] D. W. Embley, S. W. Liddle, D. W. Lonsdale, and Y. A. Tijerino,
“Multilingual ontologies for cross-language information extraction and
semantic search,” in ER, 2011.
[23] A. R. Terryn, V. Hoste, and E. Lefever, “A Gold Standard for Mul-
tilingual Automatic Term Extraction from Comparable Corpora: Term
Structure and Translation Equivalents,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2018), N. C. C. chair), K. Choukri, C. Cieri, T. Declerck, S. Goggi,
K. Hasida, H. Isahara, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, H. Mazo, A. Moreno,
J. Odijk, S. Piperidis, and T. Tokunaga, Eds. Miyazaki, Japan: European
Language Resources Association (ELRA), May 7-12, 2018 2018.
[24] R. Kisserl, Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology, May 2013, NISTIR 7298 Revision
2.
[25] ISO/IEC 27000, Information technology — Security techniques —
Information security management systems — Overview and vocabulary,
International Standard, February 2016.
[26] R. Baldoni, R. De Nicola, and P. Prinetto, Il Futuro della Cybersecurity
in Italia: Ambiti Progettuali Strategici Progetti e Azioni per difendere
al meglio il Paese dagli attacchi informatici.
Laboratorio Nazionale
di Cybersecurity (CINI) - Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per
l’Informatica, 2018.
[27] Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri - Sistema di informazione
per la sicurezza della Repubblica, Il linguaggio degli organismi in-
formativi, Glossario intelligence. https://www.sicurezzanazionale.gov.it/
sisr.nsf/quaderni-di-intelligence/glossario-intelligence.html\. Accessed:
2019-08-08.
[28] B. Barnett and A. Crapo, “A semantic model for cyber security,” 2011.
[29] L. Obrst, P. Chase, and R. Markeloff, “Developing an ontology of the
cyber security domain,” in STIDS, 2012.
[30] A. Oltramari, L. Cranor, R. Walls, and P. McDaniel, “Building an
ontology of cyber security,” CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1304,
pp. 54–61, 01 2014.
[31] M. C. Parmelee, “Toward an ontology architecture for cyber-security
standards,” in STIDS, 2010.
[32] A. Singhal and D. Wijesekera, “Ontologies for modeling enterprise level
security metrics,” ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, 01
2010.
[33] A. Aviad, K. Wecel, and W. Abramowicz, “The semantic approach to
cyber security. towards ontology based body of knowledge,” vol. 2015,
01 2015, pp. 328–336.
[34] T. Takahashi and Y. Kadobayashi, “Reference ontology for cybersecurity
operational information,” The Computer Journal, vol. 58, no. 10, p.
2297–2312, 2015.
[35] E. Doynikova, A. Fedorchenko, and I. Kotenko, “Ontology of metrics
for cyber security assessment,” in Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, ser. ARES ’19.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
[36] A. Condamines, “S´emantique et corpus sp´ecialis´es : Constitution
de Bases de Connaissances Terminologiques,” Habilitation `a diriger
des recherches, Universit´e Toulouse Le Mirail, Jun. 2003. [Online].
Available: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-01321042
[37] G. Leech, The state of the art in corpus linguistics, K. Aijmer and
B. Altenberg, Eds.
London: Longman, 1991.
[38] G. Bernier-Colborne, “Deﬁning a gold standard for the evaluation of
term extractors,” in Proceedings of the Eight International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), 2012, pp. 15–18.
[39] J. Pearson, Terms in Context.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 1998.
[40] A. Rigouts Terryn, V. Hoste, and E. Lefever, “A gold standard
for multilingual automatic term extraction from comparable corpora
: term structure and translation equivalents,” in Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018).
European Language Resources Association (ELRA),
2018, pp. 1803–1808. [Online]. Available: http://www.lrec-conf.org/
proceedings/lrec2018/index.html
26
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[41] A. Nazarenko, H. Zargayouna, O. Hamon, and J. Van Puymbrouck,
“Evaluation
des
outils
terminologiques
:
enjeux,
difﬁcult´es
et
propositions,” Traitement Automatique des Langues, vol. 50, no. 1 varia,
pp. 257–281, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/
hal-00516698
[42] E.
Loginova
Clouet,
A.
Gojun,
H.
Blancafort,
M.
Guegan,
T.
Gornostay,
and
U.
Heid,
“Reference
Lists
for
the
Evaluation
of
Term
Extraction
Tools,”
in
Terminology and
Knowledge Engineering Conference (TKE), Madrid, Spain, Jun. 2012,
pp. http://www.oeg–upm.net/tke2012/proceedings. [Online]. Available:
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00816566
[43] E. Cardillo, A. Folino, R. Trunﬁo, and R. Guarasci, “Towards the reuse
of standardized thesauri into ontologies,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Ontology and Semantic Web Patterns -
Volume 1302, ser. WOP’14, 2014, pp. 26–37.
[44] F. Giunchiglia, I. Zaihrayeu, and F. Farazi, “Converting classiﬁcations
into owl ontologies.”
[45] S.-J.
Kang
and
J.-H.
Lee,
“Semi-automatic
practical
ontology
construction by using a thesaurus, computational dictionaries, and
large corpora,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Human Language
Technology and Knowledge Management - Volume 2001, ser. HLTKM
’01.
USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2001. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.3115/1118220.1118226
[46] Cybesecurity
Osservatorio
-
Thesaurus.
https://www.
cybersecurityosservatorio.it/it/Services/thesaurus.jspt\.
Accessed:
2019-08-08.
[47] J. E. Rowley, J. E. Rowley, and R. J. Hartley, Organizing knowledge: an
introduction to managing access to information / Jennifer Rowley and
Richard Hartley , 4th ed.
Ashgate Aldershot, England ; Burlington,
VT, 2008.
[48] C. Barri`ere, “Semi-automatic corpus construction from informative
texts,” in Text-Based Studies in honour of Ingrid Meyer, ser. Lexicog-
raphy, Terminology and Translation, L. Bowkes, Ed.
University of
Ottawa Press, January 2006, ch. 5.
[49] G. Zagrebelsky, Il sistema costituzionale delle fonti del diritto, EGES,
Ed.
Turin: UTET, 1984.
[50] A. Condamines, “L’interpr`etation en s´emantique de corpus : le cas
de la construction de terminologies,” Revue franc¸aise de linguistique
appliqu´ee, vol. Vol. XII, no. 2007/1, pp. 39–52, 2007.
[51] F. Dell’Orletta, G. Venturi, A. Cimino, and S. Montemagni, “T2K: a sys-
tem for automatically extracting and organizing knowledge from texts,”
in Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), N. C. C. Chair), K. Choukri,
T. Declerck, H. Loftsson, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, A. Moreno, J. Odijk,
and S. Piperidis, Eds.
Reykjavik, Iceland: European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA), may 2014.
[52] IATE European Union Terminology. https://iate.europa.eu/home\. Ac-
cessed: 2019-08-08.
[53] C. Lanza, “Italian domain-speciﬁc thesaurus as a means of semantic
control for cybersecurity terminology,” in The Twelfth International Con-
ference on Advances in Semantic Processing (SEMAPRO 2018), U. o.
A. S. G. P. L. U. o. H. A. F. Michael Spranger, Hochschule Mittweida,
Ed., Athens, Greece, November 2018.
[54] M. van Assem, M. R. Menken, G. Schreiber, J. Wielemaker, and
B. Wielinga, “A method for converting thesauri to rdf/owl,” in The
Semantic Web – ISWC 2004, S. A. McIlraith, D. Plexousakis, and F. van
Harmelen, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004,
pp. 17–31.
[55] M. Nowroozi, M. Mirzabeigi, and H. Sotudeh, “The comparison of
thesaurus and ontology: Case of asist web-based thesaurus and designed
ontology,” Library Hi Tech, vol. 36, 01 2018.
[56] J. L. D. Kless, L. Jansen and J. Wiebensohn, “A method for re-
engineering a thesaurus into an ontology,” in Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS
2012), 2012, pp. 133–146.
[57] J. Qin and S. Paling, “Converting a controlled vocabulary into an
ontology: the case of gem,” Inf. Res., vol. 6, 2001.
[58] D. Adams, L. Jansen, and S. Milton, “A content-focused method for re-
engineering thesauri into semantically adequate ontologies,” Semantic
Web, 09 2015.
[59] I. R¨osiger, J. Bettinger, J. Sch¨afer, M. Dorna, and U. Heid, “Acquisition
of semantic relations between terms: how far can we get with standard
nlp tools?” in Proceedings of Coling 2016: 5th International Workshop
on Computational Terminology (CompuTerm), Osaka, Japan, 2016.
[60] A. Condamines, “Taking genre into account when analyzing conceptual
relation patterns,” Corpora, vol. 8, pp. 115–140, 2008. [Online].
Available: https://hal-univ-tlse2.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00606250
[61] A. Blumauer and T. Pellegrini, Semantic Web und semantische Tech-
nologien: Zentrale Begriffe und Unterscheidungen.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 9–25.
27
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

