301
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Safety, Cybersecurity and Interoperability aspects in Modern Nuclear Power Plants 
 
Asmaa Tellabi1, 4, Ines Ben Zid2, 4, Edita Bajramovic3, 4, Karl Waedt4 
1University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany 
2University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany 
3Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany 
4Framatome GmbH, Erlangen, Germany 
 
E-mail:{firstname.lastname}@framatome.com 
 
 
Abstract—The integration of digital equipment and diverse 
automation platforms in modern nuclear plants, including 
Nuclear Power Plants is due to the gradually increasing use of 
digital technologies. This digitalization either comes gradually 
based 
on 
a 
succession 
of 
refurbishment 
projects 
of 
Instrumentation & Control and Electrical Power Systems or as 
comprehensive architectures with new-built power plants. 
Therefore, similar to any critical infrastructure facing a 
growing risk of cyber-attacks, cybersecurity for Nuclear Power 
Plants has become a subject of rising concern. We envision that 
the findings in this paper provide a relevant understanding of 
the threat landscape facing digital systems in nuclear power 
plants. The knowledge can be used for an improved 
understanding and a better identification of security risks 
during the analysis and design of supporting systems. This 
paper gives an overview of the security issues and 
vulnerabilities, helping to better understand the big picture of 
cybersecurity issues and vulnerabilities in Nuclear Power 
Plants. Identifying these vulnerabilities and issues helps to 
establish new security countermeasures. A new draft standard 
IEC 63096 is presented in this paper as well.  
Keywords-nuclear 
power 
plants; 
cybersecurity 
interoperability.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Digital Instrumentation and Control (I&C) systems are 
defined as computer-based devices that monitor and control 
nuclear power plants (NPP). Electrical Power Systems (EPS) 
provide the redundant power supply for different plant 
operation scenarios, which have to be fully supported. The 
EPS may include the connection to external highest voltage 
(e.g., 400 kW) or high voltage (e.g., 110 kV) grid 
connections, Emergency Diesel Generators, Station Blackout 
Diesel Generators, different Uninterruptable Power Supplies 
(UPS), e.g., for 2 hours and 12 hours [1][2].  
Furthermore, different inverters and rectifiers are 
responsible of controlling and monitoring the entire aspects 
of the plant’s health, all plant states and helping to respond 
with the care and adjustments as needed. They are seen as 
the nervous system of NPP. Generation III+ and IV reactors 
are equipped with digital I&C systems, while analog systems 
in older reactors are being replaced with digital systems [2]. 
The high level communication between NPP control 
networks is done by Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition systems (SCADA) in order to coordinate power 
production with transmission and distribution demands. 
Integration of digital I&C systems and the connectivity 
between NPP control networks and external networks 
represent a threat for NPP, making them a target to cyber-
attacks which can include physical damage to reactors. With 
possibilities of cyber-attacks targeting NPP increasingly, 
cybersecurity has aroused as a significant problem [3].  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follow. 
Section II gives background information on typical system 
architecture in NPP. Section III outlines some of the 
notorious publically known cyber-attacks against NPP. In 
Section IV , a new IEC 63096 standard [4] is described. We 
conclude the paper in Section V.  
II. 
NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS  
A. NPP architecture  
The general digital systems configuration of NPP is 
almost similar to that of Industrial Control Systems (ICS) 
SCADA systems. The general architecture can be separated 
into two distinct domains: I&C systems, EPS and plant-local 
or corporate IT systems. The restriction on these networks is 
not similar, but also the nature of the traffic.  
According to Fig. 1, operations, such as office 
automation, document management, and email, which 
consist of conventional IT systems, such as PCs and 
enterprise workstations use the corporate network of the 
Utility. As an illustration, Internet access, FTP, email, and 
remote access will normally be allowed on the enterprise 
network level but should not be permitted on the ICS 
network level. 
Nuclear safety is the accomplishment of correct operating 
conditions, prevention of accidents or alleviation of accident 
consequences, ending up with the protection of workers, the 
public and the environment from extreme radiation hazards. 
On the other hand, nuclear security is the prevention and 
detection of, and response to, theft, sabotage, unauthorized 
access, illegal transfer or other malicious acts involving 
nuclear material, other radioactive substances or their 
associated facilities.  
Safety is expected to prevent accidents, while security is 
implemented to stop intended acts that might harm the NPP 
or lead to the theft of nuclear materials. Safety evaluations 
focus on risks arising from accidental events occurrences 

302
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
originated from nature (such as earthquakes, tornadoes, or 
flooding), hardware failures, supplementary internal events 
or interruptions (such as fire, pipe breakage, or loss of 
electric power supply), or human mistakes (such as the 
incorrect application of procedures, or incorrect alignment of 
circuits). For security, risks, or events, worried about result 
from malicious acts accomplished with the objective to steal 
material or to cause damage. Therefore, security events are 
based on ‘intelligent’ or ‘deliberate’ actions achieved 
intentionally for theft or sabotage and with the purpose to 
avoid protective measures [1] [3]. 
Safety and security have various elements in common 
and both focus on protecting the plant with the eventual 
purpose of protecting people, society, and the environment. 
As stated above, the essential objective of each is identical 
— the protection of people, society and the environment. 
Whether it was a safety or a security event causing harm, the 
acceptable risk is likely the same, usually they both adopt the 
strategy of defense in depth, which is defined as the usage of 
layers of protection.  
First concern is given to prevention. Second, abnormal 
situations need to be identified early and take action 
promptly to avoid resulting damage. Mitigation comes in the 
third place of an operative strategy. Finally, considerable 
emergency planning should be implemented in case of the 
failure of prevention, protection and mitigation systems [5].  
I&C are censorious in NPP. They are responsible of 
monitoring the operational state of the nuclear reactors 
through interaction with physical equipment, but also in 
charge of process control. With the introduction of digital 
technologies in the 2000s, I&C systems shifted from analog 
technologies to digital technologies. The usage of digital 
technologies has been steadily increasing. NPP I&C systems 
engage in environments that are different than those of 
typical IT systems. 
In a typical NPP, I&C architecture contains two types of 
systems: Non-safety and Safety systems. The Non-safety 
system is defined as a distributed computer system 
containing a number of remote control nodes spread across 
the NPP, which uses redundant real time data network to 
communicate with each other and with the Human Machine 
Interface (HMI) [6].  
Communication with third party systems and Operation 
Maintenance Corporate Systems (OMS) are also supported 
through open protocols like Object Embedding Linking 
Process Control, fieldbuses and Modbus-TCP [7].  
Additionally, monitoring and manual control of the NPP 
processes is done by the use of HMI consoles connected in 
the non-safety system. In order to display critical information 
related to safety on the non-safety HMI, the safety system 
will communicate with the non-safety system through 
Interface gateways.  
On the contrary, a safety system is regularly based on a 
channelized Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) that 
holds a number of PLC nodes distributed across the NPP. 
These PLC and its cabinets are designed to resist seismic 
events, environmental events and cybersecurity attacks. 
Furthermore, they can still be able to operate safely.  
 
Figure 1.  General architecture in nuclear power plants [2]. 
The purpose of this distribution is to coordinate with 
safety components in the process system, and also to ensure 
a safe communication in a safety channel using the 
redundant real time data safety network or through dedicated 
high speed links in between safety channels. Distributed 
control systems (DCSs) or PLC are common control 
components in I&C systems, they interact with physical 
equipment directly and industrial PCs or engineering 
workstations that are employed to configure control 
components and their related works [1]. 
B. ICS vs. IT systems 
I&C systems are used to control the physical world, 
while IT systems´ purpose is to manage data. Requirements 
for performance and reliability, operating systems used and 
applications employed for I&C systems may be considered 
uncommon in a typical IT network environment [5]. 
At first, Industrial control systems (ICS) were similar to 
IT systems to some extent, in a way where ICS were 
inaccessible systems running on proprietary control 
protocols, and applying special hardware and software. 
Easily accessible, low-cost Ethernet and Internet Protocol 
(IP) devices are now taking the place of the majority of 
proprietary 
technologies; 
as 
a 
result 
cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and incidents are increasing. Nowadays, the 
deployment of IT solutions in ICS is made to validate the use 
of business connectivity and remote access abilities, created 
and implemented to control typical industry computers, 
operating systems (OS) and network protocols. This 
combination of distinct IT capabilities provides considerably 
less separation for ICS from the outside world than previous 
systems, making security an essential requirement for these 
systems. These security solutions´ objectives were to handle 
security concerns in traditional IT systems; considerable 

303
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
safety measures must be taken when introducing these same 
solutions to ICS environments. Environments in which ICS 
and IT systems operate are constantly changing, operation 
environments comprise, but are not limited to [5]: 
 The threat space; vulnerabilities; missions/business 
activities; mission/business processes; enterprise 
and information security architectures; information 
technologies; personnel; facilities; supply chain 
relationships; organizational governance/culture; 
procurement/acquisition processes; organizational 
policies/procedures; organizational assumptions, 
constraints, risk tolerance, and priorities/trade-
offs). 
The following lists some special considerations when 
addressing security for ICS [5][6]: 
1) Timeliness and Performance Requirements 
Usually, ICS are considered time-critical, with a 
tolerable margin of delay and jitter, which depends on 
the application. Deterministic and reliable response are 
mandatory for some systems, e.g., for closed loop 
control. For IT systems, high throughput is necessary, 
while this it is not considered critical for ICS. In some 
cases, e.g., a reactor protection I&C system, automated 
system response in real time and timely response to 
human interaction is seen critical, e.g., for display 
systems in a main control room. Real-time operating 
systems (RTOS) or embedded real-time micro-kernels 
are implemented in ICS, where real-time responses are 
required. 
2) Availability Requirements 
In general, ICS processes are continuous, meaning 
that sudden interruptions of systems that control 
industrial processes are not allowed. An advanced 
schedule of these interrupts must be done. Sometimes, 
the production is considered more vital than the 
information, which can be undesirably affected by 
stopping and/or restarting ICS. In case traditional IT 
strategies are used, e.g., rebooting a module, they will 
have a negative effect on high availability requirements, 
reliability and maintainability of the ICS. In some 
industries, redundant components running in parallel are 
deployed to provide continuity when some components 
are unreachable. 
3) Risk Management Requirements 
Confidentiality and integrity are normally the 
principal concerns for IT systems. On the other hand, for 
ICS systems the main concerns are: availability, 
integrity, human safety and fault tolerance, regulatory 
compliance, 
destruction 
of 
equipment, 
loss 
of 
intellectual property, theft or damaged products. Safety 
and security concepts are paired; staffs in charge of the 
operation, security, and maintenance of ICS must 
understand those essential concepts. Security measures 
that jeopardy safeties are not allowed. 
4) Physical Effects 
ICS field devices, e.g., PLC, control physical 
processes. Interactions between ICS and physical 
processes can be very difficult, and can lead to severe 
consequences that can be noticeable in physical events. 
5) System Operation 
Generally ICS environments, counting operating systems 
(OS) and control networks, are completely different from IT 
systems, necessitating specific skill sets, experience, and 
levels of expertise. Usually, industrial control networks are 
managed by control engineers, and not by IT personnel.  
6)  Communications 
In ICS environments, communication protocols and 
media needed by field device control and intra-processor 
communication are very different from nearly every IT 
environment. 
7)  Patch Management  
Preserving the integrity of both IT and control systems is 
required. For IT systems software updates as well as security 
patches, are normally executed in a specific time based on 
appropriate security policy and procedures. On the other 
hand, software updates on ICS cannot always be forced on a 
timely basis without negatively affecting the system. 
Moreover, these procedures are usually automated via 
server-based tools. Before their implementation, these 
updates need to be tested by both the vendor and the end 
user. Also, a schedule of days/weeks must be planned by the 
ICS owner in advance. Patch management is also associated 
to hardware and firmware, the process demands careful 
assessment by ICS experts, e.g., control engineers, working 
in partnership with security and IT personnel. 
8)  Component Lifetime 
IT components´ lifetime is in the order of 3 to 5 years, 
with briefness due to the fast progress of technology. For 
ICS, the implemented technology has been designed for 
precise use cases and implementation; the lifetime of the 
proposed solution is often in the order of 10 to 25 years and 
sometimes longer. 
9)  Component Location 
Some IT modules are physically reachable by local 
transportation, also placed in corporate and commercial 
facilities. Remote locations may be used for backup services. 
Contrariwise, distributed ICS components must be isolated, 
remote services should not be allowed or used when required 
only by approved persons. Also, modules´ location 
necessitates important physical and environmental security 
measures. 
III. 
CYBERSECURITY AND CYBER WARFARE RELATED 
TO NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS 
Advancement in electronics and IT was the main 
motivation behind the replacement of traditional analog I&C 
systems in NPP with I&C systems, e.g., systems based on 
computers and microprocessors. Also, digital systems allow 
superior reliability, improved plant performance and 
supplementary diagnostic aptitudes. The systems used today 
were designed to satisfy performance, reliability, safety, and 
flexibility requirements, most of them were created a long 
time ago before new technologies became a crucial part of 
business operations.  
In most typical implementations, these systems are 
physically isolated from outside networks and are based on 

304
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
proprietary 
hardware 
and 
software. 
Communication 
protocols include basic error detection and correction 
capabilities but lack secure systems [7]. Accordingly, it is 
crucial not to connect such systems to an Intranet or the 
Internet. 
A. History of Selected Attacks in NPP 
First, in this Section we present some of the notorious 
attacks against NPP. In [8], attack taxonomy is defined by 5 
dimensions: precondition, vulnerability, target, attack 
method, effect of the attack. It was combined with a new 
dimension target—the effect it has on the confidentiality, 
availability, integrity (CIA) of a system. 
1) Ignalina NPP (1992)  
At the Ignalina NPP in Lithuania, a technician 
intentionally introduced a virus into the industrial control 
system. 
 
Precondition: Direct access to the system. 
 
Attack method: Insider attack. 
 
Target: Availability and integrity. 
 
Effect of the attack: In this case, little harm was 
caused, but someone with malicious intent could 
have provoked a serious incident [9][10]. 
2) Davis-Besse NPP (2003) 
 This plant located in Ohio was infected by the Slammer 
worm (also called W32/SQLSlam-A or Sapphire). 
 
Precondition: Unpatched system. 
 
Attack method: At first, the worm scans and sends 
itself to random IP addresses; if worm reaches a 
machine that is running Microsoft SQL 2000, it 
infects that machine and begins scanning and 
sending itself to another machine. 
 
Target: Availability. 
 
Effect of the attack: The safety parameter display 
system (SPDS), responsible of collecting and 
displaying data regarding the reactor core from the 
coolant systems, temperature sensors and radiation 
detectors, was unavailable for nearly five hours 
[9][10]. 
3) Browns Ferry NPP (2006) 
This NPP located in Alabama experienced a malfunction 
of both reactor recirculation pumps (which use variable-
frequency drives to control motor speed and are needed to 
cool the reactor) and the condensate demineralizer 
controller (a type of PLC). 
 
Precondition: Device failure, attack method. Both 
of these devices contain microprocessors that 
communicate by sending and receiving data over an 
Ethernet network. 
 
Attack method: Ethernet operates by first sending 
data to every device on the network; then they have 
to inspect each packet to define if the packet is 
intended for them or if they can ignore it, making 
them vulnerable to failure if they accept enormous 
traffic.  
 
Target: Availability. 
 
Effect of the attack: The excess traffic produced by 
network broke down the reactor recirculation pumps 
and condensate demineralizer controller. As a 
consequence, the plant’s Unit 3 had to be manually 
shut down in order to prevent a meltdown [9][10]. 
4) Hatch NPP (2008) 
Hatch NPP located in Georgia experienced a shutdown as 
an unintended consequence of an update performed by 
contractor. An engineer contractor that manages the plant’s 
technology operations installed an update to a computer on 
the plant’s business network. 
 
Precondition: Human error. 
 
Attack method: The update was intended to 
synchronize data. The updated computer was 
connected to one of the plant’s industrial control 
system networks, consequently when the engineer 
restarted the updated computer; the synchronization 
changed the control system’s data to zero for a short 
moment. 
 
Target: Availability and integrity. 
 
Effect of the attack: The interpretation of the 
temporary changed values by the plant’s safety 
system was incorrect. The updated value to zero of 
the water level signified that there was not enough 
water to cool the reactor core, which conducted to 
automatic shutdown for 48 hours of the plant’s Unit 
2 [9][10]. 
5)  Natanz Nuclear Facility and Bushehr NPP – Stuxnet 
(2010) 
 First exposed to public in June 2010, the Stuxnet 
computer worm infected both the Natanz nuclear facility 
and the Bushehr NPP in Iran, partially destroying around 
1,000 centrifuges at Natanz. 
 
Precondition: Use of commercial-off-the-shelf 
(COTS)  Operating System (OS), Stuxnet infects 
computers using the Microsoft Windows OS, 
exploiting vulnerabilities in the system that allows it 
to obtain system-level access. 
 
Attack method: The worm uses forged certificates 
as a result the installed files look to come from an 
authentic source, misleading antivirus. Iranian 
nuclear facilities work with Siemens Step 7 SCADA 
system. Once the machine is infected, Stuxnet 
inspects the network to find computers attached to a 
similar system. Stuxnet duplicates itself on other 
computers 
by 
exploiting 
another 
set 
of 
vulnerabilities found in print spoolers and also 
through USB flash drives, so it spreads to networks 
using shared printers. Stuxnet’s payload is activated 
only if the computer is connected to a similar 
Siemens system. It reprograms the system’s PLC, in 
charge of controlling centrifuges applied in enriching 
nuclear fuel, so that they spin rapidly and eventually 
finish by break down. 
 
Target: Availability and integrity. 
 
Effect of the attack: As a result, Stuxnet destroyed 
over 1000 centrifuges at Natanz [9][10]. 

305
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
6) Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co. Commercial 
Network (2014) 
 Hackers infiltrated and stole data from the commercial 
network of Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co., which 
operates 23 of South Korea’s nuclear reactors. 
 
Precondition: 
Human 
error: 
Access 
to 
the 
confidential data was obtained by hackers through 
phishing emails to the owner-operator’s employees. 
Some of them finished by clicked on the links and 
downloaded the malware. 
 
Attack method: Sending phishing emails to 
employees. 
 
Target: Confidentiality. 
 
Effect of the attack: The hackers acquired the 
blueprints and manuals of two reactors, electricity 
flow 
charts, personal data 
that belongs 
to 
approximately 10000 of the company’s employees, 
also radiation exposure estimates for nearby 
residents [9][10]. 
B. Security Vulnerabilities   
In general, I&C in NPP are physically isolated from 
external networks and have a different operational 
environment from that of conventional IT systems. As a 
result, NPP were regarded as being safe from external cyber-
attacks. However, continuous cyber-attacks against NPP 
signified that NPP are as susceptible to cyberattacks as other 
critical infrastructures [11] and conventional IT systems. 
ICS, usually control the physical world and IT systems 
manage data. ICS are different from traditional IT systems, 
including dissimilar risks and priorities. Some of the 
different characteristics include important risk to the health 
and safety of human lives, severe destruction of the 
environment, and financial problems such as production 
deficit, and undesirable effect to a nation’s economy. 
Performance and reliability requirements for ICS are distinct, 
by using operating systems and applications that may be seen 
unusual in a classic IT network environment. At first, ICS 
had slight similarities to IT systems in that ICS were 
inaccessible systems implementing proprietary control 
protocols with specific hardware and software. Commonly 
accessible, low-cost Ethernet and Internet Protocol (IP) 
devices are now substituting the older proprietary 
technologies, which raises the likelihood of cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and events. Currently, ICS are embracing IT 
solutions to endorse corporate connectivity and remote 
access abilities, and are being created and employed via 
industry standard computers, operating systems (OS) and 
network protocols, where the resemblance to IT systems 
comes from. This novel integration deploys IT capabilities, 
but it meaningfully offers less separation for ICS from the 
outside world than antecedent systems, increasing the 
necessity to secure these systems. Despite the fact that 
security solutions have been designed to deal with these 
security matters in characteristic IT systems, particular 
precautions must be engaged when presenting these similar 
solutions to ICS environments [1].   
 
1) Lack or Improper Input Validation  
Attackers exploit vulnerabilities in services and scripts 
written by I&C vendors, resulting from the non-secure 
coding practices, allowing attackers to send forged request in 
order to modify the program execution. In the same way, 
using vulnerable protocols with for networking will be 
exploited to create malformed packets. Vulnerabilities found 
in these protocols and services make an attacker able to 
manipulate plant component, via well-known attacks. 
Vulnerable modules that might be concerned include 
Workstations at Main Control Room (MCR), Remote 
Shutdown Station (RSS); Process Information and Control 
System (PICS); Safety Information and Control System 
(SICS) and HMI. The attacks that could take place by 
exploiting this vulnerability are buffer overflow, command 
injection, and SQL injection. 
2) Inappropriate Authorization  
Authorization guarantees access to resources only by 
authorized 
entities. 
Access 
control 
mechanisms 
are 
implemented to ensure appropriate authorization. Absence of 
or weak authorization mechanisms can be exploited by 
attackers to gain illegal access to resources and tamper I&C 
system 
components. 
Software 
installed 
at 
operator 
workstations side must perform access control checks, or it 
will open a new door for attackers to perform unauthorized 
actions. Vulnerable modules include Workstations at MCR, 
RSS, PICS, SICS, HMI, Safety Automation System (SAS), 
Protection System (PS), Process Automation System (PAS). 
Existing module in I&C system must first verify whether the 
requesting module is allowed to access the resource. 
Escalation of privilege is one of the attacks that could be 
performed with authorization vulnerability. 
3) Improper Authentication 
Network protocols used within I&C system architecture 
during communication, frequently suffer from weak 
authentication mechanisms to verify the identity of the 
packet and also the user. Weak authentication vulnerabilities 
permit attackers to eavesdrop on network communications 
and capture the identity credentials of legal users, ending 
with an unauthorized privilege. Mutual authentication before 
sending or receiving data is not performed by the 
components of I&C. Not verifying the origin or authenticity 
of data, permits malicious data into components, credential 
theft, authentication bypass, etc. Furthermore, non-properly 
protected confidential data stored in databases can also be 
exploited. Vulnerable modules that might be touched by this 
are almost all I&C systems, sub-systems and components 
[10]. Often, I&C vendors leave behind authentication 
information from their product code or documentation, 
which can be definitely accessed and exploited by attackers. 
Weak passwords or using default passwords are another 
significant vulnerability to consider. There are numerous 
possible aspects that can be used to authenticate a person, 
device, or system, together with something the user knows, 
something the user has or something the user is. For instance, 
authentication could be founded on something known (e.g., 
PIN number or password), something possessed (e.g., key, 
dongle, smart card), something the user is like a biological 
characteristic (e.g., fingerprint, retinal signature), a location 

306
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(e.g., Global Positioning System (GPS), location access), the 
time a request is made, or a mixture of these attributes. 
Normally, the more authentication process includes more 
factors, the more strong the process will be. Multi-factor 
authentication refers to the process when two or more factors 
are used [5]. 
4) Unencrypted Sensitive Data  
Frequently data at rest and in transit is unencrypted, 
making them vulnerable to disclosure. Moreover, network 
packets exchanged between several components of I&C are 
not encrypted but in plaintext form. Vulnerable modules that 
might be touched by this are almost all I&C systems, sub-
systems and components [10]. Exposure of product source 
code, topology, legitimate user credentials, might result as a 
consequence. 
5) Incorrect Software Configurations and Management 
Security breaches and exploitations of plant operations 
are a result of misconfigurations or vulnerabilities found in 
I&C software. Modules that are seen vulnerable to this are 
Workstations at MCR, RSS, PICS, SICS, HMI, SAS, PS, 
and PAS. The existence of these vulnerabilities is caused by 
poor patch management, poor maintenance, and built-in 
flaws in I&C products. Additionally, improper installations 
of applications also offer an opportunity to attackers to 
tamper the system.  
6) Lack of Backup Facilities  
Some of I&C systems in NPP do not own backup and 
restore facilities dedicated to databases and software. NPP 
that possess backup facilities often store them offsite, and 
they are not often exercised and tested. Vulnerable modules 
that might be concerned by lack of backup facilities are SAS, 
PS, PAS, Sensors, Actuators, PICS, and SICS [10]. NPP 
must be operated 24/7 and the absence of a backup feature 
can result in catastrophic effects if an incident occurs. 
7) Absence of Audit and Accountability  
Some attacks are hard to detect since they are launched in 
a cautious manner like insider attacks. The nonexistence of 
auditing and logging mechanisms assists attackers into 
covering their tracks after attacks. Vulnerable modules that 
might be touched by this are almost all I&C systems, sub-
systems and components. Storing activity logs of I&C 
components and operator actions is vital in order to trace 
attack patterns, but also to avoid repudiation threats from 
insiders as well as actions in I&C components and systems. 
8) Absence of Security Awareness 
Technology advancements and the people using these 
technologies present multiple risks to information security. 
The human factor is considered as one of the major sources 
of information security risk, also one of the most difficult to 
control. According to a Deloitte’s Technology, Media, and 
Telecommunications (TMT) Global Security Study [12], 
70% of the TMT organizations surveyed rate their 
employees’ lack of security awareness as an “average” or 
“high” vulnerability, which was the case for Korea Hydro 
and nuclear Power Co. Security controls that are conform to 
the NIST SP 800-53 Awareness and Training (AT) family 
offer policy and procedures for guaranteeing that each user 
of an information system is equipped with elementary 
information system security awareness and training materials 
before authorization to access the system is granted. Security 
awareness is a crucial part of ICS incident prevention, 
mainly when it comes to social engineering threats. Social 
engineering is seen as a method used to influence individuals 
into revealing private information, such as passwords. This 
information can then be exploited to endanger otherwise 
secure systems. Employing an ICS security program may 
bring changes to the means used by personnel to access 
computer programs, applications, and the computer desktop 
itself [9]. 
C. Classification of adversaries  
In [13] adversaries are categorized into eight classes 
that can endanger safety and security of NPP. The 
categories are as follows: covert agents, disgruntled current 
employees, disgruntled ex- employees or insider attackers, 
recreational hackers/ hobbyists/ script kiddies, militant 
opponents to nuclear power, non-state hackers (e.g., cyber 
criminals/organized crime), nation-state hackers (e.g., 
governments and militaries), and terrorists (e.g., non-state 
armed groups). 
1) Covert Agent 
A retired or a present employee of an intelligence 
agency, and whose identity is unknown to others. The agent 
is hired to steal secret information and personal information 
about adversaries. In order to get information, this agent 
must have access to the system and documentation, or apply 
a social engineering method. 
2) Disgruntled 
Current 
Employees 
or 
insider 
attackers 
Someone who is not satisfied with his/her job, and wants 
to compromise the system by using illegal approaches. 
Reasons behind dissatisfaction vary, but the usual 
motivations are to take revenge, create chaos, damage 
nuclear security’s image, or steal information for economic 
gain. To perform such attack, the attacker needs medium to 
high level resources to execute an attack, e.g., systems 
access. Moreover, an employee must own some higher 
privileges on processes and systems, programming skills and 
information about the system´s architecture, information 
about possible existing passwords, and the capability of 
installing “kiddie” tools or scripts. 
3) Disgruntled Ex-Employee 
This person has similar motivations as the ones of a 
disgruntled employee. Their purpose is to take revenge on 
the employer, sell confidential information to adversaries for 
economic gain, or disclose confidential information to the 
public in order to damage employer´s public image. As an 
ex-employee, 
she/he 
may 
still 
own 
confidential 
documentation, access to facility resources, and potential 
connections to other employees. To execute such an active 
attack, an attacker should have knowledge about systems´ 
passwords, access to systems, and backdoors made by social 
engineering techniques. 
 
 

307
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
4) Recreational Hackers/Hobbyists/Script Kiddies 
Their motivations behind the intrusion to systems are for 
fun or to win a challenge. These attackers are interested into 
learning about new vulnerabilities and exploiting by 
performing them on real systems. They often download and 
use free scripts and tools available on Internet. Their 
intentions might be harmless; yet, mechanisms used to learn 
about these vulnerabilities and the way to exploit them is 
risky. In case cybersecurity mechanisms are not well 
deployed inside NPP, this might be destructive. Without 
owning an advanced level of expertise, frameworks such as 
Metasploit provide SCADA-specific exploits, which script 
kiddies can use to execute an attack easily. Such attackers 
could certainly be blocked by imposing best practices such 
as patch management, policy enforcement, and suitable use 
of antivirus, intrusion detection systems (IDS), and firewalls 
inside the organization. 
5) Militant Opponent to Nuclear Power 
She/he has strong public thoughts on precise nuclear 
issues, and often slows down nuclear business operations. 
These attackers are financially supported through secret 
channels or agencies [10]. However, they only know the 
public information available on systems. Moreover, they 
have sufficient time to perform such attacks and mainly aim 
defined public events such as elections. They may or may 
not have computer skills; still, they get help from the hacker 
community to execute a cyber-attack. 
6) Non-State Hackers  
Groups or individuals with the main objective are 
financial gain by stealing nuclear sensitive data belonging 
and then blackmailing the facility to which data belong to 
into paying a ransom. Usually, they threaten to exploit 
vulnerabilities in SCADA systems. These attackers do have 
funds and can hire expert hackers or buy hacking tools in 
order to attack systems. A set of SCADA-targeted automated 
attack tools, in the form of Metasploit add-ons that can help 
in executing attacks on ICS, exist. Every so often, these 
attackers employ former/current employees of a facility to 
perform social engineering to extract information. 
7) Nation-State Hackers 
Governments hire specific individuals to perform cyber 
operations, internationally or nationally. State hackers 
vandalize and block access to websites, and perform 
industrial espionage to steal a country’s confidential data. 
Additionally, state hackers constitute the most harmful threat 
to SCADA systems, as long as these hackers get all of their 
owned information and funds from the government. The 
government has resources to hire the best hackers and offer 
those funds, infrastructure, and facilities to create zero-day 
exploits, to use them against an enemy country in order to 
steal a nuclear technology, intelligence collection, etc. 
Although zero day attacks are single-use weapons, they are 
capable of causing a huge damage to a country’s 
infrastructure, economy, and systems. 
 
 
8) Terrorist  
 Throughout the history of cyber-attacks on SCADA 
systems, no evidence can be found of a terrorist attack; still, 
the situation will not stay like this in the future. According to 
former U.S. President George W. Bush, terrorists can get 
into the network with the intention to attack a nuclear 
facility, and consequences of such intrusion could be 
intolerable [10]. Objectives of such terrorists differ: 
sometimes they want to accumulate intelligence, create 
backdoors for later use, spread fear and panic among the 
public, or take revenge on the government. Furthermore, 
some terrorist groups have developed important skills to use 
social media as a way to hire hackers. 
D. Cybersecurity requirements  
Cyber security features that provide confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability must be integrated in the design of 
safety systems. Cybersecurity controls should not have an 
opposite effect on the plant´s safety objectives and should 
not intervene with their operations. Concerns have been 
raised regarding possible effects that such features can have 
on safety functions´ performances. Also, it shall not 
jeopardize diversity and safety Defense in Depth (DiD) 
features effectiveness implemented in I&C architecture [14]. 
 Confidentiality 
Imposing this feature inside a safety system restricts 
actions an attacker can make on information transferred 
between safety systems, or between safety and non-safety 
systems. In general, to ensure confidentiality cryptographic 
techniques must be deployed, in order to avoid any illegal 
disclosure of information during transmission and reception 
[15]. To make sure that these added cryptographic features 
do not degrade safety functions, these cryptographic 
mechanisms are employed for communication between 
safety and non-safety systems. In case an unpredictable 
overhead is introduced to data communications because of 
added cryptographic approaches, other possibilities exist. 
These supplementary implementations may implicate 
physical and logical access controls on the system, 
monitoring dynamically and tracking all accesses to the 
system to detect and respond to intrusions in a convenient 
way, by enforcing auditing and/or validation mechanisms to 
identify unauthorized access and alterations to the system. 
For authorized individuals´ a background check should be 
accomplished with regards to their experiences and 
trustworthiness. 
 Integrity 
The purpose of protecting safety systems´ integrity is 
to restrict malicious actions attackers can perform on safety 
systems so that they cannot negatively impact safety 
functions [15]. Protecting integrity can be accomplished by 
restricting unauthorized alterations 
of software and 
hardware in safety system. Limiting access to these systems 
might be a possibility, since access is made via direct 
interfaces, e.g., ports on the hardware, or using indirect 
interfaces like data links.  An access control list including 

308
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
authorized actions should be implemented so that illegal 
system modification via direct interfaces is forbidden [15].  
 Availability 
Affecting negatively safety systems´ availability must 
not be permitted [15]. Safety systems´ operations can be 
compromised directly or indirectly by refusing access to the 
system to authorized users. Methods for restricting an 
attacker´s ability of performing such attacks or controlling 
the attack´s effect on a system, should not interfere with 
safety function, as enforced e.g., by IEC 62859 [14]. These 
approaches consist of installing mechanisms at the system’s 
external interface to prevent and limit denial of service 
attacks´ effects. While configuring these systems, restrictions 
on users´ actions should be considered to prevent them from 
executing such attacks against other systems, by controlling 
capacity surplus and/or bandwidth to stop information-
flooding 
and 
attacks´ 
effects. 
Some 
cryptographic 
mechanisms are capable to comply with these requirements, 
e.g., by limiting the attacker´s actions, to possibly make 
modifications that may negatively affect the availability. 
E. STRIDE threat modelling  
This 
Section 
presents 
the 
STRIDE 
(Spoofing, 
Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of 
Service, and Elevation of Privileges) threat model of a 
typical NPP’ I&C system by taking into consideration its 
characteristics and architecture. STRIDE is a method 
developed by Microsoft, which describes an adversary's 
objectives, is used for threat modelling [10]. Tab 1. shows a 
summary of the STRIDE analysis.  
 Spoofing 
Spoofing is a scam category where an intruder tries to 
gain unauthorized access to a user's system or information by 
pretending to be the legitimate user [10]. For NPP, this 
unauthorized access can cause I&C systems´ disruption or 
lead to the system´s misuse. Spoofing can be divided into 
two categories, it can be related to the system or linked to the 
personnel. The first type focuses on spoofing I&C system´s 
credentials, the second type concentrates on unauthorized 
access gained after stealing personnel credentials, e.g.,  
Passwords and tokens, and then pretending to be the real 
authorized user. Session hijacking is a typical attack for 
personnel spoofing; the attacker captures a current session 
and attempts to connect to the receiver as an authentic user. 
In the case of a system spoofing, malicious code injection in 
the form of scripts into a web browser is a common strategy. 
Other techniques exist in order to spoof credentials; it 
includes 
social 
engineering, 
e.g., 
watching 
and/or 
manipulating user or system behavior and activities, and 
incorrect input, e.g., SQL injection. 
 Tampering 
Consists of altering legitimate data, and as a 
consequence the system´s integrity is compromised. The data 
can be tampered whether it is in transit or at rest. An attacker 
can exploit any misconfiguration or if there is no presence of 
integrity checking procedure in the system to compromise 
the system´s integrity. 
 Repudiation 
It is caused by the lack of appropriate auditing and 
logging mechanisms. An attacker can exploit vulnerabilities 
in the logging mechanism, steal keys, or even produce fake 
digital signatures to allow unauthorized actions. As an 
illustration, an operator or a compromised system at a NPP 
can deny executing some actions or operations on plant 
systems, e.g., a plant operator alters temperature´s values and 
water level of a plant, but later denies performing such an 
action. 
 Information disclosure 
This threat is a result of improper protection of 
information. There are many forms of information – for 
example, user credentials, network packets, source code, 
files, or a database. Sensitive plant´s information can be 
illegally released by exploiting vulnerabilities like software 
misconfigurations, improper authorization or authentication 
mechanisms. 
TABLE 1 
STRIDE ANALYSIS. 
 
Threat 
category 
Attacker type  
Vulnerability category 
Spoofing 
Covert Agent 
Disgruntled Ex-Employee 
Non-State Hacker 
Terrorist 
No or Incorrect Input 
validation. 
Improper Authentication 
Improper Authorization 
Tampering 
Militant Opponent 
Recreational Hacker 
Terrorist 
Improper Authentication 
Improper Authorization 
Improper 
Software 
Configuration 
& 
Management 
Repudiation 
Disgruntled 
Current 
Employee 
Auditing and logging 
Information 
Disclosure 
Covert Agent 
Disgruntled 
Current 
Employee 
Non-State Hacker 
Disgruntled Ex-Employee 
Improper Authentication 
Improper Authorization 
 Improper 
Software 
Configuration 
& 
Management 
Denial of 
Service 
Recreational Hacker 
Terrorist 
Improper Software 
Configuration &  
Management 
 No or Incorrect Input 
Validation 
Lack 
of 
Backup 
Facilities 
Elevation of 
Privilege 
Disgruntled 
Current 
Employee 
Improper Authentication 
Improper Authorization 
 
 Denial of service (DoS) 
By overwhelming I&C systems with a large number of 
repetitive 
requests, 
required 
components 
become 
unavailable. These requests can be sent by installing a 
malware or in case the system is connected to internet with a 
hidden connection. DoS attacks generally take place when 
backup facilities are unavailable and inexistence of input 
validation methods. 
 Elevation of Privilege 
Leading to an abuse of legitimate access, malicious 
insiders having access to resources or operations may alter 

309
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
their account permissions to permit supplementary accesses 
to systems to which they do not have access to. They can 
then abuse their privileges by performing malicious actions, 
e.g., stopping core functions or altering parameter values.  
F. Industry and Government Responses to NPP 
Cybersecurity 
In 
the 
previous 
Section, 
known 
attacks 
and 
vulnerabilities in NPP were underlined. Since they pose 
important risks to the economy and to national security, 
numerous 
attempts 
were 
made 
by 
international 
organizations, regulatory and research institutes, and 
governments to set up cybersecurity guidelines, standards, 
and frameworks dedicated to security of NPP. 
For industry adoption and regulatory approval, three 
features of digital I&C systems are distinguishing. 
First, a digital I&C system is more complicated than its 
analog predecessor because of the number of connections it 
has among its many components. Second, the digital system 
rely more on software. Usually, a unit has around 10000 
sensors and detectors and 5000 km of I&C cables. The total 
mass components connected to I&C, is close to 1000 tones. 
Making I&C system one of the heaviest and most extensive 
non-building structures in any NPP. Third, the complete 
reliance on computers increases the importance of 
cybersecurity. The first two of these features, complexity and 
software-dependence, 
introduce 
new 
possibilities 
for 
common cause failures. 
The increased use of commercial “off-the shelf” software 
is considered as one practice hurting the nuclear industry. 
This type of software does not deliver a suitable level of 
protection from external threats and is often seen as a direct 
approach to penetrate a facility network. The use of 
insufficient software, mixed with executive-level ignorance 
of security risks, builds an easy way for an attacker to misuse 
assets. There is a common misrepresentation which refers to 
nuclear facilities as being “air-gapped” – totally inaccessible 
from the Internet – signifying that the industry is safe from 
cyber-attacks. Considerable commercial software offers 
Internet connectivity through virtual private networks (VPN) 
or else Intranet. These connections often go unlisted and 
keep on being ignored while implementing software or 
deploying momentary Internet connections for a project. 
Furthermore, the focus has been given more to physical 
safety and protection instead of cybersecurity controls. 
Therefore, very few developments have been made to reduce 
cyber risks through standardized control and measures [11]. 
NPP are securely maintained and considered as the most 
protected and secure facilities in the world. However, 
accidents can happen, undesirably affecting environment and 
people. Vulnerabilities threatening the physical security of a 
NPP and their ability to launch acts of terrorism were 
elevated to a national security issue following the attacks of 
9/11, 2001. Consequently, the American congress endorsed 
new nuclear plant security requirements and has frequently 
devoted attention on regulation and enforcement by the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).  Years passed after 
the 9/11 attacks, but security at NPP persists as a vital 
matter. To decrease the likelihood of an accident, the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) supports 
Member States in applying international safety standards to 
reinforce safety in NPP [10]. NIST has published a well-
established risk management framework in NIST Special 
Publications (SP) 800-30 [16], 800-37 [17], and 800-39 [18], 
which analyzes distinct threat scenarios and evaluates the 
various attack possibilities that can exploit system 
vulnerabilities. On the other hand, the NIST risk assessment 
framework, mentioned above, does not describe precise 
procedures on the approach a company should assess the 
quantification of risks, i.e., how and to what degree an attack 
can 
endanger 
system 
confidentiality, 
integrity, 
or 
availability. In 2008, NIST issued a guideline on securing 
ICS [5]. It systematically explained the security of ICS 
systems, mostly containing SCADA architecture, distributed 
control systems (DCS), secure software development, and 
deployment of controls in order to secure networks. NIST 
also came up with a guideline on the Security for Industrial 
Automation and Control Systems while working with the 
Industrial Automation and Control Systems Security ISA99 
Committee.  
The IEEE produced the SCADA cryptography standard 
in 2008 [19], which offers a comprehensive explanation on 
the way to found secure communication between SCADA 
servers and workstations. Organizations can also attain 
certification under this IEEE standard if they fulfill with the 
requirement. 
The 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization (ISO) has also issued a standard, ISO/IEC 
27002:2013 [20], which gives guidelines for initiating, 
implementing, maintaining, and improving information 
security 
management 
in 
organizations 
[10]. 
NRC’s 
cybersecurity regulations necessitate each NPP to present a 
cybersecurity plan and implementation schedule. The plan 
must deliver “high assurance” that the digital computer and 
communications systems implemented in order to perform 
the next functions will deliver sufficient protection against 
design basis attacks: 
 
Safety-related Functions or vital to safety. 
 
Security functions. 
 
Emergency mobility functions, as well as offsite 
communications. 
 
Support 
systems 
plus 
equipment 
that, 
if 
compromised, would undesirably jeopardize safety, 
security, or emergency mobility functions [4]. 
As a result, cybersecurity has been adopted as NPP 
regulation requirement under the US code of federal 
regulation (CFR) [3]. Also, regulatory agencies like the US 
NRC and IAEA created and distributed regulatory 
guidelines, considering construction of cybersecurity plans 
and programs for NPP. The IAEA and World Institute for 
Nuclear Security (WINS) are multiplying their efforts in 
order to protect NPP by addressing cybersecurity issues and 
challenges on a global scale. Currently, some of issues 
include: 
 
Issuing multiple documents addressing cybersecurity 
on nuclear facilities.  

310
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Providing technical and strategic security training to 
involved officials of member countries. 
 
Offering expert guidance and capacity building to 
officials and representatives.  
NSS-17 [13] was issued by IAEA as a technical guidance 
for guaranteeing computer security at nuclear facilities. 
Similarly, the IAEA NSS-13 [21] recommends that the 
available computer-based systems included in nuclear 
facilities must be protected against compromise, and also an 
appropriate threat assessment must be realized in order to 
prevent attacks.  
Threats were classified from various adversaries’ 
perspectives, detection and prevention mechanisms for 
compromises of NPP information systems were also 
addressed [22]. Additionally, nothing like usual ICS and 
SCADA systems, governments, and NPP regulatory agencies 
specify that NPP I&C systems must comply with the 
following firm safety requirements [5][23]: 
 
Requirements 
for 
annual 
maintenance, 
best 
availability 
and 
functionality 
levels, 
and 
environment tests. 
 
Nuclear reactor safety and also physical protection 
of nuclear material must be taking in consideration. 
 
Defining system security levels by bearing in mind 
safety level ranking, and evaluating safety risks in 
relation to security threats. 
 
Verification that security functions do not have 
opposing effects on the safety and functionality of 
facilities. 
 
Management and maintenance must consider the 
safety and reliability of systems, examination and 
also qualification by regulatory agencies. 
 
Redundancy and diversity must be taken in 
consideration in the design.  
However, all of these efforts are continuing and 
necessitate indefinite time to mature.  
The 
guidelines, 
standards, 
and 
recommendations 
provided by governments and regulatory authorities 
necessitate complete review to make sure that they describe 
and include the newest risk assessment developments, for 
example, cyber threat information sharing, risk assessment of 
tacit knowledge, dissemination of risk assessment results, 
etc. These features are obligatory in order to keep NPP risk 
assessment up-to-the-minute on progressive cyber threats 
and to be able to manage cyber incidents in a proper manner.  
On the other hand, at present, the abovementioned 
guidelines do not provide a detailed approach on imposing 
security controls and avoiding cyber risks. 
IV. 
SECURITY CONTROLS FOR NPP 
Standards 
are 
endorsing 
the 
improvement 
of 
cybersecurity in NPP. Fig. 2 shows the standardizing 
processes and procedures, which are important to accomplish 
an international rewarding collaboration. Abundant standards 
addressing information security were established in recent 
years. Still, not all of them are practical to apply in NPP. 
Designed for I&C systems in NPP, the new draft IEC 
63096 is expected to be published in 2019. The standard 
aims its attention specifically on the selection and application 
of cybersecurity controls from the contained security 
controls within the catalogue. Preventing, detecting, also 
reacting to digital attacks against computer-based I&C 
systems are the major functions of the selected and applied 
cybersecurity controls. Based on IEC 62645 [24], IAEA, in 
addition to country precise guidance in the technical and 
security application area. Designers and operators of NPP 
(utilities), systems evaluators, vendors and subcontractors, 
and by licensors can use this standard. For that reason, the 
goal of this standard is to enlarge the SC45A series of 
documents focusing on cybersecurity with IEC 62645 [24] as 
its high-level document, by classifying nuclear I&C precise 
cybersecurity controls for I&C systems into Safety Classes 1, 
2, 3 and non-classified (NC) I&C systems. A major 
difference between this standard and usual IT systems or 
industrial automation systems standard is the safety 
classification of I&C nuclear systems and related safety 
requirements. IEC 62645 [24] was issued in August 2014, 
and IEC 62859 [14] was published in 2016, along with this 
new standard related to cybersecurity controls, are planned to 
be used for I&C systems and NPP. The new standard is 
structured as follow. 
      The first main Section designates the intended audience, 
which is distinguished by parties that are in charge of: 
 
I&C platform development. 
 
Project Engineering for I&C system, including 
installation and commissioning. 
 
Operation and maintenance of  I&C system. 
     In the second main Section, a detailed description of each 
security control is explained. Inside this structured 
representation, the purposes of Security Degrees along with 
the specific control are defined either highly recommended 
or optional. As well, additional description specifies whether 
the control conserves the confidentiality, integrity or 
availability. Each Section related to a security control 
provides specific implementation guidance on how to 
implement the control; it also differentiates between I&C 
platform development, project engineering or operation and 
maintenance. 
 Based on IEC 62645 [24], the third main Section is 
dedicated to the process of selecting the available security 
controls. Controls are allocated depending on the security 
degree of the particular I&C system. Tools and Legacy 
systems are also considered in this standard. After selecting 
the security controls, a threat and risk assessment is required 
in order to detect a residual risk that necessitates the 
implementation of supplementary security controls. 
  Concerning controls three cases are distinguished, using the 
guidance provided by the Draft ISO/IEC 27009 [25] on 
sector specific security controls. The following three cases 
on the refinement of ISO/IEC 27002 security controls are 
examined [20]: 
 Security controls are adopted from ISO/IEC 27002 
[20] without any adjustment. If needed, the 
obligatory details are added by the standardized 
structure. 

311
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 To meet requirements from the nuclear I&C 
domain, Security controls from ISO/IEC 27002 
[20] were modified and described in details to 
better. 
 
 
Figure 2. New IEC 63096 Security Controls standard in the SC45A 
standards hierarchy [4]. 
 
 
In order to meet the particular requirements from 
the nuclear I&C domain, a new security control has 
been added and inserted into ISO/IEC 27002 [20] 
clause (5 through 18. This is the case where the 
ISO/IEC 27002 [20] does not define specific 
security controls needed in nuclear I&C. 
IEC 
62541 
[26] 
defines 
the 
open 
platform 
communication Unified Architecture (OPC UA), it is an 
automation middleware or machine-to-machine (M2M) 
protocol. The standard features an object-oriented meta-
model to characterize data structures and remote procedure 
calls, which can be dynamically explored and modified 
through IP communication, along with security mechanisms 
such as  authentication and encryption. OPC UA is adaptable 
to manufacturing software, it defines [26]: 
 
An information model for structure, behavior and 
semantics description. 
 
A 
message 
model 
for 
interactions 
between 
applications. 
 
A communication model to carry data between end 
points. 
 
And 
a 
conformance 
model 
to 
guarantee 
interoperability between systems.  
The communication services of OPC UA are mainly used 
in the following domains: Process automation, power plants 
with, traditional and renewable Building automation, and 
Factory automation (in particular robotics). 
The OPC UA specifications are made up by 13 parts, the 
first seven parts are related to the core specifications e.g., the 
concept, security model, address space model, services, 
information model, service mappings and profiles. The parts 
eight to thirteen are related to access type specifications like 
data access, alarms and conditions, programs, historical 
access, discovery and aggregates. Interoperability is 
achievable by using a communication standard that is 
platform and vendor independent, such as IEC 62451 [26] 
(OPC UA) and IEC 61850 [27] (Communication Networks 
and Systems in Substations). OPC UA is a platform-
independent standard that helps into reaching interoperability 
between 
devices 
with 
dissimilar 
manufacturers 
and 
communication 
protocols. 
OPC 
UA 
simplifies 
communication by sending messages between OPC UA 
Clients and Servers. For example, its applicability to the 
nuclear context is demonstrated by Framatome. Recognizing 
the potential of OPC-UA in sensors, Framatome started 
incorporating them into monitoring instruments (SIPLUG®) 
for mountings and their related electric drives. The solution 
is employed in the nuclear Industry for monitoring critical 
systems in remote environments, without undesirably 
affecting the availability of the system [28]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper gave an overview of security vulnerabilities in 
I&C systems and EPS inside NPP, by going through 
notorious attacks across history and listing some of the 
vulnerabilities that can be exploitable by malicious attackers. 
An introduction to a new draft standard, IEC 63096 [4] had 
being given. The improved performance digital technology 
has offered a significant influence on I&C systems design in 
NPP. The nuclear industry has a conservative methodology 
in approaching safety, and a considerable effort is obligatory 
in order to provide the essential evidence and analysis to 
guarantee that digital I&C systems can be employed in 
safety-critical and safety-related applications. In general, 
I&C systems are inaccessible from outside communication 
systems. Still, this is not sufficient for secure operation 
inside NPP, as in the case of Stuxnet. Interoperability has to 
be addressed from I&C architecture design phase, as the 
systems have to interact. The threat from cyber-attacks is 
more and more seen as a problem of national and 
international security as cyber-attacks evolve, become more 
advanced and as actors behind them are no longer limited to 
private hackers or organized criminals, but also nation states 
and insiders.  
In future work, we intend to focus more on the listed 
vulnerabilities, and introducing security in hardware by using 
a trusted platform module instead of only focusing on 
securing software, also some best practices to widen the 
protection area. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
Some of the addressed cybersecurity related topics are 
being elaborated as part of Framatome GmbH’s participation 
in the “SMARTEST” R&D (2015-2018) with German 
University partners, partially funded by German Ministry 
BMWi. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Tellabi, I. Ben Zid,  E. Bajramovic, and K. Waedt, “Safety, 
Cybersecurity and Interoperability of Modern Nuclear Power 
Plants,” IARIA 8th International Conference on Performance, 
Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications, 
2017. 
[2] J. Rrushi, R. Campbel, “Detecting cyber attacks on nuclear 
power plants,” The International Federation for Information 
Processing (ICCIP 2008), Springer, Boston, vol. 290, 2008, 
ISBN: 978-0-387-88522-3. 

312
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[3] INSAG-24, International Nuclear Safety Group, “The 
interface between safety and security at nuclear power 
plants,” IAEA, 2010. 
[4] J. Bochtler, E. Quinn, and E. Bajramovic, “Development of a 
new IEC standard on cybersecurity controls for I&C in 
Nuclear Power Plants – IEC 63096,” NPIC & HMIT 2017, 
San Francisco, 2017. 
[5] K. Stouffer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and A. 
Hahn, “NIST Special Publication 800-82: Guide to Industrial 
Control Systems (ICS) Security,”, NIST, 2011. 
[6] A. Tellabi, Y. Sassmanhausen, E. Bajramovic, and C. Ruland, 
“Overview of Authentication and Access Controls for I&C 
systems ,” IEEE 16th  international conference on industrial 
informatics, 2018. 
[7] M. Holt, A. Andrews, “Nuclear Power Plant security and 
vulnerabilities,” Congressional Research Service, January 
2014. 
[8] D. Papp, Z. Ma, and L. Buttyan “Embedded systems security: 
threats, vulnerabilities, and attack taxonomy,” 13th Annual 
Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), IEEE, 
2015, doi:10.1109/PST.2015.7232966. 
[9] C. Baylon, R. Brunt, and D. Livingstone, “Cybersecurity at 
civil nuclear facilities understanding the risks,” Chatham 
House Report, September 2015. 
[10] R. Masood, “Assessment of cybersecurity challenges in 
nuclear power plants security incidents, threats, and 
initiatives,” Cybersecurity and Privacy Research Institute the 
George Washington University, 2016. 
[11] B. Kesler, “The vulnerability of nuclear facilities to cyber-
attack,” Defense and Diplomacy Journal, vol. 5, No. 3, 2016. 
[12] Deloitte, ”Security Awareness: People and Technology,”  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www2.deloitte.com/,  
2017.12.19. 
[13] IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 17, “Computer Security at 
Nuclear Facilities,” IAEA, 2011. 
[14] IEC 62859:2016, Nuclear Power Plants - Instrumentation and 
control systems - Requirements for coordinating safety and 
cybersecurity, IEC. 
[15] Regulatory Guide 5.71, Revision 0, “Cyber Security Programs 
for Nuclear Facilities,” U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 
January 2010. 
[16] G. Stoneburner, A.Y. Goguen, and A. Feringa, “NIST Special 
800-30: Risk Management Guide for Information Technology 
Systems,”, NIST, 2002. 
[17] Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, “NIST Special 
Publication 800-37 Rev. 1: Guide for Applying the Risk 
Management Framework to Federal Information Systems: a 
Security Life Cycle Approach,” NIST, 2014. 
[18] E. Aroms, “NIST Special Publication 800-39: Managing 
Information Security Risk,” NIST, 2012. 
[19] “IEEE Trial-Use Standard for a Cryptographic Protocol for 
Cyber Security of Substation Serial Links,” in IEEE Std 1711-
2010, vol., no., pp.1-49, 2011. 
[20] ISO/IEC 27002:2013, Information Technology - Security 
Techniques - Code of Practice for Information Security 
Controls, ISO/IEC. 
[21] IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13, “Nuclear Security 
Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
and Nuclear Facilities,” IAEA, 2011. 
[22] W. Ahn, M. Chung, B. Min, and J. Seo, “Development of 
cyber-attack scenarios for Nuclear Power Plants using 
scenario graphs,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor 
Networks, vol. 11,  April 2015,  doi: 10.1155/2015/836258.A 
[23] ISO/IEC 27001:2005, Information Technology –information 
security management systems –requirement, ISO/IEC. 
[24] IEC 62645:2014, Nuclear Power Plants – Instrumentation and 
Control Systems – Requirements for Security Programs for 
Computer-Based Systems, IEC.  
[25] ISO/IEC 20009-1:2013, Information technology – Security 
techniques – Anonymous entity authentication, ISO/IEC. 
[26] IEC 62451-1:2016, OPC Unified Architecture – Part 1: 
Overview and Concepts, IEC. 
[27] IEC 61850:2013, Communication networks and systems for 
power utility automation, IEC. 
[28] V. Watson, A. Tellabi, J. Sassmannshausen, and X. Lou, 
“Interoperability and security challenges of Industrie 4.0,” 
2017, doi:10.18420/in2017_100. 
 
 

