112
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Post-Payment Copyright System versus Online
Music Shop: Business Model and Privacy
Heikki Kokkinen
Nokia Research Center
Helsinki, Finland
heikki.kokkinen@nokia.com
Mikko V. J. Heikkinen
TKK Helsinki University of
Technology
Helsinki, Finland
mikko.heikkinen@tkk.fi
Markus Miettinen
Nokia Research Center
Helsinki, Finland
markus.miettinen@nokia.com
Abstract—A post-payment copyright system is used to legalize
copyrighted music files which a user has obtained illegally. We
compare a post-payment copyright system to an online music
shop by analyzing three scenarios using both qualitative
business and quantitative techno-economic modeling. We
analyze the privacy challenges and solutions related to the
post-payment copyright system. According to our quantitative
analysis, the post-payment copyright system is potentially a
more profitable business than an online shop when no media
replacement is required. Our qualitative analysis suggests
benefits in bundling post-payment copyright system with
online music shop and customer sensitivity to the marketing
message. The privacy threat analysis and the list of suggested
solutions show that privacy is a key factor in the system
success, but it is possible to develop adequate protection for the
user privacy. Our research is a continuation to the trend of
studies suggesting peer-to-peer networks as a part of a viable
business model for media distribution.
Keywords-business model; copyright; post-payment system;
privacy; risk analysis; security; techno-economic modeling
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper analyzes a post-payment copyright system
with three methods: (1) qualitative business modeling; (2)
quantitative techno-economic modeling; and (3) the attack
tree method for security analysis of user data privacy. It
extends and refines our previous work on quantitative
techno-economic modeling of such a system [1] with
extensive qualitative analysis on business model and privacy
issues. In a post-payment system the users are able to
legalize the unauthorized music files on their hard disks and
memory cards. In order to understand the service, let us
consider a user of peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. The user has
downloaded music files on his computer from a peer-to-peer
network. With the post-payment copyright system, the user
can pay the required fees to copyright agencies and avoid
potential
litigation,
resulting
in
both
personal
and
commercial security. In this paper we study the cost
efficiency of such a system in comparison to two related
systems: a conventional online music shop and a post-
payment copyright system where the illegal file is replaced
with a legal file.
We study the following research questions: what are the
main differences in the business models of post-payment
copyright systems and conventional online music shops;
what are the differences in profit, risk and cost distribution
between post-payment copyright systems and conventional
online music shops; and what is the role of privacy in the
post-payment copyright system.
For our qualitative analysis we use the STOF (Service-
Technology-Organization-Finance) business model analysis
framework established by Bouwman et al. [2]-[5]. In our
quantitative analysis, we conduct techno-economic analysis
for digital music sales complemented with risk analysis
using Monte Carlo simulations.
The term business model has been defined in several
ways in the academic literature. Timmers [6] concentrated on
technology elements, whereas Amit and Zott [7] emphasized
revenue
generation
aspects,
and
Chesbrough
and
Rosenbloom [8] design aspects. Based on the previous
research, Bouwman et al. [3] proposed a unified definition,
which acts as a basis for the STOF business model analysis
framework.
The other bases for the STOF framework are several
componentizations of business models. Alt and Zimmerman
[9] recognized mission, structure, process, revenues, legal
issues, and technology as the main elements of business
models. Osterwalder et al. [10] proposed product, customer
interface, infrastructure management, and financial aspects
as the basic elements of business models. Shafer et al. [11]
identified strategic choices, value creation, value capturing,
and
value
network
as
the
main
components
in
12
componentization publications. Bouwman et al. [3] decided
to focus on four components in their STOF framework:
service, technology, organization, and finance.

113
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Figure 1.
Post-payment copyright system architecture
The post-payment copyright system was introduced by
Kokkinen et al. [12]. The legal framework for the service
was discussed in [13], and the method for illegal vs. legal
classification of MP3 files in [14]. In an online survey
Hietanen et al. [15] identified post-payment copyright
system as the second most attractive new P2P related
business model for consumers, following a monthly paid
file sharing service with unlimited access to music and
video.
Consumers, copyright authorities and legislators have
varying views about P2P. Cohn and Vaccaro [16] apply
neutralization theory to the ethics of P2P music file
sharing. The P2P file sharing divides opinions about its
impact on music business. Peitz and Waelbroeck [17]
show that P2P music file sharing has a positive impact on
music
sales
through
wider
sampling
of
music
by
consumers. Bhattacharjee et al. [18] simulate online music
sales with different strategies in the presence of P2P-based
piracy.
Techno-economic modeling can be considered as a
quantitative extension to qualitative business modeling. It
analyzes profitability of a new technology or service.
Techno-economic
modeling
and
its
application
to
broadband access networks is introduced in [19] where a
quantitative framework for conducting techno-economic
analysis on broadband networks and several case studies
based on it are depicted. Elnegaard and Stordahl [20]
demonstrate the use of Monte Carlo simulations as a
method for risk analysis in quantitative techno-economic
models. Both qualitative and quantitative techno-economic
modeling have been used in several studies related to
telecommunications:
Monath
et
al.
[21]
on
fixed
broadband access network strategies, Jerman-Blažič [22]
on network backbone upgrade investments, Kumar and
Kueh [23] on international mobile roaming, Smura et al.
[24] on virtual operators, Kivisaari et al. [25] on mobile
broadcast, Rokkas et al. [26] on fixed-mobile convergence,
and Heikkinen and Luukkainen [27] on mobile P2P
communications.
Security is essential in deploying the post-payment
copyright system. Schäfer et al. [28] studied security in
P2P networks from a general perspective, Suomalainen et
al. [29] from a mobile perspective, and Merz et al. [30]
from a grid perspective. Koshutanski et al. [31] analyzed
security in digital ecosystems. Without underestimating
the concerns in the web generally, the post-payment
copyright service raises even more serious concerns than
an average web or e-commerce site, because the post-
payment
copyright
service
requests
user
to
give
information about past illegal activities. Such information
is very sensitive to the user, and in normal circumstances
past illegal activities are not disclosed to anyone. Storing
so sensitive information also requires special measures.
Privacy in the general context is understood as a “right
to be left alone”. In the digital information world, privacy
can be interpreted as a right of the user to control what
personal information is disclosed to whom, and under
which circumstances [32]. In the post-payment copyright
service, privacy means among other things that the user of
the service can control the information that is submitted to
the service and that the exposure can be limited to only
such data that will not have negative consequences for the
user.
Already in the early days of online commerce,
consumer privacy concerns were prevailing. However,
during the last decade, consumers have learnt to trade
private information for personalized services. Wang et al.
[33] classify privacy concerns in Internet marketing as
follows: data is acquired improperly including access,
collection, and monitoring; data is used improperly
including analysis and transfer; privacy is invaded as
unwanted solicitation; and data is stored improperly.
Kobsa [34] has found the following privacy principles in
the European legislation: personalized services based on
traffic or location data require the anonymization of such

114
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
data or user’s consent; users must be able to withdraw
their consent to the processing of traffic and location data
at any time; the personalized service provider must inform
the user of the type of data that will be processed, of the
purposes and duration of the processing, and whether the
data will be transmitted to a third party prior to obtaining
the user’s consent; personal data obtained for different
purposes may not be grouped; and usage data must be
erased immediately after each session. Lu et al. [35]
classified the elements of privacy in a peer-to-peer system
to be identity of peers, content, and interests.
The major privacy concerns of the user arise due to the
fact that in the course of using the post-payment copyright
service, the users are submitting indirect evidence about
their past illegal activities. Users want to be absolutely
sure that there is no considerable risk of their data being
used in any other way than what it is necessary for
fulfilling the purpose of the service, i.e., legalizing the
user's content.
The nature of the service itself can feel for the user like
being accused as a criminal. Such feelings raise easily
negative reactions. An example of this was the blog
discussion triggered by a questionnaire study investigating
internet users' perceptions on peer-to-peer file sharing. The
study was published in [15]. The blog writers used very
strong language when they expressed their outrage. They
felt that the survey questions blamed all peer-to-peer file
sharing content to be illegal and that the creators of the
questionnaire
allegedly
accused
the
respondents
as
criminals.
Many web and e-commerce sites use methods which
decrease privacy concerns and build trust in users. Kobsa
[34] has found the following aspects to decrease the
privacy concerns on web sites: positive past experiences,
design and operation of the site, reputation of the site
operator, presence of a privacy statement, presence of a
privacy seal, privacy laws, pseudonymous users and user
models, client-side personalization, and privacy enhancing
techniques for collaborative filtering. Hoffman et al. [36]
discussed how to build trust online by anonymity or
pseudonymity, cooperative interaction between site owner
and consumers, and privacy policies. Palmer et al. [37]
showed how trusted third parties and privacy statements
increase the trust on an e-commerce site. Freenet [38]
protects the peer-to-peer users from privacy infringements
and uses anonymity to decrease privacy concerns.
The post-payment copyright service provider should
use the known methods of creating trust on web sites and
e-commerce sites. In Table 1, we list the web site privacy
enhancing techniques, and how they could be applied in
the post-payment system. In addition to the generic
challenges of a typical Internet site or peer-to-peer
network, the post-payment system has its own privacy and
trust challenges. The web and online shop-related privacy
challenges in the post-payment copyright system can be
solved by utilizing the methods suggested above.
TABLE I.
ONLINE SHOP AND WEB PRIVACY SOLUTIONS
AND THEIR APPLICATION IN POST-PAYMENT SYSTEM
Web site privacy solutions
Application in post-payment
copyright system
Positive past experiences
Objective to meet the customer
expectations
Design and operation of the
site
Simple and reliable workflow on
the site
Reputation of the site
operator
Established site operator brands
visible on the site
Presence of privacy statement
Use of privacy statement
Presence of a privacy seal
Not applied
Privacy laws
Finnish and EU privacy legislation
Pseudonymous users and user
models
Possibility to use the service
without giving personal
information before actually paying
for the content.
Client-side personalization
Not used in the beginning
Privacy-enhancing techniques
for collaborative filtering
Web analytics tools, which have
privacy enhancing techniques
In this paper, we study the digital music business from
the perspective of copyright owners. According to our
analysis, the post-payment copyright system is potentially
a more profitable business than the online shop when no
media replacement is required.
Our paper is structured in a following way: Section 2
portrays the post-payment copyright system; Section 3
describes our qualitative business modeling, quantitative
techno-economic modeling, and privacy threat analysis
methods; Section 4 presents our scenarios; Section 5
contains our results; and Section 6 discusses our findings.
II.
POST-PAYMENT COPYRIGHT SYSTEM
The post-payment copyright system allows the user to
pay the copyright fees of illegally copied files. The system
was introduced by Kokkinen et al. [12], and it is described
here in more detail.
In the system, the payment process and distributing the
copyright fees to the rights holders are similar to the
respective functions of an online music shop. After
creating the shopping basket, the user is directed to a
payment page. Depending on the payment method, the
user interface for typing in the payment details may belong
to an online shop or to a financial institute. Typically,
credit card information is given through the online shop
user interface and bank account information through the
financial institute interface. The details of the shopping
basket are not visible to the financial institution and the
online shop does not know the specifics of the payment
arrangement.
A
transaction
identification
code
ties
together the operations in these two systems.
The payments for the rights holders are regulated by
the legislation and signed contracts between the online
shop operator and the rights holders. In most jurisdictions
a value added tax is reported and paid to the tax
authorities. Artists, composers, writers, technicians, and
other people involved typically get their share through
record labels and copyright organizations. The contracts
between the online shop and these organizations define the
method and amount of payments for the rights holders.

115
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Figure 2.
Post-payment copyright process
The architecture of an online music shop is similar to that
of a post-payment
copyright
system;
see
Fig. 1
for
component numbering. Rights holder (7), back-end (6),
payment (5) and consumer (1) are identical. The web front-
end (3) and user device (2) are present in both architectures,
but their functionality differs from each other. The catalogue
matching server (4) is unique to the post-payment copyright
system.
We
use
corresponding
numbering
to
describe
the
components involved in the post-payment copyright process,
see Fig. 2. Compared to online music shops, the post-
payment copyright specific part takes place prior forming the
shopping basket.
Consumers
are
made
aware
of
the
post-payment
copyright site through advertising. A consumer enters the
post-payment copyright site and downloads an application,
which is used to scan user’s hard disk. The application helps
the user in selecting the files for legalizing. This phase
consists of classifying the illegal and legal files, creating a
shopping basket, and matching the selected files to the titles
in the music catalogue of the system provider. The music
catalogue is a list of tracks and albums, which are available
in the service.
With the user device and the user application, the
consumer can access the storage where the user has content
files. The user application scans the device for illegal files
and stores the information locally. The user application helps
the user to select the relevant files. With the user client it is
possible to access the services on the web front-end and on
the payment system, although also a web browser interface is
needed as a part of the process. The client communicates
with the catalogue matching server and allows the consumer
to operate the system through the user interface.
The web front-end provides the user with information
about the service and the capability to download the required
client. The web-front end manages the transfer of the content
catalogue from the back-end to the catalogue matching
server. The transfer requirement is due to an organizational
setup. The web front-end manages the contents of the
shopping baskets.
For an overview of the privacy related issues of the
system components, see Table 2. For using the web front-
end, the user does not need to provide an authentication, i.e.,
the user can interact with the service in a pseudonymous
fashion. The only personal information that the user has to
provide to the service is an email address as contact
information. The contact information is cryptographically
embedded in the purchase receipt, and its purpose is to
discourage users from copying and redistributing fake
licenses to other users. The user address in the receipt can
not be forged without making the forgery detectable and
invalidating the receipt.
TABLE II.
PRIVACY RISKS OF THE SYSTEM COMPONENTS
System
component
Required private
information
User
identifi-
cation
Re-
identification
risks
Front-end and
back-end
User contact
address and list of
content in
shopping basket
Pseudonym
User's contact
information is
available as
long as it has
not been
deleted
Catalogue
matching
server
Illegal and legal
content in user's
possession
Anonymous
User's IP
address can be
tracked
Payment
system
Payment
information,
possibly including
user identification
Payment
information
Linking of
payment
information to
actual user
identification
The catalogue matching server matches the user file
information with the music catalogue items. When there is a
mismatch
between
the
user
file
information
and
the
catalogue, the catalogue server returns one or more closest
matching items from the catalogue. Respectively, when there
is more than one match in the catalogue, the matching server
returns all matches. Catalogue matching server collects only
statistical data about the matching requests. Individual
catalog matching requests are anonymous and no private
information is stored on the catalogue matching server. The
requester can only be identified based on the source IP
address of the device. However, the catalogue matching
server does not track source IP addresses. It only collects
statistical information about the incoming requests.
The payment server has a commercial online payment
security level. The user can pay with major credit cards,
online bank, and a selection of micro-payment systems. The
payment system collects all data that are required for the
payment and stores them as long as legislation requires. The
payment system does not store information about the
contents of the shopping basket but only the transaction
identification codes. Linking of payments to shopping carts
happens via transaction identifiers and only the back-end
server has access to the actual shopping cart information.
The payment system has the most specific information about
the user in the whole system, since the user has to provide
payment information in order to fulfill the payment process.
The payment information typically consists of credit card
information.
The
payment
information
may
include
information that identifies the user.
The
back-end
system
maintains
the
catalogue
by
communicating with the rights holders. It sets the prices of
the catalogue items based on the rights owner price, value
added tax, payment method, and the target margin of the
service. The back-end system maintains records of the

116
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
payments. It may have a username database, and it stores the
information about the shopping basket, payment, and the
username. The back-end does not contain any information
about illegal files. The purchase information and the related
personal information are kept as long as the legislation
requires. Currently, the retention period in the book-keeping
legislation is six years in Finland. However, no direct link to
the user identity exists.
Before issuing a receipt, the back-end communicates
with the payment service to make sure that the payment has
been completed. Each paid basket is assigned a transaction
identification code, which is used to link basket information
to payments in the payment system. The only personal
information required by the service is the email address of
the user. It is used to send the payment receipt to the user by
email. The receipts issued by the system also include the
email address of the user in order to reduce the temptation to
copy and resell the receipt to other users, i.e., to gain
financial benefit by selling fake authorizations. The user
email addresses are deleted in the back-end daily.
In the post-payment copyright system model, the rights
holders are customers of the system. The music right holders
include
record
labels,
and
copyright
organizations
representing the rights of the artists. Tax authorities belong
to the rights holder category from the system point of view.
The rights holders receive periodically a share of the user
payments.
The
content
owners
cannot
track
personal
payments in the system without consulting the post-payment
service provider.
III.
METHODS
A.
Qualitative Business Modeling
The STOF framework for business model evaluation by
Bouwman et al. [2] consists of four domains: Service,
Technology, Organization, and Finance. A business model
outline based on the four domains is evaluated based on
Critical Design Issues (CDIs) and Critical Success Factors
(CSFs). Finally, after internal and external issues are taken
into account, a viable and feasible business model design
should have been reached. Together these steps form the
STOF method of business model evaluation, see [5] for an
elaboration.
In the following paragraphs we summarize the discussion
of Bouwman et al. [3] on the four domains of the STOF
framework. Value is the main component of the service
domain in the STOF model. Value is further divided into
intended and delivered value for the provider, and expected
and perceived value for a customer. Service domain has
additional components. Context encompasses both concrete
situations and larger socio-cultural aspects of the usage
environment of the service, and co-determines perceived
value of the service. Tariff is the price paid for the service,
and effort is made by a customer to use the service, both
affecting perceived value of the service. Bundling of services
generally increases perceived value of the service. Security
can be an essential co-determinant in the value of the service.
The
Technology
domain
focuses
on
technical
architecture, which is used to deliver technical functionality.
The technical architecture consists of applications, devices,
service
platforms,
access
networks,
and
backbone
infrastructure. All these generate costs and affect the
delivered value of the service. Intended value in turn puts
requirements on the technical architecture and the value
network behind the service. Security is generally a cost item.
The main component in the Organization domain is the
value network, which consists of several actors and their
interactions. Actors have strategies, goals, resources, and
capabilities. They perform value activities which together
with organizational arrangements are combined into roles.
The organizational arrangements affect both interactions and
financial arrangements of the actors. Value activities sett
requirements on the technical architecture, and generate
investment sources, costs, and delivered value. Security
aspects can be included in the strategy of an actor.
The Finance domain determines pricing of the service. It
consists of four sources which generate capital, costs,
revenues, and risk.
Each domain has Critical Design Issues; see Bouwman et
al. [4] for a detailed discussion on them. The Service domain
has the following CDIs: targeting, creating value elements,
branding and customer retention. The Technology domain
CDIs include security, quality of service, system integration,
accessibility for customers, and management of user profiles.
The Organization domain consists of partner selection,
network
openness,
network
governance
and
network
complexity.
The
Finance
domain
incorporates pricing,
division of investments, division of costs and revenues, and
valuation of contributions and benefits. Security aspects
affect most CDIs.
Critical Success Factors exist for both customer and
network value creation; see Bouwman et al. [4] for an
elaborated discussion on them. The CSFs for creating
customer value consist of clearly defined target group,
compelling
value
proposition,
unobtrusive
customer
retention, and an acceptable quality of service. The CSFs for
creating network value include acceptable profitability,
acceptable
risks,
sustainable
network
strategy
and
an
acceptable division of roles. Reaching high scores on CSFs
in both categories is expected to result in a service capable of
generating both customer and network value, i.e., a service
capable of meeting user expectations and motivating actor
participation. Again, security aspects affect most CSFs.
B.
Quantitative Techno-Economic Modeling
Our techno-economic model is depicted in Fig. 3. We
calculate net present value (NPV) with revenues, operational
expenditure (OPEX) and capital expenditure (CAPEX), tax
percentage, and discount rate as inputs. NPV is defined as




n
t
t
t
r
C
NPV
1
)
1(
,

where t is the time of the cash flow, r is the discount rate
and Ct is the net cash flow at time t. The cash flow is
calculated by subtracting OPEX, CAPEX, and tax from
revenues:

117
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
)
(
EX
i
i
tax
EX
i
i
t
C
R
r
C
R
C






,
(2)
where CEX is the sum of OPEX and CAPEX, and rtax is
the tax percentage.
The revenues Ri
for product
i are calculated
by
multiplying the following factors: number of product i
purchased by one user ni, the price pi per product i, content
legalization percentage, i.e., the percentage of content
available to legalization, rCL, and the number of users nU.
Value-added tax (VAT) and reimbursements after VAT to
copyright
holders
and
to
users
based
on
respective
multipliers rVAT, rRCH and rRU are deducted from revenues:
VAT
RU
RCH
U
i CL
i
i
r
r
r
n p r n
R


 

1
1
.
(3)
The number of users nU is calculated by multiplying the
total population n by illegal downloading rID, broadband
connectivity rBC, market interest rMI, and market penetration
rMP rates:
ID BC MI MP
U
n  nr r r r
.
(4)
The OPEX COPEX consists of content delivery network
(CDN), user support, and marketing CM costs:
M
SR
SR
F
PH
OPEX
C
n
C
C
T
r
C





CMbps
3600
8
. (5)
The CDN cost has two elements: cost of a megabit per
second
(Mbps)
CMbps and
fixed
cost
CF. The
Mbps
requirement is a multiplication of the total traffic T in MB
and a peak hour load percentage rPH. An even distribution of
traffic during the peak hour is assumed. The user support is
calculated by multiplying the cost per support request (SR)
CSR by the number of SRs nSR.
The CAPEX CCAPEX is a sum of person months (PMs) for
both
contract
negotiation
(CN)
and
software
(SW)
development & maintenance:
SW
SW
CN
CN
CAPEX
C
n
C
n
C


.
(6)
Security aspects influence both OPEX and CAPEX, but
due to the scope of our techno-economic model, they are
only implicitly included.
We also carry out risk analysis by running Monte Carlo
simulations. In a Monte Carlo simulation, uncertain variables
are
assigned
random
values
according
to
predefined
distributions. The simulation is repeated for thousands of
trials. The impact on the results of the calculations is
recorded for each trial. Based on the records, several
statistical
variables
can
be
calculated.
The
statistical
variables can then be used to assess the risk related to each
scenario.
We perform the risk analysis with 100,000 trials for each
scenario. The selected uncertain variables are assigned
triangular
distributions
with
expected,
minimum
and
maximum values corresponding to mode, lower limit, and
upper limit of the distribution, respectively.
NPV
OPEX
CAPEX
SW development €
no of
users
no of SR
€ per SR
revenues
tax %
reimbursement
reimbursement
to copyright
holders %
VAT %
revenue
per
user
reimbursement
to users %
marketing €
no of users
having content
potential users
for service %
content
legalization %
no of media X
€ per media X
contract negotiation €
CDN €
fixed cost
user support €
Mbps
discount %
Figure 3.
Quantitative techno-economic model for scenario comparison

118
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
C.
Privacy Threat Analysis
To assess the privacy risks facing the users of the post-
payment copyright system, we perform a threat analysis of
identified key elements in the system. Threat analysis is an
important part in security engineering and it forms the basis
for the security design of the system [39]. For the threat
analysis we form an attack tree as introduced by Schneier
[40] covering possible attacks against the privacy of user’s
data.
In
our
threat
analysis,
we
consider
following
information items to be of special relevance to the post-
payment copyright system: user identity, user contact
information, information about the illegal content of the user,
and the list of content paid with the post-payment copyright
system.
The main goal for attacks, which we assume in our
analysis, is to obtain potentially incriminating information
about the user. The threats are considered to be related to
illegal combining of user records in different parts of the
post-payment copyright system, or to the threats introduced
by direct external eavesdropping and active intrusion into
system components. The attack tree used in our analysis is
shown in Fig. 4.
IV.
SCENARIOS
We compare three different online media rights purchase
systems. They are an online media shop (A), a post-payment
copyright system where the user’s downloaded files are
replaced with new files (B), and a post-payment copyright
system where only immaterial rights are purchased by the
user but existing files remain untouched (C).
The consumer price per content item is the same in all
three cases. The rights for a song in the post-payment system
cost exactly as much as the same song in an online music
shop. Also, the reimbursement to the content owners is the
same in all three cases.
Figure 4.
Attack tree identifying privacy threats against the post-payment
copyright system
Figure 5.
Online shop model
Figure 6.
Post-payment copyright model
In the online shop model (see Fig. 5) the media
companies and organizations representing artists are called
rights holders. The service back-end company makes a
distribution contract with the rights holder. The back-end
service provider acquires the files, delivers them to the
consumer and handles the payment of the user. The service
visible for the consumer is provided by the service front-end.
The service front-end is a web site marketing the service and
building consumer’s shopping cart. The service back-end
provider uses a CDN to ensure a satisfactory content
download service for the consumer.
The post-payment copyright system, where the files are
replaced with new files, does not differ from the online
music shop model. The post-payment part of the service is
just a marketing tool for the content in the service back-end.
In the post-payment copyright system (see Fig. 6) no files
are distributed. The service legalizes the unauthorized files
on user’s hard disks and memory cards. The service front-
end handles the rights shopping cart for the user and the
service back-end distributes the copyright fees to the rights
holders.
The basic differences of the three scenarios compared are
based on the market size and delivery cost differences
depicted in Table 3. The online shop has all users of the
potential market; post-payment variants have only the past
users of illegal file sharing systems. The delivery and storage
costs are considerable for both online shop and post-payment
with file download. In practice the post-payment download
services have the market potential of the online shop, but in
this simplified comparison we study only the potential of the
post-payment download feature.
Obtain
incriminating
information
2. External
eaves-
dropping
1.1 User IP
address
tracking
1. Combining
user records
3. External
component
intrusion
1.2 Joining
on common
keys

119
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
TABLE III.
COMPARISON OF THE SCENARIOS
Scenario
Market size
Delivery cost
Online shop (A)
Full
Full
Post-payment
download (B)
P2P users
Full
Post-payment (C)
P2P users
Nominal
CDN adds additional security considerations and cost to
the scenarios A and B. Additional cost related to security
considerations is also present in contract negotiations,
software development and user support for the post-payment
scenarios B and C.
We use Finland in 2009-2013 as a case for our study. We
use the population n of Finland in 2006 (5,276,955) as a
basis for our population calculations and assume a 0.4%
annual growth [41]. Table 4 summarizes the annual usage
input values for our scenarios. In all scenarios, the initial
value for the broadband connectivity rBC is 53% in 2006 [42]
which is extrapolated using a simple logistic saturation
function with a saturation value of 65%.
In the scenarios B and C, the illegal downloading rID
vector is an estimate based on [15]; the market interest rMI is
assumed to be a constant 20% based on [15]; the market
penetration rMP and its distribution into different user groups
are hypothetical; and the penetration of a fourth user group
“long tail small” is calculated by subtracting the other user
group penetrations from 100%.
In the scenario A, rID is 100% every year because it is not
relevant to the calculation of usage; an estimate of 15% in
2007 [43] with 16% annual growth [44] is used as a basis for
rMI; rMP is hypothetical; and no user group distribution is
used: only “long tail small” user group is in use.
We use only one product category: song with a price of
€0.99 including VAT. A “parent,” a “heavy user,” a “long
tail large” customer and a “long tail small” customer
purchase annually 250, 500, 400 and 50 songs, respectively.
In scenario A, a user buys annually 50 songs. Content
legalization rCL vectors are depicted in Table 5. In the
scenario A, rCL is 100%. Users are reimbursed (rRU) 5% of
their total purchases in the scenarios B and C, 0% in the
scenario A. VAT rVAT is 22% and reimbursement to
copyright holders rRCH is 80% in all the scenarios.
We use the following values for the calculation of OPEX.
For the CDN cost, a base transfer of 10 MB per user is
assumed in the scenarios B and C, 5 MB in the scenario A.
In the scenarios A and B, a song transfer generates 5 MB of
traffic. In the scenario C, each item generates only 1 kB of
traffic (i.e., a transfer of a checksum). The peak hour load rPH
is 0.05% of total traffic assuming a 95th-to-mean ratio of 4:1
[45] in all the scenarios. In the scenarios A and B, the data
transfer capacity cost CMbps is €5±0.5 per Mbps and the fixed
cost CF is €24,000±2,400 annually. In the scenario C, the
prices are €1,000±100 and €8,000±800, respectively. The
data transfer costs decrease annually by 5±0.5% in all the
scenarios. For calculating the user support costs, we assume
a fixed cost per SR CSR: €5±0.5 in all the scenarios with an
annual growth of 5±0.5%. In the scenario B and C, a parent
generates 0.6 SRs annually, a heavy user and a long tail large
user 0.4 SRs annually, and a long tail small user 0.2 SRs
annually. In the scenario A, a user generates 0.2 SRs
annually. The post-payment system is more complex, thus
generating
more
SRs.
Fixed
marketing
costs CM
are
€50,000±5,000 in all the scenarios in 2009. In the scenario A
they decrease by €3,000±300 annually; in the scenarios B
and C by €10,000±1,000 annually. The difference in the
marketing costs is based on the assumption that the online
shop is marketed to a broad audience, whereas the post-
payment systems are marketed to a limited audience. We
estimate the catalogue matching costs in the scenarios B and
C to be marginal; therefore they are not included in our
calculations.
PMs for calculating CAPEX are depicted in Table 6.
Regarding the cost of a PM, CSW is €10,400±1,040 and CCN
is €20,800±2,080. Both have an annual growth rate of
5±0.5%. We assume the online shop is less complex to
develop and deploy due to several existing solutions. The tax
rate rtax is 26% and the discount rate r is 10% in all the
scenarios.
V.
RESULTS
A.
Qualitative Business Modeling
The dynamic business model framework in STOF has
three phases, and each of them includes a STOF analysis.
The phases are Technology R&D, Roll-out and Market. In
this
paper
we
analyze
the
Technology
R&D
phase
empirically based on the literature presented in previous
Sections of this paper. The business model is discussed from
the post-payment copyright system operator point of view.
TABLE IV.
ANNUAL USAGE INPUT VALUES (%)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
rID
40±10
45±10
47.5±10
45±10
42.5±10
rBC
55.4
59.9
62.1
63.3
64.0
rMI
a
20
23
27
32
37
rMP
0
4.5±2.5
7±2.5
10±2.5
12±2.5
rMP
a
0
5±2.5
7.5±2.5
12.5±2.5
15±2.5
parentb
80±5
70±5
60±5
40±5
20±5
heavy
userb
1±0.5
2±0.5
3±0.5
2±0.5
1±0.5
long tail
largeb
10±2.5
15±2.5
13±2.5
11±2.5
8±2.5
a. in the online shop scenario (A)
b. not in use in the online shop scenario (A)
TABLE V.
CONTENT LEGALIZATION RCL VECTORS (%)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
parent
70± 10
74± 10
78± 10
82± 10
86± 10
heavy user
60± 10
62± 10
64± 10
66± 10
68± 10
long taila
40±5
41±5
42±5
43±5
44±5
a. applies to both “long tail large” and “long tail small” user groups
TABLE VI.
PERSON MONTH VECTORS
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
nSW
24±3
3
1
1
1
nSW
a
8±1
3
1
1
1
nCN
6±1
2
1
0.5
0.5
nCN
a
3±0.5
2
1
0.5
0.5
a. in the online shop scenario (A)

120
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
1)
Service, Technology, Organization and Finance
The Service is the post-payment copyright service, which is
discussed in detail in Section 2 of this paper. In the service
the user can legalize the earlier illegally copied music files.
In the early phase of deployment, the target customer group
is Finnish peer-to-peer file sharing users. Most of them are
males in the age group of 25-35 [15]. The value for the
customer is that they can legalize the illegal music files, to
which they listen a lot. The availability of Digital Rights
Management free (DRM-free) online music is still very
limited in Finland, and the service may attract consumers
who prefer DRM-free music files.
The most of the Technology in the system is available in
the existing online music shops. The technical architecture is
described in Section 2 of this paper. The new technology in
the system includes an algorithm to analyze illegal vs. legal
status of the user files, catalogue matching server and user
client. The user client integrates different system and service
components together to form a smooth and compelling user
experience. The illegal vs. legal music file classification may
have serious legal consequences. Considering the early stage
of the technology, the feature is introduced to consumers
rather as a tool to help them to select the files they may want
to legalize than to prove if the file is from an illegal or a legal
source. The catalogue matching is also a critical component.
The user payments are made according to the catalogue
matches, not according to the real user files. The catalogue
matching results are shown to the user and the user accepts
to pay for the matching results, not for the music files. It is a
considerable challenge to get correct matches from the
multitude of music file descriptions to the limited coverage
of the music catalogue.
The current state of the music industry impacts on the
Organizational setup strongly. The digitalization of media,
multimedia computers, and broadband connectivity has lead
to a strong trend of illegal downloading and copying. The
music industry continuously searches for new models for
revenue and profit. At the same time they make effort to get
publicity for the copyright issues in order to decrease the
impact of illegal copying. From this perspective the rights
holders, i.e., record companies and copyright organizations,
have research interests in post-payment copyright system in
addition to direct revenue and profit. For the existing online
shops the incremental effort to take the post-payment
copyright system into use is relatively small, and it opens the
potential market of legalizing illegally copied media.
However, organizing the different actors into a viable
value network is challenging. Users do not have strong
incentives to legalize their content unless there is strong
legislative pressure for it. Even though copyright legislation
has developed partially according to the lobbying of the
music
industry,
consumer
rights
advocates
and
the
proponents of freedom in the digital domain are resisting
with
increasing
force
the
sanctions
of
copyright
infringements done by consumers. On the other hand, new
actors to the digital media industry are establishing new
business models where the ultimate goal is to possess the
leading platform for digital media distribution. The new
actors include both device manufacturers with their own
distribution platforms (e.g., Apple iTunes and Nokia Comes
with Music) and independent distribution platform providers
(e.g., Amazon and Spotify). The role of devices and
distribution platforms as part of digital music experience is
under constant change and subject to re-definition.
The Finance of the business model is very similar to the
online music shop business model. Artists, composers and
technicians have contracts with record labels and copyright
organizations. The back-end system provider has contracts
with record labels and copyright organizations to pay them a
certain portion of the consumer price. The back-end provider
has a contract with financial institutions to enable payments
in exchange for a fee.
The post-payment system operator has a similar role as
the web front-end in the online music shop white label
business model. It concentrates on the marketing of the
service and operates as a reseller, whereas the back-end
system provider acts like a wholesales organization. The
consumer is the customer paying for the service. More
indirect revenue models also exist: capitalizing on the
copyright campaign nature of the service, reselling the
information
about
consumer
music
preferences,
and
advertising in various parts of the system, but they are not
evaluated in this paper.
2)
Critical Design Issues
The first Critical Design Issue is targeting by making the
choice between the business to consumer (B2C) and business
to business (B2B) models. In B2C the post-payment service
provider markets the service to consumers and receives
payments from them. In the B2B model the post-payment
service provider offers the service to rights holders or to an
existing online music shop. In first service trials the model
must be B2C, but when the service establishes itself on the
market, dedicated B2B post-payment service providers are to
be expected.
In creating value elements for the basic post payment
copyright, the system can be enhanced by providing access
to high quality music files, album art, and song lyrics. An
important issue in the value context is Digital Rights
Management (DRM). In some cases a file without DRM is of
higher value to a consumer, even when its source is illegal,
compared to a commercial legal file with DRM.
The service branding is closely related to the choice
between the B2B and B2C options. The possible branding
alternatives include own branding, use of an existing online
music shop brand, or a connection to a rights holder brand,
e.g., a brand of a record label or a copyright agency.
The customer retention of a post-payment copyright
system to an online music shop can be arranged so that the
user account or the payment information of the post-payment
copyright system is bundled with the online music shop. The
customer retention to the post-payment copyright system
itself can be obtained through personalization: the system
can store the user classification of files to be legalized, being
legal, being illegal, among other possibilities.
The security of the post-payment copyright system has
two distinctive parts. The information related to payment has
very high security requirements which are met by established
solutions. The unique security challenge in the system is

121
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
privacy. The personal information in the system basically
describes
evidence
for
copyright
law
violation.
The
collection, communication and storage of the personal
information must be well understood both by the operator
and the consumer. Generally, it is an advantage if the
communication is transparent and it is possible for an
advanced user to check if the communication contains only
the promised information. On the other hand, unencrypted
transfers are prone to eavesdropping, so the data sent should
be protected by encryption.
The quality of service consists of the time needed for
downloading
the
application,
scanning
the
hard
disk,
analyzing the legal status of files, and the catalogue
matching. From the privacy point of view it would be
beneficial to carry out the catalogue matching in the user
application, but it would increase the download time
dramatically.
In
this
respect
the
quality
of
service
consideration exceeds the privacy concern. In order to
improve the time consumed at each phase of the process it is
possible to develop algorithms which optimize the time used
for processing while maintaining the accuracy of the results.
In the early phase when the market is building up,
system integration to several other systems may not seem
relevant. But especially in the B2C model the possibility to
integrate the system to various online backend systems is
crucial. A generic modular structure and well defined simple
interfaces using common technology components decrease
the time needed for individual system integration projects.
The user application providing the best accessibility for
customers is web browser. On the other hand, the web
browser is not allowed to get full access to the computer
where it is running. Plug-ins like Java script engine and
Adobe Flash player are a compromise between the full
access rights on the local computer and the need to download
and run an application. The latest plug-in technology
versions normally have the most advanced feature sets and
include
many
functions,
which
can
speed
up
the
development phase, but the support for them may not be
available on all common computing platforms.
Management of user profiles gives the possibility for
service personalization, but they also create a difficult
situation for the service provider. The service provider has
knowledge of the copyright violation of the user, and access
to the user account which can link to the real personality of
the user. In many jurisdictions police may force the service
provider to reveal such information to copyright authorities.
In order to avoid such procedures it may be preferable for the
service provider not to have user accounts even if the
absence of them decreases the possibility for service
personalization and customer retention.
When considering the partner selection, the added value
of the service provider is related to the contribution it makes
for the value network. In one extreme the rights holder could
run the post-payment copyright service bundled with its own
online music shop. In the early phase it might be useful to
have a number of partners, which are specialized in certain
parts of the value chain, at least in order to learn how those
parts of the value chain typically operate. Having partners
enables the service provider to concentrate on the novel parts
of the system where it most likely can add significant value.
Concerning network openness, network governance and
network complexity, a balance between the network growth
and control of the network has to be maintained. The post-
payment copyright value network has generally better
possibilities to grow uncontrolled, but for the post-payment
system operator and for the early players, the uncontrolled
growth may lead to lost opportunities and lost market share.
A realistic and attractive business case could be to specialize
in one part of the system when the value network has
potential to grow. The specialization could be providing the
post-payment system as a back-end service for existing
online music shops, delivering catalogue matching system or
user application. Also licensing, consulting and system
integration services for the entrants can be considered.
Pricing is probably the most important factor for any
product. In the post-payment copyright system, the reference
price point is the price of a piece of music in an online music
shop. As the system does not need to distribute copies of a
file, a lower price point could be justified. On the other hand,
the system provides a substitute product for the online music
shops and it would not be logical to allow very different
price points for substituting product formats. Special pricing
according to the quantities should at least be considered so
that the system would encourage the users to legalize as
many files as possible.
The division of investments for the system includes the
development of the system and marketing efforts. Our
assumption is that these costs are shared by the rights holder,
the online music shop providing the contracts and the back-
end system, and the post-payment copyright system provider.
The development costs are most naturally carried by the
post-payment copyright system provider, because the service
is its own initiative. The marketing costs should be shared
more evenly.
The post-payment copyright business contracts define the
division of costs and earnings. The post-payment system
operator may not be able to include all its development costs
into new contracts, but at least the amount it would cost for a
new player to develop the same system can be taken into
account. Basically the same applies for the contribution of
the other partners as well.
In
the
contract
negotiations
between
the
partners
probably the most important issue is how the valuation of
contributions and benefits is carried out. A joint venture can
be created where the partners are investors, or more typically
each link in the value chain forms a customer – service
provider relationship. Each link can be negotiated as a fixed
fee, transaction based revenue sharing, or a combination of
them.
3)
Critical Success Factors
Several Critical Success Factors are not positive by
default in the service. The compelling value proposition to
the customer depends on the viewpoint. On the other hand,
no other way to legalize illegal downloads exists in most
markets. But as the consumer already has the music file and
does not get any concrete value by paying for it after
obtaining it, the value proposition is not strong.

122
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
The clearly defined target customer group consists of
users who have downloaded and copied music illegally in the
past, and of the parents of children who have illegal copies of
music files. The target groups are rather well defined,
although convincing them to use the service is very
challenging.
While a compelling value proposition is not strongly
present, the value analysis of the service design provides
additional insight to the case. The intended value for the end-
user customer is the possibility to legalize illegal copies of
music files. This gives a covenant not to sue protection to the
customer. The delivered value depends on the contracts
between the service provider and the rights holders. We can
expect that the contracts are professionally made and the
jurisdiction has the concept of covenant not to sue, or the
freedom of the contract prevails, so that the delivered value
matches well to the intended value. The expected value is a
more challenging aspect. In most services, the user gets
something when he pays money for the service. In the case
of a post-payment service, the user gets a receipt. The receipt
may not be tangible enough to drive the user to make a
purchase decision. Additional material like CD covers, track
lyrics, or other material about the artist could improve the
perceived value for the customer. On the other hand, the
music file to be legalized is known by the consumer. He
knows the content, how much he listens to the file, what is
the coding quality is, and in which devices the file can be
played. Hence, the perceived value of the content equals to
the delivered value in the post-payment copyright system.
Unobtrusive customer retention is a challenging aspect.
The core offering is to give a unique opportunity to legalize
illegal downloads. Furthermore, the user is encouraged to use
legal music shops instead of illegal means. From this
perspective, customer retention is realized only when the
user legalizes just a part of the illegal files in possession
when the service is used for the first time. Another
possibility for customer retention is that the service is
bundled with an online music shop, and customers accessing
the music shop are considered as a part of the overall
customer retention.
The acceptable quality of service is guaranteed in the
web front-end and the payment services, as they follow
industry standards. The specific areas to develop the quality
of service are illegal vs. legal file recognition and music
catalogue matching. Illegal file classification is a recent area
of forensics, and major improvements can still be expected.
The implementation of the catalogue matching is a trade-off
between accuracy, number of methods in use, and resources.
The accuracy can be improved by adding more methods for
matching. For example, fingerprint recognition can be used
in addition to metadata analysis. The accuracy of a method
can be increased by adding execution cycles, i.e., increasing
the number of times the method is applied. Additional
methods require increased development resources. Running
methods in parallel and increasing execution cycles require
processing resources.
The
acceptable
profitability
of
the
post-payment
copyright service is quantitatively analyzed in Section 5.2.
Figure 7.
Differences in post-payment system and online music shop
STOF models
The acceptable risks are gained by re-using the existing
technology assets of the partners. The main investments in
the beginning are related to client development, catalogue
matching
server
development,
and
marketing.
In
this
analysis, we expect that the development risk is taken by the
post-payment system operator, and the marketing risk is
shared between the participating organizations.
The sustainable network strategy has a good basis,
because for all others except for the post-payment system
operator, the service is an extension in their current business
operations. For most of the participating organizations in the
value chain adding the new service does not require new
technical development and could be described as “business
as usual”.
The acceptable division of roles is achieved by having
the same roles as in the online music shop value chain. The
roles follow industry standards, and the same applies for the
profitability and risk. Post-payment system providers have
potential to negotiate better contract terms than online music
shop providers due to the advantages of the post-payment
copyright system, including the opportunity to increase
consumers’ moral regarding copyright.
4)
Differences in post-payment and online shop STOF
models
As part of the STOF analysis, we compare the Service,
Technology, Organization, and Finance domain descriptive
models of the post-payment copyright system and the online
music shop. For both of them, the Organization and Finance
domains
are
similar
according
to
our
analysis.
The
differences are visible in the Service and Technology
domains, see Fig 7.
In the Service domain, the customer most likely has
previous experience of online music. For the post-payment
system only the payment experience exists. The post-
payment copyright experience is new for the customer. The
customer does not know how long scanning, or catalogue
matching takes. Also, the accuracy of matching and illegal
vs. legal classification is without earlier references. The
intended value of the online music shop is that the user is
able to listen to the purchased music file. The perceived
value of the DRM protected content can be lower, if the
customer would like to play the files in a device without the
DRM client of the online music shop. In the post-payment

123
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
system, the content itself is well know by the customer, as it
is already in her possession, but due to that the delivered
value of the system is abstract rather than practical.
In the Technology domain the payment and customer
data platforms are similar in both online shop and post-
payment systems. The main differences are in the client and
in the backbone infrastructure. The online music shop client
has a download feature, and often it also has its own music
player with the DRM client installed. The post-payment
system client includes the scanning and illegal vs. legal
classification but no download or player features. The main
difference in the network components is the catalogue
matching service existing only in the post-payment copyright
system.
B.
Quantitative Techno-Economic Modeling
With the base case parameters, the scenario A produces
total revenue of €1.49 million and the scenarios B and C
€1.43 million. Therefore, the scenarios are at a comparable
revenue level. The online shop scenario (A) has a linear
revenue curve, whereas the post-payment scenarios (B and
C) have a peak curve.
Table 7 depicts the results of break-even analysis in the
base cases. The break-even point is reached when NPV is
zero. The break-even market penetration rate rMP
B-E in the
table is defined as the number of users in the break-even
situation. It is calculated as the number of users nU multiplied
by a break-even multiplier rB-E, which is set so that NPV is
zero divided by the number of potential users, i.e., the
number of users nU divided by market penetration rate rMP:
E MP
B
MP
U
U
B E
MP
B E
r
r
r
n
n
r
r





/
.
(7)
The post-payment scenario (C) reaches the lowest break-
even market penetration rates, followed by the post-payment
download
scenario
(B).
Thus,
post-payment
scenarios
require less market penetration among potential users than
the online shop scenario (A) to reach a break-even situation
in the base case.
The results of the NPV analysis are depicted in Fig. 8.
The first bars illustrate the mean values, whereas their error
bars display the minimum and maximum values. The second
bars are base values. The mean, minimum, and maximum
values are calculated based on the risk analysis, whereas base
values represent the results without risk analysis. The results
clearly indicate that the post-payment scenario (C) is the
most profitable and has mid-level risk, whereas the post-
payment download scenario (B) is the least profitable and
has the most risk.
According
to
our
sensitivity
analysis,
the
usage
parameters have the largest effect on the outcome in all the
scenarios. Because we did not perform extensive sensitivity
analysis eliminating the effect of potential cross-correlations
of variables, we do not present the results in detail.
Fig. 9 depicts the results of the cost analysis. Mean
values and error bars are displayed. Reimbursement to
copyright holders is the most significant cost item in all the
scenarios. The other items are notably less substantial. The
differences in scenario definitions are clearly visible in the
cost structure of each scenario.
TABLE VII.
BREAK-EVEN MARKET PENETRATION RATES RMP
B-E (%) IN
THE BASE CASE SCENARIOS
Scenario
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
A
0.0
4.4
6.6
11.0
13.3
B
0.0
4.2
6.6
9.4
11.3
C
0.0
3.9
6.1
8.7
10.4
-0,2
-0,1
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
online shop (A)
post-payment
download (B)
post-payment (C)
€ million
mean
base
Figure 8.
Results of NPV analysis

124
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
reimbursement to
copyright holders
€ million
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
user support
marketing
contracts
softw are
CDN
reimbursement to
users
€ million
online shop (A)
post-payment dow nload (B)
post-payment (C)
Figure 9.
Results of cost analysis
C.
Privacy Threat Analysis
In this section, we present the results of the attack tree
method -based privacy threat analysis, see Fig. 4. We
describe how the system provider can try to assure the user
that private information is not compromised. For the success
of the post-payment copyright system, it is particularly
important that the users of the system can be confident that
the user identity in combination with the list of illegal
content in the user's possession does not leak out of the
system. The goal of the privacy protection measures is to
limit the privacy exposure of the users.
In our analysis, the threat class 1 combining user records,
relates to the improper re-identification of the user and
linking of data records between system components. The
most critical re-identification risk is related to the requests to
the catalogue matching server. If the requester is identified
and the requests tracked, one can obtain an extensive list of
potentially illegal content on the requester's device. That can
obviously be incriminating evidence against the user. While
the request protocol as such is based on anonymous
operation, the source IP address of the requests still remains
traceable. In some cases, the IP address may be linkable to a
specific device. That can potentially reveal the requester's
identity, described as user IP address tracking, threat class
1.1.
Even if the IP address cannot be traced back to a specific
device or person, the IP address provides a potential key,
based on which information between the system components
could be linked. If the front-end and the catalogue matching
server colluded by comparing the IP addresses of requests
they serve, it would be possible to link the shopping cart
information with the actual list of illegal content on the user's
device. For a comparison of privacy risks arising from
collusion of individual system components, see Table 8.
TABLE VIII.
COLLUSION RISKS AGAINST USER PRIVACY
Collusion risks
Worst-case privacy
exposure
Colluding
components
Catalogue
matching
server
Front-end and
back-end
Payment
system
Linking of catalogue
matching requests to
purchase sessions
based on IP address
User contact
information + list of
content to purchase
licence for + list of
illegal content in
user's possession
X
X
Linking of shopping
cart information to
payment information
leading to full user
identification
User identity + User
contact information +
list of content to
purchase licence for
X
X
Linking of catalogue
matching request to
payment
transactions based
on IP addresses
User identity + list of
illegal content in
user's possession
X
X
Linking of catalogue
matching requests to
shopping carts and
payment information
leading to full
privacy exposure
User identity + User
contact information +
list of content to
purchase licence for +
list of illegal content
in user's possession
X
X
X
Even when there is no malicious intent against the users
in the system itself, there are external privacy threats. They
are related to the user information that external attackers can
get by eavesdropping. The external communication threats
are threat class 2 external eavesdropping of unprotected user
communications, and threat class 3 external component
intrusion. Note that also law enforcement officials using a
search warrant can be regarded as such external attackers
against the users’ privacy. Once an intrusion happens, the
intruder can of course learn user information, which is hosted

125
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
on the system component. Increase in privacy exposure by
combining this information to other data is much more
challenging, as can be seen in Table 9.
From the privacy point of view, threats in class 2 related
to eavesdropping are as problematic as the collusion threats
in class 1 combining user records. Unlimited eavesdropping
on the system communications would enable an external
attacker to know the same information as the system
components. However, as all communications between the
user’s device and the system are protected by using
encryption, we estimate that the probability of successful
eavesdropping attacks against the user is very low. The
eavesdropping will not impact users’ privacy perceptions so
much that it would have a negative impact on the adoption of
the post-payment copyright system.
After analyzing the threats, we present solutions for the
recognized privacy threats of the post-payment copyright
system. We also go through the tradeoffs of the selected
solutions, see Table 10.
Distributing the user information in the system decreases
the impact and risk of the threat class 1 combining user
records.
Storing
payment
information
and
receipt
information is regulated by the legislation. The information
is distributed in the system: backend provides clearing the
payments for the rights holders; payment system operator
handles the payment; and the service front-end operator
works with the shopping basket. The distribution may
decrease the consumer privacy concerns, as no one in the
system has information about the user files, real identity, and
credit card information. All these transactions can be
collected and linked together for example in a copyright
infringement claim investigation. If the user loses the receipt
and likes to get another copy of the receipt, the distribution
of the data makes the task more challenging.
Academic research is a valid reason to collect private and
sensitive information in copyright legislation. At this state of
the work, the post-payment copyright system is a research
project. The research part is clearly separated from the
commercial service, it has its own privacy statements, and
the difference is clearly communicated to the user.
TABLE IX.
PRIVACY EXPOSURE IN EXTERNAL INTRUSION THREATS
Linking scenarios
Privacy exposure
Linking of catalogue
matching requests to
purchase sessions
Linking cannot be done, since catalogue
matching requests are anonymous and IP
addresses are not tracked
Linking of shopping
cart information to
payment information
leading to full user
identification
Back-end cannot identify user, since
payment system provides only information
about the success of the transaction not
about payment information
Linking of catalogue
matching request to
payment transactions
Linking is not possible since there is no
linking key. IP addresses are not tracked.
TABLE X.
PRIVACY SOLUTIONS, TRADEOFFS AND BENEFITS
Solution
Threat
Tradeoff
Benefit
Distributed
architecture
1
More privacy
statements, service
agreements, and
other legal
documents. More
complicated
management of
the system.
All information
related to the user
is not available at
one point
Research data
separated
1
More complicated
data storage
system. More
complicated data
structures in the
research analysis.
Less private
information stored
long periods
No user
accounts
1
Less possibilty for
personalization of
the service
Less information
can be linked to a
user
Anonymizing
proxy
1.1
Service cannot use
any information
gained during the
previous session.
Research of data
gets more difficult.
Extremely difficult
to link any service
use to the user
Encrypted
communication
2
Difficult for user
to verify the data
sent to the network
No eavesdropping
at intermediaries
Illegal vs. legal
analysis at user
device
1
The accuracy of
analysis is
decreased
The most sensitive
information is not
transmitted in the
Internet or stored
on the servers
Catalogue
matching only
for items which
user considers
paying
1
The only a coarse
price of the music
available in the
client for all user
files
Minimized
personal data
transfers from the
device to the
network
User data not
stored
1.1
Tedious tracking
of all purchase
data afterwards at
the service
provider. No
possibility for
service
personalization.
As little as
possible personal
data is stored in
the system
Rights holders
clearly visible
Adds
trust
May raise worries
about hidden
agenda of the
rights holders
Increases trust for
the validity of the
service
Storing information about the users' past illegal activities
is naturally a very sensitive matter. It should be handled with
similar care as the patient registers in health care. Collection
of such information would be an attractive target for internal
and external attacks, and it could potentially be interesting
for authorities. From a user point of view, this would
represent threats that could deter users from using the service
in the first place. Therefore, we decided not to store any of
the information that links a specific user to the illegal past
actions. The result of with this decision is that we don’t have
any user accounts on the web frontend. The user accounts
could be used to help the user during the consecutive usage
sessions
and
to
provide
a
possibility
for
service
personalization.

126
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
A commonly used method to protect against the threat
class 1.1 user IP tracking, is that the service is used through
an anonymizing proxy. If all system components maliciously
collude against the user of the system, user privacy is
compromised leading in the worst case to full exposure of
the user's private information. This is clearly unacceptable
for the users of the system. From the user point of view, the
best improvement here would be that the users would apply
an anonymizing proxy or an anonymizing network in all
interactions with the system.
As
a
solution
for
the
threat
class
2
external
eavesdropping, we apply encryption in all communication in
the service. We use Secure Socket Layer (SSL) to decrease
the concerns about potential eavesdropping or network
monitoring by authorities. Also here, the selection of the
encrypted communication is a privacy concern tradeoff. The
positive impact is that the users need not to be so worried
about their sensitive information being transmitted in clear
text through the Internet. The negative side is that for people
like civil liberties and web activists, who would really like to
check what is communicated between the application and the
servers, it is challenging to verify that the service provider
promises about the communicated content match with
reality.
The exposure to the threat class 1 combining user records
is decreased by carrying out the illegal vs. legal analysis in
the user device only. As a tradeoff of the client based
analysis we lose the centralized analysis help in researching
the accuracy of the analysis. The centralized analysis would
also allow faster deployment of the improvements to the
users. But as that information is the most sensitive in the
system, the user privacy was selected as the dominating
factor in the implementation.
An opposite tradeoff was accepted with the catalogue
matching functionality. It is implemented on the network
server. In this case, we therefore trade the privacy concern
for a small application download size and for a more reliable
catalogue matching in the system. The impact of the threat 1
combining user records with the selected architecture is
decreased by carrying out the catalogue matching only for
the items, which user considers paying, and by clearing all
private data like IP addresses in the logs of the catalogue
matching server. The threat class 2 external eavesdropping is
made very difficult by encrypting all communication with
the catalogue matching server. It is however to be noted that
encryption alone cannot hide the fact that a specific source IP
address has been in interaction with the catalogue matching
server.
Even
this
information
might
be
considered
incriminating. The alternative of the adopted solution would
have been to download the entire catalog of available content
to the user device and to perform the catalogue matching
locally, thus minimizing the exposure of the user.
In addition to protecting the user against the negative
privacy threats, we try to use a positive approach to improve
the user trust in the post-payment system. The privacy
concerns of the users are greatly diminished if they can
consider the post-payment copyright service as a trusted third
party that does not forward sensitive data to the rights
holders. The challenge of the post-payment copyright service
is to act as a reliable trusted third party between the users and
the rights holders. The trusted third party should be credible
in the users’ perception and make the users willing to use the
service.
Communication about the system plays a very important
role. We build the system architecture and operating process
to minimize privacy concerns. The consumers become aware
of these solutions through communication. With successful
communication about the selected solutions we can build
trust in the consumers and lower their privacy concerns.
Peer-to-peer
is
a
very
sensitive
issue
from
the
communication point of view. In the communication, it
might be wise not to mention peer-to-peer as a source of
illegal copies in order to avoid the wave of emotional bursts
in the peer-to-peer user groups, leading to a decreased trust
within other post-payment users.
Showing clearly which rights holders are behind the post-
payment system builds trust in the consumer. It convinces
the users that the service really delivers what it promises. At
the same time, quite a few consumers may wonder if the
rights holders have a hidden agenda in the service. The users
might get increased privacy concerns about what data is
really collected and to whom it is given.
VI.
DISCUSSION
Our quantitative study shows that a post-payment
copyright system is potentially a more profitable business
than an online music shop. However, the study is limited by
the
definition
of
the
inputs
to
the
model
and
the
simplifications used in the model. In reality, the outcome
may differ significantly from our results.
In our study, the models are separated, whereas in
commercial systems the post-payment system will be linked
to other models. We have assumed that the users of a post-
payment system receive electronic vouchers to online shops
as reimbursements of their transactions. The vouchers
encourage post-payment users to buy their digital music in
online shops.
The largest source of inaccuracy is the number of people
using the service. The popularity of the service is very
difficult to estimate due to the following factors: the
development of P2P networks, broadband connections,
digital rights management, upcoming legal implications on
P2P networks, popularity of digital media, the perceived
usability of the service, and the benefit from the service.
Comparing the scenarios, CDN cost for file storage and
delivery is very deterministic, because the post-payment
without download scenario benefits significantly from the
absence of media retention and transfer. There are ways to
the cost: limiting the market area geographically, replacing
CDN with own servers, locating servers close to an Internet
exchange point, having point of presence in the Internet
exchange point, and leasing own fibers.
Our research is a continuation to the trend of studies
suggesting P2P networks as a part of a viable business model
for media distribution [15]-[18]. We also demonstrate the
usefulness of techno-economic modeling and associated risk
analysis when making decisions regarding the development
and deployment of a new online service. Our model could be

127
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
generalized for the analysis of different types of media, for
instance the online distribution of movies, and potentially
extended with real options analysis [46].
The qualitative analysis with STOF helps to form a
working business model and to identify the relevant partners.
The main benefits of using STOF instead of other potential
analysis frameworks are its holistic and systematic approach
and its fit to novel online services. With the help of STOF
analysis, we were able to create a more solid business model
for
post-payment
copyright. The
post-payment
system
architecture (Fig. 1) and the post-payment process (Fig. 2)
support directly the new business model.
The Critical Success Factor evaluation reveals that the
service design and enrollment of the service may have a
great impact on the revenue generated by the service. The
main challenges in the post-payment copyright system are
low value for customers and low customer retention rate.
Service bundling with an online music shop offering and
careful consideration of marketing message are suggested as
solutions for value perception and customer retention.
Our analysis does not concentrate on the Roll-out and
Market phases of the STOF framework. In the actual
deployment of the service, a current and detailed analysis of
the market situation and the relevant competing services
should be made. De Reuver et al. [47] demonstrated that
addressing Critical Design Issues in sufficient detail leads to
better scores in Critical Success Factors, i.e., a viable service
design improves the chances for actual success. Furthermore,
according to de Reuver et al. [48], having a balanced
business model internally is not sufficient for success. The
business model also has to be continually balanced to
changing market, regulation, and technology conditions in
different phases of the service lifetime.
Based on our threat analysis, it seems that trustworthiness
of the system is a key factor for users to be willing to use the
post-payment copyright system. The users need to be able to
trust the system. It must not maliciously act against the user
in any way, and it has to protect the user against external
threats. If we presume that the post-payment copyright
system implements the suggested privacy solutions, we can
conclude that it provides quite sufficient protection for the
user's privacy even against external threats.
Our
study
does
not
confirm
that
a post-payment
copyright system will be the winning model, but the study
shows that in favorable conditions post-payment copyright is
a very competent model compared to the online shop model.
The privacy challenges play in an important role in the user
adoption of the service, and solutions for the most important
challenges are available. Our recommendation is to do
further evaluation among industry experts and end-users and
finally to test the validity of our results with a live post-
payment service.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
An earlier version of this work was presented at the
ICDS 09 conference, see [1]. We would like to thank our
colleagues, especially Mark de Reuver, Asta Kärkkäinen,
Sakari Luukkainen, Ben Mellin and Jukka K. Nurminen, the
reviewers of this journal, and the reviewers and participants
of the ICDS 09 conference for their feedback on previous
versions of this work.
The research was partially conducted in the DECICOM
project
funded
by
the
Finnish
Funding
Agency
for
Technology and Innovation (Tekes), Nokia, Ericsson, and
NetHawk and partially within the Econ@Tel (COST605)
network.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. V. J. Heikkinen and H. Kokkinen, “Techno-Economic Modeling
of Post-Payment Copyrights,” Proc. Intl. Conf. on Digital Society
(ICDS
09),
IEEE
Press,
Feb.
2009,
pp.
217-222,
doi:10.1109/ICDS.2009.12.
[2]
H. Bouwman, H. De Vos, and T. Haaker, Eds., Mobile Service
Innovation
and
Business
Models,
Springer,
May
2008,
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-79238-3.
[3]
H. Bouwman, E. Faber, T. Haaker, B. Kijl, and M. De Reuver,
“Conceptualizing the STOF Model,” in Mobile Service Innovation
and Business Models, H. Bouwman, H. De Vos, and T. Haaker, Eds.
Springer, May 2008, pp. 31-70, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-79238-3_2.
[4]
H. Bouwman, E. Faber, E. Fielt, T. Haaker, and M. De Reuver,
“STOF Model: Critical Design Issues and Critical Success Factors,”
in Mobile Service Innovation and Business Models, H. Bouwman, H.
De Vos, and T. Haaker, Eds. Springer, May 2008, pp. 71-88,
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-79238-3_3.
[5]
H. De Vos and T. Haaker, “The STOF Method,” in Mobile Service
Innovation and Business Models, H. Bouwman, H. De Vos, and T.
Haaker, Eds. Springer, May 2008, pp. 115-136, doi:10.1007/978-3-
540-79238-3_5.
[6]
P. Timmers, “Business Models for Electronic Markets,” Electronic
Markets, vol. 8, Apr. 1998, pp. 3-8, doi:10.1080/10196789800000016
[7]
R. Amit and C. Zott, “Value Creation in E-Business,” Strategic
Management
J.,
vol.
22,
June
2001,
pp.
493-520,
doi:
10.1002/smj.187.
[8]
H. Chesbrough and R. S. Rosenbloom, “The Role of the Business
Model in Capturing Value from Innovation: Evidence from Xerox
Corporation’s Technology Spin-Off Companies,” Industrial and
Corporate Change, vol. 11, pp. 529-555, 2002.
[9]
R. Alt and H.-D. Zimmerman, “Introduction to Special Section:
Business Models,” Electronic Markets, vol. 11, Jan. 2001, pp. 3-9,
doi:10.1080/713765630.
[10] A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C. L. Tucci, “Clarifying Business
Models:
Origins,
Present,
and
Future
of
the
Concept,”
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 16,
pp. 1-25, 2005.
[11] S. M. Shafer, H. J. Smith, and J. C. Linder, “The Power of Business
Models,”
Business
Horizons,
vol.
48,
2005,
pp.
199-207,
doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2004.10.014.
[12] H. Kokkinen, J. E. Ekberg, and J. Noyranen, “Post-Payment System
for Peer-to-Peer Filesharing,” Proc. Consumer Communications and
Networking Conf. (CCNC 08), IEEE Press, Jan. 2008, pp. 134-135,
doi:10.1109/ccnc08.2007.37.
[13] H. Hietanen, A. Huttunen, and H. Kokkinen, “Laila: File Sharing
Indulgence Service,” NIR Nordic Intellectual Property Law Review,
vol. 78, pp. 175-180, 2009.
[14] H. Kokkinen and J. Nöyränen, “Forensics for Detecting P2P Network
Originated MP3 Files on the User Device,” in Forensics in
Telecommunications, Information and Multimedia, LNICST 8, M.
Sorell, Ed. Springer, May 2009, pp. 10-18, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
02312-5_2.
[15] H. Hietanen, A. Huttunen, and H. Kokkinen, “Criminal Friends of
Entertainment:
Analysing
Results
from
Recent
Peer-to-Peer
Surveys,”
SCRIPTed,
vol.
5,
2008,
pp.
31-49,
doi:10.2966/scrip.050108.31.

128
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
[16] D. Y. Cohn and V. L. Vaccaro, “A Study of Neutralization Theory’s
Application to Global Consumer Ethics: P2P File-Trading of Musical
Intellectual Property on the Internet,” Intl. J. Internet Marketing and
Advertising, vol. 3, pp. 68-88, 2006.
[17] M. Peitz and P. Waelbroeck, “An Economist’s Guide to Digital
Music,” CESifo Economic Studies, vol. 51, pp. 359-428, 2005.
[18] S. Bhattacharjee, R. D. Gopal, K. Lertwachara, and J. R. Marsden,
“Economic of Online Music,” Proc. Intl. Conf. on Electronic
Commerce, ACM Intl. Conf. Proc. Series, vol. 50, 2003, pp. 300-309,
doi:10.1145/948005.948045.
[19] L. A. Ims, Ed., Broadband Access Networks: Introduction Strategies
and Techno-Economic Evaluation, London: Chapman & Hall, 1998.
[20] N. K. Elnegaard and K. Stordahl, “Analysing the Impact of Forecast
Uncertainties in Broadband Access Rollouts by the Use of Risk
Analysis,” Teletronikk, vol. 4, pp. 157-167, 2004.
[21] T. Monath, N. Kristian, P. Cadro, D. Katsianis, and D. Varoutas,
“Economics of Fixed Broadband Access Network Strategies,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 41, Sept. 2003, pp. 132-139,
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2003.1232248.
[22] B. Jerman-Blažič, “Techno-Economic Analysis and Empirical Study
of
Network
Broadband
Investment:
The
Case
of
Backbone
Upgrading,” Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 10, 2008, pp. 103-
110, doi:10.1007/s10796-007-9059-y.
[23] K. R. R. Kumar and V. Y. H. Kueh, “Techno-Economic Analysis of
International Mobile Roaming,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 15, June 2008, pp. 73-80, doi:10.1109/MWC.2008.4547526.
[24] T. Smura, A. Kiiski, and H. Hämmäinen, “Virtual Operators in the
Mobile Industry: A Techno-Economic Analysis,” Netnomics, vol. 8,
Oct. 2007, pp. 25-48, doi:10.1007/s11066-008-9012-3.
[25] E. Kivisaari, T. Autio, T. Smura, and H. Hämmäinen, “Operator
Roles in Mobile Broadcast,” Nordic and Baltic J. of Information and
Communication Technologies, vol. 2, pp. 48-60, 2008.
[26] T. Rokkas, D. Varoutas, D. Katsianis, T. Smura, R. Kumar, M.
Heikkinen, J. Harno, M. Kind, D. Von Hugo, and T. Monath, “On the
Economics of Fixed-Mobile Convergence,” Info, vol. 11, 2009, pp.
75-86, doi:10.1108/14636690910954999.
[27] M. V. J. Heikkinen and S. Luukkainen, “Value Analysis of
Technology Evolution: Case Mobile Peer-to-Peer Communications,”
Proc. Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS 2009), IEEE
Press, in press.
[28] J. Schäfer, K. Malinka, and P. Hanáček, “Peer-to-Peer Networks:
Security Analysis,” Intl. J. on Advances in Security, vol. 2, pp. 53-61,
2009.
[29] J. Suomalainen, A. Pehrsson, and J. K. Nurminen, “A Secure P2P
Incentive Mechanism for Mobile Devices,” Intl. J. on Advances in
Security, vol. 2, pp. 42-52, 2009.
[30] P. Merz, F. Kolter, and M. Priebe, “A Distributed Reputation System
for Super-Peer Desktop Grids,” Intl. J. on Advances in Security, vol.
2, pp. 30-41, 2009.
[31] H. Koshutanski, M. Ion, and L. Telesca, “Towards User-Centric
Identity Interoperability for Digital Ecosystems,” Intl. J. on Advances
in Security, vol. 1, pp. 26-38, 2008.
[32] T. Buchanan, C. Paine, A. N. Joinson, and U-D. Reips, ”Development
of Measures of Online Privacy Concern and Protection for Use on the
Internet,” J. of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, vol. 58, Nov. 2006, pp. 157-165, doi: 10.1002/asi.20459.
[33] H. Wang, M. K. O. Lee, and C. Wang, “Consumer Privacy Concerns
about Internet Marketing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 41, Mar. 1998, pp.
63-70, doi:10.1145/272287.272299.
[34] A. Kobsa, “Privacy-Enhanced Personalization,” Commun. ACM, vol.
50, Aug. 2007, pp. 24-33, doi:10.1145/1278201.1278202.
[35] Y. Lu, W. Wang, B. Bhargava, and D. Xu, “Trust-Based Privacy
Preservation for Peer-to-Peer Data Sharing,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans, vol.
36, May 2006, pp. 498-502, doi:10.1109/TSMCA.2006.871795.
[36] D. L. Hoffman, T. P. Novak, and M. Peralta, “Building Consumer
Trust Online,” Commun. ACM, vol. 42, Apr. 1999, pp. 80-85,
doi:10.1145/299157.299175.
[37] J. W. Palmer, J. P. Bailey, and S. Faraj, “The Role of Intermediaries
in the Development of Trust on the WWW: The Use and Prominence
of Trusted Third Parties and Privacy Statements,” J. of Computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 5, Jun. 2006, doi:10.1111/j.1083-
6101.2000.tb00342.x.
[38] I. Clarke, S. G. Miller, T. W. Hong, O. Sandberg, and B. Wiley,
“Protecting Free Expression Online with Freenet,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 6, Jan 2002, pp. 40-49, doi:10.1109/4236.978368.
[39] S. Lipner, “The Trustworthy Computing Security Development
Lifecycle,” Proc. 20th Annual Computer Security Applications Conf.
(ACSAC
04),
IEEE
Press,
Dec.
2004,
pp.
2-13,
doi:10.1109/CSAC.2004.41.
[40] B. Schneier, “Attack trees,” Dr. Dobb’s J., Dec. 1999.
[41] Statistics Finland, “Population Projection,” May 2007.
[42] Ministry of Transport and Communications Finland, “National
Broadband Strategy: Final Report,” Jan. 2007.
[43] IFPI, “Digital Music Report,” Jan. 2008.
[44] Jupiter Research, “US Digital Music Forecast,” Jan. 2007.
[45] W. B. Norton, “Video Internet: The Next Wave of Massive
Disruption to the U.S. Peering Ecosystem (v1.5),” Apr. 2007.
[46] J. Alleman, G. Madden, and H. Kim, “Real Options Methodology
Applied to the ICT Sector: A Survey,” Communications & Strategies,
no. 70, pp. 27-44, 2008.
[47] M. de Reuver, H. Bouwman, and T. Haaker, “Mobile Business
Models: Organizational and Financial Design Issues that Matter,”
Electronic
Markets,
vol.
19,
Mar.
2009,
pp.
3-13,
doi:10.1007/s12525-009-0004-4.
[48] M. de Reuver, H. Bouwman, and I. MacInnes, “Business Models
Dynamics for Start-Ups and Innovating E-Businesses,” Intl. J.
Electronic Business, vol. 7, pp. 269-286, 2009.

