232
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Complexities of Auditing and Securing Systems
in the Cloud — is there a Solution and will the
GDPR move it up the Corporate Agenda?
Bob Duncan∗, Mark Whittington†
Business School
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, UK
Emails: ∗robert.duncan@abdn.ac.uk, †mark.whittington@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—It would seem that some companies have been slow
or unable to secure their cloud activities or to be aware of
breaches in a timely manner. The European Union (EU)s General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) has been introduced with
the intent of sufﬁcient threat of meaningful ﬁnes that direc-
tors will now take cloud security seriously, even if they had
not perceived it as a strategic priority before. However, just
introducing such penal incentives does not mean that solutions
are easy to implement. Whilst the perfect solution would always
include stopping attackers from becoming intruders, once the
attacker gets access the challenge is not just the immediate ﬁscal
damage to the company or its trading partners, but also to the
very records and integrity of the databases themselves. Once
the intruder gains a foothold, they may then be able to grant
themselves sufﬁcient privileges to completely delete all trace of
their incursion, possibly deleting far more records than they need
to. They may remain undetected within the system, accessing,
modifying, deleting or ex-ﬁltrating data at will from the victim’s
system. This is referred to as the Cloud Forensic Problem. This,
then, presents a compliance nightmare to a great many cloud
users, many of whom are poorly prepared to cope with this serious
practical and ﬁnancial challenge. In this paper, we consider how
experience and traditional techniques from the accounting world
might be applied and adapted to mitigate this serious challenge.
Keywords–Forensic audit; GDPR compliance; cloud forensic
problem.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Achieving information security with conventional dis-
tributed network computer systems presents a signiﬁcant chal-
lenge, but this challenge increases exponentially when we
introduce cloud computing to the mix, due to the multiplicity
and complexity of hardware and software layers and the
number of actors with differing agendas, involved in any cloud
ecosystem. While this high level of complexity has been a
fundamental part of cloud computing, we shall see that the
capabilities of cloud computing have evolved considerably
beyond what was ﬁrst envisaged. The principal reason for the
difﬁculty of this challenge is the so called “Cloud Forensic
Problem”.
The Cloud Forensic Problem arises when an attacker gains
a foothold in a cloud system and becomes an intruder. Once
this happens, there is little to prevent the intruder from helping
themselves to any amount of data, either by viewing, modify-
ing, deleting or ex-ﬁltrating it from the victim system. Worse
still, there is nothing to prevent the intruder from gaining
sufﬁcient privileges to completely delete all trace of their attack
through modifying or deleting entirely the forensic records of
the system. In this paper, we consider how the use of forensic
audit might help mitigate the impact of this problem based on
our earlier work [1].
In addition to the cloud forensic problem, the EU General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [2] came into effect on
25th May 2018, and a principal requirement is the protection
of any personally identiﬁable information of any EU resident
held by any organisation, anywhere in the world, on pain
of severe ﬁnancial penalties. Given that the cloud forensic
problem presents a potentially insurmountable compliance
problem, a great many organisations are likely to be exposed to
incalculable potential penalties for the string of cyber breaches
that are likely to ensue. Full compliance will inevitably pose
a challenge for all organisations, but for those using cloud,
due to the potential impact of the cloud forensic problem, the
challenge will become so much more difﬁcult.
It is too early to speculate on what approach the regu-
lator might take towards setting penalties for breaches, but
there is little doubt that where a company has an attitude
problem towards proper compliance, or is complicit through
poor internal security controls and provisions, then all these
factors will be taken into account when gauging the level at
which to set any potential ﬁnes. Equally, where a company
can demonstrate that it has taken proper steps to mitigate the
impact of the cloud forensic problem, it is clear that this will
have the opposite effect, resulting in considerably lower levels
of ﬁnes as a consequence of any breach.
We start in Section II, by considering the cloud forensic
problem and the challenges it poses. We turn to the accounting
world to see which techniques we could implement to help
address these serious challenges in Section III, where we look
at accounting, audit and forensic accounting to see how it
works for the accounting world, and in Section IV, we address
the importance of separation of duties. In Section V, we
consider how we might develop some of these well established
techniques to help us address this signiﬁcant cloud security
problem. In Section VII, we ﬁrst consider some possible
impediments to restoring the ‘paper ink’ trail. In Section VIII,
we look at how we might use the immutable database as
the core of this approach. In Section IX, we discuss the
implications of this proposed solution. In Section X, we draw
our conclusions and discuss our possible future work.

233
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II.
THE CLOUD FORENSIC PROBLEM
Cloud systems are extremely popular with companies due
to the ﬂexibility offered by cloud. Speed of start-up, ease
of scalability to match the demand curve and the revenue
nature of the costs involved all provide a strong incentive for
companies to use cloud services. Cloud computing has been
with us now for over 10 years, and while much of the early
research concentrated on usability [3] [4] and performance [5]–
[7] it was not long before thoughts of security [8]–[10] and
privacy [11] [12] started to surface.
While the US National Institute for Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST) were one of the ﬁrst organisations to propose
standard deﬁnitions [13] [14] interest in security [15]–[18] and
privacy [19]–[21] started to grow.
Thoughts also started turning to accountability [9] [22]–
[24] given the evolving complexities of cloud ecosystems. This
ultimately led the EU to set up the Accountability for Cloud
(A4Cloud) Project [25] to consider such important matters.
The A4Cloud project drew much attention to the need for
proper accountability in cloud systems and the contributors
developed many useful mechanisms for ensuring proper levels
of accountability could be monitored and achieved.
While there have been some really positive advances in
both security and privacy during this time, there remains one
fundamental weakness that has not been resolved, namely the
“cloud forensic problem”. All computer systems connected to
the internet are subject to continuous and serious attack, and
cloud systems are no exception. It would be realistic to state
that no system is immune to attack, and this is particularly true
for cloud systems. Attackers will always succeed in gaining
entry to systems. The secret of success here is to be able to
identify these occurrences the moment they happen, so that the
attack can be shut down and the perpetrator removed from the
system.
The main focus of an attacker is to breach a system, which
can involve a considerable amount of work on their part. The
more diligent will ﬁrst perform surveillance, compile many
analyses of how the various company systems are structured
and how they interact with each other. Often, they will also
carry out huge amounts of work to understand the people of the
organization, since they are usually the weak link in the chain
[26]. This extensive intelligence gathering will usually cover
every conceivable aspect of all company systems to ensure they
discover everything they need to know about the company.
This is why it is so important for all companies to analyse
their system logs, in order to gain a better understanding of
who is actually attacking their systems.
Other attackers, will be much less organised, simply trying
to hack in to company systems, without a thought of the
overview of the company concerned. They will merely look
for known vulnerabilities and try to attack them. There are
other attackers who will speciﬁcally attack the people of
the company through social engineering and other similar
approaches. The ﬁrst objective of all attackers is the same
— to penetrate the system in order to set up a foothold in the
system, thus allowing them to take steps to become an intruder.
The aim is not just to get in, and out, as quickly as possible,
but to be able to develop a long term foothold, secreting
themselves into corporate servers and other subsidiary systems
which will allow them to return time and time again to help
themselves to more information whenever they want. The
longer they remain in the system, the more they are likely to
try to escalate privileges to give them access to more and more
possible information. All too often, they are helped along the
way by the companies themselves, often through an element
of laziness on the part of system administrators [27].
If we look back ﬁve years ago, at previous cyber breach
reports [28] there was a global average time of 6 months
between breach and discovery. With more rigorous attention
paid to reading and analysing their server logs, it is obvious
they could have discovered intruders much more quickly. By
2016, the time between breach and discovery had dropped to
a matter of weeks rather than months [29] however, this is
still not good enough to keep on top of what is going on in
corporate systems.
Companies often contribute to their own downfall by
failing to update security patches to both operating systems
and software systems, complexities from legacy applications
applications and risks of outages being reasons or excuses for
slow implementation [30]. All of these issues conspire to lead
inexorably to the, as yet unresolved, cloud forensic problem
— namely, that once an intruder is in the system, and has
escalated sufﬁcient privileges, there is nothing to prevent them
from deleting the forensic trail, all system logs and audit trails,
thus hiding all evidence of their successful penetration and of
the size and nature of their crime.
Under the GDPR [2] any breached organisation must
report the breach within 72 hours of discovery of the breach.
They must also report how many relevant records have been
compromised, whether by having been read, amended, deleted
or ex-ﬁltrated from the system. Given that many system logs
are also not turned on by default [31] this means identifying
which records have been compromised, whether by having
been read, amended, deleted or ex-ﬁltrated, will present a
serious enough challenge in the ﬁrst place.
However, since the intruder will likely have worked hard to
increase privileges to the point that they are able to modify or
worse, delete all forensic trails in the system, the likelihood of
an organisation being able to properly identify which records
have been compromised may prove impossible to determine.
Often, capturing adequate levels of forensic data does not
happen due to many such features being turned off by default.
It is bad enough when intruders delete forensic records, but
it is inexcusable when an organisation fails to collect them in
the ﬁrst place.
The consequence of failure to detect such intrusions means
not only non-compliance with the GDPR, triggering ﬁnes, but
failure to tackle some elementary steps will then cause these
ﬁnes to escalate following repeated events to the greater of
e20million or 4% of global turnover. The size of the potential
ﬁnes, along with the bad publicity will surely get the attention
of organizations, their managers and all their stakeholders.
III.
USEFUL TECHNIQUES FROM THE ACCOUNTING
WORLD
The process of accounting has been around for millen-
nia, with the underlying standard approach of double entry
bookkeeping in use for over 500 years, with the generally
accepted story placing its creation in Italy. It can be argued
that accounting and the reporting of accounting numbers has

234
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
had two overriding purposes that are in tension with each
other. The ﬁrst, that had dominance in earlier centuries [32]
is stewardship, though the term itself has seemed to evolve
over time [33] (pp. 264) from being the careful, honest and
accurate recording of transactions to efﬁcient use of resources
to ﬁnally ensuring an appropriate return for shareholders.
This progression is dependent on the trust that the earlier
deﬁnition can now be taken as given due to improvements in
recording mechanisms and the outside eye of an auditor. The
conﬁdence in the recording mechanism requires a complete
history of transactions that means the accounts can be checked
and even re-built if necessary whether in the mythical “shoe-
box” of receipts for the small business or the sophisticated
computerised ledgers of a multinational.
The integrity of the items recorded and the potential value
of the detail highlights another concern that the data could be
useful to people for whom it was not intended (competitors and
fraudsters). Hence the need to lock up the accounting ledgers
(or their computerised descendants) to keep them from being
corrupted or seen by those who have no right of access.
From the 1950s onwards a more developed theory of
accounting and reporting evolved with the focus being on
accounting as a technique for collecting, measuring, processing
and communicating ﬁnancial information about the economic
performance of entities, in order to provide decision useful
information for interested parties, such as management, in-
vestors, creditors and regulators [34].
The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
issued a similar, but more user-constrained deﬁnition in 2015,
namely “The objective of general purpose ﬁnancial reporting
is to provide ﬁnancial information about the reporting entity
that is useful to existing and potential investors, lenders and
other creditors in making decisions about providing resources
to the entity. Those decisions involve buying, selling or holding
equity and debt instruments, and providing or settling loans
and other forms of credit.” [35]
“Decision usefulness”, particularly for investors, became
the central determinant of “good” or “bad” accounting meth-
ods, again one could argue, because of a conﬁdence (some-
times misplaced) that stewardship, the basic recording, could
be taken for granted.
In the above story of accounting development, we already
needed to introduce the term “auditing”. Auditing, too, has
been around for millennia, as there has always been a need
to provide assurance that accounts and ﬁnancial statements
present a “true and fair view”, or some similar phrase, of the
business under review. Audit, the checking of conformity or of
being ﬁt for purpose, takes place in many ﬁelds, each of which
develop over time and may (or may not) learn appropriate
lessons from audit practices that have been honed over decades
or centuries in more mature situations or professions .
Hence, not only accounting but also ﬁnancial auditing
techniques can also be applied to any other sphere where there
is a need for recording, safety or trust and where there are
records and some element of measurement, in this case, of
course, we are particular interested in data. Hence, seeking
to apply the more evolved and time tested techniques from
accounting and auditing to the management and governance of
data — and speciﬁcally data in the cloud would seem logical.
A further extension of the processes of accounting and
audit is forensic (OED [36] “pertaining to, connected with,
or used in courts of law; suitable or analogous to pleadings
in court”) accounting, which as the deﬁnition suggests is the
process of preparing evidence suitable for use in a court of law,
though such approaches are often used without a courtroom on
the horizon. Forensic accounting is tuned to expose fraud and
manipulation.
We can potentially use these techniques, which have long
been developed in the accounting world to good effect in
helping us secure our cloud data. We can then liken any
database system to an accounting system, whereby we collect,
measure, process and communicate data and the information
gleaned from it concerning a business to the people for
whom it is intended or relevant. Of course, the reliability, and
even completeness, of data is a prerequisite for assessing any
organisational efﬁciency level or for decision making.
We can see that the completeness of recording, the trust in
the methods of processing the transactions and the ability of
an auditor to interrogate the raw transactions are key building
blocks for any effective data management system — whether
accounting or otherwise focused.
This medium presents the beneﬁt of providing a hard ink
trail to follow, something which we shall later see is no longer
available with modern cloud systems. This trail of records
written in ledgers and of pieces of paper with signatures,
comments and account codes provides for even the smallest
business a trail of evidence for the accountant or auditor to
follow through. The occasional missing item can usually be
determined through “incomplete records analysis” as there is
a surety concerning the other data and the bank statements. A
larger business would think through more streamlined and con-
sistent approaches to record keeping which then evolved into
some of the earliest computer records, where (with known hard
drives and no internet) anything entered would stay entered
with the identity of the person undertaking the transaction, a
time stamp and the matching double entry.
In principal, we can then use cloud audit to provide
assurance of the data provenance of all the data held in the
database system, and in the event of a security breach, we
should then be able to easily apply cloud forensic techniques,
learning from the accounting world, in order to help us bring
about a successful prosecution in the courts and to become
aware of the steps needed to improve security for the future.
In practice, this, of course, will be far harder to achieve.
Of course, it is worth pointing out that for centuries,
accountants have enjoyed the beneﬁts of working with hard
copy books, written with quill pen and ink. This medium
presents the beneﬁt of providing a hard ink trail to follow,
something which we shall later see is no longer available
with modern cloud systems. We can learn lessons from the
accounting world, speciﬁcally in the area of the audit trail,
as used with accounting systems for centuries. A further
relevant step in business and accounting risk mitigation in the
accounting process is separation of duties, and we will now
discuss this more fully in the next section.
IV.
THE IMPORTANCE OF SEPARATION OF DUTIES
For many decades, a key part of the structure of depart-
ments and of businesses overall is that of “separation (or

235
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
segregation) of duties.” This is a simple but straight forward
security measure that could be employed by all but the smallest
businesses. The logic is to carefully separate out the tasks in
a business process so that no one person can have input or
control into steps that might give them the opportunity, and
temptation, to commit fraud or to effect theft. The smallest
business would struggle to achieve this as different employees
will be required to be responsible for speciﬁc tasks.
Ashton, [37] used a questionnaire to ask auditors a series
of questions with the intent of being able to weigh their consis-
tency as they inspected accounts and applied judgement. The
ﬁrst questions in his questionnaire addressed the segregation
of tasks —
•
Are the tasks of both timekeeping and payment of em-
ployees adequately separated from the task of payroll
preparation?
•
Are the tasks of both payroll preparation and payment
of employees adequately separated from the task of
payroll bank account?
It is not hard to see the result of a negative answer to
either question. In both cases, an employee would be faced
with the chance to change numbers in order to beneﬁt them-
selves or, applying a little cunning, someone else. Involving
two or more people may not be perceived to be enough, a
further good safety feature would be to site the wages and
salaries staff away from most of the workforce, reducing the
chance of collaboration on a fraudulent scheme. A further gain
from segregation, even when all employees are honest, is the
opportunity to spot mistakes — a second person being required
to take up the next stage of a process will mean either a clearly
deﬁned check or at least a “reasonableness” check on the work
done to date.
The implications of judging that the answer to either of
these two questions is “no” are obvious — an opportunity and
a temptation arises for an individual to manipulate the payroll
to their advantage. Clearly if it were possible to locate the
payroll department away from the main work location and be
conﬁdent that no one in payroll knew anyone in the rest of
the company, then conﬁdence would be increased yet further.
Such separation not only makes fraud difﬁcult, but also means
unintentional errors are more likely to be spotted.
According to Gelinas et al. [38] there are four areas
in a business or accounting process that need to be sepa-
rated: authorising transactions, executing transactions, record-
ing transactions and safeguarding resources subsequent to
the transactions being completed. Vaassen et al. [39] add a
further need for separation with — “authorisation; custody;
recording; checking and execution”. We move to more direct
relevance to our key concern with the work of Hall [40] who
addresses segregation when computerised accounting has been
implemented. Hall sees that further concerns now need to
be added, including “Is the logic of the computer program
correct? Has anyone tampered with the application since it was
last tested? Have changes been made to the programme that
could have caused an undisclosed error?” (page 208). Even
such apparently obvious questions need to be asked if the
integrity of the system is to be assured..
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act [41] introduced new disclosure
requirements for senior directors to commit personally to the
quality of their numbers, and by implication the systems that
produced those numbers. Ge and McVay [42] found 261 ﬁrms
in 2002-2004 that admitted weaknesses in control and of these
45 included a reference to separation of duties. A further
concern for us is that companies from the computer sector were
a noticeably high proportion of the 261 problem companies in
Ge and McVays study.
Taking these examples and then applying the same logic
to both programming in general to software use is straight-
forward, though one might still question whether knowledge
of this is sufﬁciently carried through into practice. If practice
is indeed good, we still need a record of activity in order for
audit and to investigate when things go awry (i.e., the audit
trail).
This may all sound like unnecessary work and detail.
However, when one of the authors ran a large purchase ledger
department, a ledger clerk became confused when processing
a number of very similar invoices from one large supplier that
totalled to 2 million. She had entered invoices, then entered
credit notes to cancel them and then repeated this a number
of times before coming to him in some distress. The problem
was sorted, but, as the author expected, an auditor spotted this
unusual activity some time later and asked for an explanation.
The event log and records showed each step, who had carried
out which transactions and how the issues were corrected.
V.
FORENSIC CLOUD AUDIT
An interesting distinction in deﬁnition between “forensic
accounting” and “cloud computing forensic science” is the
presence of that last word “science”. Hopwood et al. [43]
give the following deﬁnition for forensic accounting: Forensic
accounting is the application of investigative and analytic skills
for the purpose of resolving ﬁnancial issues in a manner that
meets standards required by courts of law. Notice that forensic
accounting is not limited to the use of ﬁnancial investigations
that result in legal prosecution; however, if this is the purpose,
the investigation and analysis must meet the standards required
in the court of law that has jurisdiction. (page 3).
Whilst NIST [44] provides the following discussion and
deﬁnition: Many experts consider forensic science to be the
application of a broad spectrum of sciences and technologies
to the investigation and establishment of facts of interest in
relation to criminal, civil law, or regulatory issues. How-
ever, the resulting techniques may also be used for purposes
outside the scope of law to reconstruct an event that has
occurred. Cloud computing forensic science is the application
of scientiﬁc principles, technological practices and derived and
proven methods to reconstruct past cloud computing events
through identiﬁcation, collection, preservation, examination,
interpretation and reporting of digital evidence.
Note that the forensic accounting deﬁnition does not in-
clude the word science, despite the area (see for example
two textbooks Taylor [45] and Hopwood et al. [43]) including
scientiﬁc methods. Taylor [45] as a more introductory text,
focuses initially and at some length on the need to understand
background and environmental issues, using this as a backdrop
before moving on to, again, a largely discursive review of the
wide range of relevant criminal activities that might require
the attention of the forensic accountant. He also addresses risk
management issues in relation to IT systems, brieﬂy including
the cloud, and the process of investigation. Hopwood et al.

236
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[43] have a similar structure but give a little greater weight to
forensic science and computer forensics.
From the computer science camp, Choo and Dehghantanha
[46] a more scholarly work, reﬂects a greater weight placed on
technical issues, as well as the tools and techniques needed,
for forensic cloud investigations. Almulla et al. [47] review
the cloud forensic literature and ﬁnd some discursive, though
mostly technical papers. Some of our previous research [48]–
[50] has focused on the critical nature of understanding human
frailties and interactions as well as what seems the more
technically demanding elements of computer science.
Issues requiring computer forensic audit are likely to in-
volve the stealing of money, the stealing of monetizable data or
the misrepresentation of data to personal or group advantage.
These are areas which accountants have strived to address over
decades in less technical and complex settings. It would seem
logical that their group learning over time would have some
relevance and currency to the new cloud situation.
Like most professions, accountants have well organised
professional exams. There are many accounting associations,
many with long histories and experience in exam setting. The
syllabi of these bodies depends somewhat on the countries in
which they operate and are revised over time to reﬂect new
priorities and changes in the world -both technical and social.
The Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants (ACCA),
is a signiﬁcant international accounting professional body and
we will take their professional examination content as an
exemplar of others. The ACCA has over 200,000 members [51]
and has an exam at its professional stage, Advanced Auditing
and Assurance [52] that includes — a section on forensic audit
though it should be noted that — it is only a very small part
of the content of that exam.
Each of the professional bodies faces a dilemma when
revising their syllabi for a changing and ever more complex
world. In many countries, the market to attract accounting stu-
dents is competitive, hence a more complex world cannot lead
to more exams and a longer route to qualiﬁcation without the
body facing a competitive disadvantage. It is also very difﬁcult
to decide to drop traditional content to make appropriate space
for newer material or issues.
It would seem that qualifying accountants are ill-prepared
by their professional bodies for the complexities of the cloud
environment. This is both in terms of understanding the
environmental issues, though there is accessible material for
them to pick up some of this (see Taylor [45] and Hopwood
et al. [43]), as well as comprehending the technical ones, which
would be a far more complex and difﬁcult step.
Whilst there are a few small organisations focusing on
forensic accounting and audit, these appear peripheral and it
does not seem that many qualiﬁed accountants have moved
into this more rareﬁed space by adding years of further learn-
ing to their accounting badge. The large accounting “ﬁrms”,
commonly referred to as the “Big 4” (KPMG, PWC, EY and
Deloitte), who audit nearly all the worlds big companies and
collectively employ about a million people (2017), do offer
forensic services along with a broad range of consultancy
services (see [53] for example).
The ever-widening scope of the Big 4, making far more
money from consultancy than audit, is contentious in some
countries. The reliance on an oligopolistic audit industry with
seemingly conﬂicted aims of professionalism and commercial
gain, along with what many see as questionable competence
in their core audit activity, is building a crescendo for change
Marriage2018 and Marriage2018a highlight some audit quality
issues and FRC2018 also includes an example of the con-
sultancy dilemma at paragraph 34). Whilst these ﬁrms have
undoubtedly built up some expertise in the area, there are some
signiﬁcant issues with their continuing range of activities. Two
discussed options, in the UK at least, are either splitting up
the ﬁrms or to separate the audit arm from consultancy.
From the other direction, computer specialists clearly have
an understanding of the technology and some understanding
of the softer environmental, legal and behavioural issues (see
Choo and Dehghantanha [46]) though little if any accounting
awareness.
So, it would seem, that apart from a few exceptional, mo-
tivated, highly skilled individuals there is not yet a signiﬁcant
body that balances the three areas in Figure 1 in the Venn
diagram below. The diagram is, of course, highly simplistic
intending to just give a broad view of the difﬁculties in
bringing the wide range of knowledge and experience required
for forensic cloud investigation. One logical conclusion would
be the need to build multi-disciplinary teams, though the
development of sufﬁcient common understanding, shared tech-
nical language, never mind recognition of mutual professional
credibility and importance should not be taken as insigniﬁcant.
Figure 1: The Area of Desired Expertise
Whilst there are many audit tools used in accounting, the

237
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
computing literature already uses the “audit trail” [47] when
discussing evidence integrity, however in previous work [31],
[54]–[56] we have questioned the level of development of these
audit trails and whether all the lessons from the rich accounting
history in this area have been understood and then taken on
board.
One stark difference between the accounting approach and
the computing one is that of redundancy. To the accountant,
there is an expectation of keeping more rather than less —
indeed the whole concept of double entry is to record every
transaction twice. Computer scientists, on the other hand,
have a focus on efﬁciency and minimising costs, using such
terms as “redundancy” for seemingly unnecessary or duplicate
recording.
An audit trail needs to be developed and be ﬁt for purpose
— it may require some thought and planning to decide ﬁrstly
on the purpose(s) of the trail and then logically what data needs
to be safely and securely recorded. For example, Bernstein [57]
sees the trail including: events, logs, and the analysis of these,
whilst Chaula [58] gives a longer, more detailed list: raw
data, analysis notes, preliminary development and analysis
information, processes notes, and so on. Pearson et al. [10] as
far back as 2010, accept that attaining consistent, meaningful
cloud audit trails is a goal rather than reality. More worryingly,
Ko et al. [22] point out that it is possible to delete the audit
trail along with a cloud instance, meaning there is no record
then remaining. In the traditional accounting external audit, the
external accountant appears at the end of the year and would
need to access all the records they might need in order to
satisfy themselves that everything is in order — an ephemeral
audit trail would not be ﬁt for purpose. Ko [59] also details
the requirements for accountability.
VI.
THE SPECIAL SKILLS MIX NEEDED FOR CLOUD
FORENSIC AUDIT
As we mentioned earlier, with modern cloud systems, we
are no longer able to enjoy the beneﬁts of the permanent
ink trail. While reasonable alternatives can be available with
conventional distributed network systems, this is not the case
for cloud systems. We discussed the Cloud Forensic Problem
earlier, and it is this security weakness inherent in cloud
systems that makes this job signiﬁcantly harder to accomplish
effectively.
When considering cloud forensic issues, it is now clear
that we can no longer afford to rely on conventional discipline
boundaries when trying to address these issues, as it is now
likely that all the disciplines affected are likely to suffer
from potentially signiﬁcant knowledge gaps. Clearly, the cloud
environment is considerably different from conventional dis-
tributed network models under the sole control of a company.
There are now a great many actors involved in such an
environment, each potentially with their own agenda. Legal
and regulatory issues are also a lot less clearly deﬁned for
cloud environments, with the increased likelihood of multiple
companies and jurisdictions.
We also have to contend not only with the invited actors
but also with the potential of a number of uninvited actors
too. The list of the invited players is longer than we might
ﬁrst think. Company employees and managers may not be
as competent or trustworthy as we would wish. Outside the
company itself, there will be many others, including the
software provider, the cloud service provider, the auditor and,
in a modern business-to-business environment, the suppliers
and the customers. This is a complex mix of actors with
disparate agendas and, frustratingly, it cannot even be taken as
given that these legitimate actors will be willing to co-operate
fully with each other if a problem arises. Of course, there are
also the potential uninvited guests — namely attackers and
intruders, with the latter presenting the greater challenge.
Figure 2: Who is in your cloud?
Figure 2 shows a little of this complexity with the internal
actors in black, other companies in green, the auditor in
orange and the intruder in red. Whilst one might hope that
the authorized participants will play by the rules, any intruder
will make up their own, hence gaining access via a customer,
supplier or even the auditor is a reasonable option for them.
This level of complexity means we should no longer
consider addressing cloud forensic audit from an insular
perspective, since accountants, computer scientists and legal,
regulatory and other actors within the cloud environment will
all suffer from both incomplete knowledge and skill sets. These
gaps are not just missing pieces of a jigsaw that someone
else from a different discipline can potentially add, but the
ﬁlling of the gap may also redeﬁne some of the other problems
and issues in other disciplinary domains within the complex
situation.
Further, in the absence of the solid ‘ink trail’, this increases
the complexity of the task exponentially. In Figure 1 we show
the overlapping Area of Desired Expertise that is needed for all
three disciplines to fully understand where this knowledge gap
needs to be addressed. Assuming individuals are approaching
the centre from an initial disciplinary perspective, the need for
each to move well beyond their professional comfort zone is
obvious and challenging.
Currently, when it comes to Cloud, intruders can potentially
have it all their own way. Once they are in the system, it
can be merely a matter of time before they have built up
sufﬁcient privileges to delete the forensic trail of their activity,
thus allowing them to either bed down for the long run, or to
withdraw without leaving ﬁngerprints or “steps in the mud”.
The deleting of all audit and forensic trails as they proceed,
means that there is an signiﬁcant difﬁculty, verging on the
impossible, for data controllers to safely keep the organisation
fully compliant with all regulatory and legislative requirements

238
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
they must adhere to in order to achieve compliance, security
and privacy.
There are, therefore, two major goals that must be dealt
with. First, we need to ﬁnd a way to restore in some way
the permanent ‘ink trail’ so that we have something to fall
back on and to enable us to re-trace and re-build if necessary,
this is where an immutable audit trail process needs to be
conceived, designed and implemented. Second, we need to
recognise all the experience and skill sets required and then
enable the knowledge gaps to be bridged, ensuring that all
the parties who need to be involved in Cloud Forensic Audit
are fully up to speed. This will come down to a combination
of collaboration and proper training. This latter is outside the
scope of this paper, but the ﬁrst is very much a part of it, and
we discuss this further in the following sections.
VII.
SOME IMPEDIMENTS TO RESTORING THE
PERMANENT ‘INK TRAIL’
Before discussing how we might resolve the matter of the
permanent ‘ink trail’, we should consider some impediments
that are often inadvertently placed by companies on themselves
when using cloud systems. Companies should not rush this
decision, but should prepare properly ahead of time. They
should not assume it will be easy. Instead, they should think it
through, understand the costs properly, and ensure they have
the right service package rather than continuing to use the
ﬁrst one that came along [60]. Companies frequently wore
cost blinkers when choosing cloud provisioning. It is vital to
factor in risks and potential exposure too [61] not just looking
at the short term, but also taking the long view too.
Many companies have failed to prepare a proper disaster
recovery plan [62]. They must always expect the unexpected,
and plan for it. It is vital to be aware of precisely which data
needs to go to cloud, who should be able to see it, and this data
needs to be protected with proper access control. Companies
must understand where their data is stored [63] and how they
can get their data back, if required. They must understand
who all can gain access to their data. As we discussed in
Section V cloud systems will not necessarily only be exposed
to CSP personnel, but also other sub-contracted organisations
[64] whose security and privacy approach might not be as
robust as that of the CSP. Companies often fail to account for
data privacy risks, which presents a really good incentive for
using encryption for their data.
As far as cloud security and privacy is concerned, there is
no single solution [54]. It is a mistake to assume the CSP’s
security is good. CSPs have a huge incentive not to disclose
full details of previous security and privacy breaches, as they
do not wish to lose future sales. Companies themselves should
not use the wrong privacy approach. Wherever possibly, they
should try to align security with their own business goals
[65]. No matter which approach is used, it should be cloud-
friendly. For GDPR compliance, companies should always
consider encryption [66] preferably with split encryption keys.
Companies often sign up to cloud accepting the standard SLA,
which can be a big mistake. Many standard contracts are
extremely vague about security and privacy, or do not even
mention it. This lack of accountability on the part of the CSP
can only help attackers breach company systems more easily.
All companies must understand the true threat against
their employees, customers, suppliers and ultimately, their
data. Their information security plan must be cutting-edge
and comprehensive. They should view security not just as
an “IT problem”, but rather as a “business problem” that
also includes IT. Many who implement security as an IT
problem have ended up with a strong IT implementation of
data security controls but limited (if any) attention paid to the
required security controls such as physical security, security
policies and procedures, training, and other administrative and
environmental controls. People are frequently the weakest link
in the security chain, meaning this is why special attention
must be paid to their proper training in all security matters.
This is precisely the reason why security mirrors the business
architecture of any company, namely it is a combination of
people, process and technology [67] not technology alone.
There have been many interesting approaches to trying to
resolve some of the obvious issues in cloud security. One such
area is how to ensure data integrity in the cloud. There have
been a number of interesting proposals, such as [68] [66] [69]
[70] [71] which seek to provide data integrity assurance to
users through various forms of audit, which as a rule do work
quite well. Others, such as [72] [73] [74] [75] have suggested
trust computing might be the way to solve these problems.
Again, these often work well, but despite establishing trust
between providers and users, nevertheless, the fact remains
that the work is being performed on someone else’s systems,
thus risks will always remain. Yet others, such as [76] [77] [78]
[79] believe provable data possession could help address this
problem, whereas others believe that timeline entanglement,
such as [80] [81] [82] is the best solution.
All of these systems, while proving capable of delivering
what they promise, share a common ﬂaw. They provide an
excellent means of achieving their objectives, but not a means
to deal with what happens after a serious security breach. In
such cases, the intruders often act in a brutal and indiscrim-
inate way, modifying or deleting multiple records. Any user
who does not understand the true purpose of an audit trail
may quickly discover that they no longer have access to the
necessary data with which to restore the modiﬁed or deleted
data to its original state.
Thus warned, we will now turn to looking at the immutable
database in the next section.
VIII.
THE IMMUTABLE DATABASE
We can see that compliance with the GDPR is not a readily
achievable goal that can be easily met by any organisation
using Cloud services, due to the difﬁculties associated with
the Cloud Forensic Problem. Thus, we must ensure we create
and maintain both a secure forensic and audit trail in order to
have any chance of making this happen. Three fundamental
weaknesses exist and need to be addressed.
First, failure to use adequate default logging options will
result in a reduced level of required audit trail data being
collected. Second, there is often a lack of understanding that
audit trail data can be accessed by a malicious user gaining
root privileges. This can allow the malicious user remove key
data which would otherwise have provided evidence of who
compromised the system, and what actions they performed
once they took control. Third, log data must be properly
collected in permanent storage such that there can be no loss
of audit trail data, either when an instance is shut down, or
when it is compromised. The obvious answer would be to store

239
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
this data away from the running cloud instance, in a secure
environment using an immutable database which will allow
“append-only” transactions to be made.
Starting with the ﬁrst point, most database software offers
a considerable range of audit trail options that can be used to
keep proper records of what is happening within the system.
However, by default, logging is set to “off”! Since many
organisations rely on default installation settings, it is clear
that they will be at an immediate disadvantage unless the
logging options are fully explored and activated. An obvious,
yet simple point missed by many.
Looking at the second point, as Anderson [83] states, the
audit trail should only be capable of being read by users. In
a cloud setting, this presents a problem, as the software being
used is usually running on someone else’s hardware, with
the output being stored there as well. There is always a risk
of compromise from any outside user with malicious intent.
There may also be a risk of compromise by some malicious
actor working for the CSP. The CSP may very well take
vetting of staff seriously, but there may be situations that arise
where a temporary contract worker, subject to lesser scrutiny,
is engaged at short notice.
Turning to the third point, where database logging is
actually switched on, this data is logged to the currently
running instance. Thus, this data remains accessible to any
intruder who is able to successfully breach the system. This
will afford them the opportunity to cover their own tracks by
modifying or deleting any entries relating to their intrusion of
the system. Equally, they may simply delete the entire audit
trail ﬁles. Finally, when the instance is shut down, all the data
would disappear anyway.
These three points are generally not much thought about,
yet they present a serious weakness to the success of main-
taining the audit trail. Equally, these are relatively trivial to
address. All too often, management and IT staff will take the
view “so what?. We don’t need to collect redundant data”.
This entirely misses the point that this data is the only source
of proof of what intruders have done whist inside the system.
Without these records, it will not be possible to comply with
GDPR compliance procedures.
Of course, we need to consider very carefully exactly what
data we should log to ensure we can achieve compliance with
the GDPR. First, we need to monitor our Cloud instances.
We need to understand exactly who is accessing our systems,
whether authorized or not and we need to monitor what is
happening with our database systems to understand what these
users are doing with them.
Looking at our Cloud instances, as Duncan and Whitting-
ton have shown in [31] [84] [55] a working solution can be
found using an immutable database at its core to record all the
relevant information we would require. This means we must
ﬁrst consider carefully exactly what that information should
be.
We would want to log all signiﬁcant events as they transpire
during the life cycle of each Cloud instance, with the ﬁrst
signiﬁcant event being the creation of the Cloud instance, and
the last being the shutting down of that instance. Under normal
circumstances, these, and all other lifetime events, would be
logged on the instance itself. This, as we know from Ko et al.
[22] is a dangerous thing to do; thus our ﬁrst step will be to
ensure this data is logged additionally onto an external secure
immutable database to ensure it achieves full persistence.
This external database must run on a dedicated secure
server, protected by an Intrusion Detection System (IDS), and
the database must be immutable, i.e., append only. This secure
server will also use dedicated software agents to police the
activities being logged, so that the occurrence of any signif-
icant event (such as the shutting down of a Cloud instance)
will be instantly identiﬁed and reported for approval/further
investigation.
Turning to the question of who is using our systems, we
want to understand who is logging in to our systems, where
they come from and what they do once they have successfully
logged in. Thus we must capture the relevant detail from
the access logs. The detail of how this may be carried out
will depend on the systems architecture deployed, the type of
access control credentials used and means of controlling access
to the various systems available to speciﬁc users. A multi-
factor authentication approach is always better than access by
password. Proper logging of each step in the process is also
always preferable.
Once a user gains access to any system, we still want to
know where the user came from, and we certainly want to
know what the user did with the system after they gained
access. Thus we should be logging all the steps that the user
takes, regardless of whether access is via physical presence
or via remote login. In other words, we need to log every
single query made or instruction given to the system. We might
wish to consider whether we want to record what the result
of that query would be, since this might generate inordinate
amounts of data in the case of a database query. Whatever
we decide is required, we must ensure a separate copy of
the queries recorded are stored into our dedicated secure
immutable database. It is clear that redundancy can be a good
thing.
IX.
DISCUSSION
It is clear that without the assistance of the humble audit
trail, compliance with the GDPR while using cloud is likely
to prove an unattainable goal. Of course, not being breached
would also provide a solution, but based on events to date,
there is no guarantee that such a situation would be readily
achievable, let alone sustainable in the long run.
Having developed an effective, yet simple and workable
solution to this problem, we may well have some further
questions, such as:
•
How easy is it to implement?
•
How quickly and how well will interested parties
adhere to such a solution?
•
In the event of a breach, who will be responsible and
what might the consequences be?
The answer to the ﬁrst question is that we take the view
that this approach needs to be simple to implement and simple
to maintain. It is as simple as switching on the necessary
forensic and audit trail logging, then writing a chron job to
forward the resulting logs to the immutable database. Wherever
possible, such programmes should be set to immutable to make
it difﬁcult for attackers and intruders to delete them. A regular

240
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
check on the conﬁguration ﬁles would also be a useful thing
to do.
For the second question, it is likely that the easier some-
thing is to implement, the more likelihood that it will be im-
plemented. It is not challenging to implement, nor to maintain,
and the consequences of failing to do so could have a huge
adverse impact, so there is a considerable incentive to both
implement and maintain this approach.
As to the third question, it is not a question of ‘in the
event of a breach’, but rather a case of accepting there will
be breaches, and these are likely to be a continuous feature.
As soon as a breach occurs, a forensic trail will be generated
and stored both within the Cloud instance , as well as in the
off-site immutable database. Under normal circumstances, the
attacker will now attempt to dig deep, escalate privileges and
delete the forensic trail. The longer the intruder remains inside
the system, the more likelihood that a successful deletion of
the audit trail will take place. However, with a covert copy of
the forensic and audit trail data available, this will allow some
potentially fruitful investigative work to take place.
In the event that an attack against the Cloud instance is
successful, where will liability sit? The GDPR regulation is
quite clear. In the event of a breach, the Data Controller has a
legal obligation to notify the Supervisory Authority within 72
hours of becoming aware of a breach. Individuals must also
be notiﬁed in the event that encryption is not used. Clearly the
use of encryption would be a prudent approach to minimise
the impact of the breach, as well as the amount of any possible
ﬁne. It is also the case that some practical measure should also
be taken, such as ensuring that the encryption and decryption
keys are not stored on the cloud instance they are designed to
protect.
Clearly, doing nothing is not an option. Without a means of
being able to tell which records have been accessed, modiﬁed
or deleted, compliance with the GDPR will not be possible,
and that will potentially carry a very high price tag indeed.
X.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have seen that compliance with the EU GDPR for all
Cloud users is likely to present a signiﬁcant challenge. Without
special measures being taken, it is likely that compliance will
prove impossible to achieve. This is likely to expose such
Cloud users to the full force of the penalties of this regulation,
which are signiﬁcant.
It is clear that a minimal requirement will be to generate
both a secure forensic trail and an audit trail, in order to
have the basic requirements to be able to consider fulﬁlling
the regulatory requirements in the event of a breach. Without
this in place, it is likely to be impossible to comply with
the legislation, thus rendering the organisation liable to some
serious penalties.
In this article, we have identiﬁed the particular issues that
companies who are Cloud users and are liable to be GDPR
compliant must be able to deal with. There is no point in
relying on Cloud service providers to take care of this matter.
The company data controller is accountable to the regulator
for ensuring the company is compliant, and without both a
forensic trail and a full audit trail for the PII held on behalf of
EU residents, then compliance will not be possible. This will
lead to potentially massive ﬁnes being applied — a situation
that is potentially avoidable.
We have built a miniature real life Cloud system on which
to test our ideas. The server runs a full Cloud management
system, which will be used to run a number of independent
Cloud instances, all of which will run web servers with
database back ends to replicate the approach of many Cloud
users. This system will run on a closed network where it will
be subject to rigorous attack, with the view to discover whether
the immutable database approach can succeed in allowing
Cloud users to be GDPR compliant.
We have developed a range of scenarios to test, and we
seek to ﬁnd the optimum solution providing the right balance
between usability, performance, cost and ease of dealing with
breaches. We shall be reporting on our results next year, and
we will be working towards delivering a workable solution to
keep Cloud users compliant.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Can Forensic Audit Help Address
the Cloud Forensic Problem in Light of the Requirements of the
Forthcoming European Union General Data Protection Regulation?” in
Cloud Computing 2018: The Ninth International Conference on Cloud
Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. February. Barcelona, Spain:
IARIA, 2018, pp. 84–89.
[2]
EU, “EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” 2017. [Online].
Available: http://www.eugdpr.org/ [Last accessed: August 2018]
[3]
T. Takahashi, Y. Kadobayashi, and H. Fujiwara, “Ontological Approach
toward Cybersecurity in Cloud Computing Categories and Subject De-
scriptors,” in Science And Technology, 2010, pp. 100–109.
[4]
L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, “A Break
in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Deﬁnition,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, vol. 39, no. 1, 2008, p. 50.
[5]
M. Alhamad, T. Dillon, C. Wu, and E. Chang, “Response Time for Cloud
Computing Providers,” Response, 2010, pp. 8–10.
[6]
D. Durkee, “Why Cloud Computing Will Never Be Free,” Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 5, may 2010, p. 62.
[7]
S. Fraser, R. Biddle, S. Jordan, K. Keahey, B. Marcus, E. M. Maximilien,
and D. Thomas, “Cloud Computing Beyond Objects: Seeding the Cloud,”
Communications, 2009, pp. 847–850.
[8]
A. Haeberlen, “A Case for the Accountable Cloud,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, vol. 44, no. 2, 2010, p. 52.
[9]
S. Pearson, “Towards Accountability in the Cloud,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 15, no. 4, jul 2011, pp. 64–69.
[10]
S. Pearson and A. Benameur, “Privacy, Security and Trust Issues Arising
from Cloud Computing,” in 2010 IEEE Second International Conference
on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, no. December. Ieee, nov
2010, pp. 693–702.
[11]
R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and I. Brandic, “Cloud
computing and emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for
delivering computing as the 5th utility,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 25, no. 6, 2009, p. 17.
[12]
L. M. Kaufman, “Data security in the world of cloud computing,” IEEE
Security and Privacy, vol. 7, no. 4, jul 2009, pp. 61–64.
[13]
P. Mell and T. Grance, “Effectively and Securely Using the Cloud
Computing Paradigm,” NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, vol. 2,
no. 8, 2009, pp. 304–311.
[14]
P. Mell, T. Grance, and Others, “The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud
Computing,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, Tech. Rep.,
2011.
[15]
S. Bradshaw, C. Millard, and I. Walden, “Contracts for Clouds: Com-
parison and Analysis of the Terms and Conditions of Cloud Computing
Services,” International Journal of Law and Information Technology,
vol. 19, no. 3, 2011, pp. 187–223.

241
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[16]
K. Hon, C. Millard, and I. Walden, “The Problem of ‘Personal Data’
in Cloud Computing - What Information is Regulated ?” 2011. [On-
line]. Available: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1562461 [Last accessed: August
2018]
[17]
M. Iansiti and G. L. Richards, “Economic Impact of Cloud Computing,”
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, vol. 7, no. 2000, 2010,
pp. 1–42.
[18]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. K. L. Ko, “Towards
Greater Accountability in Cloud Computing through Natural-Language
Analysis and Automated Policy Enforcement,” Engineering, 2011, pp.
1–4.
[19]
Data
Protection
Working
Party,
“Opinion
05/2012
on
Cloud
Computing,”
2012.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-
29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/ﬁles/2012/wp196 en.pdf
[Last accessed: August 2018]
[20]
W. Jansen and T. Grance, “Guidelines on Security and Privacy in Public
Cloud Computing,” NIST, Tech. Rep. 7, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-144/SP800-144.pdf
[Last
accessed: August 2018]
[21]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and M. C. Mont, “Towards Natural-
Language Understanding and Automated Enforcement of Privacy Rules
and Regulations in the Cloud: Survey and Bibliography,” Analysis, 2011,
pp. 1–9.
[22]
R. K. L. Ko, P. Jagadpramana, M. Mowbray, S. Pearson, M. Kirchberg,
Q. Liang, and B. S. Lee, “TrustCloud: A framework for accountability
and trust in cloud computing,” Proceedings - 2011 IEEE World Congress
on Services, SERVICES 2011, 2011, pp. 584–588.
[23]
R. K. L. Ko, B. S. Lee, and S. Pearson, “Towards achieving account-
ability, auditability and trust in cloud computing,” Communications in
Computer and Information Science, vol. 193 CCIS, no. Part 4, 2011, pp.
432–444.
[24]
S. Pearson and A. Charlesworth, “Accountability as a way forward for
privacy protection in the cloud,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 5931 LNCS, no. December, 2009, pp.
131–144.
[25]
EU, “Accountability for Cloud (A4Cloud),” 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://a4cloud.eu/ [Last accessed: August 2018]
[26]
M.
Hammock,
“A
Review
of
the
Economics
of
Information
Security
Literature,”
pp.
1–38,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1625853 [Last accessed: August 2018]
[27]
A. M. Froomkin, “Government Data Breaches,” Berkeley Technology
Law Journal, 2009, pp. 1–42.
[28]
Verizon, “2012 Data Breach Investigations Report,” Verizon, Tech. Rep.,
2012.
[29]
Verizon, “2016 Verizon Data Breach Report,” Tech. Rep., 2016.
[30]
D. Kossmann, T. Kraska, and S. Loesing, “An evaluation of alternative
architectures for transaction processing in the cloud,” in Proceedings of
the 2010 International Conference on Management of Data. Indianapolis,
Indiana: ACM Press, 2010, pp. 579–590.
[31]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Com-
puting 2016: The Seventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, no. April. Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp. 125–130.
[32]
R. M. Skinner and J. Milburn, Accounting standards in evolution,
2nd ed. Toronto: Prentice Hall, 2001.
[33]
S. A. Zeff, “The objectives of ﬁnancial reporting: a historical survey
and analysis,” Accounting and Business Research, vol. 43, no. 4, 2013,
pp. 262–327.
[34]
A. A. A. C. to Prepare a Statement of Basic Accounting Theory, A
statement of basic accounting theory. American Accounting Association,
1966.
[35]
IASB, “IASB ED/2015/3 - Exposure Draft Conceptual Framework for
Financial Reporting Comments,” IASB, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[36]
OED,
“Oxford
English
Dictionary,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.oed.com [Last accessed: August 2018]
[37]
R. H. Ashton, “An experimental study of internal control judgements,”
Journal of Accounting Research, 1974, pp. 143–157.
[38]
S. S. G. Gelinas U.J. and A. E. Oram, Accounting Information Systems
(4th edition). South-Western College Publishing, Cincinnati, Ohio, US.,
1999.
[39]
E. Vaassen, R. Meuwissen, and C. Schelleman, Accounting information
systems and internal control. Wiley Publishing, 2009.
[40]
J. A. Hall, Accounting Information Systems (3rd edition). South-
Western College Publishing, Cincinnati, Ohio, US., 2001.
[41]
Sox, “Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,” p. 66, 2002. [Online]. Available:
news.ﬁndlaw.com/hdocs/docs/gwbush/sarbanesoxley072302.pdf
[Last
accessed: August 2018]
[42]
W. Ge and S. McVay, “The disclosure of material weaknesses in internal
control after the Sarbanes-Oxley Act,” Accounting Horizons, vol. 19,
no. 3, 2005, pp. 137–158.
[43]
W. S. Hopwood, J. J. Leiner, and D. G. R. Young, Forensic accounting
and fraud examination.
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
[44]
NIST, “NIST Cloud Computing Forensic Science Challenges,” 2014,
p. 51.
[45]
J. Taylor, Forensic accounting. Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2011.
[46]
K.-K. Choo and A. Dehghantanha, “Contemporary Digital Forensics
Investigations of Cloud and Mobile Applications,” in Contemporary Dig-
ital Forensic Investigations of Cloud and Mobile Applications. Elsevier,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[47]
S. A. Almulla, Y. Iraqi, and A. Jones, “A State-of-the-Art Review of
Cloud Forensics,” Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, vol. 9,
no. 4, 2014, pp. 7–28.
[48]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Information Security in the Cloud:
Should We be Using a Different Approach?” in 2015 IEEE 7th In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science
(CloudCom), Vancouver, 2015, pp. 523–528.
[49]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Company Management Approaches
Stewardship or Agency: Which Promotes Better Security in Cloud
Ecosystems?” in Cloud Computing 2015: The Sixth International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, IARIA, Ed.
Nice, France: IEEE, 2015, pp. 154–159.
[50]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Reﬂecting on whether checklists can
tick the box for cloud security,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, CloudCom,
vol. 2015-Febru, no. February.
Singapore: IEEE, 2015, pp. 805–810.
[51]
ACCA, “ACCA celebrates hitting 200,000 members worldwide with a
global tour to honour each and every one,” London, 2018.
[52]
ACCA, “Advanced Audit and Assurance: Syllabus and Study Guide
September 2018 to September 2019,” 2017.
[53]
KPMG,
“Forensics,”
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://home.kpmg.com/uk/en/home/services/advisory/risk-
consulting/forensic-landing.html [Last accessed: August 2018]
[54]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Compliance with standards, assurance
and audit: does this equal security?” in Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Security of Information and Networks - SIN ’14.
Glasgow: ACM, 2014, pp. 77–84.
[55]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating an Immutable Database for
Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,” in Cloud Computing
2017: The Eighth International Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs,
and Virtualization. Athens, Greece: IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-529-6,
2017, pp. 54–59.
[56]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Creating and Conﬁguring an Im-
mutable Database for Secure Cloud Audit Trail and System Logging,”
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol. 10, no. 3&4, 2017,
pp. 155–166.
[57]
D. Bernstein, E. Ludvigson, K. Sankar, S. Diamond, and M. Morrow,
“Blueprint for the intercloud - Protocols and formats for cloud computing
interoperability,” in Proceedings of the 2009 4th International Conference
on Internet and Web Applications and Services, ICIW 2009, 2009, pp.
328–336.
[58]
J.
A.
Chaula,
“A
Socio-Technical
Analysis
of
Information
Systems
Security
Assurance:
A
Case
Study
for
Effective
Assurance,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q=intitle:A+
Socio-Technical+Analysis+of+Information+Systems+Security+
Assurance+A+ Case+Study+for+Effective+Assurance#1 [Last accessed:
August 2018]

242
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[59]
R. K. L. Ko, “Data Accountability in Cloud Systems,” in Security,
Privacy and Trust in Cloud Systems. Springer, 2014, pp. 211–238.
[Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-38586-5
[Last accessed: August 2018]
[60]
Q. Zhang, L. Cheng, and R. Boutaba, “Cloud computing: State-of-the-
art and research challenges,” Journal of Internet Services and Applica-
tions, vol. 1, no. 1, 2010, pp. 7–18.
[61]
K. Dahbur, B. Mohammad, and A. B. Tarakji, “A Survey of Risks,
Threats and Vulnerabilities in Cloud Computing,” Computing, 2011, pp.
1–6.
[62]
Z. Chen and J. Yoon, “IT Auditing to Assure a Secure Cloud Comput-
ing,” in Proceedings - 2010 6th World Congress on Services, Services-1
2010, 2010, pp. 253–259.
[63]
D. J. Abadi, “Data management in the cloud: limitations and opportu-
nities,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull., vol. 32, no. 1, 2009, pp. 3–12.
[64]
R. Chow, P. Golle, M. Jakobsson, E. Shi, J. Staddon, R. Masuoka, and
J. Molina, “Controlling data in the cloud,” in Proceedings of the 2009
ACM workshop on Cloud computing security - CCSW ’09, 2009, p. 85.
[65]
K. Popovic and Z. Hocenski, “Cloud computing security issues and
challenges,” MIPRO, 2010 Proceedings of the 33rd International Con-
vention, 2010, pp. 344–349.
[66]
S. Subashini and V. Kavitha, “A Survey on Security Issues in Service
Delivery Models of Cloud Computing,” Journal of Network and Com-
puter Applications, vol. 34, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1–11.
[67]
PWC, “UK Information Security Breaches Survey - Technical Re-
port 2012,” London, Tech. Rep. April, 2012. [Online]. Available:
www.pwc.com www.bis.gov.uk [Last accessed: August 2018]
[68]
Z. Hao, S. Zhong, and N. Yu, “A Privacy-Preserving Remote Data In-
tegrity Checking Protocol with Data Dynamics and Public Veriﬁability,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 23, no. 9,
2011, pp. 1432–1437.
[69]
D. Chen and H. Zhao, “Data Security and Privacy Protection Issues in
Cloud Computing,” 2012 International Conference on Computer Science
and Electronics Engineering (ICCSEE), vol. 1, no. 973, 2012, pp. 647–
651.
[70]
K. Yang and X. Jia, “An Efﬁcient and Secure Dynamic Auditing
Protocol for Data Storage in Cloud Computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. I, no. 9, 2014, pp. 2–5.
[71]
L. Wei, H. Zhu, Z. Cao, X. Dong, W. Jia, Y. Chen, and A. V. Vasilakos,
“Security and privacy for storage and computation in cloud computing,”
Information Sciences, vol. 258, 2014, pp. 371–386.
[72]
N.
Santos,
K.
P.
Gummadi,
and
R.
Rodrigues,
“Towards
Trusted
Cloud
Computing,”
Information
Security
Technical
Report,
vol.
10,
no.
2,
2005,
p.
5.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1363412705000221
[Last accessed: August 2018]
[73]
Z. Shen, L. Li, F. Yan, and X. Wu, “Cloud Computing System Based
on Trusted Computing Platform,” 2010 International Conference on
Intelligent Computation Technology and Automation, 2010, pp. 942–945.
[74]
S. Sengupta, V. Kaulgud, and V. S. Sharma, “Cloud Computing Security
- Trends and Research Directions,” 2011 IEEE World Congress on
Services, no. October, 2011, pp. 524–531.
[75]
Z. Xiao and Y. Xiao, “Security and Privacy in Cloud Computing,”
Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 2, 2013, pp. 843–
859.
[76]
Y. Zhu, H. Wang, Z. Hu, G.-j. Ahn, H. Hu, S. S. Yau, H. I. Storage,
and R. Information, “Efﬁcient Provable Data Possession for Hybrid
Clouds,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and
communications security, 2010, pp. 756–758.
[77]
G. Ateniese, R. Burns, R. Curtmola, J. Herring, O. Khan, L. Kissner,
Z. Peterson, and D. Song, “Remote data checking using provable data
possession,” ACM Transactions on Information and System Security,
vol. 14, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1–34.
[78]
Q. Wang, C. Wang, K. Ren, W. Lou, and J. Li, “Enabling Public Veri-
ﬁability and Data Dynamics for Storage Security in Cloud Computing,”
in IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 22, no. 5,
2011, pp. 847–859.
[79]
Y. Zhu, H. Hu, G. J. Ahn, and S. S. Yau, “Efﬁcient audit service out-
sourcing for data integrity in clouds,” Journal of Systems and Software,
vol. 85, no. 5, 2012, pp. 1083–1095.
[80]
H. T. T. Truong, C.-L. Ignat, and P. Molli, “Authenticating Operation-
based History in Collaborative Systems,” Proceedings of the 17Th Acm
International Conference on Supporting Group Work, 2012, pp. 131–140.
[81]
M. Mizan, M. L. Rahman, R. Khan, M. Haque, and R. Hasan,
“Accountable proof of ownership for data using timing element in cloud
services,” Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on High
Performance Computing and Simulation, HPCS 2013, 2013, pp. 57–64.
[82]
S. L. Reed, “Bitcoin Cooperative Proof of Stake,” 2014, pp. 1–16.
[83]
R. J. Anderson, Security Engineering: A Guide to Building Dependable
Distributed Systems, C. A. Long, Ed. Wiley, 2008, vol. 50, no. 5.
[84]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Cloud cyber-security: Empowering the
audit trail,” International Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 9, no. 3
& 4, 2016, pp. 169–183.

