Practical Use Case Evaluation of a Generic ICT Meta-Risk Model  
Implemented with Graph Database Technology 
 
Stefan Schiebeck, Martin Latzenhofer,  
Brigitte Palensky, Stefan Schauer 
Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {stefan.schiebeck.fl | martin.latzenhofer | 
brigitte.palensky | stefan.schauer}@ait.ac.at 
Gerald Quirchmayr 
Research Group Multimedia Information Systems  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: gerald.quirchmayr@univie.ac.at 
Thomas Benesch 
Research & Development  
s-benesch 
Vienna Austria 
e-mail: thom@s-benesch.com 
Johannes Göllner, Christian Meurers, Ingo Mayr 
Department of Central Documentation & Information 
National Defence Academy of the Austrian Federal 
Ministry of Defence and Sports, Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {johannes.goellner | christian.meurers | 
ingo.mayr}@bmlvs.gv.at 
 
Abstract— Advanced Persistent Threats impose an increasing 
threat on today’s information and communication technology 
infrastructure. These highly-sophisticated attacks overcome 
the 
typical 
perimeter 
protection 
mechanisms 
of 
an 
organization and generate a large amount of damage. In this 
article, we introduce a generic ICT meta-risk model 
implemented using graph databases. Due to its generic nature, 
the meta-risk model can be applied on both the complex case of 
an APT attack as well as on a conventional physical attack on 
an information security management system. Further, we will 
provide details for the implementation of the meta-risk model 
using graph databases. The major benefits of this graph 
database approach, i.e., the simple representation of the 
interconnected risk model as a graph and the availability of 
efficient traversals over complex sections of the graph, are 
illustrated giving several examples. 
Keywords— risk management; APT; ICT security; physical 
security; graph databases; interconnected risk model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Based on a practical use case of a real-life Advanced 
Persistent Threat (APT) lifecycle, we showed in a recent 
article [1] how this type of attack can be tackled by a 
generic information and communication technology (ICT) 
meta-risk model using graph databases. In the present 
article, we will extend our preliminary work and show how 
the meta-risk model can be applied in a different context, 
i.e., a physical attack scenario.  
Although internal attacks can be seen as today’s biggest 
threat on information security [2], in practice, information 
security officers still put great emphasis on perimeter 
control. The internal area of a company’s ICT network, e.g., 
the demilitarized zone (DMZ) or the intranet, is secured 
based on standard technical guidelines demanding, e.g., the 
logical separation of a network into subnetworks according 
to specific security requirements [3]. Nevertheless, the effort 
invested in monitoring the internal network is moderate. 
Intrusion detection and prevention systems are cost and time 
consuming and require a large amount of administration. 
Recent attack strategies like APTs take advantage of this 
lack of internal control.  
The term APT summarizes a family of highly 
sophisticated attacks on an ICT network or infrastructure. 
Usually, an APT runs over an extended period of time with 
the objective to steal data and maintain presence indefinitely 
without being detected. A continuous access allows 
collecting new data as it emerges, extending the achieved 
foothold over time, and using the site as a jumping point for 
the attack on other facilities. The adversary – usually a 
group of people – has a large amount of resources at hand 
and applies the whole range of digital, physical and social 
attack vectors to gain access to a system. The attack is 
specifically designed for a particular victim, i.e., a company 
or an organization, such that common security measures can 
be circumvented effectively. Thus, the adversary stays 
undetected over a long period of time. One particular 
technique recurrently used in APTs is social engineering, 
which exploits the human factor as a major vulnerability of 
an ICT system. Potential countermeasures, like increasing 
the staff’s awareness concerning ICT security threats via 
training courses, are not very common. According to a 
Ponemon study [4], about 52% of the interviewed 
organizations do not offer respective training courses for 
their employees.  
In the course of the last decade, APTs became one of the 
most significant kinds of threats on information security, 
causing a great number of security incidents all over the 
world [5]. Besides the most prominent APT attack, the 
application of the malware Stuxnet in an Iranian nuclear 
66
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

power plant, a number of other APT attacks have become 
known, e.g., Operation Aurora, Shady Rat, Red October or 
MiniDuke [6][7][8]. As it is shown in the Mandiant Report 
[5], some adversaries even have a close connection to 
governmental organizations. The former director of the US 
cyber command, General Keith Alexander, referred to the 
currently occurring industrial espionage and theft of 
intellectual property as ”the greatest transfer of wealth in 
history” [9]. In Europe, the disclosures of Edward Snowden 
[10] have drawn great attention to this issue. Based on 
current numbers from cyber-crime reports, which show the 
growing amount of damage [11][12], it is distressing how 
poorly evolved today’s countermeasures seem to be. 
This article focuses on the implementation of a generic 
ICT meta-risk model that can deal both with the described 
issues and can be applied on conventional ICT security use 
cases as well – e.g., a physical attack on a building with the 
aim to gain access to some information. The implementation 
of the meta-risk model is based on graph databases and 
social network analysis concepts to provide a perspective 
that can focus on a specific aspect (node) and its influences 
(relationships). From a technological perspective, the 
advantages of the chosen approach are demonstrated, in 
particular concerning aggregation of exposures, risks, etc.. 
Therefore, different types of assets, e.g., organizational 
aspects like processes and personnel, ICT components like 
IT systems and logical networks, and physical infrastructure 
objects, serve as examples of assets that are attacked in 
fictitious, but realistic ways.  
In detail, after a short overview of related work on graph-
based models in Section II, Section III sketches the different 
steps of an APT attack for a fictitious scenario to illustrate 
the basic principles of this family of threats. Section IV 
introduces the theoretical background and the development 
of the generic ICT meta-risk model depicted as a graph 
model. The subsequent Section V shortly discusses the pros 
and cons of an implementation via graph databases vs. 
relational databases. Sections VI and VII show the modeling 
of the two use cases introduced in this article, the APT and 
the physical attack scenario. Section VIII provides a detailed 
description of how the generic risk model is implemented 
using a graph database. Finally, Section IX summarizes the 
results. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Whereas 
the 
internationally 
widely 
spread  
ISO 31000 standard [13] provides generic guidelines for the 
design, implementation and maintenance of risk management 
processes throughout an organization, the ISO/IEC 27005 
standard [14] specifically focuses on information security 
risk management. In [15], this standard is taken as a basis 
and extended by the introduction of iteratively calculated 
management measures, indicators and expert knowledge, as 
well as the possibility to integrate sensors for automation 
purposes. The resulting continuous information security risk 
management model (cf. Figure 1) is also demonstrated and 
verified by a prototype and provides a framework for 
extendable sensors. This framework can be used to 
continuously gather security relevant attributes having a high 
impact on the overall model, derive security metrics and 
indicators based on ISO/IEC 27004 [16] and enable 
adaptable knowledge management approaches to infer risk 
factors of a risk assessment model. In the KIRAS project 
MetaRisk [17], the approach of [15] is connected with meta-
models for organization planning and control to derive a 
comprehensive enterprise risk management system referred 
to as meta-risk model. Additionally, a graph-based 
implementation has been introduced, which allows the 
visualization and semi-heuristic handling of complex 
relationships in a schema-free form. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
 INDICATOR ANALYSIS
RISK ASSESSMENT
CONTEXT DEFINITION
RISK ANALYSIS
RISK ANALYSIS
RISK EVALUATION
RISK TREATMENT
RISK ACCEPTANCE
RISK MONITORING AND REVIEW
RISK COMMUNICATION
Depth of risk 
analysis sufficient?
Risk treatment 
sufficient?
END OF THE FIRST OR REPEATED ITERATION
RISK-IDENTIFICATION
No
Yes
No
Yes
INDICATOR IDENTIFICATION
SENSOR-INTEGRATION
DEFINITION OF EXPERT KNOWLEDGE
Automatization 
suffitient?
Yes
No
INDICATOR EVALUATION
Depth of indicator 
analysis sufficient?
Yes
No
 
Figure 1. Extended ISO/UEC 27005 risk management process.  
67
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In general, graph-based models are used to capture 
relations among system entities at various abstraction levels. 
In [18], Chartis Research advises the introduction of graph 
analytics (based on graph databases) to the risk management 
activities of financial institutions so that they can discover so 
far unknown risks by revealing interconnected risk patterns. 
In [19], graph-based representations are applied in the area of 
risk management for critical infrastructures (CI). Bayesian 
Networks are used to learn (or simply estimate) CI service 
risks and their interdependencies. Additionally, a risk 
prediction is introduced and a case study to validate the 
model is carried out. However, some of the model’s features, 
like risk prediction and the handling of cyclic dependencies, 
could not be verified because they simply did not occur 
during the run-time of the case study. In contrast to the work 
presented in this article, the main goal of the approach in 
[19] is to identify an abstract set of variables and their 
dependencies based on system measurements and it is for 
this purpose that graph-based representations are introduced.  
The direct use of graph databases is not foreseen or discussed 
in [19].  
The continuous risk management process depicted in 
Figure 1 essentially consists of four main steps, which are 
performed iteratively (cf. in particular with the additional 
parts to the standard version on the right side of Figure 1 
referred to as Knowledge Management). These steps are the 
business value analysis, the scenario analysis, the threat 
analysis and the relation analysis (further described in 
Section IV. All risk-relevant measures and events available 
within an organization can be integrated in the continuous 
risk assessment process by repetitively identifying these 
measures (categorized and compressed according to ISO/IEC 
27004 [16]) and evaluating them with respect to indicators. 
The input of formally defined expert knowledge ensures a 
continuous update of the used risk factors and their 
corresponding indicators. The development and application 
of sensors for an ongoing collection of relevant data leads to 
a higher degree of automation.  
In this article, we introduce the explicit usage of graph 
databases  and combine it with the aforementioned, already 
existing risk scheme retrieved mainly from the IT-
Grundschutz catalog described in [15]. This approach has 
initially been shown in [1] and is extended here with a 
conventional 
use 
case 
implementation 
for 
physical 
information security. However, many important extensions 
have been made to this scheme to derive a much more 
generic model. The presented approach enables a measurable 
iterative increase of the depth of the risk analysis on all the 
analysis levels as well as an improved risk treatment. It 
enables the setup of an appropriate balance between required 
effort and obtained risk coverage. Furthermore, using the 
approach, cascading risks can be represented in a straight-
forward way that allows us to run easily through a typical 
APT attack scenario. The underlying model and functional 
assessment concept presented in this article, excluding the 
usage of a graph database for data manipulation, have been 
demonstrated in [20], although with the use of a relational 
database. 
Before going into more detail on the description of the 
meta-risk model in Section IV and its implementation in 
Section V, we will present the general APT use case scenario 
we will rely our further discussion on. 
III. 
APT SCENARIO 
In [5], the US security company Mandiant describes the 
typical lifecycle of an APT attack based on an analysis of 
how a Chinese cyber espionage group infiltrated several 
companies in the US and worldwide. In the following, the 
different steps in this APT lifecycle are briefly sketched to 
give an overview on the basic operations of an APT attack 
(cf. Figure 2). To provide a better illustration of the scenario, 
a fictional research facility, Biomedical Research, is used. It 
consists of four research laboratories with increasing degrees 
of security requirements (Biosafety Level 1-4) located in 
physically separated buildings. Additionally, the research 
facility runs two data centers, one located in the research 
building itself, and the other, which works as a backup, 
located at a distant administrative building. The information 
most valuable for an attacker is assumed to be hosted in 
Research Laboratory FL4, which is the one with the highest 
security level, or in one of the data centers. Based on this 
setting, a generalized APT attack can be outlined in eight 
steps.  
As a first step, Initial Recon, the adversary tries to gain 
access to the organization’s ICT infrastructure. Since the 
terminals in Research Laboratory FL1 are the only ones 
having full connection to the internet, a user in FL1 would be 
a primary target for a spear phishing attack (cf. (1) in Figure 
1) in order to place a remote backdoor on either of these 
terminals. A potential user to be attacked can be identified 
for example using social engineering. In the second step, 
Initial Compromise, a user in FL1 receives a spear phishing 
mail and opens the infected attached file (e.g., a ZIP-file). 
During the execution of the ZIP-file, a basic backdoor 
(beachhead backdoor, cf. (2) in Figure 2) is installed on the 
terminal W1. Through this backdoor, a connection to the 
adversary’s command and control server is established. In a 
third step, Establish Foothold, this initial connection is used 
to install a standard backdoor on the compromised terminal, 
giving the adversary an increased set of possibilities. Hence, 
the adversary is able to gain foothold at the application 
server S1 in FL1 (cf. (4) in Figure 2). 
The following four steps (steps 4 to 7) are usually 
performed more than once, until the adversary acquires the 
desired information. In step 4, Escalate Privileges, the 
adversary gathers information on valid combinations of user 
names and passwords inside the internal networks. The 
attacker also gains additional information about the internal 
network structure (step 5 – Internal Recon – cf. (5) in Figure 
2), potentially including internal authentication information. 
In the following step 6, Move Laterally, the adversary 
infiltrates the local data center as well as the backup data 
center to locate the valuable information. This is achieved 
using a vulnerability scan on the file servers S7.1 and S7.2 
and an appropriate exploit allowing the compromise of both 
identically configured systems (cf. (6) in Figure 2). As a final 
step of this recurrent loop, Maintain Presence, all tracks are 
68
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

covered up and the adversary silently stays in the victim’s 
system with an extended foothold (cf. (7) in Figure 2). 
The final step, Complete Mission, starts when all the 
target information is collected. Covert channels are 
established (e.g., using cryptography/steganography) to 
extract the sensitive information from the file servers (cf. (8) 
in Figure 2). Afterwards, all traces of the attack are erased.  
IV. 
SETUP OF THE ICT META-RISK MODEL 
The risk analysis process of the continuous information 
security risk management model presented in [15] (cf. 
Section II above) incorporating the knowledge management 
parts comprises of the following layers or steps:  
• 
business 
value 
analysis 
for 
the 
systemic 
representation of all the assets that need to be 
protected, 
• 
scenario analysis (optional) for the representation 
of high-level dependencies between assets,  
• 
threat analysis (optional) for the specific modeling 
of low-level threat cascades, 
• 
relation analysis (automatic) which delivers a 
combined risk overview over all the modeled 
scenarios for each asset.  
 
Figure 2. Sample scenarios: APT attack (red), physical security attack (blue). 
69
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The Business value, scenario and threat analysis can be 
modelled with iterative increase of modelling depth and 
detail, while the relation analysis automatically incorporates 
all asset instances modeled. So far, the implementation of 
the prototype of the proposed general model and thus also of 
the risk-analysis is largely based on the standards, 
catalogues and cross references from the BSI’s IT-
Grundschutz [15]. The advantage of using the IT-
Grundschutz approach is that it delivers an extensive list of 
IT-related threats, which are already connected with assets, 
together with safeguards against these threats and roles that 
are responsible for planning and implementation of these 
safeguards. Although using it as a basis, our model extends 
the BSI approach in several aspects, e.g., concerning the 
view on the protection criteria (i.e., confidentiality, integrity 
and availability), or the introduction of risk management 
aspects. In the following, we will describe the four steps of 
the risk analysis process of our model (cf. also Figure 3). 
A. Business Value Analysis 
In the first step, all assets of an organization requiring 
protection have to be identified. This can be done, for 
example, using the IT-Grundschutz catalog. In this case, the 
business assets are represented by one or more modules from 
the IT-Grundschutz. In this context, standard assets are, for 
example, applications, IT-systems, networks, rooms, and 
buildings. Additionally, in more complex models also legal 
entities, organizational divisions, or processes can be taken 
into account by representing them in the form of modules. In 
any case, each module has several protection criteria (e.g., 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability) and is associated 
with various threats, which, in turn, are related to protection 
criteria on the one hand, and appropriate security measures to 
mitigate them on the other hand (cf. Figure 4).   
 
 
Figure 3. Analysis layers of the overall model. 
 
Figure 4. Business Asset Analysis. 
70
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The information contained in the interrelations between 
modules, threats, and security measures is used for the 
calculation of a value for the exposures of an asset.  Thereby, 
the threat exposure is a function of the likelihood of an attack 
and the vulnerability of the threatened asset (which largely 
depends on the maturity levels of the related security 
measures). Higher level exposures (e.g., module exposure, 
asset exposure) are aggregated using generic estimation 
functions (e.g., maximum, sum, energetic sum, etc.). At the 
asset level, each protection criteria (e.g., confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, etc.) has an associated requirement 
level which corresponds with the maximum tolerable impact. 
By multiplication of protection criterion impact of an asset 
with its distinct exposure, , an asset risk value is obtained for 
this protection criterion (e.g., availability risk). An overall 
asset risk value can, for example, be estimated based on the 
sum of its protection criteria risks.  
B. Scenario Analysis 
In the scenario analysis [21], the identified business 
assets are connected with each other. This is done in a 
structural way, starting from high-level assets (e.g., legal 
entities or business processes) and going down to more and 
more specific assets they depend on (e.g., applications, IT 
systems and networks, buildings and personnel) (cf. Figure 
5). Based on the determined dependencies between assets the 
necessary risk inheritance functions between assets can be set 
up. Moreover, with the obtained structural knowledge, a 
business impact analysis [22] can be carried out to identify 
the protection criteria requirements of each of the assets in 
various scenarios. In the course of the business impact 
analysis, a choice of inheritance functions for the protection 
criteria associated with assets also takes place. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Generalized structure of a scenario analysis. 
 
 
  
Figure 6. Representation of threat cascades. 
71
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7. Meta-model of an organization [23]. 
C. Threat Analysis 
Building on the aforementioned structural relations 
describing the risk inheritance between different business 
assets, a representation of how different threats affect each 
other can be obtained. Figure 6 schematically presents 
several such threat cascades between two assets. In detail, 
the first asset is an ICT system (“Generic Server”) and the 
second 
one 
is 
an 
organizational 
entity 
(“Security 
Management”) [24]. From this representation it is easy to 
see that an “Inadequate Security Management” (T2.66) can 
lead to several other threats, i.e., “Unauthorized Use of 
Rights” (T2.7), “Non-Compliance with IT Security 
Measures” (T3.3), and “Software Vulnerabilities or Errors” 
(T4.22). By iteratively extending the model of low-level 
threat cascades between the assets connected during 
scenario analysis, the estimation model gains knowledge 
about adapted threat exposures based on required threat 
predecessors. 
D. Relation Analysis 
As a final step, to get an estimation of the threat exposure 
per asset additionally to the scenario-based threat picture, all 
the risk carrying scenarios that affect a specific asset are 
aggregated. Further, the protection criteria values coming 
from the various scenarios are combined per asset. The 
negative effects of unwanted events on the protection criteria 
of an asset are a measure of their impact on that asset. By 
combining the threat exposure with the impact, a risk value 
can be calculated. 
E. ICT Meta-Risk Model 
In the course of the MetaRisk project, the approach 
described above has been further extended to develop a 
comprehensive ICT meta-risk model. Derived in a combined 
bottom-up/top-down way, this generic ICT meta-risk model 
subsumes all the typical components of common risk 
management models, tools, processes, and control logic. Its 
central component is a meta-model of an organization, which 
aims at describing an organization in a holistic way (cf. 
Figure 7 for a schematic representation and [23] for a more 
detailed description of the model).  
This meta-model of an organization builds upon three 
layers: a strategic layer, an operative layer, and a layer that 
subsumes the enablers of the organization. It also includes 
the organization’s supply chain network. On the strategic 
level, the overall strategy of the organization is described, 
together with the corporate compliance, the corporate 
identity and the development of the organization. These four 
topics influence the risk management on the highest level, 
defining the long-term goals of the organization.  
On the operative layer, more detailed models can be 
found. These include the organization’s structural models, 
i.e., the general setup of the organization, including 
buildings, machines and other tangible objects, as well as 
process models describing the activities and day-to-day 
business of the organization. A special focus is laid on the 
ICT infrastructure of the organization, since it represents a 
core feature of every organization and is crucial to achieve 
the organization’s goals. 
The third layer describes the enablers, i.e., all the actors 
and resources required to perform the organization’s daily 
business. In this context, actors are usually divided into 
several groups and types of actors, often specific to the 
underlying organization, together with their respective roles 
according to knowledge management. The enablers have to 
be seen as key factors in the overall risk management process 
since they can represent threats, targets, and safeguards (i.e., 
mitigation actions). 
Starting from the described generic model of an 
organization, several standard processes and frameworks for 
risk assessment and risk management are combined in a 
bottom-up approach to derive the ICT meta-risk model. 
Therein, the plan-do-check-act (PDCA) cycle defined in the 
ISO 31000 [13] represents the reference for the basic process 
and categorization model. A detailed analysis of several 
further standards and frameworks has shown that the PDCA 
cycle works as a robust basis for their integration. Generic 
modelling requirements outlined in ISO 31000, ISO 27000, 
ISO 28000 and, e.g., OCTAVE have been used to perform 
completeness checks on the ICT meta-risk model. 
Furthermore, several frameworks, primarily the IT-
Grundschutz catalogues, COBIT 5 as well as the respective 
control mappings and goal cascade information, have been 
integrated as modelling catalogs.  
72
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The resulting ICT meta-risk model (cf. Figure 8) can be 
represented by a graph. It integrates all information required 
for the modeling and computation of risk objects within an 
organization. The intended purpose of the generic graph-
based ICT meta-risk model is to provide an easy-to-extend 
and schema-less representation with the ability to interrelate 
different types of nodes and to aggregate information across 
affected relationships.  
V. 
PROTOTYPE IMPLEMENTATIONS 
In the following, we will describe the implementation 
details of the ICT meta-risk model in graph databases. The 
underlying approach covers semi-quantitative analysis steps 
usually used within risk models applying ISO 27005 [14]. 
We focus on the interconnections in the graph-based meta-
model (cf. Figure 8), their representation in the graph 
database, and the relation to the implementation of the APT 
attack scenario and the physical attack scenario therein.  
 
 
Figure 8. Graph-based meta-risk-model. 
A. Graph Databases 
In this work, as architectural background for the 
implementation of the model, the graph database Neo4j [25] 
is used instead of a relational database. Graph databases 
provide the advantage of being able to perform near-real-
time traversals and aggregations, efficient topology analyses, 
and the optimal finding of node neighbors [26]. The retrieval 
time of graph databases is usually significantly less than that 
of relational databases [27][28]. Moreover, the graph-based 
implementation ensures more flexibility for defining 
relationships between datasets. Whereas relational databases 
are difficult to extend, in graph databases only a few edges 
and nodes have to be added to extend the graph. Thus, the 
adaption and extension capabilities of the generic ICT meta-
risk model are supported by the schema-less definition of 
data in graph databases. For instance, additional information 
on customer and competitor intelligence, responsibilities, or 
other quantifiable business data can be easily integrated in 
the database schema. When using Neo4j, the integrated 
declarative query language CYPHER [25] supports most of 
the work. Thus, analysis models with extended and adapted 
functionality are greatly simplified and the graph-based 
approach is more efficient than business code migration on 
the software backend. 
In situations, where the data set is quite homogenous and 
rarely changed, other architectural designs, like relational 
databases or in-memory databases, may be more appropriate. 
They also offer more support as well as advantages in the 
field of maturity. Regarding security, MySQL has an 
extensive security support based on access control lists. In 
contrast, graph databases like Neo4j expect a trusted 
environment.  
B. Graph-based ICT Meta-Risk Model 
The starting point for the graph-based ICT meta-risk 
model is the node Risk Model. This risk model contains 
narrative information on the scope of the risk analysis, the 
goals as well as its requirements. Each risk model has several 
goals relevant for the analysis attached to it (Risk Model 
defines Goals). For the categorization of these goals we will 
use the taxonomy coming from the IT-Grundschutz. In 
detail, the following categories are distinguished: 
• 
Modules: applications, IT systems, networks, 
infrastructure, high-level aspects, etc. 
• 
Threats: 
elementary 
risks, 
force 
majeure, 
organizational deficiencies, human failure, technical 
failure, intentional actions, etc. 
• 
Safeguards: infrastructure, hard- and software, 
emergency 
planning, 
organization 
personnel, 
communication,  etc. 
The integration of several frameworks into the ICT meta-
risk model allows us to use the taxonomy of COBIT 5.0 and 
to deduce COBIT-specific goals, e.g., stakeholder needs, 
enterprise goals, IT-related goals. These goals correlate to 
the exposure of the components in the risk model and 
therefore affect the relevant protection criteria, e.g., 
confidentiality, integrity, availability (Goals translate_to 
Protection Criteria). Furthermore, the ICT meta-risk model 
also allows evaluating these protection criteria separately 
(Risk Model analyses Protection Criteria). 
Users can be associated to the risk model (Risk Model 
requires User) in specific roles (User described_by Role) 
regarding the planning, implementation, and audit of 
required safeguards (Role responsible_for Safeguard). Users 
as well as automatable sensors using pre-aggregated data 
from external support systems (e.g., security information 
management solutions or security incident and event 
management (SIEM) systems) can provide measurements 
and events to the framework (User/Sensor provides Event). 
Events can be used to trigger workflows (Event triggers 
Workflow), e.g., when a new IT system is detected. The 
framework also provides a possible inference option between 
objective measurements and related subjective risk factors 
using fuzzy indicators (Event triggers Indicator) and an 
expert knowledge system. There might be the following 
interferences: 
• 
Protection criteria (Indicator infers Protection 
Criteria) meaning that the indicators refer to the 
estimated damage 
73
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Threats (Indicator infers Threat) meaning that the 
indicators refer to probabilities of occurrence 
• 
Safeguards (Indicator infers Safeguard) meaning 
that the indicators refer to the exploitation potential 
of vulnerabilities. 
In context of some events it can be useful to trigger 
workflows (Event triggers Workflow), e.g., integrating new 
vulnerabilities of IT systems into the risk model, which were 
discovered during scans. In order to support basic risk 
management functionalities, safeguards can be summarized 
as organizational actions (Safeguard handled_by Action), 
which can be combined with resources, e.g., personnel, 
finance, etc. (Action requires Resource) or projects (Action 
belong_to Project). By integrating priorities, return on 
security investment models can be feed with the results from 
cost and availability information analyses. 
Pre-existing information including goals, boundaries, and 
requirements are narratively documented within the nodes of 
the risk model. Risk identification is carried out by the 
definition 
of 
organizational 
assets 
(Risk 
emergency 
planning,Model involves Asset) that are depicted by modules 
(Asset described_by Module), threats (Module threatened_by 
Threat), safeguards (Threat mitigated_by Safeguard), and 
roles (already introduced: Role responsible_for Safeguard). 
Goals can be defined based on the usual protection criteria 
(confidentiality, integrity, availability), as well as on 
requirements 
derived 
from 
other 
taxonomies. 
IT-
Grundschutz [15] defines a respective risk catalog, providing 
a categorization by module type (applications, IT systems, 
networks, infrastructure, common aspects), threat type 
(basic, force majeure, organizational shortcomings, human 
error, technical failure, deliberate acts), and safeguard type 
(infrastructure, organization, personnel, hardware and 
software, 
communications, 
contingency 
planning). 
Moreover, 
additional 
goals 
and 
requirements 
(e.g., 
stakeholder needs, enterprise goals, IT-related goals, etc.) 
coming from different frameworks like COBIT [29] can be 
integrated using cross-references with IT-Grundschutz. The 
defined goals correlate with the respective exposure of the 
components within the risk model, which translate to several 
risk dimensions Risk Model analyses Protection Criteria). 
Risk estimation is based on the determination of 
safeguard maturities (supported by additional control 
questions, 
Safeguard 
has_question 
Question), 
threat 
likelihoods, and impacts on protection criteria. As a result of 
estimation, exposures are calculated for assets, modules, and 
threats 
separately 
(Asset/Module 
exposes 
Protection 
Criteria; Threat affects Protection Criteria) (cf. Section 0).  
Assets can optionally be related to each other during 
scenario analysis in order to depict their dependencies (Asset 
requires Asset). This supports business impact analysis and 
the option to perform risk propagation between scenario 
assets. Another optional step is to perform a detailed threat 
analysis by modeling threat cascades [30] (Threat 
gives_rise_to Threat) based on the relationships of the pre-
structured scenario model (Asset requires Asset).  
VI. 
MODELING THE APT SCENARIO 
In the following, the graph-based model of the APT use 
case scenario described in Section III is discussed in detail 
(cf. Figure 9). Assets (blue ovals) are modeled by _requires_ 
dependencies, which can be identified by a scenario analysis. 
The resulting structure defines the top-down inheritance 
between sub-systems and, at the same time, serves as default 
path for potential bottom-up threat cascades (_gives rise to_). 
Assets are connected to IT-Grundschutz modules (yellow 
hexagons) [15], where the referring relation is described_by. 
Threats (red trapezia) are linked to assets by threatened_by 
relations and associated with security measures (green 
rectangles) by mitigated_by relations. For the purpose of a 
detailed analysis, available threats can be combined to threat 
cascades via gives_rise_to relations. The business impact 
analysis model (described_by) and the IT-Grundschutz 
taxonomy itself indicate how these cascading paths might 
look like. This approach of modeling cascades might not 
address all of the potentially existing correlations, but it 
provides an easy way of dealing with chained probabilities. 
When looking in detail at the APT attack scenario as 
described in Section III, we see that initially a user opens a 
spear phishing mail at the Terminal W1 (Module M 3.201 
General client). This is an exploitation of the organizational 
threat T 3.3 Non-compliance with IT security measures, 
which is connected with the following security measures: 
• 
S 2.23 Issue of PC Use Guidelines  
• 
S 4.3 Use of virus Protection Programs 
• 
S 4.41 Use of appropriate security products for IT 
systems 
Afterwards, at the corresponding terminal server S1 
(Module M 3.305 Terminal servers) a standard backdoor is 
installed. This is possible because of the threat T 2.36 
Inappropriate restriction of user environment, which could 
have been addressed by the following security measures: 
• 
S 2.464 Drawing up a security policy for the use of 
terminal servers 
• 
S 4.365 Use of a terminal server as graphical 
firewall 
• 
S 4.367 Secure use of client applications for 
terminal servers 
Having gained access to the Terminal server S1, a 
software vulnerability scan is performed, helping the attacker 
to exploit the threat T 4.22 Software vulnerabilities or errors 
at the File server S 7.1 and, later on, at the file server S 7.2 
(Module 3.109 Windows Server 2008). In the analyzed use 
case, the following security measures were not properly 
implemented: 
• 
S 2.32 Establishment of a restricted user 
environment 
• 
S 2.491 Use of roles and security templates under 
Windows Server 2008 
• 
S 4.417 Patch Management with WSUS under 
Windows Server 2008 and higher 
• 
S 4.419 Application control in Windows 7 and 
higher by means of AppLocker 
 
74
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 9. Graph-based illustration of the APT scenario. 
At the same module, the follow-up threat T 5.71 Loss of 
confidentiality of classified information can be triggered, 
which is addressed by the following security measures: 
• 
S 2.32 Establishment of a restricted user 
environment 
• 
S 2.370 Administration of access rights under 
Windows Server 2003 and higher 
• 
S 2.491 Use of roles and security templates under 
Windows Server 2008 
• 
S 4.277 Protection of SMB, LDAP, and RPC 
communication under Windows Servers  
In order to perform quantitative analyses, the risk 
inheritance between different components can be modeled 
by appropriate functions, e.g., maximum, sum, product, or 
minimum. More complex normalized, weighted, or bounded 
variants are also applicable. Possible candidates for the 
latter are weighted weakest link or prioritized sibling 
[20][31]. 
VII. MODELING THE PHYSICAL SCENARIO 
In this section, it is shown that in an analog way to the 
ATP attack example, the ICT meta-risk model can also be 
used to describe and evaluate a physical attack scenario. 
Therefore, the use case discussed below models a typical 
physical environment of an ICT infrastructure. This scenario 
is also depicted in Figure 2. A layered architecture is 
assumed, i.e., the relevant ICT infrastructure is located 
within a building, the building is located on the grounds of a 
company, and the company is protected by a specific 
perimeter.  
A graph-based illustration of this scenario, similar to the 
one of the APT scenario in Figure 9, is given in Figure 10. 
Therein, the relevant assets are represented by blue ovals and 
modeled by _requires_ dependencies. The associated 
modules (yellow hexagons) do not correspond to modules 
from the IT-Grundschutz anymore, but can still be treated as 
such by the ICT meta-risk model. Thus, each module is 
linked to threats (red trapezia) by the _threatened_by_ 
relations, and threats themselves are linked to mitigation 
actions (green rectangles) using the _mitigated_by_ relation.  
In the physical security use case, just as in the APT use 
case, the ICT meta-risk model allows the representation of 
threat cascades using the _gives_rise_to_ relations. Thus, the 
cascading effects of a threat as well as different attack 
variants affecting various assets (physical objects) can be 
modeled. Accordingly, not only the analysis of unrelated 
individual risks of single objects can be achieved but also 
that of threat cascades and the risks of whole attack chains. 
As shown in Figure 10, an attacker who wants to enter a 
building has to overcome the perimeter protection first. This 
can be mitigated, for example, by the following safeguards: 
• 
Protection against climbing over (e.g., using a 
barbed wire on top of a fence) 
• 
Patrols (i.e., security guards walking around the 
area to spot trespassing 
If no physical barrier is present, an attacker could simply 
cross the perimeter line. This could be mitigated for example 
by the security measures 
• 
Surveillance (e.g., using CCTV cameras at the 
perimeter line) 
• 
Guard (e.g., located at a gate to the area) 
If the perimeter is not well-protected by these security 
measures, both above mentioned threats will give rise to the 
threat Crossing the grounds. To mitigate this threat, two 
possibilities are given  
• 
Identity badges  
• 
Patrols (as described above)  
If an attacker can overcome the area around the building, 
there are several ways to enter it. Thus, the threat Crossing 
the grounds gives rise to five new threats, i.e., 
• 
Unauthorized entry into building (via door) 
• 
Break-in door 
• 
Break-in ground floor 
• 
Break-in upper floor 
• 
Break in lower ground floor 
  
75
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 10. Graph-based model for the physical environment use case (excerpt). 
For each of these threats, a number of safeguards are 
exemplarily given. One safeguard can be used to mitigate 
several of the above threats. For example, the safeguard 
Patrol is effective against all the threats. Other security 
measures could be 
• 
Sensors 
• 
Locks 
• 
Burglarproof doors and windows 
• 
Avoidance of scaffolding 
Usually, the representation of the threatened objects 
(assets/modules, 
threats, 
safeguards) 
follows 
a 
risk 
inheritance model based on an instantiated structure similar 
to a fault tree. Such an implementation is based on master-
scenario assets and the dependencies representation of the 
different branches of the attack tree is done as a nested set of 
a relational database. This approach described above is 
appropriate for the representation of different scenarios. 
However, the physical scenario requires an individual 
definition and maintenance of the attack vectors, following 
separate paths for each variant. Consequently, such attack 
variants like trespassing/crossing the perimeter on the ground 
floor must be defined and maintained separately for the 
upper floors of the building. 
To overcome this problem as well as to solve the basic 
requirement for a simple combination of risk information, 
the advantages of an implementation in a graph database (as 
described in Section V above), where nodes, relationships 
and attributes are provided, can be used. Additionally, the 
schema-less representation of a graph database simplifies 
extensions of the model. By applying graph operations, 
structures, traversals and aggregations can be easily extended 
as well. These advantages can only be achieved by switching 
to a representation within a graph database.  
Based on the described threats within the physical 
security example and following the _gives_rise_to_ relations 
of the ICT meta-risk model, the model will not only indicate 
one single but several potential threat cascades for the 
physical security use case (in Figure 10, we highlighted only 
one of them). Thus, due to the graph-based nature of the 
model, a large number of attack vectors can be described in a 
rather simple way. To compute a quantitative score for the 
risk analysis, the risk inheritance has to be modeled by 
appropriate functions (as already described in Section IV 
above). 
VIII. RESULTS 
In this section, it is demonstrated how the presented risk 
analysis approach can be used to derive (semi-)quantitative 
results (e.g., annualized loss expectancy (ALE) risk) based 
on semi-quantitative inputs (e.g., safeguard maturity levels 
according to the Capability Maturity Model Integration 
(CMMI) framework: 0.. Incomplete, 1.. Initial, 2.. Managed, 
etc.). By using graph databases as model environment, the 
writing of complex business code for risk estimation can be 
avoided by performing the required assessments using 
CYPHER statements.  
The outlined risk estimation method is a simplified 
variant of the method defined in [20]. The general view is 
that vulnerabilities of assets can be exploited by threat 
sources resulting in negative impacts on protection criteria. 
Thus, for risk estimation, the vulnerabilities of assets are 
explicitly taken into account; however, instead of using them 
directly, they are substituted by maturity gaps of safeguards. 
This results in risk as a function of the likelihood of the 
occurrence of a threat, the maturity gap of an associated 
safeguard, and the impact that the unwanted event has on 
protection criteria (cf. (1)). 
 
R:= f (Tlikelihood , Smaturity gap , Iprotection criteria) 
(1) 
 
In an initial step, the safeguard requirements are derived 
from goals and estimated using maturity levels (from 
[0…5]). The product of the maturity gap (i.e., 1+maturity 
gap to evade division by zero) and the safeguard priority 
(from [1…4]) gives an estimation of the safeguard exposure 
(from [1…24]) (2). Additionally, the relation to the potential 
maximum exposure (based on the current goal definitions) is 
also calculated (cf. (3) (4) and Figure 11). 
 
 
76
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

safeguard exposure = (1+ maturity goal –  
estimated maturity) * safeguard priority 
(2) 
safeguard exposure max =  
(1+ maturity goal) * safeguard priority 
(3) 
safeguard exposure % = safeguard exposure / 
safeguard exposure max*100 
(4) 
 
match (a:USE_CASE:Asset{name_de:'x'}) 
-[r1:described_by]->(b:USE_CASE:Module{name_de:'x'}) 
-[r2:threatened_by]->(c:USE_CASE:Threat) 
-[r3:mitigated_by]->(d:USE_CASE:Safeguard) 
with (1+r3.target_maturity-r3.maturity)*r3.priority as 
exposure, (1+r3.target_maturity)*r3.priority as 
exposure_max, r3 
set r3.exposure = exposure 
set r3.exposure_max = exposure_max 
set r3.exposure_rel = r3.exposure/r3.exposure_max*100 
return r3 
Figure 11. Listing for the calculation of safeguard exposures. 
After all safeguard exposures are calculated for each 
asset, the threat likelihoods are estimated for a specific 
timeframe (from [0…1], however, to simplify the CYPHER 
code, the null value is excluded to avoid a potential division 
by zero).  
In a next step, the threat exposures are calculated. The 
threat exposure (from [0…20]) depends on the estimated 
likelihood (from [0…1]) and a function of its safeguard 
exposures (cf. (5)(6)(7) and Figure 12). For reasons of 
simplicity, here, the maximum function is used. In order to 
assess estimation variances, it may be appropriate to estimate 
the threat likelihood risk-averse (likelihood high) and risk-
affine (likelihood low). Based on the calculation of current 
and potential maximum events, the risk factors within the 
model can be described either absolutely or relatively.  
 
threat exposure =  
likelihood(low) * MAX(safeguard exposure) 
(5) 
threat exposure max =  
likelihood (high) * MAX (safeguard exposure max) 
(6) 
threat exposure % = threat exposure / threat 
exposure max * 100 
(7) 
 
 
match (a:USE_CASE:Asset{name_de:'x'}) 
-[r1:described_by]-
>(b:USE_CASE:Module{name_de:'x'})-[r2:threatened_by]-
>(c:USE_CASE:Threat) 
-[r3:mitigated_by]->(d:USE_CASE:Safeguard) 
with max(r3.exposure) as safeguard_exposure, 
max(r3.exposure_max) as safeguard_exposure_max, c 
set c.exposure = c.likelihood*safeguard_exposure 
set c.exposure_max = 
c.likelihood*safeguard_exposure_max 
set c.exposure_rel = c.exposure/c.exposure_max*100 
return c 
Figure 12.  Listing for the calculation of threat exposures. 
The threat exposures of all threats that have no incoming 
gives_rise_to-relationships are calculated first. The reason 
why the exposures of all uninfluenced threats are calculated 
initially is because no other threats have an effect on them 
(business impact analysis does not allow cyclic models). 
After having calculated the threat exposures of all 
uninfluenced threats, the threat likelihood of all influenced 
threats (gives_rise_to-relations) can be updated based on the 
likelihood of their predecessors (chained likelihood). The 
calculation will be triggered as soon as all predecessors have 
been calculated. For reasons of simplicity, this is done by a 
simple multiplication of the original likelihood of the threat 
and the maximum of the likelihoods of its predecessors. Of 
course, a more complex function (weighting) representing 
the relative exposure of the threat to its influences can be 
used. In the following example (cf. Figure 13), the originally 
estimated likelihood of threat 'y' is multiplied with the 
maximum of all its incoming gives_rise_to-likelihoods.  
 
 
 
Figure 13. Possible aggregation of exposures on  
asset-specific protection criteria (here: confidentiality). 
77
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
match (a:USE_CASE:Asset{name_de:'x'}) 
-[r1:described_by]->(b:USE_CASE:Module{name_de:'x'}) 
-[r2:threatened_by]->(c:USE_CASE:Threat) 
-[r3:gives_rise_to]->(d:USE_CASE:Threat{name_de: 
'Threat y', module_id:2}) 
with max(c.likelihood) as trigger_likelihood, 
d.likelihood as original_likelihood, d 
set d.original_likelihood = original_likelihood 
set d. likelihood = d. likelihood *trigger_ likelihood 
return d 
Figure 14. Listing for the likelihood update of influenced threats. 
After the likelihood update of all threats with incoming 
gives_rise_to-relations is finished, the remaining threat 
exposures can be calculated.  
Depending on the desired level of detail, threats can be 
assessed individually or as generalized protection criteria 
related to assets (asset exposures), as illustrated in Figure 14. 
By extending the graph model, arbitrary aggregation layers 
can be defined. Here, to simplify the outlined use case, asset 
exposures are aggregated based on the maximum principle 
and risk is estimated based on the annualized loss expectancy 
(ALE) formula (cf. (8) and Figure 15). Again, additional 
lower and upper bounds could be integrated to express 
variance. 
asset risk =  
estimated impact * MAX (threat exposure % / 100) 
 
(8) 
match (a:USE_CASE:Asset{name_de:'x'}) 
-[r1:described_by]->(b:USE_CASE:Module{name_de: 'x'}) 
-[r2:threatened_by]->(c:USE_CASE:Threat) 
with max(c.exposure) as threat_exposure, 
max(c.exposure_max) as threat_exposure_max, a 
set a.exposure = threat_exposure 
set a.exposure_max = threat_exposure_max 
set a.exposure_rel = a.exposure/a.exposure_max*100 
set a.ale_risk = a.impact*a.exposure_rel/100 
return a 
Figure 15. Listing for the calculation of asset exposures  
and annualized loss expectancy (ALE) risks. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
This article describes how a generic ICT meta-risk model 
benefits from the qualities of a graph-based implementation, 
especially from the features of schema-less information, 
which can be parametrized based on the individual 
requirements of the organization, near-real-time traversals 
and flexible definitions of relationships between nodes, and 
the ability of easy model extension. A representative APT 
scenario is described to demonstrate a practical application 
of the presented ICT meta-risk model. The consideration of 
cascading risk effects, including human-based information 
system vulnerabilities, is a necessary prerequisite for an 
effective defense against APTs, which exploit the full range 
of attack vectors, from social over digital to physical. 
Consequently, a second use case introduced in this article 
illustrates an application of the ICT meta-risk model on a 
physical security attack. In general, the generic nature of the 
model allows addressing all kinds of threats - from the cyber 
over the physical to the business realm - and their 
dependencies.  
The presented approach shows the application of a 
combination of several analysis steps and different parts of 
existing methods, e.g., morphological matrices, fault-tree- 
and event-tree-analysis, scenario analysis, threat analysis, 
system decomposition, and functional relationships [32]. The 
advantages of the presented combined approach are, for 
example, the possibility to focus on special requirements of 
information security and to cover a broader range of analysis 
depth and detail. These features cannot be achieved by using 
the previously mentioned methods on their own. The 
introduced scenarios are represented as a particular instance 
of a graph-based implementation of the generic ICT meta-
risk model. The relevant risk components, which can be 
easily integrated into the graph-based ICT meta-risk model, 
are provided by widely-accepted ICT risk frameworks, most 
importantly by IT-Grundschutz. The defined relations 
between relevant risk components within this framework 
give an excellent starting point for possible paths that 
potential cascading risk effects might take.  
From a technical point, for modeling and inference 
analysis of threat cascades, the graph-oriented database 
Neo4j with its query language CYPHER was used. Threat 
cascades and their relations can be visualized by graph 
databases in a more optimized way compared to relational 
databases. The schema-less data model of graph databases 
allows an easier adaption during the modeling process and 
the application of traversals to integrate calculations without 
modifications of the business code. However, with regard to 
the correctness of the results, the domain has to be specified 
and defined with a low level of uncertainty, and the level of 
detail of the risk factors has to correlate with the granularity 
of the results to guarantee a consistent distribution of risk 
values. Within the discussed use cases, uncertainty resulting 
from subjective assessments, or inconsistencies and errors in 
modeling depth is not dealt with explicitly. It can be 
addressed, like any other aspect, by introducing semi-
quantitative descriptors (e.g., assessment uncertainty, etc.), 
which can be aggregated within the graph model similar to 
other variables. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work is party supported by the research project 
”MetaRisk” (Project-Nr. 840905), which is funded by the 
Austrian National Security Research Program KIRAS 
(http://www.kiras.at/). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Schiebeck, M. Latzenhofer, B. Palensky, S. Schauer, G. 
Quirchmayr, T. Benesch, J. Göllner, C. Meurers, and I. 
Mayr, “Implementation of a Generic ICT Risk Model using 
Graph Databases,” presented at the SECURWARE 2015, 
9th International Conference on Emerging Security 
Information, Systems and Technologies, Venice, Italy, 
2015, pp. 146–153. 
[2] 
T. 
W. 
Coleman, 
“Cybersecurity 
Threats 
Include 
Employees,” 
International 
Policy 
Digest. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.internationalpolicydigest.org/2014/ 
05/12/cybersecurity-threats-include-employees/. [Accessed: 
19-Mar-2015]. 
78
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[3] 
SANS Institute, “Critical Security Controls: Guidelines.” 
[Online]. Available: http://www.sans.org/critical-security-
controls/guidelines. [Accessed: 19-Mar-2015]. 
[4] 
Ponemon Institute, “Exposing the Cybersecurity Cracks: A 
Global Perspective Part 2: Roadblocks, Refresh and Raising 
the Human Security IQ,” Traverse City, Michigan, USA, 
2014. 
[5] 
Mandiant Intelligence Center, “APT1. Exposing One of 
China’s Cyber Espionage Units,” Mandiant, Alexandria, 
Washington, DC, Feb. 2013. 
[6] 
D. Moon, H. Im, J. Lee, and J. Park, “MLDS: Multi-Layer 
Defense System for Preventing Advanced Persistent 
Threats,” Symmetry, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 997–1010, Dec. 2014. 
[7] 
C. Tankard, “Advanced Persistent threats and how to 
monitor and deter them,” Netw. Secur., vol. 2011, no. 8, pp. 
16–19, Aug. 2011. 
[8] 
I. Friedberg, F. Skopik, G. Settanni, and R. Fiedler, 
“Combating advanced persistent threats: From network 
event correlation to incident detection,” Comput. Secur., 
vol. 48, pp. 35–57, Feb. 2015. 
[9] 
The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual 
Property, “The IP Commission Report,” National Bureau of 
Asian Research, May 2013. 
[10] 
G. Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the 
NSA, and the U.S. Surveillance State. Metropolitan Books, 
2014. 
[11] 
Internet Crime Complaint Center, “2013 Internet Crime 
Report,” Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2013. 
[12] 
BMI, “Polizeiliche Kriminalstatistik 2013,” Bundesmini-
sterium des Innern, Berlin, 2013. 
[13] 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Ed., 
ISO 31000:2009 Risk management - Principles and 
guidelines. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2009. 
[14] 
ISO International Organization of Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27005 - Information technology -- Security techniques -- 
Information security risk management. 2011. 
[15] 
BSI, “IT-Grundschutz-catalogues 13th version 2013,” 
Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik - 
Federal Office for Information Security, Bonn, Germany, 
2013. 
[16] 
International Standards Organization (ISO), IEC 27004: 
2009 Information Technology - Security Techniques - 
Information Security Management - Measurement. Geneva, 
Switzerland: ISO, 2009. 
[17] 
Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology 
(BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG), 
“KIRAS Security Research: MetaRisk,” 2016. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.kiras.at/. [Accessed: 17-Feb-2016]. 
[18] 
T. Schaberreiter, “A Bayesian Network Based On-line Risk 
Prediction 
Framework 
for 
Interdependent 
Critical 
Infrastructures,” Dissertation, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finlande, 2013. 
[19] 
Chartis Research, “Looking fo Risk. Applying Graph 
Analytics to Risk Management. Leading practices from 
YarcData,” 2013. 
[20] 
S. Schiebeck, “An Approach to Continuous Information 
Security 
Risk 
Assessment 
focused 
on 
Security 
Measurements,” Dissertation, University of Vienna, Wien, 
2014. 
[21] 
B. Williams and R. Hummelbrunner, Systems concepts in 
action: a practitioner’s toolkit. Stanford University Press, 
2010. 
[22] 
S. Radeschütz, H. Schwarz, and F. Niedermann, “Business 
impact analysis—a framework for a comprehensive analysis 
and optimization of business processes,” Comput. Sci.-Res. 
Dev., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 69–86, 2015. 
[23] 
J. Göllner, T. Benesch, S. Schauer, K. Schuch, S. 
Schiebeck, G. Quirchmayr, M. Latzenhofer, and A. Peer, 
“Framework for a Generic Meta Organisational Model,” in 
Abstract Proceedings for the 14th FRAP Conference - 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2014. 
[24] 
R. McCrie, Security operations management. Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2015. 
[25] 
Neo4j Graph Database, “Intro to Cypher - Neo4j Graph 
Database.” [Online]. Available: http://neo4j.com/developer/ 
cypher-query-language/. [Accessed: 25-Mar-2015]. 
[26] 
R.-G. Urma and A. Mycroft, “Source-code queries with 
graph 
databases—with 
application 
to 
programming 
language usage and evolution,” Sci. Comput. Program., vol. 
97, pp. 127–134, Jan. 2015. 
[27] 
C. Batra and C. Tyagi, “Comparative Analysis of Relational 
And Graph Databases,” Int. J. Soft Comput. Eng., vol. 2, no. 
2, pp. 509–512, May 2012. 
[28] 
C. T. Have and L. J. Jensen, “Are graph databases ready for 
bioinformatics?,” Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 24, pp. 3107–
3108, Dec. 2013. 
[29] 
ISACA, “COBIT 5 - Enabling Processes,” Rolling 
Meadows, Illinois, 2012. 
[30] 
T. UcedaVelez and M. M. Morana, Risk Centric Threat 
Modeling: Process for Attack Simulation and Threat 
Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[31] 
C. Wang and W. A. Wulf, “Towards a Framework for 
Security Measurement,” in Proc. of 20th National 
Information Systems Security Conference, Baltimore, 
Maryland, 1997. 
[32] 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Ed., “FAA System 
Safety Handbook.” 30-Dec-2000. 
 
79
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

