Security for the Smart Grid –  
Enhancing IEC 62351 to Improve Security in Energy Automation Control 
Steffen Fries*, Hans Joachim Hof*,  
Thierry Dufaure+  
Siemens AG 
*Corporate Technology; +Energy Automation 
Germany 
{steffen.fries; hans-joachim.hof; 
thierry.dufaure}@siemens.com 
Maik G. Seewald 
Cisco Systems 
Hallbergmoos, Germany 
maseewal@cisco.com 
 
Abstract— Information security has gained tremendous 
importance for energy distribution and energy automa-
tion systems over the last years. Security for the smart 
grid is crucial to ensure reliability and continuous opera-
tion of the smart grid. However, the smart grid comes 
along with new use cases that impose new challenges on 
existing standards like IEC61850.  IEC61850 offers stan-
dardized communication services and standardized data 
models for communication in energy automation, hence it 
is beneficial for the realization of the smart grid. IEC 
61850 is flanked by the standard IEC 62351 that ad-
dresses security and specifies technical requirements, 
which have to be met by vendors. This paper provides an 
overview about the different aspects of security necessary 
to build and operate smart grid systems by describing 
current and new use cases. The focus lies on the current 
state of the standardization of IEC 62351 and its applica-
bility to the described use cases. Moreover, this work 
discusses potential enhancements of the standard to ad-
dress potential shortcomings through changed business 
and operation models leading to changed trust relations in 
new use cases like decentralized energy generation and 
load control. These shortcomings are addressed by de-
scribing potential enhancements for part 4 of IEC 62351 
allowing multiple parallel distinguishable sessions based 
on the Manufacturing Message Specification and proper 
end-to-end authentication as well as authorization.   
 
Keywords – Smart Grid; Information Security; Cyber 
Security; 
Authentication; 
Authorization; 
Energy 
Automation;Smart Home; IEC Standards; NERC-CIP. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Power generation and distribution systems are char-
acterized by the existence of two infrastructures in 
parallel, the electrical grid, carrying the energy, and the 
information infrastructure used to automate and control 
the electrical grid. Especially the latter is becoming 
more and more one of the critical parts of power sys-
tem operations as it is responsible not only for retriev-
ing information from field equipment but most impor-
tantly for sending control commands. A dependable 
management of these two infrastructures is crucial and 
strongly relies on the information infrastructure as 
automation continues to replace manual operations. 
Hence, the reliability of the power system strongly 
depends on the reliability of the information infrastruc-
ture. Therefore the information infrastructure must be 
managed to the level of reliability needed to provide 
the required stability of the power system infrastructure 
to prevent any type of outage. 
The current, rather centralized approach for power 
generation is evolving to a decentralized power genera-
tion involving existing power plants, power plants 
producing renewable energy (like wind parks) down to 
households having their own micro power plants (e.g., 
solar cells). Decentralized energy generation (e.g., 
solar cells) is believed to become more and more im-
portant and common in the future to fight global warm-
ing by reducing the CO2 footprint. Introducing decen-
tralized energy generators into the current energy dis-
tribution network poses great challenges for energy 
automation (EA) in the smart grid scenario, especially 
secure communication between a control station (e.g.,  
substation) and equipment of users (e.g., decentralized 
energy generators) must be addressed. Moreover, elec-
tro mobility will become more important and needs to 
be integrated into the current power system landscape. 
This increases the complexity of power systems even 
more.  In addition, there is also the trend to intercon-
nect the formerly closed and proprietary architectures 
with office environments and enterprise systems to 
provide new functionalities and increase cost effective-
ness on the move to smarter grid infrastructures. This is 
accompanied by complete restructuring of the conven-
tional roles on energy market participants.  
169
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The classical system architecture of the electric 
power grid defines distinct roles for energy producers, 
suppliers and consumers. With the new paradigm of 
smart grids driving towards sustainability, some of 
these roles will be redefined. The energy supplier sys-
tems have to handle an increasing amount of energy 
gained from distributed renewable energy sources and 
independent power production systems in residences. 
These forms of energy are produced in a much more 
decentralized way and also have a much more volatile 
characteristic compared to traditional forms of energy 
provided by existing power plants, often called bulk 
generation. At the same time one of the key factors for 
efficient and economic power generation is a balanced 
load level on power plants. Smart grid is the approach 
to address the mismatch between energy generation and 
consumption. Both aspects directly influence the distri-
bution process of transport and distribution system 
operators and require the adoption of advanced infor-
mation and communication technologies (ICT) in these 
processes. 
As the information infrastructure can be described as 
the backbone of the smart grid and therefore needs 
appropriate protection to ensure a stable operation of 
power systems in order to support the required system 
reliability. Information and cyber security provides the 
base for protection and resiliency against cyber attacks. 
This has also be addressed in the comprehensive do-
cument set NISTIR 7268 from the Smart Grid Interop-
erability Panel (cf. [6], [7], and [8]). 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II provides an overview about energy automa-
tion control frameworks focusing on IEC 61850 as one 
corner stone for the smart grid. Section III discusses 
security requirements in the context of smart grid. The 
following Section IV discusses the currently available 
security in terms of the standard IEC 62351. Based on 
this, Sections V to VIII discuss potential shortcomings 
of the standard that become visible through new smart 
grid use cases. Sections IX and X provide an outlook 
for potential future work and a conclusion. 
II. ENERGY AUTOMATION CONTROL FRAMEWORKS 
Typical automation systems are built in a hierarchi-
cal way. Figure 1 shows typical layers of an automation 
pyramid. On the lowest level there are sensors and 
actors like switchgear that are connected to field de-
vices. Serialized field buses as used for a long time are 
increasingly be replaced by standard communication 
technology as Ethernet and IP. These field devices are 
actuated by, e.g., substation controllers, which may be 
interconnected with other substation controllers using 
TCP/IP based protocols. On the top are interconnec-
tions to supervisory systems the so called control cen-
ters, again via TCP/IP. 
 
Human 
Supervision 
Controller 
Field devices 
Sensors / Actors 
 
Figure 1. Automation Pyramid 
IEC 61850 is a popular standard for communication 
in the domain of energy automation. It is assumed to be 
the successor of the currently used standards IEC 
60870-4-104 and DNP3 also for the North American 
region. IEC 61850 enables interoperability between 
devices used in energy automation, i.e., two IEC 61850 
enabled devices of different manufacturers can ex-
change a set of clearly defined data and the devices can 
interpret and use these data to achieve the functionality 
required by the application due to a standardized data 
model. In particular IEC 61850 enables continuous 
communication from a control station to decentralized 
energy generators by using a standardized data format. 
IEC 61850 addresses the data exchange on three 
levels: process level, field level, and station level. It 
defines the following four important aspects on these 
levels: Standardized self-describing data, standardized 
services, standardized networks, and standardized 
configuration for a complete description of a device. 
An XML-based system description language – Substa-
tion Configuration Language (SCL) – is used to de-
scribe a device. Standardized services are used to send 
standardized data over standardized communication 
systems. However, IEC 61850 defines abstract com-
munication services that are mapped on existing proto-
cols like TCP/IP, and Ethernet, using the Manufactur-
ing Message Specification (MMS). Moreover, there are 
also dedicated IEC standards mapping of the IEC 
61850 to the target application domain, like IEC 
61400-25 providing an adaptation for wind power 
plants. Here, a mapping to Web Services is targeted 
and currently under discussion. Security for IEC 61850 
is addressed in the related standard IEC 62351 that is 
described in the following section. 
170
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Today, IEC 61850 is mainly used for reporting stat-
us and transmitting sampled value information from 
Intelligent Electronic Devices (IED) to Substation 
automation controller as well as for command transport 
from Substation automation controller to IEDs. It also 
addresses the communication directly between IEDs 
using the Generic Object Oriented Substation Event 
(GOOSE) instead of dedicated wires. Necessary tasks 
comprise also configuration of equipment as well as 
control of circuit breakers. 
The following Figure 2 gives an example of the com-
munication between multiple substations using IEC 
61850. 
 
 
Figure 2. Typical IEC 61850 Scenario 
III. SMART GRID SECURITY REQUIREMENTS  
Security requirements stem from regulation, techni-
cal boundary conditions, and/or direct end-customers. 
Regulative requirements are given, e.g., by the follow-
ing regulations. 
A. Regulations and Regulative requirements 
NERC-CIP: North American Electric Reliability 
Council (NERC) has established the Critical Infrastruc-
ture Protection (CIP) Cyber Security Standards CIP–
002 through CIP–009 , which are designed to provide a 
foundation of sound security practices across the bulk 
power system. These standards are not designed to 
protect the system from specific and imminent threats. 
They apply to operators of Bulk Electric Systems (see 
also [2]). The standards originate in 2006. Last updates 
have been made in May 2009, but new parts of the 
standards (CIP 010 and CIP 011) are currently under 
development. 
NERC-CIP provides a consistent framework for se-
curity control perimeters and access management with 
incident reporting and recovery for critical cyber assets 
and cover functional as well as non-functional require-
ments. TABLE I provides an overview about the differ-
ent NERC-CIP parts. 
TABLE I. NERC-CIP Overview 
CIP  
Title / covers 
002 
Critical Cyber Asset Identification 
Identification and documentation of Critical Cyber 
Assets using  risk-based assessment methodologies 
003 
Security Management Controls 
Documentation and implementation of Cyber Security 
Policy reflecting 
commitment and ability to secure Critical Cyber Assets 
004 
Personnel and Training 
Maintenance and documentation of security awareness 
programs to ensure personnel knowledge on proven 
security practices 
005 
Electronic Security Protection  
Identification and protection of Electronic Security 
Perimeters and their access points surrounding Critical 
Cyber Assets 
006 
Physical Security Program 
Creation and maintenance of physical security controls, 
including processes, 
tools, and procedures to monitor perimeter access 
007 
Systems Security Management 
Definition and maintenance of methods, procedures, and 
processes to secure Cyber Assets within the Electronic 
Security Perimeter to do not adversely affect existing 
Cyber Security Controls. 
008 
Incident Reporting & Response Planning 
Development and maintenance of a Cyber Security 
Incident response plan that addresses classification, 
response actions and reporting 
009 
Recovery Plans for Critical Cyber Assets 
Creation and review of recovery plans for Critical Cyber 
Assets 
Draft 
010 
Bulk Electrical System Cyber System Categorization  
Categorization of BES systems that execute or enable 
functions essential to reliable operation of the BES into 
three different classes. 
Draft 
011 
Bulk Electrical System Cyber System Protection  
Mapping of security requirements to BES system cate-
gories defined in CIP-010 
171
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As already stated, NERC-CIP relates primarily to the 
operation of critical infrastructure. Nevertheless, this 
also places requirements on the product vendors to 
cope with certain security requirements. 
BDEW: The “Bundesverband  für Energie- und 
Wasserwirtschaft – BDEW was founded by the federa-
tion of four German energy related associations: Bun-
desverband der deutschen Gas- und Wasserwirtschaft 
(BGW),  Verband der Verbundunternehmen und Regi-
onalen Energieversorger in Deutschland (VRE), Ver-
band der Netzbetreiber (VDN) and Verband der Elekt-
rizitätswirtschaft (VDEW). The BDEW introduced a 
white paper defining basic security measures and re-
quirements for IT-based control, automation and tele-
communication systems, taking into account general 
technical and operational conditions. It can be seen as a 
further national approach targeting similar goals as 
NERC-CIP but less detailed. The white paper ad-
dresses requirements for vendors and manufacturers of 
power system management systems and can be used as 
an amendment to tender specification. 
B. Supportive actions 
Besides regulative actions, there are also supporting 
actions, that currently take place, e.g., by investigating 
in currently available standards and technologies, e.g., 
by the NIST (National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nologies) Smart Grid Interoperability Project (see also 
[4]). There are two documents, which are mentioned 
here as they are very compulsory covering a wide range 
of existing material as well as requirements for further 
investigation, that have been accomplished by NIST: 
— 
NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid 
Interoperability Standards, identifying technical 
standards and specifications, which are also relate 
to smart grid security (cf. [5]).  
— 
NISTIR 7628 (cf. [6], [7], and [8]) originates from 
the Smart Grid Interoperability Panel (Cyber Secu-
rity WG) and targets the development of a com-
prehensive set of cyber security requirements 
building on the NIST SP 1108 (cf. [5]), also stated 
above. The document consists of three subdocu-
ments targeting strategy (cf. [6]), security architec-
ture (cf. [7]), and requirements, and supportive 
analyses and references (cf. [8]). 
In addition to the NIST activities, the IEC has issued 
the IEC SG3 report (SMB/4175/R), which encom-
passes requirements, status and recommendations of 
standards relevant for the Smart Grid. Security is cov-
ered in detail in a separate section of this document. An 
overall security architecture capturing the complexity 
of the Smart Grid is requested. Beside this, the follow-
ing recommendations pertaining open items and neces-
sary enhancements are listed: 
− A specification of a dedicated set of security con-
trols (e.g., perimeter security, access control…) 
− A defined compartmentalization of Smart Grid 
applications (domains) based on clear network 
segmentation and functional zones 
− A specification comprising identity establishment 
(based on trust levels) and identity management 
− Security of the legacy components must be ad-
dressed by standardization efforts 
− The harmonization with the IEC 62443 standard to 
achieve common industrial security standards 
− Finally, it is recommended to review, adapt and 
enhance existing standards in order to support gen-
eral and ubiquitous security across wired and wire-
less connections. 
IV. SECURE ENERGY AUTOMATION BASED ON IEC62351 
Security services to be supported in energy automa-
tion comprise the usual suspects: 
− Authentication: The property that the claimed 
identity of an entity is correct. 
− Authorization: The process of giving someone 
permission to do or have something. 
− Integrity: The property that information has not 
been altered in an unauthorized manner. 
− Non-repudiation: The property that involvement in 
an action cannot be denied. 
− Confidentiality: The property that information is 
not made available or disclosed to unauthorized in-
dividuals, entities or processes. 
In contrast to office networks, automation networks 
have different requirements to security services as 
shown in the following figure. 
 
Confidentiality (Data) 
Integrity (Data) 
Availability / Reliability  
Non-Repudiation 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low – Medium  
High 
High 
High 
Office 
EA-Network  
Component Lifetime 
Short - medium 
Long 
 
Figure 3. Comparison Office/Automation security 
172
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In the context of energy automation, IEC 62351 de-
fines explicit security measures for TCP-based and 
serial protocols.  It applies directly to substation auto-
mation deploying IEC 61850 and IEC 60870-x proto-
cols as well as in adjacent communication protocols 
supporting energy automation, like ICCP (TASE.2) 
used for inter-control center communication. A clear 
goal of the standardization of IEC62351 is the assur-
ance of end-to-end security. The standard comprises 
multiple parts that are in different state of completion.  
While part 1 and 2 are more general and comprise 
the explanation of threat scenarios and the definition of 
terms, part 3 to 8 are directly related to dedicated pro-
tocols like IEC 61850 (IEC 62351 Part 6) and IEC 
60870-5-x (IEC 62351 Part 5) and their mappings to 
lower layer protocols like TCP/IP (IEC 62351 Part 3) 
and MMS (IEC 62351 Part 4) as well as the mapping 
of security to the network management (part 7) and 
role-based access control (part 8). These parts utilize 
symmetric as well as asymmetric cryptographic func-
tions to secure the payload and the communication link. 
The remaining part of this section provides an over-
view about the different parts of IEC 62351 and their 
current status in standardization. 
IEC 62351 applies existing security protocols like 
Transport Layer Security (TLS, cf. [10]), which has 
been successfully used in other technical areas and 
industrial applications, in different parts of the stan-
dard. The application of TLS provides for security 
services like mutual authentication of communication 
peers and also integrity and confidentiality protection 
of the communicated data. Thanks to the mutual au-
thentication required by IEC 62351 attacks like Man-
in-the-Middle can be successfully countered. 
Part 3 of IEC 62351 defines how security services 
can be provided for TCP/IP based communication. As 
TLS is based on TCP/IP part 3 specifies cipher suites 
(the allowed combination of authentication, integrity 
protection and encryption algorithms) and also states 
requirements to the certificates to be used in conjunc-
tion with TLS. These requirements comprise for in-
stance dedicated certificate context, application of 
signatures, and the definition of certificate revocation 
procedures. For the latter, the focus lies mostly on 
Certificate Revocation Lists (CRL). The application of 
the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) is not 
considered due to limited communication links within 
the substations. In contrast to office applications, the 
connections in energy automation are relatively long 
lasting. This requires the definition of strict key update 
and CRL update intervals, to restrict the application of 
cryptographic keys not only for a dedicated number of 
packets but also for a dedicated time. Another chal-
lenge are interoperability requirements between im-
plementations of different vendor’s products.  
Part 4 of IEC 612351 specifies procedures, protocol 
enhancements, and algorithms targeting the increase of 
security messages transmitted over MMS. MMS is an 
international standard (ISO 9506) dealing with a mes-
saging system for transferring real time process data 
and supervisory control information either between 
networked devices or in communication with computer 
applications. Part 4 defines procedures on transport 
layer, basing on TLS, as well as on application layer to 
protect the communicated information. One goal of this 
paper is to analyze if the defined security is appropriate 
especially in the context of smart grid applications. 
This will be discussed in detail in Section VI. 
Besides TCP/IP, IEC 62351 Part 5 relates to the 
specialties of serial communication. Here, additional 
security measures are defined to especially protect the 
integrity of the serial connections applying keyed 
hashes. This part also specifies a separate key man-
agement necessary for the security measures. 
Part 6 of IEC 62351 describes security for IEC 
61850 Peer-to-Peer Profiles. It covers the profiles in 
IEC 61850 that are not based on TCP/IP for the com-
munication of Generic Object Oriented Substation 
Events (GOOSE), and Sample Measured Values 
(SMV) using, e.g., plain Ethernet. Specific for this type 
of communication is the usage of multicast transfer, 
where each field device decides based on the message 
type and sender if it processes the message or not. 
Security employs digital signatures on message level to 
protect the integrity of the messages sent, to also cope 
with multicast connections. 
IEC 62351 Part 7 describes security related data ob-
jects for end-to-end network and system management 
(NSM) and also security problem detection. These data 
objects support the secure control of dedicated parts of 
the energy automation network. Part 7 can help to im-
plement or extend intrusion detections systems for 
power system specific objects and devices. 
Part 8 of the standard is currently in definition and 
addresses the integration of role-based access control 
mechanisms into the whole domain of power systems. 
This is necessary as in protection systems and in con-
173
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

trol centers authorization as well as stringent traceabil-
ity is required. One usage example is the verification of 
who has authorized and performed a dedicated switch-
ing command. Part 8 supports role-based access control 
in terms of three profiles. Each of the profiles uses an 
own type of credential as there are identity certificates 
with role enhancements, attribute certificates, and soft-
ware tokens.  
 The following table provides a short overview about 
the different IEC 62351 parts and their status in stan-
dardization: 
TABLE II. IEC 62351 Overview 
IEC 
62351  
Definition of Security 
Services for 
Standardization 
Status 
Part 3 
TCP / IP (Profile) 
Technical  
Specification 
Part 4 
MMS (Profile) 
Technical  
Specification 
Part 5 
60870-5 and Derivates 
Technical  
Specification 
Part 6 
IEC 61850 
Technical  
Specification 
Part 7 
Network Management 
Technical  
Specification 
Part 8 
Role-based Access Control 
Committee  
Draft 
Part 9 
Credential Management 
New Work Item 
Proposal 
A first glimpse at the current IEC 62351 parts shows 
that many of the technical security requirements to be 
applied to energy automation components and systems 
can be directly derived from the standard. For instance 
part 3 and 4 explicitly require the usage of TLS. They 
define cipher suites, which are to be supported as man-
datory. These parts also define recommended cipher 
suites and also deprecate cipher suites, which shall not 
be applied from IEC 62351 point of view. Note, that 
the mandatory cipher suites do not collapse with the 
cipher suites the different TLS versions (1.0 – RFC 
2246, 1.1 – RFC 4346, 1.2 – RFC 5246) state as man-
datory. IEC 62351 always references TLS v1.0 proba-
bly to better address interoperability. 
Analyzing the standard more deeply shows that sev-
eral requirements are provided rather implicit. These 
requirements relate mostly to the overall key manage-
ment, which guarantees a smooth operation of the secu-
rity mechanisms. IEC 62351 uses heavily certificates 
and associated private keys, e.g., in the context of 
transport layer protection (using TLS) but also on ap-
plication layer as in part 6 to secure GOOSE. But to 
apply this type of credentials, the general handling and 
life-cycle management including generation, provision-
ing, revocation, and especially the initial distribution to 
all participating entities needs to be considered. This is 
currently underspecified, but has been acknowledged 
by standardization as important for the general opera-
tion but also for the interoperability of different ven-
dor’s products. As the standard is extensible a new 
part, describing credential handling in the context of 
IEC 62351 services is under development. Moreover, a 
security architecture, required for building, engineer-
ing, and operating power systems is a necessary base to 
ensure safety and reliability of these systems. Hence 
further work has been initiated to describe hands-on 
security architecture guidelines for system engineers 
and operators to implement, manage and operate power 
systems securely.  
Besides standard enhancements, which have become 
necessary through findings during the implementation 
of IEC 62351, new scenarios may also require the 
further evolvement of already existing or new parts of 
the standard, to better cope with new use cases. This is 
the focus of the next section, investigating in new sce-
narios, which slightly deviate from standard substation 
automation and thus lead to new security requirements. 
 
V. NEW USE CASES FOR IEC 61850 AND IEC 62351 
Current challenges for the power grid include the in-
tegration of fluctuating renewable energy sources, 
distributed power generation, short interval feedback 
on users on their energy usage, user indicated demand 
peaks, and the foreseeable need for the integration of 
private electronic cars, leading to an even higher en-
ergy demand of customers at peak times. A “smarter” 
grid can meet many of these challenges. With the move 
to a Smart Grid the importance of IT communication 
technologies in energy automation rises. With the 
availability of pervasive IT communication services, a 
bunch of new use cases become possible that enhance 
the service to the customer and mitigate the impact of 
the challenges mentioned above. These new use cases 
include dynamic pricing, time of use pricing, selling 
local power into the grid, smart metering, and the like. 
As IEC 61850 is an introduced standard, the trend is to 
use this standard to realize these new use cases. While 
this keeps the effort low to implement new use cases, it 
may bring new security requirements up that are not 
addressed by IEC 62351 yet. 
174
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Consumer Perspective: Smart Home 
Many use cases center around the Smart Home sce-
nario. Smart Home in combination with the Smart Grid 
will allow people to understand how their household 
uses energy, manage energy use better, sell energy 
produced by local distributed energy generation, and 
reduce their carbon footprint. IEC 61850 is a natural 
candidate to use for communication between instances 
of the Smart Grid and the gateway of a Smart Home.  
 
Market Place 
Value Added  
Services 
Energy 
Provider 
Meter Data 
Management 
Distribution 
Network Operator  
Homes, equipped with smart meters, intelligent  
household devices and energy producer  
Gateway Operator  
(Data Aggregator)  
 
Figure 4. Connection of households to the smart grid 
Figure 4 shows a typical system architecture of a smart 
grid:  
− Homes are equipped with smart meters, intelligent 
household devices, and energy producers. 
− Home gateways control the communication be-
tween the devices in a home and the Smart Grid and 
define a security perimeter. The home gateway 
hides the complexity of the in-house network from 
the Smart Grid. The home gateway may act as a 
proxy for the appliances of the home, e.g., on the 
market place. 
− A gateway operator is responsible for administra-
tion of the home gateways and provides connec-
tivity for the home gateways. 
− The distribution network operator communicated 
with the home gateways by the means of another in-
stance (in this case, the gateway operator is this in-
stance) that hides the complexity of the home gate-
way management from the distribution network op-
erator. 
− The Meter Data Management manages the metering 
data received from the smart meters. The Meter 
Data Management processes the metering data for 
the various energy providers and provides them 
with a summary for accounting. 
− At the energy market, consumers (resp. their home 
gateways) buy energy, and energy generators sell 
energy; hence the market offers a demand regulated 
price. An energy market alleviates the integration of 
distributed energy generators (e.g., solar cells). 
− The smart grid communication infrastructure and 
the energy market are the enabler for other value 
added services. 
Having a communication and IT infrastructure like 
this at hand, the following use cases are possible in a 
Smart Home scenario: 
1) Energy-aware home appliances 
Nowadays, the price of energy for private consumers 
is mostly constant. From the perspective of a utility it 
would be beneficial to have dynamic pricing to influ-
ence the energy usage of customers. On the customer 
side, new intelligent, energy-aware home appliances 
can optimize the costs for energy usage by starting and 
stopping energy extensive tasks (e.g., cloth or dish 
washing) at appropriate times (e.g., start when energy 
is cheap). This requires that the current price of energy 
is known and there is some way to determine the price 
of energy for the duration of an operation (e.g., wash-
ing a load of wash). One way to implement such a 
system is an energy market, where energy-aware home 
appliances buy a certain amount of energy before they 
start an operation. Especially charging a private electri-
cal car during the night is an extremely flexible opera-
tion that requires much energy but has a large time 
window for execution, hence benefits from a good deal. 
To implement this use case with the architecture pre-
sented above, the home gateway trades energy at the 
energy market. Accounting for any contract on the 
energy market includes the energy provider as well as 
the meter data management. 
2) Distributed power generation 
If energy is produced in a home, e.g., by solar cells, 
175
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the energy is traded on an energy market to achieve the 
best possible price. Especially if the energy market is 
on a large scale, selling the energy may be more attrac-
tive than a fixed pricing.  
To implement this use case with the architecture pre-
sented above, the home gateway trades energy at the 
energy market. Accounting for contracts includes the 
distribution network provider as well as the smart me-
ter management. 
3) Energy Management and User Awareness 
An application with integrated user interface in the 
home is used for communication with the utility, e.g., 
to get a diagram of current energy usage, to get current 
energy pricing, to get the personal energy usage his-
tory, to get energy saving tips and the like. The user 
interface may also be used to receive energy outage 
forecasts, for troubleshooting, or to dynamically select 
a desired energy mix. 
Even energy-aware home appliances may offer a 
user interface that states the current price for one op-
eration execution. E.g., a coffee machine may state the 
price per coffee pot. 
To implement this use case with the architecture pre-
sented above, the home gateway informs appliances 
about current energy prices, which it either gets at the 
energy market or directly from the energy provider 
(price signals as special incentive for special behavior). 
B. Utility Perspective 
Other use cases are focused on keeping the distribu-
tion network stable and keeping costs for utilities low 
(e.g., because it is not necessary to buy additional en-
ergy at short notice). As IEC 61850 is already wide-
spread in use in the distribution network, it is a natural 
candidate for the following use cases: 
1) Reactive shutoff of home appliances 
A utility has the ability to shut down certain home 
appliances in the household of users on short notice to 
react on certain situations in the network (e.g., if too 
many consumers are active). Such switch-off com-
mands can be based on special contracts between user 
and utility operator. 
To implement this use case with the architecture pre-
sented above, the utility must have a list of home appli-
ances that can be shut off as well as the communication 
addresses of the associated home gateways. In the 
architecture above, home gateways may be addressed 
by the gateway operator that also ensures the connec-
tivity of the home gateways. The utility sends a shutoff 
message via the gateway operator to a set of home 
gateways. Sending this shutoff message to many house-
holds must be finished in a short time to allow fast 
reactions. The shutoff message must be protected to 
avoid being misused by attackers. The home gateway 
takes the appropriate actions to meet the request of the 
utility, especially, it communicates with proper appli-
ances to be shut off. 
2) Shutoff of power generator 
The utility may not only turn off certain home appli-
ances, it may also instruct distributed power generators 
not to feed energy to the distribution network to fight 
situations when there is a low demand for energy. The 
signaling process is the same as in the last use case. 
3) Demand Response 
Another use case from a utility prospect is demand 
response: A utility can send price signals (either a 
rather high price if energy demand is too high or a low 
price if the energy demand is too low) to influence 
energy usage of intelligent home appliances without 
using the energy market. Price signals are especially 
interesting for the loading of electric cars. Price signals 
can be sent for future time periods or as real time pric-
ing information. The utility sends price signals via the 
gateway operator that knows to address the home gate-
ways. The home gateways distribute the pricing infor-
mation in the home to the appropriate home appliances. 
4) Asset Management 
Yet another use case from the utility perspective is 
asset management. Given a rising number of equipment 
for decentralized energy generation in the households 
of the users, managing the network gets more complex. 
An automated asset management helps to reduce costs 
and gives a good view on the state of the distribution 
network. IEC 61850 includes self-describing configura-
tions of device and all kind of tracking data; hence it is 
a natural candidate for the following use cases: 
− Utilities collect data about the state of the network 
and about the equipment in a user’s home. 
− Utility gathers circuit and/or transformer load pro-
files, makes decisions on asset replacement based 
on a range of inputs including comprehensive off 
line and on line condition data and analysis  
− Utility performs localized load reduction to relieve 
circuit and/or transformer overloads 
176
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

− Utility system operator determines level of severity 
for an impending asset failure and takes corrective 
action 
C. New Requirements 
One requirement arising from these new use cases is 
scalability. Security solutions for the Smart Grid must 
scale with millions of devices - Germany for example 
has more than 39 million households and each house-
hold may have more than one device. Multiple levels of 
hierarchy from a control station to a device in a house-
hold are a common solution to address scalability.  
This includes communication other than the point to 
point communication used today.  
As shown in Figure 4, in smart grid scenario’s new 
roles and/or components may be introduced in terms of 
a home energy gateway operator. This gateway opera-
tor is in charge of concentrating the communication 
from the home energy gateways up to the control center 
as well as providing an easy way to the control center 
to reach a high number of energy gateways at once. 
Moreover, a gateway operator may also offer additional 
services like remote management of the home energy 
gateways, e.g., to provide enhanced functionality or 
path and updates for installed software. This new com-
ponent changes the trust assumptions for the substation 
communication as it may be seen new intermediate 
component, which belongs to a different security do-
main. This component most likely terminates the trans-
port connection between a control center and the home 
energy gateway, which is used synonym here for a field 
device. 
Today’s security solutions assume trusted intermedi-
ate nodes if one application connection is realized over 
multiple transport connections. This assumption may 
not hold in the future and new security concepts may 
only assume intermediate nodes that forward traffic but 
may or may not be trusted. 
The following section targets the analysis of apply-
ing IEC 62351 in the context of the smart grid scenario 
just described to discuss, if the standardized security 
provides sufficient counter measures. 
VI. MISSING PIECES IN IEC62351 
As stated in Section II above, part 4 of IEC 62351 
specifies procedures, protocol enhancements, and algo-
rithms targeting the increase of security of applications 
utilizing the MMS. MMS is an international standard 
(ISO 9506) dealing with a messaging system for trans-
ferring real time process data and supervisory control 
information either between networked devices or in 
communication with computer applications. Within 
IEC 61850 there exists a mapping to MMS to transport 
commands and data between the different energy auto-
mation components. Thus IEC 61850 can directly lev-
erage the security enhancements defined in part 4 of 
IEC 62351.  
The security, as defined in IEC 62351 part 4, is de-
scribed by two profiles targeting transport security as 
T-Profile on one hand and application security as A-
Profile. The T-Profile describes the protection of in-
formation, which is exchanged over TCP/IP using TLS. 
This is mainly being done by referring part 3 for TLS 
application and the definition of additional mandatory 
cipher suites.  The A-Profile defines security services 
on application layer, targeting mainly authentication. 
Note that the authentication in the A-Profile is per-
formed only during connection establishment on appli-
cation layer using the MMS initiate command. More-
over this authentication is defined in a way that it does 
not provide application layer message integrity. Fur-
thermore the authentication phase is not used to form a 
session. A session in this context cryptographically 
binds the authentication performed during the connec-
tion setup with subsequent messages exchanged be-
tween the communicating peers. Thus, in the current 
stage of the standard, messages on application layer are 
not protected regarding their integrity. To achieve 
integrity protection, the application of the T-Profile is 
being referred.  
Combining A-Profile and T-Profile provides a con-
nection allowing for authentication, integrity protection 
and confidentiality on transport level and authentica-
tion on application level. This approach works fine in 
scenarios, where the transport connection spans the 
same entities as the application connections as shown 
in Figure 5.  
 
Control Center 
Substation Controller 
Field Device 
Switching command 
issued by control center 
TLS Connection 2  
according to T-Profile 
TLS Connection 1 
according to T-Profile 
Switching command issued  
by substation controller 
 
Figure 5. Direct switching action 
177
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

While this approach may be sufficient for many en-
ergy automation scenarios, it may not cope with new 
use cases, for instance the ones described in Section V. 
As soon as there is a difference in transport connec-
tion hops and application connection hops, security 
problems may arise. An example may be a scenario in 
which a proxy is used, e.g., to combine different con-
nections or to multicast a single command to several 
other connections as described in Figure 4 by the gate-
way operator. From the standard energy automation 
architecture – Control Center, Substation Controller, 
Field Device – this gateway operator resembles the 
substation controller and operates as a communication 
proxy as shown in Figure 6. Therefore, the T-Profile is 
terminated by the substation controller, while the appli-
cation connection may be established end-to-end, di-
rectly with the actual entity to be reached. Since IEC 
62351 part 4 does not provide application level integ-
rity, no end-to-end application level security is pro-
vided. 
 Such a scenario can be described as multi-hop con-
nection from a transport level view and would require 
that the proxy is a trusted intermediate host, which 
cannot be guaranteed in many scenarios. For example 
in one of the new use cases addressed in the last sec-
tion, a utility may use a number of proxy that multicasts 
a single “switch off” command issued by the control 
station to multiple households. This approach allows 
multiple hierarchy level for issuing the “switch off” 
commands to achieve scalability and fast reaction. 
 
Control Center 
Substation Controller 
Field Device 
Switching command issued  
by control center 
TLS Connection 1  
according to T-Profile 
TLS Connection 2 
according to T-Profile 
Switching command is 
forwarded from substation 
controller 
  
Figure 6. Proxied switching action 
To provide also end-to-end integrity in multi-hop use 
cases with intermediate nodes additional measures have 
to be defined. Ideally, these will enhance the standard 
IEC 62351 to foster both, security and interoperability. 
The approach to find appropriate security enhance-
ments taken here involves the investigation into exist-
ing protocols, which already provide a secure session 
concept on application layer. The following section 
analyzes different approaches to enhance part 4 based 
on existing security measures. 
VII. CANDIDATES FOR ADAPTATION 
This section discusses three potential candidates, 
which are already defined and widely used in commu-
nication technology and their suitability for IEC 62351 
part 4 to better cope with multi-hop scenarios. As 
stated in the previous section, the additional security 
requirements to be met comprise peer authentication 
and message integrity on application layer between 
end-to-end communicating peers. The three candidates 
are: 
− 
HTTP Digest Authentication as typically used in 
web based communication 
− 
H.235 based security as used to protect multimedia 
communication  
− 
XML security as applied in web service frame-
works 
The goal is the enhancement of MMS communica-
tion to allow cryptographically based sessions to pro-
vide end-to-end security on application layer. More-
over, being able to associate MMS commands with a 
dedicated session, also allows running multiple parallel 
distinguishable sessions over the same T-Profile pro-
tected link(s). 
A. Candidate 1 HTTP Digest Authentication 
RFC2617 (cf. [9]) describes authentication options 
in the context of HTTP (Hypertext Transport Protocol), 
which is used in many web-based applications. While 
basic authentication is deprecated because of its worst 
security, digest authentication is being widely used.  In 
digest authentication a shared secret needs to be avail-
able on both ends of the communication, which is used 
to calculate an MD5 checksum over either a certain 
part of the message or the complete message as part of 
a challenge response mechanism to provide integrity 
protection. Typically each HTTP request can be chal-
lenged to authenticate the requestor. In the worst case 
this would mean that each communication action is 
doubled. The general approach is depicted in Figure 7. 
178
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Client 
Server 
Request 
401 (unauthorized) 
WWW-Authenticate: Digest 
            realm = “x@y.com” 
            nonce = “12AB….” 
Request 
Authorization:  
Digest username=“alice” 
            realm = “x@y.com” 
            nonce = “12AB….” 
            nc = 1 
            cnonce = “123…” 
            response = “98FE….” 
200 OK 
Authentication-Info: 
nextnonce="4732…" 
response-auth=”4711…”  
 
Figure 7. HTTP Digest Authentication 
To avoid the doubling of all message exchanges the 
challenge for the next exchange can be transmitted as 
part of the response message to the initial request as 
optimization f this method. The next nonce mechanism 
in combination with the initial application of username 
and password can be used to form a (weak) crypto-
graphic session.  
B. Candidate 2 H.235 based security 
H.323 is an umbrella recommendation defined by the 
ITU-T (International Telecommunication Union) to 
address call control, multimedia management, and 
bandwidth management in telecommunication envi-
ronments. H.235 is also an ITU-T based standard de-
scribing security functions for the multimedia commu-
nication standard H.323. H.235 features in summary 
nine different profiles, were only some of them are 
interesting to be discussed in the context of leveraging 
them for the securing of MMS: 
− H.235.1 provides signaling integrity and authentica-
tion using mutually shared secrets and keyed 
hashes, based on HMAC-SHA1-96. This profile is 
widely implemented in available H.323 solutions. 
− H.235.2 provides signaling integrity and authentica-
tion using digital signatures on every message in 
gatekeeper-routed scenarios. Since signature gen-
eration and verification is costly in terms of per-
formance, this profile may not gain momentum and 
is stated here rather for completeness. 
− H.235.3 is a hybrid approach using both, H.235.1 
and H.235.2. During the first handshake a shared 
secret establishment is performed, protected by 
digital signatures. Afterwards keyed hashes are used 
for message integrity protection, based on the estab-
lished shared secret. 
The syntax of the H.323 messages is depicted in 
Figure 8. As it can be seen, security is provided based 
on an included crypto token in the message, which 
transports all necessary data to integrity protect the 
message. 
 
Q.931  
Payload 
Authentication and Integrity 
TCP 
Header 
IP  
Header 
H.225 
CS  
Payload 
Crypto 
token 
Q.931 only used for Call signaling 
and call control, transmitted via TCP  
Crypto Token  
for Message Integrity 
and Authentication 
 
 
Figure 8. H.235 protected message 
As H.235.3 allows for a hybrid security approach, 
utilizing asymmetric and symmetric cryptography, the 
crypto token is defined to serve for both approaches at 
once and carries all necessary information for both 
phases. 
C. Candidate 3 XML Security 
The Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a sim-
ple, very flexible text format, which is defined by the 
W3C (World Wide Web Consortium). It specifies a set 
of rules for encoding documents in machine-readable 
form and is meanwhile used in a variety of applications 
and builds the base for message structures in several 
protocols and language derivations.  
The W3C also provides recommendations for secu-
rity of XML data. XML security comes in two flavors, 
XML Encryption and XML Signature. Both can be 
used on XML encoded data in so-called XML elements 
and provide privacy and integrity protection. XML 
encryption allows the encryption of any type of data 
with symmetric and asymmetric methods. The key to 
be used can be selected by key names. XML signature 
on the other side applies asymmetric methods to 
achieve integrity protection and non-repudiation and 
can be included in the XML document directly or pro-
vided in a detached fashion (see also [18]).    
VIII. PROPOSED ENHANCEMENTS OF IEC62351 
Based on the discussion of candidates in the previ-
ous section and the fact that integrity protection is the 
first protection goal in energy automation networks, the 
approach of candidate 1 and 2 and their application to 
179
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

MMS is discussed here further, as they allow the integ-
rity protection of application layer messages based on 
an cryptographic authenticated and integrity protected 
session. The application of a hybrid approach as in 
candidate 2 in this context, using asymmetric key mate-
rial for the authentication and protection of a session 
key establishment and symmetric key material for the 
remaining session provides for a high flexibility while 
keeping the load on the system low during the applica-
tion of the symmetric key. This cannot be achieved 
with candidate 1.  
Candidate 3 is not discussed further here as directly 
it maps to web services instead of MMS. IEC 61400-25 
(for wind power plants) describes a mapping of IEC 
61850 services to web services. Moreover, other ap-
proaches like OPC-UA (Object Linking and Embed-
ding for Process Control – Unified Architecture) also 
apply web service technology and may also be used in 
this context. As for web services own security measures 
are defined (e.g., XML security), these security meas-
ures may be applied straight forward. Nevertheless, 
these possibilities should be kept in mind, to provide an 
adequate security level for MMS, operating at the same 
level as web-services. This is especially important for 
the protocol interworking when different transport 
mappings are used.  
Again, the goal is the enhancement of MMS-based 
communication to allow multiple parallel distinguish-
able integrity protected sessions started with the MMS 
Initiate command and proper authentication (and au-
thorization).  
Providing this security session approach can gener-
ally be done in different ways: 
1. Enhancement of commands transported via MMS 
with security tokens to allow authentication and 
authorization to be bound to the messages directly. 
This approach would be independent of MMS se-
curity and thus may be applied over other trans-
ports as well. 
2. Enhancement of MMS itself to allow security 
services on the layer transporting IEC 61850 
commands. This approach requires fewer changes 
in the current message structure and better interop-
erates with other approaches, like security options 
for web services. 
 
The enhancement of the MMS messages itself re-
quires changes in IEC62351 Part 4 for security of 
MMS communication as currently only the MMS initi-
ate command has the appropriate ASN.1 structures to 
transport the security information. It also requires 
changes in the IEC 61850 standard to provide the nec-
essary integrity field carrying the security parameters as 
a base for the introduction of a cryptographic session 
concept. 
Therefore, the current approach of MMS must also 
be enhanced to provide not only authentication, but 
also integrity protection. This means the current de-
scription of the signature calculation in IEC62351 Part 
4 needs to be revised.  
The following discussion relates to candidate 1 and 2 
explained in the previous section: 
The basic idea for both approaches, the enhance-
ments of the syntax of the commands send via MMS 
(case 1 above) or of the MMS message syntax (case 2 
above), is the enhancement of the datagram with a 
substructure to transport all necessary security informa-
tion. This change may be done as Figure 9 suggests, 
based on the investigation into the realization of candi-
date 2 in the previous section.  
 
 
UDP/TCP 
Header 
IP  
Header 
Integrity 
Command Payload 
Crypto 
token 
MAC 
Application Layer Payload  
 
Figure 9. Message protection using a crypto token 
The application of a crypto token provides a dedi-
cated security container to transport message authenti-
cation codes and additional information, e.g., necessary 
to setup a session key. 
An alternative addressing only message integrity on 
application layer without enabling the transport of key 
establishment values for the integrity protection is 
depicted in Figure 10. This approach would be suitable, 
when focusing on candidate 1. 
 
 
UDP/TCP 
Header 
IP  
Header 
Integrity 
Command Payload 
MAC 
Application Layer Payload  
 
Figure 10. Message integrity protection 
For the following discussion, the approach using a 
crypto token, as depicted in Figure 9 is favored as it 
offers most flexibility. The command payload may be 
seen either on MMS level (Layer 6) or on application 
level (Layer 7). In any case, the crypto token to be 
included in the payload carries at least (necessary pa-
180
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

rameter should be discussed, depending on the solution 
approach; the following list may not be complete): 
− tokenOID 
Object identifier 
− certificate 
certificate information  
− timestamp 
Timestamp  
− sequence 
Sequence number 
− random 
nonce value  
− dhkey 
Diffie Hellman set (to negotiate a 
session key) 
− receiverID     Receiver Identifier  
− sendersID      sender Identifier 
− hashed  
message authentication code based on 
keyed hash (HMAC) 
− signed 
message authentication code based on 
signatures  
The inclusion of the crypto token in the messages 
enables the following functionality:  
1. Authentication of connected to and connecting 
peer during first message exchange, here during 
the MMS Initiate. Based on the chosen credentials, 
this may be done using either symmetric or asym-
metric long term keys (hashed or signed). 
2. Negotiation of a session key during the first hand-
shake to be used for all subsequent messages in 
this session. This may be done by using for in-
stance the Diffie Hellman Key Agreement, were 
both, the client and the server provide to the ses-
sion key. The session enables the distinction of 
messages sources in terms of applications or users. 
3. Integrity protection of messages on application 
layer. In scenarios, were multiple hosts are trav-
ersed this approach does not require to trust an in-
termediate hosts to not alter messages contents. 
The intermediate hosts needs only to be trusted to 
deliver the message. 
4. Replay protection through the use of timestamps 
and sequence numbers or nonce’s alternatively. 
A potential call flow between a control center and a 
field device via a substation controller using the de-
scribed approach of candidate 2 using the MMS layer 
is shown in Figure 11. This figure also merges the 
existing energy automation systems with roles and 
systems of smart grid scenarios with residential integra-
tion as shown in Figure 4. 
 
Control 
Center 
Substation 
Controller 
Field 
Device 
TLS Session 
Establishment 
PDU1 (command, Cryptotoken, signed, DHset) 
PDU2 (ack, Cryptotoken, signed, DHset) 
PDU3 (command, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
PDU4 (ack, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
PowerCC 
Application 1  
or  User 1 
TLS Session 
Establishment 
PDU1 (command, Cryptotoken, signed, DHset) 
PDU2 (ack, Cryptotoken, signed, DHset) 
PDU3 (command, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
PDU4 (ack, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
SICAM PAS 
Application 1  
or User 1 
SKTLS2 
SKTLS1 
SKA1 
SKB2 
PDU1 (command, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
PDU2 (ack, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
PowerCC 
Application 2  
or User 2 
SSA2 
PDU1 (command, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
PDU2 (ack, Cryptotoken, keyed Hash) 
SICAM PAS 
Application 2  
or User 2 
SSB2 
Distribution Network 
Operator 
Home Gateway 
Operator 
Home 
Gateyway 
 
Figure 11. Security enhanced call flow 
181
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The following description explains this call flow: 
− At first a TLS connection is established on both 
hops. Here, TLS negotiates session keys on trans-
port level on both hops: SKTLS1 and SKTLS2.  
− Afterwards an application/user A1 on the control 
center issues a command to the field device. As this 
is the first command for this application/user, the 
command is authenticated using the long term cre-
dential (e.g., digitally signed). The acknowledge-
ment in turn is secured using the long term creden-
tial of the field device. During the handshake a ses-
sion key may be established SKA1 using a Diffie 
Hellman key agreement. This session key may then 
be used to secure all subsequent traffic between A1 
and the field device. The command is send via the 
TLS protected hops via the substation controller to 
the field device. 
− A second application/user A2 on the control center 
issues a further command to the field device. As 
both communication parties possess a shared secret 
SSA2, it is used to secure the message exchange ap-
plying a keyed hash (e.g., HMAC-SHA1). The 
command is send via the same TLS protected hops 
via the substation controller to the field device. 
− Then an application/user B1 on the substation con-
troller issues a command to the field device. As this 
is the first command for this application/user, the 
command is authenticated using the long term cre-
dential (e.g., digitally signed). The acknowledge-
ment in turn is secured using the long term creden-
tial of the field device. During the handshake a ses-
sion key may be established SKB1. This session key 
may then be used to secure all subsequent traffic 
between B1 and the field device. The command is 
send via the TLS protected hop to the field device. 
− A second application/user B2 on the substation 
controller issues a further command to the field de-
vice. As both communication parties possess a 
shared secret SSB2, it is used to secure the message 
exchange applying a keyed hash (e.g., HMAC-
SHA1). The command is send via the same TLS 
protected hops via the substation controller to the 
field device. 
The advantage of this approach is that single TLS 
connections can be used on the hops to secure the 
transport between all involved peers, while multiple 
applications or users may use these TLS connections to 
transport specific commands to the field devices. 
Moreover, due to the session concept, the long term 
credentials need only to be used during the first hand-
shake, while all other communication can rely on the 
negotiated session keys. If digital signatures are per-
formed during the first handshake, performance can be 
saved on all further messages of this application con-
nection, as the keyed hash operation is less consuming 
compared to a signature generation or verification. The 
approach as shown in Figure 11 is suitable for both, 
MMS or direct command integration. 
IX. 
FUTURE WORK 
As already stated in chapter VI, Web Services are 
gaining more momentum. They have already been 
addressed as part of the wind power craft related stan-
dard IEC 61400-25 and it is expected that there will be 
a mapping for IEC 61850 in the near future. Web ser-
vices are also one building block in the OPC-UA 
framework initially mentioned were security functions 
already being considered on transport and application 
layer.  
Web services enable the application of Web security 
mechanisms like XML Security to provide encryption 
and integrity protection. Moreover authorization can 
also be addressed utilizing the Security Assertion 
Markup Language (SAML). SAML allows the defini-
tion of secured tokens, to be issued by a trusted com-
ponent. Currently, security is also not being addressed 
in the wind power standard. Nevertheless, as web ser-
vice security is already defined (by the W3C), the stan-
dard only needs to be enhanced with a mapping to the 
available web security, without the necessity to defined 
own security mechanisms.  
To ensure security interworking between installa-
tions utilizing different mappings of IEC 61850 like 
MMS or Web Service secure services transition func-
tions need to be defined. Therefore, from the inter-
working perspective, the integration of security en-
hancements in MMS may provide a better base for 
secure interworking as it operates on the same level as 
web services and already provides an end-to-end appli-
cation layer connection.  
X. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper provides an overview of smart grid envi-
ronment focusing especially on the security of dedi-
cated new scenarios, which become more likely 
through the integration of renewable energy sources not 
only on substation level, but also on end-user level. 
Additional security requirements will be the result of 
these new use cases. The energy automation security 
standard IEC 62351, which is used to secure communi-
182
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cation according to the standards IEC 61850 and IEC 
60870-x and to provide End-to-End Security plays a 
major role here. Because of the manifold Smart Grid 
activities and the standardization efforts driven by 
NIST, new parts of IEC 62351 can be expected soon. 
Motivated by the analysis of new use cases for Smart 
Grids, some shortcomings of IEC 62351 are presented. 
Especially, IEC 62351 can currently not offer applica-
tion layer end-to-end security if multiple transport layer 
connections are used. Such multi-hop connections are 
important for new use cases. Currently, often a trusted 
intermediate is assumed for application layer end-to-
end security. This assumption may be a weakness in the 
overall system design depending on the use case and 
may not hold in the future. 
An extension of IEC 62351 is proposed to overcome 
the identified weaknesses by introducing security ses-
sions for MMS connections in IEC 62351. The exten-
sion enables cryptographic sessions on application 
layer providing application layer end-to-end security 
for new use cases in Smart Grid scenarios. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Fries, S.; Hof, H-J; Seewald, M.: The Fifth International 
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services – 
ICIW 2010: “Enhancing IEC 62351 to Improve Security for 
Energy Automation in Smart Grid Environments”, May 2010, 
ISBN 978-0-7695-4022-1 
[2] 
NERC, North American Reliability Corporation, last access 
February 2011: http://www.nerc.com/page.php?cid=2|20  
[3] 
BDEW – Bundesverband der Energie- und Wasserwirtschaft, 
Datensicherheit, 
last 
access 
January 
2011: 
http://www.bdew.de/bdew.nsf/id/DE_Datensicherheit  
[4] 
NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technlogies, Smart 
Grid Interoperability Project, last access January 2011 
http://www.nist.gov/smartgrid/  
[5] 
NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperabil-
ity Standards, Version 1.0, last access January 2011, 
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/upload/smartgrid_
interoperability_final.pdf  
[6] 
NIST IR 7628 Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security, Vol. 
1 Smart Grid Cyber Security Strategy, August 2010, last ac-
cess 
January 
2011: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7628/nistir-
7628_vol1.pdf  
[7] 
NIST IR 7628 Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security, Vol. 
2 Security Architecture and Security Requirements, August 
2010, 
last 
access 
January 
2011: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7628/nistir-
7628_vol2.pdf  
[8] 
NIST IR 7628 Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security, Vol. 
3 Supportive Analyses and References, August 2010, last ac-
cess 
January 
2011: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7628/nistir-
7628_vol3.pdf  
[9] 
RFC2617: HTTP Authentication: Basic and Digest Access 
Authentication, J. Franks, P. Hallam-Baker, J. Hostetler, S. 
Lawrence, P. Leach, A. Luotonen, L. Stewart, June 1999 
[10] RFC 5246: The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol, 
Version 1.2, T. Dierks, E Rescorla, August 2008 
[11] ISO-IEC 61850, Part 1: Introduction and Overview, May 
2003 
[12] ISO-IEC 61850, Part 8-1: Specific Communication Service 
Mapping (SCSM) – Mappings to MMS (ISO 9506-1 and ISO 
9506-2) and to ISO/IEC 8802-3, May 2004 
[13] ISO-IEC IEC 61400, Part 25-4: Communications for monitor-
ing and control of wind power plants – Mapping to communi-
cation profile, August 2008 
[14] ISO-IEC 62351, Part 4: Communication Network and System 
Security – Profiles Including MMS, October 2006 
[15] ISO-IEC 62351, Part 5: Security for IEC 60870 and Deriva-
tives, February 2007 
[16] ISO-IEC 62351, Part 6: Security for IEC 61850, October 2006 
[17] H.235.0: Security framework for H-series, ITU-T, 2005 
[18] XML Signature Syntax and Processing (second Edition), 
W3C Recommendation, 10.June 2008, last access January 
2011: http://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core/  
 
 
183
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

