1
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
A Distributed Identity Handling Approach Enriched with Identity Semantics
Mohammad M. R. Chowdhury
UniK-University Graduate Center
Post Box. 70, 2007 Kjeller, Norway
mohammad@unik.no
Josef Noll
UniK-University Graduate Center
Post Box. 70, 2007 Kjeller, Norway
josef@unik.no
Abstract
People rely on many forms of identities to access off-
line and online services. The inconvenience of possessing
and using identities creates signiﬁcant security vulnerabil-
ity. This paper proposes an identity handling mechanism
enriched with identity semantics which is believed to ease
and secure identity usage. In this regard, user’s identities
are classiﬁed into personal, corporate and social identities,
and they are going to be distributed over user’s personal de-
vice and a secure network place. Corporate and social iden-
tities are represented through user’s roles and relationships
exploiting Web Ontology Language. Secure service access
is ensured through multi-factor authentication method. Ac-
cess is further restricted through authorization making use
of user’s deﬁned roles and relationships. This paper demon-
strates an implementation of service access by means of au-
thentication and authorization through one’s personal and
corporate or social identities. The proposed solution is an-
alyzed and compared with other relevant concepts, methods
and solutions.
Keywords: authentication, authorization, identity,
ontology, role, relationship
1. Introduction
Identiﬁcation is a process through which a system ascer-
tains the identity of a person who is trying to gain access to
the system. It is essential to provide access to various value
added services. Human beings play different roles while
interacting with these services. Paper-based identities can-
not be used while accessing services in the digital world.
Moreover, different types of services require different types
and forms of identities. People increasingly use computers
to do business over the Internet. But accessing online value
added services invariably requires typing various usernames
and passwords for identiﬁcation. These passwords can be
captured and reused by hostile parties. To make the service
access simple, hassle-free and above all secure, a manage-
able but usable identity mechanism is expected.
Mobile phone penetration is expected to reach 100% in
most of the European countries1. It has become a foremost
electronic device for worldwide communication because of
its mobility, seamless and secure access provision to net-
works. In addition to this, mobile phone has always online
functionality. Lately, computing capabilities of the mobile
devices are enhanced manifold. Nowadays, there are provi-
sions for being connected with the Internet using SIM from
the laptop computers. It is evident that ubiquitous access
and pervasive computing facilitate service access anywhere,
anytime. In this paper, we focus on accessing the Web ser-
vices through Mobile Phone/SIM card authentication.
User’s identity data is not merely ‘Information’. The se-
mantics of identity information and the data itself are crucial
for decision making, such as deriving access authorization
decisions. This paper extends such interpretation towards
an identity handling mechanism. In this regard, user’s iden-
tities are classiﬁed into personal, corporate and social iden-
tities, and they are going to be distributed over user’s per-
sonal device and a secure network place. User’s roles and
relationships represent a part of the corporate and social
identities exploiting Web Ontology Language (OWL), a se-
mantic technology standard for knowledge representation.
Security in service access is ensured through multi-factor
authentication method. Authenticated access is further re-
stricted through authorization making use of user’s deﬁned
roles and relationships. This paper demonstrates an imple-
mentation of secure service access by means of authenti-
cation and authorization through personal and corporate or
social identities.
The paper starts with the deﬁnitions of identity and its
management emphasizing the motivation of terming roles
and relations as identity of users (section 2).
Section 3
introduces semantic technologies and discusses the moti-
vation behind the use of them. The paper then illustrates
1Telecom & IT research reports by RNCOS, European Mobile Market
Scenario to 2012, http://www.rncos.com/Report/IM101.htm
[retrieved on Jan. 17, 2009]

2
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
the generic architecture of the proposed identity handling
mechanism in section 4. Section 5 addresses the security
requirements and methods of the proposed identity mech-
anism bringing the detail authentication and authorization
aspects. Section 6 presents the concept of service interac-
tion using the distributed identity mechanism and shows the
prototypical implementation of the presented concept. The
paper will review some of the related works and then pro-
vide critical analysis on different aspects of the proposed
distributed identity mechanism in section 7 and 8. The pa-
per concludes with a summary of the paper and comments
on future research.
2. Identity
In this section, we look for the deﬁnitions of identity
from different angles and explain how these deﬁnitions mo-
tivate us to extend the social aspects of identity with a goal
to interact services securely.
2.1
Deﬁnition of Identity
In social sciences, Identity is broadly used to describe an
individual’s comprehension of him or herself as a discrete,
separate entity2. Analyzing the current usage of identity in
ordinary language and social science discourse, it can be
summarized that identity is currently used mainly in two
linked senses, ‘social’ and ‘personal’ [10]. In the former, a
person is distinguished by rules deciding membership and
characteristic features or attributes. In the second sense,
identity is distinguishing characteristics that a person takes
a special pride in. ‘How people relate to others’ is termed as
identity by [15]. It ‘refers to the ways in which individuals
and collectivities are distinguished in their social relations
with other individuals and collectivities’ [19]. According
to Dick Hardt, CEO of Sxip Identity, identity is also what i
prefer, what my interests are, what my roles are in real life
[14].
In this paper, we take into account both the ‘personal’
and ‘social’ sense of identity. ‘Personal’ sense is realized
through possessing or knowing some identifying character-
istics and the later is established through roles and relation-
ships of an individual.
2.2
Role as Identity
Central to the identity theory developed by Stryker [32],
McCall and Simmons [24], and Turner [34] is the concept
of role identities. The Theory links self attitudes, or iden-
tities, to the role relationships and role-related behavior of
2Identity(social science) http://www.answers.com/topic/
identity-social-science [retrieved on Jan. 18, 2009]
individuals. The theorists argue that the self consists of a
collection of identities, each of which is based on occupy-
ing a particular role. Stryker said ‘the number of identities is
limited only by the number of structured role relation ships
one is involved in’ [32].
2.3
Relationship as Identity
In the Social Identity Theory [33], beyond the ‘personal
self’ a person has several selves that correspond to widening
circles of group membership. Apart from ‘personal self’, an
individual has multiple social identities. Social identity is
the individual’s self-concept derived from perceived mem-
bership of social groups [16]. The group membership cre-
ates positive self-esteem by positively differentiating their
ingroup from a comparison outgroup on some valued di-
mension. Because of these, people’s sense of who they are
is deﬁned in terms of ‘we’ rather than ‘I’. Thus the social
identity differs from the notion of personal identity which
refers to self-knowledge that derives from the individual’s
unique attributes.
2.4
Paper-based Identity
It is the traditional form of identity. People are carry-
ing a good number of paper-based identities, for example,
passport/personal ID, credit cards, bank cards, student card,
ofﬁce ID, driving license etc. with them. Nowadays, people
increasingly use smart cards with electronic chip for ser-
vice access and payment. It enhances the security and al-
lows storage of user details on the card. These are normally
used at designated service points that can recognize spe-
ciﬁc smart cards. The possession factor of such identities
are coupled with a knowledge factor like PIN codes, which
authenticate the true owner and serve as additional secu-
rity requirements (this phenomena will be discussed more
detailed in section 5). However, with the increasing dig-
itization of identity transaction, many of the paper-based
identities are gradually replaced or supplemented by digital
identities.
2.5
Digital Identity
Digital identity is the digital representation of a set of
claims made by one digital subject about itself or another
digital subject.
A digital subject can be human or non-
human. Instead of set of claims made by parties, digital
identity can also be deﬁned as a collection of information
that relates to an individual, that is created and managed as
a single unit in a network, and that is stored in electronic
form3.
3Deﬁnition of digital identity, http://idcorner.org/2005/
03/07/on-the-definition-of-digital-identity/
[re-
trieved on Jan. 18, 2009]

3
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2.6
Identity Management
In information systems, identity management is a broad
administrative area that deals with the management of iden-
tity life cycle of entities starting from establishing identities
and ending with repealing those identities, when required.
This is the pure identity paradigm that does not consider
access or entitlements. Within the life cycle, identities are
described through various attributes. Identity management
involves user access paradigm which considers the manage-
ment of identity associated data required to access a system.
User may know these data beforehand or a secure physi-
cal device may contain these. Here, entities are identiﬁed
by presenting these identity associated data.
The access
to resources within the system can be controlled by asso-
ciating user roles, rights and restrictions, presence with the
established identity. Thus system can deliver personalized
services. This is service paradigm perspective of identity
management. Therefore, in addition to identity and access
manager, identity management solutions4 5 also encompass
role manager.
In this paper, we are concerned with user access and ser-
vice paradigm identity management. That is why, we also
demonstrated how the proposed distributed identities can
facilitate service interaction.
3
Introduction to Semantic Technology
We used semantic technologies to represent part of user’s
corporate and social identities, and to realize access autho-
rization decisions (detail in section 5). This section intro-
duces the technologies and the motivations of using them in
this work.
Semantic Web [4] provides various technologies to cap-
ture the knowledge about a domain of interest in the form
of concepts and their relationships at different levels of ab-
straction. It supports the reasoning about both the structures
and the properties of the elements that constitute the sys-
tem. Ontologies [11] are the cornerstone technology of Se-
mantic Web. Among the different ontology languages, the
OWL [31] is chosen because it facilitates greater machine
interpretability of the Web content than that is supported
by XML, RDF, and RDFS by providing additional vocab-
ularies along with formal semantics. RDF/XML syntax is
the basis of serialization in OWL ontology. There are three
species of OWL: OWL Lite, OWL DL and OWL Full and
these are designed to be layered according to their increas-
ing expressiveness.
4Oracle
Identity
Management,
http://www.oracle.
com/products/middleware/identity-management/
identity-management.html [retrieved on Jan. 18, 2009].
5Sun Identity Management, http://www.sun.com/software/
products/identity/offerings.jsp [retrieved on Jan.
18,
2009].
Apart from the representation of domain knowledge, the
architecture requires more expressivity to deduce decidable
conclusions which in fact provide the authorization deci-
sions during controlling access to a system. To enhance
the expressivity of the ontology, we decided to use OWL
DL which is based on the Description Logics (DL) and
amenable to automated reasoning6. Though OWL DL lacks
in expressivity power compared with OWL Full, it main-
tains decidability7 and computational efﬁciency. The com-
putational efﬁciency is important since the scheme has to
handle many relations.
As the expressivity provided by the OWL is limited by
tree like structures [25], the implicit relations representing
the restricted access scenarios cannot be inferred from the
indirect relations between the entities. These require rule
support and interworking with ontologies.
One suitable
rule language is the Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL)
[17].
Along with SWRL, we also use Semantic Query-
Enhanced Web Rule Language (SQWRL8) to further en-
hance the expressivity of OWL, speciﬁcally to derive the
access authorization decisions based on deﬁned knowledge
(ontologies).
4
Generic Architecture of the Identity Han-
dling Mechanism
This chapter introduces the generic architecture of the
identity handling mechanism and illustrates each of its com-
ponents.
4.1
Roles in Life
Every human being plays numerous roles in life to live.
As a student, we are attending an educational institute; as
a researcher or engineer, we are working in a company; as
a consumer, we are buying things with cash or credits; we
are maintaining social relationships with family, relatives,
neighbors and colleagues. While exercising these roles in
life, we are interacting with many service providers to re-
ceive different types of services. For example, as a student
one has access to various services of the institute. Ana-
lyzing these scenarios, it can be said that every human be-
ing plays roles basically in three different areas, personal,
professional and social areas. Therefore in reality, leading
everyday life is nothing but playing some personal roles,
professional roles and social roles in general.
6Reasoning is the process of deducing implicit or indirect relations
from the explicit knowledge.
7Logics are decidable if computations/algorithms based on the logic
will terminate in a ﬁnite time.
8Semantic Query-Enhanced Web Rule Language (SQWRL), http:
//protege.cim3.net/cgi-bin/wiki.pl?SQWRL [retrieved on
Jan. 18, 2009]

4
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
In this article, we are proposing a concept of ‘My digital
identity’ which contains ‘My personal identity (PID)’, ‘My
corporate identity (CID)’ and ‘My social identity (SID)’
that would represent ourselves and our relevant real life
roles to the digital world. ‘My personal identity’ can be
used to identify ourselves in our personal and commercial
interactions. Similarly, ‘My corporate identity’ and ‘My so-
cial identity’ can be used in our professional and interper-
sonal interactions respectively.
4.2
Personal, Corporate and Social Iden-
tities
Each of these three identities will have several identi-
ﬁers. Each identiﬁer will be used to access several rele-
vant services and a number of attributes will characterize
an identiﬁer (see ﬁgure 1). Attributes are those set of char-
acteristics of an identiﬁer that are required by the service
providers during service interactions. For example, passport
can be one of the identiﬁers and name, date of birth, date of
issue, date of expiry, the country that issued the passport,
passport number etc. can be its attributes. The passport
My digital 
identity
Identifier 1
§ Attribute11
§ Attribute12
Identifier 2
§ Attribute21
§ Attribute22
PID
CID
SID
Figure 1. Generic architecture of ‘My digital
identity’.
that is in fact the most important personal identity issued
by the government and used to deal with many government
or non-government services. Similarly, another identiﬁer
will be used to get access to ﬁnancial services, like, buying
something through credit cards. Attributes of such identi-
ﬁers are name of the person who holds the credit card (may
be optional), number of the card, pin code, date of expiry
etc. My PID might have some more identiﬁers to access
our home premises, home network or VPN etc. In the same
way, My CID and My SID will have several such identiﬁers
and attributes. My CID might hold the identiﬁers to ac-
cess our ofﬁce premises, ofﬁce LAN/VPN etc. According
to Dick Hardt, individual’s interests, fondness, preferences
or tastes are also part of his/her identity [14]. In the pro-
posed identity model, these features will also be dealt with
by My CID and SID through roles and relations. It may
also include identiﬁers for accessing my email, messenger,
IP telephony etc. Each identiﬁer will contain only the re-
quired identifying information that a service provider needs
to know. ‘My digital identity’ thus, ensures the minimum
disclosure of identifying information.
4.3
Representation of Relationship
Following the research in social science, we proposed
the notion of social identity, which in this paper means in-
dividual’s relationship to a group or with other individu-
als. Social relation can refer to a multitude of social in-
teractions, regulated by social norms, between two or more
people, with each having a social position and performing a
social role. We consider the fact that, in the social context
we sometime like to be identiﬁed as ‘member of Cycling
Group’ or ‘Friend of X’ etc.
In our research, we represented these social identities us-
ing ontologies and we used OWL to design these ontologies.
Later (in section 5.3), it is explained how these identities are
exploited to authorize a person to see and access group’s re-
sources.
Friend
Resource
Resource
Mushfiq
Bill
Josef
George
Community space
Rowing
Cycling
Figure 2. A sample community structure.
Suppose, there exists a community space in the net-
work where there are two communities: Cycling and Row-
ing, each containing community and public resources. Bill,
Josef and Mushﬁq are members of Cycling community,
while George is a member of Rowing community.
Bill,
George and Josef are friends to each other. Figure 2 illus-
trates this sample community structure. The relationship to
the community (membership) and the relationship among
individuals are exploited to provide access authorization to
the right resources. A virtual social network may contain
such architecture to ensure security and privacy of com-
munity itself and its members. Figure 3 shows the sample
codes in RDF/XML (OWL syntax) representing a commu-
nity environment containing members, some of whom are
friends of each other, while some are not.

5
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
-----
-----
<Community rdf:ID="Cycling">
 <hasMember rdf:resource="http://www.owl-ontologies.com/OntologyBill4.owl#Bill"/>
 <hasMember rdf:resource="#Mushfiq"/>
 <hasMember rdf:resource="#Josef"/>
 <hasCommunityResource rdf:resource="http://www.owl-ontologies.com/
OntologyBill4.owl#CyclingPartyVideo"/>
 <hasPublicResource rdf:resource="http://www.owl-ontologies.com/
OntologyBill4.owl#HowToCycleVideo"/>
</Community>
<Community rdf:ID="Rowing"> 
<hasMember rdf:resource="#George"/> </Community>
-----
-----
<owl:Class rdf:ID="Member"/>
<Member rdf:ID="Bill">
 <belongTo rdf:resource="#Cycling"/> 
<hasFriend rdf:resource="#George"/>
 <hasFriend rdf:resource="#Josef"/>
 <hasPrivateResource rdf:resource="http://www.owl-ontologies.com/
OntologyBill4.owl#PrivatePartyVideo"/>
</Member>
<Member rdf:ID="Josef"> <belongTo rdf:resource="#Cycling"/>
</Member> 
<Member rdf:ID="Mushfiq">
 <belongTo rdf:resource="#Cycling"/> </Member>
<Member rdf:ID="George"> <belongTo rdf:resource="#Rowing"/>
</Member>
-----
-----
Figure 3. RDF/XML code sample representing
a community environment.
4.4
Representation of Role
Individuals gain a social identity and group identity by
their afﬁliation. Individuals play numerous roles in the in-
stitutions they are associated with. We distinguish profes-
sional institutions from the other social institutions, because
the former demands the higher security requirements in par-
ticipation than the later. Therefore, in this paper we mostly
focused on roles an individual plays in professional orga-
nization. In this regard we are going to illustrate a spe-
ciﬁc scenario. Nowadays people in business organizations
increasingly work in project oriented environments. The
project members come from different departments.
The
role of each department constitutes at least a supervisor and
subordinate employees. Similarly, each project contains a
project leader and members. From the sense of identity, we
are accustomed to identity ourselves as ‘supervisor of de-
partment X’ or ‘project member of project Y’, especially in
social context. These distinctions of roles play a crucial role
in controlling the access to work unit’s resources. For this
purpose, we also represented this speciﬁc scenario of roles
using OWL.
Suppose, an organization (a company) consists of two
departments: Dept.
A and B, each containing some re-
sources. Hans Christian is the supervisor of Dept. B and
Josef Noll plays the similar role in Dept. A. Erik Swansson
and George Kalman are the employees of Dept. B and A
respectively. Figure 4 shows such a sample organizational
Company
Department A
Josef Noll
Supervisor
George Kalman
Employee
Department B
Hans Christian
Supervisor
Erik Swansson
Employee
Figure 4. A sample organizational structure.
-----
-----
<Department rdf:ID="DepartmentA">
 <hasResource rdf:resource="#DeliverableDeptA"/>
 <hasResource rdf:resource="#DocDeptA"/>
 <hasResource rdf:resource="#AdminResDeptA"/> </Department>
<Department rdf:ID="DepartmentB">
 <hasResource rdf:resource="#DeliverableDeptB"/>
 <hasResource rdf:resource="#DocDeptB"/>
 <hasResource rdf:resource="#AdminResDeptB"/> </Department>
-----
<EmployeeID rdf:ID="Erik_Swansson">
 <hasRole rdf:resource="#DeptB_Employee"/> </EmployeeID>
<EmployeeID rdf:ID="George_Kalman">
 <hasRole rdf:resource="#DeptA_Employee"/> </EmployeeID>
<EmployeeID rdf:ID="Hans_Christian">
 <hasRole rdf:resource="#Supervisor_Hans"/> </EmployeeID>
<EmployeeID rdf:ID="Josef_Noll">
 <hasRole rdf:resource="#Supervisor_Josef"/> </EmployeeID>
<Supervisor rdf:ID="Supervisor_Hans">
 <rolePlaysIn rdf:resource="#DepartmentB"/> </Supervisor>
<Supervisor rdf:ID="Supervisor_Josef">
 <rolePlaysIn rdf:resource="#DepartmentA"/> </Supervisor>
<Dept_Employee rdf:ID="DeptA_Employee">
 <rolePlaysIn rdf:resource="#DepartmentA"/> </Supervisor>
<Dept_Employee rdf:ID="DeptB_Employee">
 <rolePlaysIn rdf:resource="#DepartmentB"/> </Supervisor>
-----
-----
Figure 5. RDF/XML code sample representing
an organization.
structure. We will see later (in section 5.3) that depending
on roles and relationships to the work units, each individ-
ual is authorized to access the right resources. The sample
codes in RDF/XML are shown in ﬁgure 5.
4.5
Distributed Identity Mechanism
The paper introduces a notion of distributed identity and
this section explains the mechanism in detail. With the iden-
tity services subscription, Identity Provider (IDP) issues a
certiﬁcate to the user and allocates a secure identity space in
the network. User identity data and attributes are distributed
and stored into two places. A part of the user identities that
contain very sensitive user information like, PID (e.g., cred-
itcard identiﬁer, home admittance key) will be stored (per-
manently or temporarily) in the SIM card of mobile phone.
This is the primary part of the identities which is used to ac-
cess the remaining of identities. Therefore, access to these
requires strict authentication. The other part of user iden-
tities which need medium/low authentication requirements,

6
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Table 1. The PID, CID and SID, their realization, storage location and security requirements.
Identity
Examples
Realization
Location
Security requirements
PID
PID (Credit card)
Certiﬁcate + key (public + private)
SIM
High
PID (Home admittance)
Fixed binary key
SIM
High
CID
CID (Ofﬁce admittance)
Fixed binary key
SIM
High
CID (Ofﬁce admittance)
Temp. binary key
Network
Medium
CID proﬁle (Role)
foaf/OWL (RDF+XML)
Network
Medium
SID
SID proﬁle (Relation)
foaf/OWL (RDF+XML)
Network
Medium/Low
for example social identities and preferences (SID), will be
stored into the secure identity space in the network. Table 1
gives several examples of PIDs, CIDs and SIDs, their pos-
sible realizations and where these identities will be located
or stored. Considering the various levels of security, the
corresponding security requirement of each identity is also
mentioned.
During the subscription, an operator can load the SIM
card with a private key for the user. PID credentials are real-
ized through certiﬁcates and keys provided from the Banks.
These can also be stored in the SIM card. The trusted third
party (whoever it is) can mediate the whole process. There
are few possibilities of realizing PID for home admittance.
Admittance keys can directly be stored in binary format in
the SIM card or a hash can be generated from the stored pri-
vate key and hash algorithm. The keys or a hash can later be
transferred to other devices using NFC technology. CID and
SID proﬁles and preferences are realized using either FOAF
(friend of a friend) or Web Ontology Language (OWL) and
stored these foaf/owl ﬁles in the network. We think Seman-
tic Web Technology (foaf/OWL) can provide solutions to
access control and privacy in corporate and social environ-
ment by deﬁning users’ roles, relations and access and pri-
vacy policies. We have already represented such provisions
in OWL implementing identity handling, access control and
privacy support in corporate and social community areas in
a separate work [8]. Detail description of the work is be-
yond the scope of this paper. However, we introduce the
motivation of using Semantic Technologies for the purpose
of security and privacy assurance in section 3
4.6
The Role of Identity Providers
The role of an identity provider is very crucial in iden-
tity provisioning. Similar to the subscription of voice and
data services, access to identity services subjects to explicit
agreement between users and identity providers. An IDP
is maintaining strong trust relationships among the sub-
scribers, service providers and the other IDPs.
Identity
providers may come from users social, corporate or per-
sonal domain. Security requirements of identity provision-
ing from these domains depend on the relevant service ac-
cess security demands. State/government is the traditional
and most accepted identity provider in national and interna-
tional level providing citizen ID. With strong regulations in
place (by state), banks and mobile operators can also act as
an IDP. Having a state or citizen ID is obligatory to estab-
lish access to some of these services. Several service access
(e.g., access to Banks or Creditcards) requires high secu-
rity environments and therefore the roles of these IDPs are
strictly regulated.
4.7
SIM as Identity Storage Element
The SIM card is considered as secure identity storage
place because it can be revoked, there are possibilities of
further security enhancements in it and user now-a-days can
rarely be found without a mobile phone. High capacity SIM
cards are available in the industry with increased memory
size, additional cryptographic and high speed communica-
tion (SIM-handset, SIM-network) capabilities [35]. Han-
dling identities from the SIM gives the user control over
the usage of his identities. It is expected that IDPs do not
own or control SIM card rather act as facilitators to man-
age identities. To manage multiple credentials, IDPs can
load additional IDs conﬁdentially to either a SIM card (with
over-the-air provisioning) or at network identity space with
user’s consent. In case of loosing the SIM card, a new one
can be ordered and the identities previously stored in the
card can be reloaded.
With the identity subscription certiﬁcate user can iden-
tify himself to access the network identity repository that
contains identities for example SIDs. These identities will
be used to access services that need medium or low level of
security requirements. The SIM card holds only the most
sensitive user identities. As the network is vulnerable to
many security threats, only information of less sensitive
character are stored in the network.
5
Security Mechanism
This section discusses the security mechanism introduc-
ing the levels of security and explaining the authentication
and authorization methods in detail.

7
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
5.1
Levels of Security
Ensuring secure service access using proposed identity
mechanism is a challenging issue, considering the fact that
we are going to store part of the identity in the network
that is vulnerable to electronic attack. It has been proposed
in this paper that the mobile phone will act as the primary
device to access ‘My digital identity’ in the network. In ad-
dition to this, a part of the identity that requires the highest
security will be stored in mobile phone SIM card. Here, it
is assumed that the user has the provision for ‘always-on’
functionality in his mobile phone.
Access control is a general way to ensure security in ac-
cessing services and resources in the Web. It mainly in-
cludes Authentication and Authorization. These two meet
two different security requirements.
The former veriﬁes
user’s identity and the authorization assures users rights in a
system. Moreover, multi-factor authentication enhances the
security of authentication mechanism.
Different levels of authentication mechanisms need to be
maintained depending on service access security require-
ments.
From user point of view, a securely maintained
communication channel is required to exchange very sen-
sitive user information with the service provider. There are
services that require only little information about the user.
Highly secured infrastructure is not a necessity for them.
Besides, building or maintaining very secure channel re-
quires good investment as well. Therefore, different levels
of security should be employed for different types of ser-
vices. Analyzing all these aspects, [27] introduced three
levels of security: Nice to know, need to know, have to
know according the increasing security requirements (see
ﬁgure 6).
Authentication
 means
Nice to know
Need to know
Have no know
Service 
examples
Financial 
transactions
Admittance
Network 
access
Smartcard &
 PIN
Username &
password
Device ID
Figure 6. Levels of security based on security
requirements of services.
5.2
Authentication
Authentication is the process of identifying an individ-
ual. It gives individuals access to system objects based on
their identity. Authentication merely ensures that the indi-
vidual is who he or she claims to be, but says nothing about
access rights of individuals.
5.2.1
Multi-factor Authentication
An authentication factor is the information or the pro-
cess used to authenticate or verify the identity of an entity
requesting access to a system under security constraints.
There are generally three types of authentication factors
(listed from weakest to strongest): something a user knows
(e.g., password), something a user has (e.g., security token),
and something a user is or does (e.g., biometrics). The pro-
cess of combining multiple authentication factors is called
multi-factor authentication. Single factor authentication can
be compromised quite easily. Hence, multiple factors can
make the authentication stronger.
In the proposed system, we also include multi-factor au-
thentication mechanism. Through a nice to know authen-
tication method, user can access ‘My digital identity’ and,
through a need to know authentication mean, user can ac-
cess most other services, such as, accessing messenger (msn
or yahoo), my address book, voip services, e-mail account;
accessing home or ofﬁce premises etc. Nice to know ser-
vices are network access, where knowledge about usage is
only required. Access to a very personal device like, SIM of
a mobile phone (it contains unique identiﬁer), can provide
nice to know authentication to the network. Need to know
services have higher security requirements. In addition to
the device identiﬁer, these require passwords or PIN. If the
mobile phone usage is PIN protected, need to know authen-
tication can be avoided. Highest security requirements are
needed for have to know services. Users have to be authen-
ticated through a have to know authentication mechanism to
use the identiﬁers that are necessary to access ﬁnancial ser-
vices such as, banking, online shopping etc. Here, we are
proposing to deploy the have to know authentication mech-
anism in SIM card through Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
Thus SIM card will be a part of ‘My digital identity’. This
will signiﬁcantly minimize the possibility of disclosure of
identities for ﬁnancial services, in case there are electronic
attacks on network contents of ‘My digital identity’.
5.2.2
Extended SIM Card Authentication
Currently, the SIM card provides the nice to know access to
network. We propose that the SIM card authentication will
also be enough to enter the part of ‘My digital identity’ lo-
cated in the network. The higher security requirements that

8
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
need to know services may require might also be satisﬁed
through SIM card authentication [27].
As proposed, the have to know authentication mecha-
nisms will be realized in SIM card. Hence, we are introduc-
ing an extended SIM card (ESIM) is a customized variant
of USIM (Universal Subscriber Identity Module) and it has
the capability to hold multiple credentials. One will be re-
sponsible to provide the nice to know and need to know
authentications and another one will store the have to know
authentication mechanisms. ESIM will also be a part of
‘My digital identity’ which the users will always carry.
The have to know authentication mechanism in SIM card
can be realized by implementing PKI. PKI enables users
to secure a public network (e.g., Internet) through using
public and private cryptographic key pair that is obtained
and shared through trusted authority (Certiﬁcate Authority)
[13]. In mobile networks, there exists a formal relationship
between users/subscribers on one hand and the network op-
erator of the other. Therefore, network operator can nat-
urally play the role of Certiﬁcation Authority (CA). The
users private key as well as the root CA public key can be
distributed in a secure way in the form of SIM card. The for-
mal relationship, which the operators already have through
roaming agreement, could be extended to cross-certiﬁcation
of each other public keys. Mobile network operators there-
fore are in a very strong position to establish themselves as
CAs, and the mobile device naturally lends itself to become
a secure storage medium for these cryptographic keys [20].
Figure 7. SIM based certiﬁcate and key han-
dling.
PKI enables the parties in a dialogue to establish conﬁ-
dentiality, message integrity and user authentications with-
out having to exchange any secret information in advance.
Figure 7 illustrates SIM based certiﬁcate and key han-
dling provisions. Certiﬁcates can be provided to the mo-
bile phone either physically or through mobile over-the-
air (OTA)9 provisioning. It is possible to sign the certiﬁ-
9Over-the-air (OTA) is a standard for the transmission and reception of
application-related information in a wireless communications system.
cate/transactions using stored private key from the mobile
phone or PC. These signed certiﬁcate/transactions will pro-
vide authentication, integrity and non-repudiation services
during service interactions.
5.2.3
Acceptability of Mobile Phone as Identiﬁer
Nowadays mobility of people increases due to dynamic life
style and working nature. The mobile phone has become
a foremost electronic device not only for communication
but also for managing different other activities, such as,
banking, collecting information from web, checking emails
etc. Mobile phone penetration is expected to reach 100%
in most of the developed countries. So, the basic infras-
tructure to use the mobile phone as identiﬁer is already in
place. Currently, different types of access systems can be
found in wireless networks. Services are expected to be in-
teroperable in different wireless communication systems. A
SIM is a temper resistant device in a wireless system hold-
ing subscriber identity and authentication information. The
SIM card in the mobile phone has the capability to pro-
vide all levels of authentication, and support mechanisms
for revocation of credentials stored in the SIM card [26].
It is only active if authenticated by the network operator.
If it gets stolen, the operator can disable the card. SIM
card opens for authentication and encryption in every wire-
less network (Bluetooth, WLAN, WiMAX) in addition to
GSM and UMTS [26]. So, SIM card enables authentication
mechanism to interact different services will certainly give
a technological edge to the development of future wireless
technologies and services. By storing a part of the identity
in the network, we are reducing the volume of data transfer
from mobile phone to network. In consequence, the addi-
tional data transfer due to the use of such system will leave a
very little effect on the capacity of air interface. Therefore,
the acceptabilirty of mobile phone as identiﬁer is expected
to be very high.
5.3
Authorization
When a user is authenticated, information system has to
make sure that he accesses only what he is allowed to. Ac-
cess authorization determines a) what an user can do in a
system (access to contents/services) and b) with which priv-
ileges? (e.g., read and/or write over the contents).
5.3.1
Authorization Based on Relationships
In this section, we refer to the representation of identity (re-
lationship) to discuss the authorization based on relation-
ships. Access authorization decisions are derived based on
the relationship among the individuals, and between the in-
dividuals and the community they belong to. Bill, Josef and
Mushﬁq belong to the Cycling community; George belongs

9
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
to the Rowing community; Bill has two friends: George and
Josef, and he also possesses a private resource: Private Party
Video. Cycling community has community and public re-
source. From this scenario, we are expecting the following
access situations:
• Cycling community members (Bill, Josef and Mush-
ﬁq) can access community resource: Cycling Party
Video with full access privilege (streaming and down-
load the full length).
• Josef is expected to get full access to Bill’s private re-
source: Private Party Video, as he is not only a friend
of Bill, but they also belong to the same community.
• George gets limited access (preview only) to Cycling
Party Video as he is not a member of Cycling commu-
nity.
• George is allowed to see the Private Party Video of Bill
with limited access privilege though he is a friend of
Bill, as they are not in the same community.
• Mushﬁq can see the Private Party Video of Bill with
limited access privilege as he is not a friend of Bill,
though they belong to the same community.
These access situations are realized through a set of ac-
cess authorization policies and they are designed through
rules exploiting SWRL. Figure 8 illustrates these policy
Figure
8.
Access
policies
are
designed
through rule using SWRL.
sets and a snapshot of one of the rules. The rules executed
using Jess rule engine to derive the access authorization de-
cisions. Figure 9 shows the authorization decisions which
follow the deﬁned access situations. The access privileges
are not shown in the ﬁgure but these are working from the
back end.
5.3.2
Authorization Based on Roles
In section 4.4, we have represented an organizational envi-
ronment containing different work units, employees, their
roles and relationships with relevant work units. Table 2
shows the detail organization structure containing roles and
Figure 9. Access authorization decisions de-
rived executing SWRL rule shown in ﬁgure 8.
Table 2. The detailed organizational structure
with roles and privileges of each employee.
Employee Name
Work Unit
Role
Privilege
Josef Noll
Dept. A
Supervisor
Administrator
Final Approval
Read & Write
George Kalman
Dept. A
Employee
Read & Write
Hans Christian
Dept. B
Supervisor
Administrator
Final Approval
Read & Write
Erik Swansson
Dept. B
Employee
Read & Write
privileges of each employee. In this section, we will see
how an employee can access to the right work unit’s re-
sources based on his deﬁned roles and relationships. In this
case, the expected access situation are,
• Hans Christian and Josef Noll work as supervisor in
department A and B. They hold privileges: Adminis-
trator, Read & Write and Final Approval. Therefore,
they are expected to administer relevant department’s
administrative resources, give ﬁnal approval to deliv-
erables, and read and write ordinary documents.
• Erik Swansson and George Kalman work as employee
of the department. They possess only Read & Write
privilege. Hence, they should only read and write rel-
evant department’s ordinary documents.
Figure 10. Rules (SWRL) along with queries
(SQWRL).
A common access policy is designed according to these
situations through rule using SWRL and ﬁgure 10 shows

10
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Figure 11. Access authorization decisions
derived executing rule and queries of ﬁgure
10.
the rule. Jess rule engine executed this rule and derived the
access authorization decisions. The decisions are displayed
in ﬁgure 11 and employees are found to get desired access
to the right resources.
6
Service Interaction
This section presents a service interaction concept and
demonstrates a practical implementation of a sample ser-
vice interaction involving proposed authentication and au-
thorization mechanism.
6.1
Service
Interaction
through
Dis-
tributed Identity
A concept of service interaction using distributed iden-
tity is introduced here. Figure 12 shows graphical represen-
tation of the concept. My digital identity consists of PID,
CID, SID
PID
Network
Service 
Providers
Authentication 
Providers
User’s devices
My 
Digital 
Identity
Trust
Trust
User
Service access
Figure 12. Concept of service interaction
through distributed identity.
CID and SID. User personal device (e.g., SIM of mobile
phone) stores PID, and CID and SID are stored mainly in
the network. The later mostly are the roles and relation-
ships of the users. Authentication providers (e.g., Bank,
Government, Mobile Operators) provides the PIDs, and the
roles and relationships are deﬁned either by the user him-
self or by the proper authorities. The ﬁnal goal is to interact
the services offered by their providers through my digital
identity. In this regard, users need to be authenticated and
authorized. Authentication is done through PIDs and Au-
thorization is done through role and relationships which are
part of CID and SID. To facilitate the service interaction,
the service providers and authentication providers should
trust each other. In addition, authentication providers and
users should also maintain strong trust relations. However,
trust mechanism is beyond the scope of this paper. The next
section presents a prototypical implementation of service
access involving authentication and authorization mecha-
nism. Authentication is done with stored binary key and
authorization is realized through roles and relationships.
6.2
Prototypical Implementation of Ser-
vice Access
The demonstration includes a mobile based key distri-
bution and thereby authentication to a service by the key.
It was built based on an earlier implementation of NFC-
based key distribution and admittance [27]. The key gen-
eration and distribution was modiﬁed to support online ac-
cess to contents of a service provider (SP). The authentica-
tion provider generates key upon request and transmit to the
user through mobile phone system. The key is stored in in-
tegrated smartcard and transmitted on demand to the mobile
terminal. The terminal can itself access services based on
that key or, as demonstrated, can be used to perform user
identiﬁcation where higher security is required. In our ser-
vice example, the key is transmitted over the NFC interface
towards SP.
User wants to access contents remotely from a service
provider using the PC. Figure 13 illustrates the steps of ser-
vice access demonstration. In step 1, the access request is
sent to the SP. Triggered by the request, in step 2, access
control system of the provider sends a message to the au-
thentication provider. This entity transmits access informa-
tion and an access key to the mobile phone of user. We
assume that Service and authentication provider belong to
a common trust system and user’s mobile phone number is
sent to SP during service access request. The user authenti-
cation provider creates an information message (3) and a bi-
nary key (4), which is transmitted to the user’s phone (here
Nokia 3320) and stored in the SmartMX card of its NFC
unit. The key can be transmitted over the NFC interface to
NFC-enabled devices. In case, services are accessed from
the PC, the key is transmitted to the PC using near ﬁeld

11
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Service 
provider
Service 
provider
Authentication
provider
Hans
Christian
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Figure 13. Prototype of online content ac-
cess.
communication (5). User then presents the key to the SP
(6), it then validates the key (7), and ﬁnally user gets the
authenticated access (8). If services are accessed from the
mobile phone, the phone number can even validate the key,
provided SP has previous knowledge of key holder’s phone
number. Service providers also need the capability to iden-
tify the phone number from the initial service request mes-
sage (1). Our implementation used Telenor’s mobile net-
work through PATS Innovation lab10.
Figure 14. Prototype of access authorization
to enterprise contents.
The objective is to access contents from a system of
an enterprise with appropriate privileges when, each of the
users has predeﬁned roles within the organization. Hans
Christian has just been authenticated by presenting a key to
an enterprise content/service provider. Figure 14 illustrates
a front end of the provider’s content/service management
10PATS (Program for Advanced Telecom Services), http://www.
pats.no [retrieved on Jan. 18, 2009]
system. It shows the contents, Hans Christian is authorized
to access. We have seen from the discussion before that
Hans is a supervisor of department B and he is permitted
to access administrative resources, deliverables and docu-
ments of department B with administrator, read & write and
ﬁnal approval privilege. Privileges are working from the
back end of the system.
7
Related Work
This section brings in literatures and research related to
secure access speciﬁcally in the area of access authoriza-
tion. In this paper, we introduced user’s corporate and so-
cial identities through roles and relationships. Access au-
thorization is realized using the formal description of these
roles and relationships. We are going to review some of the
relevant works in this section.
Role Based Access Control (RBAC) [29] is an increas-
ingly popular and efﬁcient solution where users access per-
missions are associated with the roles, and users are made
members of appropriate roles. We consider the concept of
RBAC as a part of our access authorization mechanism. Be-
sides incorporating the notion of roles, the proposed archi-
tecture includes the attribute which states ‘where (depart-
ment or project) one plays the roles’. Therefore, a simple
notion of Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) [36] has
also been integrated in this architecture. This further re-
stricts the relevant access authorization (toward the speciﬁc
work unit) decisions. Role as a basis for authorization en-
ables the use of constraints to support Separation of Duty
(SoD). SoD is widely considered to be a fundamental pre-
cept in computer security [9],[28]. In brief, the principle
states that if a sensitive task is composed of two steps, dif-
ferent user should do each step. We can interpret this def-
inition in the context of the organizational environment il-
lustrated in section 5.3. To deliver a ﬁnal audit report, em-
ployee of audit department should get access to the report
only to read and write speciﬁc entries but supervisor of the
department has the authority to give ﬁnal approval to it. In
this paper, we ensure this to happen though through simple
static role assignment.
In social community environment, we have chosen the
relationship of an individual with the community (member)
or with the fellow individuals (family or friend) as a basis
to authorize access to private or community resources. In-
stead of relations, a concept of trust or reputation can also
facilitate the access authorization [7]. In this regard, [12]
introduced a distributed trust management approach to pro-
vide access to community resources. From the context of
this paper, trust cannot be considered as identity traits of a
person and therefore, this should not be used as the only
mean to authorize access to private resources. However, the
trust coupled with relationship can strengthen the privacy in

12
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
virtual community networks.
We represented the access authorization policies using
OWL and SWRL. XACML (eXtensible Access Control
Markup Language) is a popular access control policy lan-
guage [23]. In [22], authors suggested expressing the access
control policies based on OWL and SWRL citing the lack
of formal semantics in XACML. KAoS [5] and Rei [21] are
the two noticeable works in this regard. Policy speciﬁca-
tion language in Rei is based on OWL Lite which is less
expressive compared with OWL DL. In [18], a Semantic
Based Access Control Model was presented which consid-
ered semantic relations among different entities in decision
making process. Therefore, use of formal representation of
roles and relationships for access authorization is gaining
momentum to secure a social or organization community
space.
8
Discussion
This section introduces several other critical features of
the proposed identity mechanism. In the ‘Laws of Iden-
tity’, Kim Cameron states that any sustainable and uni-
versally adopted identity architecture must only reveal the
least identifying information possible with the users consent
[6]. In the proposed identity mechanism, user controls how
much identifying information it would reveal to the service
providers by controlling the access to the primary storage of
the identities (SIM card). As the services are accessed only
through relevant identiﬁers of the PID, CID or SID, min-
imal disclosure of only necessary identifying information
with users consent is ensured.
Sxip [2] and Windows CardSpace [3] are the two identity
solutions developed by Sxip identity and Microsoft Corpo-
ration. In Sxip, membersites are typical websites that con-
sume identity data by sending Sxip requests for user data
to homesites, also websites that store user identity data.
Homesites authenticate and identify users.
It uses two-
factor authentication solution to access services, like, on-
line banking that requires strong authentication mechanism.
Sxip 2.0 can use a third party credentials which is an inter-
esting way to hide the use of PKI behind a software layer.
Windows CardSpace uses a variety of virtual cards, each
retrieving security token from the identity providers for au-
thentication and identiﬁcation to services. For greater se-
curity, user protects cards with personal identiﬁcation num-
ber (PIN). To provide further assurance of secure commu-
nication, Microsoft together with other partners in industry
is expected to create a new level of certiﬁcate that might
contain more information than a traditional Secure Sockets
Layer (SSL) certiﬁcate. These two identity solutions pro-
vide the movement of identity data over the Internet.
Storing the primary part of the identities in mobile phone
provides the major advantage over the other available iden-
tity mechanisms. It is available 24 h/7 days a week, as com-
pared to about 4 h average usage of a PC. Thus, it provides
the always online functionality with availability. As, SIM
card may also provide need to know authentication, some
services that require minimum security can be available to
the users as soon as they enter the proposed identity repos-
itory by mobile phone. Deployment of have to know au-
thentication mechanism in SIM (ESIM) not only enhances
the security to access ﬁnancial services but also increases
the acceptability of this identity to users. One of the use-
ful features is portability of identiﬁer from one device to
another, especially to the devices that has no direct connec-
tivity to ‘My digital identity’. Thus, these identities can be
accessed from anywhere and service continuity is possible
in heterogeneous wireless environment. In case of losing
or theft of SIM, we can use our PC to access ‘My digital
identity’ which is optional and demands modiﬁcation or en-
hancement of existing security mechanisms.
The proposed identity mechanism will create values for
the users, network operators and service providers. User
can use a unique identity mechanism that is simple, easy to
use, digital in nature but available anywhere and portable
to any device. It has the potential to replace many of the
paper-based identities, such as credit card, admittance card
etc. Network operators can also earn revenues by providing
space for the identity repository and facilitating the addi-
tional data transfer that the system requires. As there are
trust relationships among the parties involved in transac-
tions here, the integrity and conﬁdentiality of the transac-
tions are ensured. Once ‘My digital identity’ repositories
are known to the service providers, new offers can even be
posted directly to these repositories.
In addition to effortless movement of identity over the In-
ternet, the proposed mechanism supports the portability of
identity data among the devices. Authentication and iden-
tiﬁcation provided by the SIM card is the principle distinc-
tive feature of it. The federated identity standards provided
by the Liberty Alliance project11 also used mobile phone
identiﬁer to access Web services. In this paper, PKI based
have to know authentication mechanism has been moved to
SIM card to reduce the security vulnerability. The Web-
PKI suffers from insecure distribution and storage of cryp-
tographic keys and therefore does not provide a complete
chain of trust [20]. By combining the roles of CA, mo-
bile network operators would make it easier to have a com-
plete chain of trust around PKI because there already exists
a trust relationship between mobile network operators and
their customers. Gemalto, one of the leading digital secu-
rity providers, is using high capacity SIM card for storing
digital certiﬁcates or rights [1]. The identity repository can
be used instead to store these rights that can be accessed
11Liberty
Alliance
Project,
http://www.projectliberty.
org/ [retrieved on Jan. 18, 2009]

13
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
through mobile phone. Thus, some overheads during data
transfer can be avoided. The mechanism also ensures the
portability of rights. There are many identities based on
chip cards, like, memory cards and smart cards [30]. There
are multiple chip cards, provided by multiple entities and
single chip card, shared by few entities. If the proposed
identity repository is available in the network which can be
accessed anytime and from anywhere through an always on-
line mobile phone, such various identity based chip cards
might not be necessary. User needs only one smart card,
ESIM card.
9
Conclusion
The paper presented a concept of digital identity, a mech-
anism of its management, its security infrastructures, and
demonstrated a prototypical service interaction implemen-
tation. User identities are classiﬁed into personal, corporate
and social identities. Part of these identities which require
the highest security are going to be placed in user’s personal
device. The Web contains the rest of the identities. We be-
lieve the mobile phone’s SIM card has the potential to be the
secure personal device. User’s corporate and social identi-
ties are represented through roles and relationships. Secure
service access is ensured by means of authentication and
authorization mechanism. Personal identiﬁer authenticates
user and authorization is achieved through user’s roles and
relationships. A practical implementation is demonstrated
which exploits the proposed authentication and authoriza-
tion mechanism. In our future work, we will focus on prac-
tical implementation of a use case that supports seamless
service access in heterogeneous wireless networks using the
proposed identity mechanism.
References
[1] Gemalto, a leading digital security provider.
http://
www.gemalto.com [retrieved on Oct. 11, 2008].
[2] The Simple eXtensible Identity Protocol, Sxip. http://
sxip.net/ [retrieved Oct. 11, 2008].
[3] Windows CardSpace.
http://cardspace.netfx3.
com/ [retrieved Oct. 11, 2008].
[4] T. Berners-Lee, J. A. Hendler, and O. Lassila. The seman-
tic web. Scientiﬁc American Magazine, 284(5):34–43, May
2001.
[5] J. M. Bradshaw, S. Dutﬁeld, P. Benoit, and J. D. Woolley.
KAoS: Toward an industrial-strength open agent architec-
ture. In Software Agents, J. M. Bradshaw (ed.), AAAI press,
pages 375–418, 1997.
[6] K. Cameron.
The Laws of Identity.
http://www.
identityblog.com [retrieved Oct. 11, 2008], Decem-
ber 2005.
[7] H.-C. Choi, S. R. Kruk, S. Grzonkowski, K. Stankiewicz,
B. Davis, and J. G. Breslin. Trust models for community-
aware identity management.
In Architecture and Phi-
losophy of the Web Identity, Reference, and the Web.
IRW2006/WWW2006 Workshop, Scotland, May 2006.
[8] M. M. R. Chowdhury, J. Noll, and J. M. Gomez. Enabling
access control and privacy through ontology. In the proceed-
ings of 4th International Conference on Innovations in In-
formation Technology, 2007, Innovations ’07, Dubai, pages
168–172, November 2007.
[9] D. D. Clark and D. R. Wilson. A comparision of commercial
and military computer security policies. In Proceedings of
the 1987 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages
184–194, April 1987.
[10] J. D. Fearon.
What is identity (as we now use the
word)? Working paper, http://www.stanford.edu/
˜jfearon/papers/iden1v2.pdf [retrieved on Oct.
22, 2008], 1999.
[11] D. Fensel. Ontologies: A silver bullet for knowledge man-
agement and electronic commerce (2nd ed.).
Springer-
Verlag, Heidelberg, 2003.
[12] T. Finin and A. Joshi. Agents, trust, and information access
on the semantic web. ACM SIGMOD, Special Issue: Special
section on semantic web and data management, 31, 5:30–35,
May 2002.
[13] T. O. Group.
Public key infrastructure standards.
http://archive.opengroup.org/public/tech/security/pki/index.htm
[retrieved on Oct. 11, 2008].
[14] D. Hardt.
Identity 2.0.
Presented at OSCON 2005,
http://www.identity20.com/media/OSCON2005/ [[retrieved
on Oct. 08, 2008]].
[15] M. Hogg and D. Abrams. Social Identiﬁcations: A Social
Psychology of Intergroup Relations and Group Processes.
Routledge, London, 1988.
[16] M. A. Hogg and G. M. Vaughan. Social Psychology (3rd
ed.). Prentice Hall, London, 2002.
[17] I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet,
B. Grosof, and M. Dean. SWRL: A semantic web rule lan-
guage combining OWL and RuleML. W3C Member Sub-
mission, May 2004.
[18] S. Javanmardi, M. Amini, R. Jalili, and Y. Ganjisaffari.
SBAC: Semantic Based Access Control.
In the proceed-
ings of the 11th Nordic Workshop on Security IT Systems,
Linkoping, Sweden, pages 157–168, October 2006.
[19] R. Jenkins. Social Identity. Routledge, London, 1996.
[20] A. Jsang and G. Sanderud. Security in mobile communica-
tions: Challenges and opportunities. In the proceedings of
the Australasian Information Security Workshop, Adelaide,
Australia, February 2003.
[21] L. Kagal.
Rei:A Policy Language for the Me-Centric
Project. TechReport, HP Labs, September 2002.
[22] H. Li, X. Zhang, H. Wu, and Y. Qu. Design and Applica-
tion of Rule Based Access Control Policies. In proceedings
of the International Semantic Web Conference Workshop on
Semantic Web and Policy, pages 34–41, 2005.
[23] M. Lorch, S. Proctor, R. Lepro, D. Kafura, and S. Shah. First
experience using XACL for access control in distributed sys-
tems. In proceedings of ACM Workshop on XML Security,
VA, USA, October 2003.
[24] G. J. McCall and R. Simmons. Identities and Interactions.
NewYork: Free Press.., 1966.

14
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
[25] B. Motik, U. Sattler, and R. Studer. Query answering for
OWL-DL with rules. Proceedings of International Semantic
Web Conference, pages 549–563, 2004.
[26] J. Noll.
Services and applications in future wireless net-
works. In Telektronikk, Q4/2006.
[27] J. Noll, J. C. L. Calvet, and K. Myksvoll. Admittance Ser-
vices through Mobile Phone Short Messages. Proceedings
of the International Multi-Conference on Computing in the
Global Information Technology (ICCGI 2006), pages 77–82,
July 2006.
[28] J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder. The protection of infor-
mation in computer systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE,
63, 9:1278–1308, September 1975.
[29] R. S. Sandhu, E. J. Coyne, H. L. Feinstein, and C. E.
Youman. Role-based access control models. IEEE Com-
puter, 29, 2:38–47, February 1996.
[30] S. Sengodan. On secure mobile identity provisioning. In the
proceedings of Wireless World Research Forum Meeting 15,
Paris, France, December 2005.
[31] M. K. Smith, C. Welty, and D. L. McGuinness. OWL Web
Ontology Language guide. W3C Recommendation, Febru-
ary 2004.
[32] S. Stryker. Symbolic Interactionism. Menlo Park, CA: Ben-
jamin/Cummings., 1980.
[33] H. Tajfel and J. Turner. An integrative theory of intergroup
conﬂict. In William G. Austin, Stephen Worchel (ed.), The
Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Monterey, CA:
Brooks-Cole, pages 94–109, 1979.
[34] R. H. Turner. The Role and the Person. American Journal
of Sociology, 84:1–23, 1978.
[35] White
Paper.
High
capacity
SIMs.
http://visionmobile.com/whitepapers.html
[retrieved
on
Oct. 11, 2008], March 2006.
[36] E. Yuan and J. Tong.
Attributed based access control
(ABAC) for web services. In the proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Web Services (ICWS05), Or-
lando, Florida, pages 561–569, 2005.

