Workshop-based Security Safeguard Selection with AURUM 
 
Thomas Neubauer 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria  
thomas.neubauer@tuwien.ac.at  
Markus Pehn 
SBA Research 
Vienna, Austria  
pehn@sba-research.org
 
 
Abstract - Organizations are increasingly exposed to manifold 
threats concerning the security of their valuable business 
processes. Due to the increasing damage potential, decision 
makers are permanently forced to pay attention to security 
issues and are raising their security investments, but often (i) 
without considering the efficiency of the investments made, (ii) 
neglecting to involve people in order to raise security 
awareness and (iii) without full awareness of the importance of 
the decision at hand. This paper provides a crucial extension to 
the established risk management solution AURUM and 
extends its functionality by introducing the AURUM 
Workshop, which allows the selection of efficient safeguards 
based on corporate business processes. It highlights typical 
problems of (group) decision making and provides a solution to 
eliminate those shortcomings. Thereby, it supports decision 
makers in (i) refining the basic infrastructure elements to the 
specific requirements of the corporation, (ii) focusing on the 
most relevant risks and (iii) improving their awareness for the 
problem at hand. 
Keywords-Risk Management, AURUM, Decision Support 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Security hazards, such as viruses, hacker attacks or data 
theft, pose major threats to corporate assets and affect profit, 
shareholder value and a company’s reputation. The 
increasing usage of the Internet leads to a rise in the 
frequency of security breaches related to information 
technology. Garg, Curtis and Halper [2] estimated security 
investments within US companies to reach about $30 billion 
by 2005. CERT estimated that about 90% of big and 
medium-sized companies were affected by security incidents 
in 2006. In May 2009, the New York Times reported on a 
billion dollar contract the US Government signed with 
security companies and universities with the aim of being 
equipped for so-called cyber warfare. Due to the continuous 
increase of information technology use and its monetary 
importance, the main questions posed by companies’ 
managers are how to determine the optimum level of security 
investments and which measures are necessary and efficient. 
This work provides an extension to the established risk 
management solution AURUM (AUtomated Risk and Utility 
Management; cf. [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]). AURUM 
provides a risk management solution that allows decision 
makers to evaluate security investments based on corporate 
business processes and infrastructure defined in a security 
ontology. A Bayesian network supports the risk definition, 
whereas an interactive multiobjective decision support 
approach is used for selecting safeguards. This paper extends 
the functionality of AURUM by introducing the AURUM 
Workshop. The AURUM Workshop provides the missing 
link between the ontology comprising corporate business 
processes and infrastructure, the Bayesian network, and the 
decision support module that allows the interactive selection 
of efficient safeguards. It takes typical psychological and 
social influence factors from literature into consideration. 
Thereby, it supports decision makers in (i) refining the basic 
infrastructure elements to the specific requirements of the 
corporation, (ii) focusing on the most important risks (risks 
with a high frequency, a high impact, or both) and (iii) 
improving their awareness for the problem (risks) at hand. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
introduces the state-of-the-art related to group decision 
making, whereas Section 3 gives a deeper insight into the 
psychological and sociological factors of group decision 
making. Section 4 introduces the AURUM Workshop. 
Sections 5 and 6 focus on describing the roles and the 
methods needed in the Workshop process. Finally, the 
Workshop process is described in detail in Section 7. 
II. 
GROUP DECISION MAKING 
Groups of persons are commonly employed in a various 
ways: to counterbalance individual subjectivity of goal and 
preference systems, assist creativity, compensate for 
complexity, and to increase members’ identification with a 
decision (cf. [10], [11]). According to Frech [11], groups are 
similar to teams and characterized by "face to face contact of 
more than two persons over a longer time period oriented 
toward a goal identical to all members". 
He argues that within a group, certain phenomena can be 
observed:  
 
A sense of togetherness also referred to as cohesion.  
 
The emerging of certain rules and restrictions in formal 
and informal interaction.  
Staehle [12] uses these psychological facts to explain the 
difference between groups and teams. He defines a team as a 
focus-oriented work group with a stronger cohesion (team 
spirit) and stronger internal psychological relations. The role 
structure is more oriented to a team leader vs. member 
situation and the time span of working as a group is normally 
shorter. The designation of a team as "work group" leads to a 
point where teams are working toward a common goal, and 
individual preferences have to be shelved. This common goal 
leads to a higher level of cohesion in combination with high 
conflict 
potential. 
Groups 
bound 
by 
instructions, 
123
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

characterized through the goal of achieving a common 
purpose, will be discussed below. Autonomic groups are not 
part of these considerations (cf. [13] for a definition and 
further discussion of autonomic groups). 
 
A. Structure of Group Decisions 
A group decision is the result of a group decision process 
(GDP). Laux [14] describes this process as two stages: the 
information process and the choice process (cf. [10], [13]). 
Paschka [15] divides the information stage into: 
 
Problem definition: Measure methods to elicit goal 
values. The problem definition can be predetermined by 
the management. A common approach is a comparison 
of actual and targeted business results that ends in a 
clear formulation of the problem’s context.  
 
Detailed specification of the goal system: This means 
mainly the annulment of goal conflicts, approaches and 
intervention techniques in order to refine preference 
orders. A diversification of goal conflicts can be found 
in [16].  
Paschka’s choice stage consists of the following steps (cf. 
[14]):  
 
Determination of alternatives for action: These are 
multiple different methods, mostly selected via voting or 
exclusion approaches (or both), which also include 
decision finding based on these techniques (cf. [17]).  
 
Realization: Methods and techniques, for example 
project management to execute the decision.  
 
Control: Methods and techniques to compare the 
received results.  
Once the information has been gathered, a discussion about 
possible alternatives and their results has to be carried out, 
usually leading to a voting process and a decision. This 
phase may possibly be influenced by members who try to 
further their individual preferences (cf. [14]). A participant 
of a group decision process is described through a set of 
variables (cf. [15]): 
 
Individual 
goal 
function 
and 
preference 
order: 
Depending on job position, knowledge, and interest in 
topic.  
 
Probability judgment: Depending on an individual’s 
processing of given indicators, knowledge of the topic, 
and experience in similar situations. 
 
Information amount: Inside the group, external 
information will be presented through indicator values, 
but there is still the possibility that the amount of 
information certain group members have differs because 
of differences at the information processing level 
(prognostic 
function, 
cf. 
[14]) 
and 
external 
experience/knowledge (information structure) that is not 
available to the whole group (for example: secret 
strategic preferences of the management).  
Based on these individual attributes it is obvious that, 
especially at the beginning of the information phase, each 
group member has different preferences and accordingly, a 
different preference order.  
 
B. Application of the Group Decision Making Process to 
IS Safeguard Evaluation 
Table I shows the application of the above described 
GDMP, according to Paschka and Laux, to information 
security by mapping the actions to the process.  
TABLE I.  
APPLICATION OF IS SAFEGUARD EVALUATION TO THE 
GDMP 
Phase of GDMP
Security Safeguard Evaluation Action(s)
Problem definition
Definition of cost and resource categories; 
Definition of tactical goals according to 
security policies.  
Detailed specification of 
the goal system 
Specification of strategic and tactical goals: 
analysis of the goal system and preference 
order (importance valuation of the goals) 
referring to the definition s made in the 
problem definition phase; Definition of assets, 
vulnerabilities, threats leading to risks.
Determination 
of 
alternatives
Definition of proper safeguards following the 
specified risks over a valuation scheme. 
Realization
Implementation through physical, technical 
and administrative controls. 
Control
IS control mechanism such as internal or 
external audits. 
 
C. Structural Characteristics of Groups 
Adler [18] describes cultural perspectives and background 
via a classification scheme:  
 
Homogeneous team/group: All members have the same 
cultural background  
 
Token team/group: All members expect one have the 
same cultural background  
 
Bicultural team/group: Two cultures that are represented 
by at least two members each  
 
Multicultural team/group: Three or more persons with 
different cultural backgrounds  
Martirossian [19] describes homogeneous groups as more 
efficient for executing well-defined tasks, whereas more 
heterogeneous ones tend to find a greater number of feasible 
results. According to Adler [18], the monitoring effort 
increases with the degree of cultural difference. The 
problem solving approach as well as the communication 
mode can show large differences, which can be an 
opportunity but can also create risks in terms of 
misunderstandings and a lack of respect for personal 
attributes and behavior. The moderator can pick out the best 
of the available behaviors without harming group members, 
which can increase efficiency (cf. [18]).  
Martirossian [19] argues that the group size is an 
important criterion. While big groups require a high degree 
of communication to include all members at a certain level, 
small 
groups 
are 
easier 
to 
handle 
in 
terms 
of 
communication, but bear risks like a lack of information or 
ideas. The workshop solution provided in this work tends to 
124
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

involve a variety of different members, which requires good 
preparation and an experienced coordinator open to different 
problem solving structures. 
Group leadership [19], which can be "people-oriented" 
and/or "goal-oriented", is an important criterion in a group. 
People-oriented leaders focus more on satisfying the group, 
while goal-oriented leaders place more emphasis on 
production and results. Both factors are important, as a 
balanced solution is recommended to hold a good 
Information Security Workshop. In a workshop situation, 
where the aim is to achieve optimal solutions, it is of utmost 
importance to structure the group with a view to the points 
described above. A certain degree of heterogeneity in team 
members’ job positions (security experts as well as 
employees from outside the security field) and possibly their 
cultural background has to be handled with respect to 
balanced process leadership, which should be both goal and 
people-oriented to a certain degree.  
III. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL INFLUENCE 
FACTORS 
Decision makers, no matter whether they act on their own or 
as part of a group, are usually confronted with a variety of 
psychological and social issues that have a major influence 
on their decisions (cf. e.g., [20]).  
A. Basic Phenomena 
1) Confirmation trap: Humans aspire towards consistency, 
which induces them to insist on the correctness of their 
actions and to ignore, eliminate or distort contrary 
information. Insist on belief effect: Works similarly to 
the confirmation trap mentioned above. Humans try to 
maintain their view of the world by ignoring, 
eliminating 
or 
distorting 
contrary 
information. 
Availability heuristic: Humans are able to remember 
some things better than others (cf. [21]). Possible 
reasons are emotional involvement, time, and spatial and 
sensory proximity [22], leading to an incorrect 
interpretation of these events by exaggerating their 
frequency, importance, etc. Anchoring and adjustment: 
The anchor is a basis for classifying new information 
based on a person’s experience (cf. [23]). A lack of 
information often leads to the use of an arbitrary anchor, 
which causes a misclassification in relation to the 
anchor. Hindsight bias: After an event, people 
frequently believe that they predicted it correctly. There 
are a few theories concerning the origins of this 
mechanism:  
 
Relations were built after the event that do not or did not 
exist in reality.  
 
The theory of distorted answers (cf. [24]), which was 
formulated as a result of questioning eyewitnesses, 
shows that when people are confronted with irritant 
information, the capacity for remembering the facts 
decreases.  
 
The third theory is based on the abovementioned anchor 
heuristic, where the event is positioned too close to the 
anchor.  
2) Distortion by reasons of process variation: People are 
generally inconsistent in their behavior. Lichtenstein and 
Slovic [23] as well as Tversky and Kahneman [25] have 
shown that this relation is not universally valid, and that 
logical procedure orientation and inductive behavior are 
only partially predetermined. Question structure: The 
formulation of the question is of vital importance to the 
processing 
and 
argumentation 
process 
inside 
respondents’ minds.  
3) Prospect theory: The frame in which a situation is 
embedded in terms of winning or losing dictates the 
expectations of the situation. If a loss is expected, a 
small benefit will be seen as a gain, whereas if a high 
benefit is expected, a small benefit will be handled as a 
loss (cf. [20]). 
4) Presentation of information: Subjects are able to 
remember and categorize well presented information 
much better than badly presented information (cf. [20]).  
B. Basic Phenomena in the Context of Group Decisions 
The difficulty in mapping the basic phenomena to the group 
level is related to the nescience of specific group 
characteristics. In a group typically more resources, such as 
knowledge, power and financial capital are available.  
 
Availability heuristic at group level: Auer-Rizzi [20] 
takes it for granted that discussion of a prior case used as 
a prototypical example can affect the considerations in a 
positive or negative way.  
 
Anchoring at group level: Anchoring remains individual 
at group level; no group anchor is constructed, but rather 
individual anchors.  
 
Prospect theory at group level: Participants who see a 
situation as a gain are willing to take higher risks than 
others [25].  
 
Hindsight bias at group level: According to Stahlberg 
[26] there are no differences compared to the individual 
level if anchoring was used to provide the base of 
hindsight bias.  
C. Influence of Majorities on Minorities and Vice Versa 
The theory of social comparison (cf. [27]) postulates the 
human need to reassess own opinions. This mindset leads to 
behavioral uncertainty and the need for orientation towards 
reference points represented through  
 
a majority and the opinion it holds, or  
 
a strong individual opinion maker who persuades other 
participants of his view and, thereby, founds a majority.  
According to Festinger [27] influencing majorities are one 
of the main reasons for distortion inside groups. An 
important factor within this theory is the divergence 
between physical and social reality. Physical reality is 
defined through the verifiability of facts, allowing everyone 
to check for themselves: e.g., financial data, statistics, etc. 
Social reality describes the common point of view 
125
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

represented by a group or a strong majority. Asch [28] 
shows that in situations of divergence between social and 
physical reality, a tendency toward social reality is 
noticeable.  
In contrast, Moscovici and Faucheux [29] showed that 
minorities can also influence the majority, if the minority 
argues with strong self-confidence and forcefulness. This 
refers explicitly to the behavior and not to fuzzy skill 
definitions (cf. [30]). In this case the majority tends to 
reflect on its point of view and often changes its opinion. 
Typical examples of this are influences on organizational 
hierarchies from outside the group structure. This arises for 
two reasons: A person who is accustomed to leading and 
can argue strongly also tends to be dominant within a group. 
Second, the behavior of subordinates is oriented towards 
their leader for reasons of personal benefit. This means 
expecting to gain favor by holding the view of the boss, and 
can occur consciously or unconsciously (cf. [31] for the 
theory of sociometric leader choice). 
D. Readiness to Take Higher Risks at Group Level 
People are ready to take higher risks at group level than in 
individual 
decisions 
(cf. 
examples 
[32], 
[33] 
and 
experiments [34], [35]).  
 
Allocation of responsibility: The risk level of group 
decisions increases with the number of liable 
participants (cf. [35]). A certain degree of anonymity 
arises as well, and risk aversion decreases with the 
degree of individual liability. 
 
A person who is willing to take higher risks has more 
influence: Individuals who tend towards risky decisions 
from the start argue more convincingly and are more 
successful at persuading others (cf. [36]).  
 
Social comparison: Brown [37] holds the view that risky 
decisions 
are 
preferred 
because 
of 
the 
social 
phenomenon that people willing to take higher risks 
have a better reputation. While this theory is not 
applicable in every situation, it often results in the 
unconscious attempt to take a little bit more risk than the 
other group members, which in turn leads to a positive 
evaluation of this person by the others.  
 
Strong arguments: According to Burnstein and Vinokur 
[38], group members are influenced by arguments that 
seem to be cogent, even in the case the argument or 
position being criticized is new and valid. Individual 
preferences as well as the characterization of the person 
and agreement with the person raising the argument can 
influence the rating of the argument.  
E. Groupthink and its Criticism 
Under certain circumstances, groups of sensible, smart, even 
shrewd men and women think and act in a way that can only 
be described as "collective stupidity" [32]. The most 
important psychological phenomenon in this area contains 
distortion mechanisms at individual and group level and 
results in a usually negative effect on decision finding.  
The 
groupthink 
theory 
(cf. 
[39]) 
contains 
some 
preconditions that have to be met for groupthink to occur:  
1) High cohesion: The phenomenon appears only in groups 
with a high or medium level of cohesion, due to the 
impossibility of individual members with a different 
view prevailing against the majority (cf. [40]). The main 
problem is the lack of disagreement and discussion in 
strong cohesive groups and the resulting isolation of 
opposition (cf. [20]).  
2) Compartmentalization makes it easier to isolate oneself 
from external and new circumstances or restrictions. A 
compartmentalized group does not allow the influence 
of group harmony.  
3) Direct leading: A patriarchic leader is not willing to 
accept disagreement.  
4) The absence of standardized decision procedures leads 
to conformity and the loss of social control in the 
group’s work.  
5) Intragroup social and ideological homogeneity usually 
leads to homogeneous solutions of low impact due to the 
absence of opposition. The participants’ goal is to 
achieve consensus at any price. 
6) Provocative and situational context: Pressure on people 
with low self-esteem has a significant influence on the 
decision. Pressure to succeed leads to a high degree of 
conformity with group leaders’ preferences. Low self-
esteem arises from previous failures, excessive decision-
making problems and moral dilemmas (cf. [40]).  
7) Tendency towards agreement: People normally strive 
for harmony for reasons of conflict reduction within 
their environment.  
Janis [33] characterizes the symptoms of groupthink with 
three, possibly overlapping, categories:  
1) Category 1 - overestimation of the group’s own 
capabilities: On the one hand, this is expressed by the 
illusion of invulnerability: the group holds the opinion 
that nobody and nothing is able to thwart them, which 
results in an extreme readiness to take risks. On the 
other hand, it results in the group’s opinion that it 
upholds high moral and ethical standards, which creates 
a dilemma, as the group believes that everything it does 
is correct and, therefore, on a high ethical level.  
2) Category 2 – narrow-mindedness: Everyone who holds 
a different view is excluded from the discussion. 
Further, stereotyping of opponents as well as collective 
resistance against warnings and different arguments is 
characteristic. Decisions that have already been taken 
are defended without considering new information and 
its implications. 
3) Category 3 - pressure toward uniformity: This is mainly 
self-censorship that expresses itself in the tendency to 
keep doubts and misgivings to oneself.  
Criticism of the groupthink theory is founded in part on the 
fuzzy definition of cohesion (cf. [40]). Classical conformity 
studies describe humans’ aspirations towards a state of 
normative group conformity, where conformity within the 
group grows with an increasing degree of cohesion. Critics 
126
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

address the case of different group norms: if the group norm 
does not prescribe the keeping of harmony but rather critical 
questioning, groupthink would be diminished. Furthermore, 
Janis holds the view that groupthink does not occur in 
groups with low cohesion. Schulz-Hart [40] disagrees and 
shows examples in which groupthink occurs in extreme 
situations or conditions such as compartmentalization 
outwards, homogeneity, directive leadership or extreme 
stress.  
Janis only focuses on homogeneity of preferences, other 
forms are not accounted for. He does not explain how 
company-wide framework conditions can lead to unanimity. 
No methods are described for measuring low self-worth or 
hopelessness, and literature definitions disagree on 
contextual levels. In addition, there are some statements in 
Janis’ work where the action-reaction relation is not 
sufficiently explained. Other issues include that there is no 
explanation of how overestimation of one’s own capabilities 
and insularity can arise, because the pursuit of harmony or 
agreement cannot be used as an explanation [40]. There is 
also no clear specification what sort of consequences are 
caused by different preconditions. In response to the 
criticism Hart (cf. [32]) adds de-individualization. This 
concept is based on the work by Zimbardo [41] and defines 
unsocial, shortsighted behavior of groups and masses 
towards individuals with the goal of inducing groupthink. 
An opposing approach to explaining typical groupthink 
symptoms and the associated decision distortion was 
established 
by 
Whyte 
(cf. 
[42]), 
who 
bases 
his 
considerations on the prospect theory of Kahneman and 
Tversky [21]. Schulz-Hart [40] argues that the fiascos 
described by Janis [33] are founded on risk ignoring in case 
of 
loss 
expectancy 
and 
describes 
the 
groupthink 
characteristics as only cumulative values.  
 
F. Decision Autism 
According to Schulz-Hart [40] the distortion mechanism of 
decision autism occurs if a decision maker is controlled by 
self-affirmation tendencies. The symptoms are divided into 
3 categories: 
1) Self-centered symptoms: These are, first, a feeling of 
infallibility, which leads to a high degree of decision 
confidence and mental simplification of the problem 
area. Second there is self-reassurance, where any doubts 
are minimized by distorting them. The third is an 
increase in self-esteem, i.e., an increase of subjective 
confidence in oneself and one’s opinion, combined with 
decreasing esteem for others and their opinions.  
2) Social symptoms: Sniezek and Buckley [43] argue that 
social symptoms are not only of relevance within a 
group, but also for each individual, and lead to decision 
autism due to the fact that each individual acts in a 
social environment. Out of the whole range of social 
effects and symptoms, this refers to the ones who create 
selective communication. In this context, Schulz-Hart 
[40] has identified the following: more support for 
preferred 
discussion 
topics, 
selective 
attention, 
supporting likeminded people, and downplaying doubts. 
He also lists pressure on people who disagree, self-
proclaimed mind guards and collective rationalization as 
symptoms resulting from personal attitudes that are only 
influenced at group level.  
3) Symptoms within the decision process: Each step of the 
decision process potentially contains symptoms of 
decision autism (cf. [44]): 
 
Identification of the problem: Ignoring inconvenient 
problems, preference for supporting case studies. 
 
Generation of alternatives: Generation of fewer 
alternatives and focusing on the preferred one. 
 
Evaluation of alternatives: Distorted rating caused by 
selective 
information 
search, 
self-affirmation 
in 
evaluating information and rapid rejecting of divergent 
alternatives.  
 
Deciding: Lack of scrutiny of decisions. 
 
Implementation of the decision: Implementation without 
"what if" scenarios in mind. 
 
Control mechanisms: Excessive decision control.  
IV. 
OVERVIEW OF THE AURUM WORKSHOP 
The AURUM Workshop is a process for supporting risk 
management. It is used to determine, refine and review 
security-relevant data needed as input for the AURUM risk 
management framework. The main characteristics of the 
AURUM Workshop are:  
 
Moderated: The workshop comprises three methods - 
Brainstorming/Discussion, Evaluation, and Selection - 
that are used by the moderator to get objective results 
from the workshop participants.  
 
Role based: Each process participant has a specific role 
that determines his tasks.  
 
Group based: Each process participant is a member of a 
small group of three or more people. By splitting one 
big group into several small groups, the approach aims 
to avoid psychological issues such as the “influence of 
majorities” and groupthink. 
 
Clear task structures: The process categorizes its tasks in 
three groups, where each is a basic type of task 
instances.  
 
Clear voting structures: The process provides a way to 
model consensus of opinions, which is based on the 
clear structures of the voting process.  
 
Awareness building: The AURUM Workshop aims to 
improve the security awareness of its participants in 
order to build an understanding of relevant risks, and 
options for their mitigation.  
 
 
127
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  AURUM Workshop Process. 
 
Figure 1 shows the overall scheme of the AURUM process 
and the integration of the AURUM Workshop. The gray 
squares denote activities and methods that are part of the 
workshop process. The workshop supports decision makers 
in going through the risk management process step by step. 
It supports the following risk management phases defined in 
AURUM: 
(i) 
Business 
Process 
Determination, 
(ii) 
Inventory, (iii) Threat Probability Determination and (iv) 
Control Evaluation. In the briefing phase, which is carried 
out prior to the workshop, the moderator selects a number of 
volunteers from different departments for the required roles.  
V. 
ROLES 
Heterogeneous group configuration can lead to impacts on 
decisions. To address this problem, this section outlines the 
roles used in the AURUM Workshop. A short description 
outlines each role’s tasks and responsibilities, followed by a 
list of recommended skills for each role. We describe the 
main tasks of the role during the workshop and the 
interaction with other process participants (specifically 
whether and how they exchange knowledge and experience 
for task execution).  
A. Moderator 
Short Description: Ideally, a security consultant familiar 
with the AURUM process and the business area should be 
selected as moderator. It is highly recommended that the role 
of the moderator is assumed by an external consultant 
familiar with the process and its typical problems. If there is 
a high number of participants, two moderators can be 
selected.  
Recommended Skills: High familiarity with AURUM, the 
ability to nurture security awareness and build an 
understanding of security in the participants’ minds, 
128
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

consideration of psychological issues that can occur in group 
decision processes. 
Main Tasks and Interaction: The moderator has one of 
the main roles in the AURUM Workshop. He has to 
administrate groups and data input: (i) He defines small 
groups, creates user accounts and assigns roles to all process 
participants. (ii) Data exchange Data input tasks are mostly 
brainstorming, which involves naming and the need for 
merging and deleting. (iii) Data input: The moderator can 
choose whether he wants to join one of the small groups. In 
that case, he must input data like all other process 
participants. Due to the complexity and number of tasks the 
moderator has to deal with, this is not recommended. (iv) 
Regulation of interaction: The AURUM Workshop is 
characterized by highly interactive tasks where the 
moderator is the main interaction controller: he opens the 
tasks, users input data and discuss, and then he closes the 
task.  
Involvement in Group: The moderator leads and guides 
the participants through the workshop. In this respect it is 
also not impossible for the moderator to be a member of a 
group, but because of the number and complexity of the 
tasks it is not recommended. Additionally, prior knowledge 
and his position of respect with regard to the other process 
participants can cause group dynamic issues.  
B. Management Member 
Short Description: This role is ideally assumed by 
members of middle or high level management who 
contribute to the group with structural and process 
knowledge. It must be taken into consideration that the 
dynamics between majorities and minorities within the group 
can cause problems with established authority relations 
outside the group. Therefore, it should be attempted to form 
groups at the same or similar levels of hierarchy. The 
presence of management members is an indispensable 
cornerstone of an accepted process execution at management 
level, due to their knowledge of cost restrictions and running 
processes. Before process execution, it is essential to ensure 
management support and therefore sufficient presence of 
management members.  
Recommended 
Skills: 
(i) 
Process 
knowledge: 
Management members have to be aware of the strategic 
goals of internal or external business processes so as not to 
lose sight of integration problems that could be caused by 
new security controls. (ii) Knowledge of cost structures: The 
best security control set is worthless if it cannot be 
implemented due to cost restrictions. Including cost 
considerations from the beginning can eliminate unrealistic 
economical security control estimations. This requires a high 
degree of interaction with members in "security" roles 
concerning possible safeguard costs, and therefore security 
members with some knowledge of costs. (iii) The ability to 
present decisions and their costs at management level is 
indispensable for the adoption of the developed solutions. To 
build this understanding in management members’ minds, it 
is necessary to impart knowledge about effects of security 
incidents before process execution. (iv) The task “category 
voting”, in particular, has to be executed under guidance of 
the group‘s management member, who should have 
knowledge about cost and value categories the company uses 
and the ability to give the other process participant an idea of 
these categories..  
Main Tasks: A rating task is done by the individual user 
and indicates an assignment of numerical values that were 
voted upon. Of special interest for management members is 
the task category of voting, where they contribute with data 
input as well as performing the leading role because of their 
special knowledge about cost and process structures. 
Involvement in Group: Each management member is 
directly integrated in exactly one group. The interaction with 
members of other groups happens through discussion tasks. 
Each management member is involved in all group decisions 
and has the leading role in category evaluation. 
C. Expert Member 
Short Description: Depending on the problem area, an 
expert member can come from a different department. In our 
considerations these mostly concern information security 
employees, but generally this could be any department that 
tries to evaluate security claims and corresponding 
safeguards. An expert member fills the gap between the 
structural and cost knowledge of management members and 
the user experience of the key process user. Other process 
participants improve the expert’s knowledge by giving him a 
broader view of the issues. Security expert members are 
essential for identifying the problem space and ideally help 
to understand problems at other business levels. It is highly 
recommended that the importance of team-oriented work is 
borne in mind in selecting the expert member. Expert 
members who are not willing or able to share knowledge and 
responsibility are a destructive power and impede the 
process. 
Recommended Skills: (i) Infrastructural knowledge to 
handle the asset identification is one of the main skills an 
expert member must have. This also holds true for 
experience with past incidents affecting the assets in question 
and their occurrence rates, which is essential for refining 
probability ratios. (ii) Technology knowledge: The ability to 
identify and estimate possible synergy effects and 
effectiveness of safeguard candidates. Records and statistics 
can be of additional help in these steps. (iii) Cost knowledge, 
which is important in interacting with the management 
members. Without feasible estimations about possible 
safeguard implementation costs, the management is unable 
to consider cost restrictions in the evaluation process. It is 
rarely possible to give even a rough estimate because of the 
difficulty 
of 
determining 
issues 
like 
installation, 
maintenance, etc.  
Main Tasks: A rating task is performed by an individual 
user and is an assignment of numerical values to tasks that 
were voted upon. Of special interest for expert members is 
the task asset voting, where they input definition data 
because of their special infrastructural knowledge, as 
mentioned above. Risk voting is also performed only by the 
expert members and deals with the estimation of occurrence 
rates. 
129
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Involvement in Group: Each expert member is directly 
integrated in exactly one group. The interaction with 
members of other groups happens through discussion tasks 
as described above. Each expert member is involved in all 
group decisions. 
D. Key Process User 
Short Description: In addition to the structural and expert 
knowledge provided by management and expert members, 
users must also contribute to the process. The participation of 
key process users also enhances acceptance of the decided 
actions and their costs at employee level. In the selection of 
key process users, it is recommended that their prior 
knowledge and openness to new approaches are taken into 
consideration. Candidates with negative attitudes towards 
new ideas can cause major acceptance problems. It is 
essential to understand that if the key process users are not 
convinced of the approach, they will not be able to 
communicate the idea and need for information security 
measures at their business level. 
Recommended Skills: (i) Experience with main business 
processes and tasks to enable use of user know-how within 
the process considerations. This, in particular, takes data 
input problems into consideration at the task execution level, 
as well as experience with the use of previous information 
security measures. (ii) Ability to defend unwelcome 
decisions at execution level founded on in-depth knowledge 
about their necessity. This is based upon the introduction to 
security problems and possible consequences at the briefing 
held prior to the process.  
Main Tasks: A rating task is done by the individual user 
and indicates an assignment of numerical values to voted 
tasks. In the current version this is only done manually to get 
an asset ranking and to evaluate the incident occurrence rate; 
the rating of the other steps occurs automatically via the 
number of mentions. Discussions are lead by the moderator, 
who is the only one who can perform data changes on that 
basis. Unlike the other roles, the key process users 
themselves do not have any tasks in which they assume a 
leading role. 
Involvement in Group: Each key process user is directly 
integrated in exactly one group. The interaction with 
members of other groups happens through discussion tasks 
as described above. Each key process user is involved in all 
group decisions. 
VI. 
WORKSHOP METHODS 
The workshop comprises three methods that are used by the 
moderator to generate data necessary to carry out the risk 
management process (see Table II): Brainstorming, 
Evaluation, and Selection. 
1) Brainstorming: Brainstorming enables a group of 
decision makers to quickly assess the data relevant for 
the information security of their organization. The 
system supports the decision makers as they enter as 
many items as they judge appropriate.  
2) Evaluation: Based on Grünbacher (cf. [45]) we use a 
border criterion voting mechanism for rating the items 
gathered during brainstorming. Each participant decides 
upon the importance and ease of implementation of the 
so-called win conditions. The system calculates a 
medium value depending on the degree of consensus.  
The voting results are underlined with a traffic light 
system to signal the degree of controversiality using the 
colors red (<50% consensus), orange (>=50 and <=75% 
consensus) and green (>75% consensus). The borders 
are variable and arise from task-dependent mathematical 
methods: (i) Taking numerical values as input, the 
standard deviation of the input values from the different 
decision makers is used to determine the threshold and, 
thus, the degree of consensus. (ii) Taking the number of 
votes as input, the number of votes related to the total 
number of voters determines the threshold and, thus, the 
degree of consensus. To avoid disagreement, e.g., out of 
ignorance, the voters are instructed not to vote if they do 
not know. The evaluation process can be summarized as 
follows: 
a) A set of possible win conditions arising from 
brainstorming phases are the input for voting. 
b) Each possible win condition is voted on in the 
categories of business importance and ease of 
realization. To avoid distortion from blind votes, the 
members are instructed not to vote if they do not 
know.  
c) The average of each condition over the two 
categories will be displayed, and a red/green 
colored marking indicates the degree of consensus.  
d) A structural discussion helps to clarify reasons for 
disagreement and convey tactical knowledge known 
to individuals to the rest of the group [45].  
3) Selection/Discussion: During a group discussion based 
on the ratings’ analysis, the group decides which items 
are to be selected. If judged necessary, the brainstorming 
and rating steps can be repeated. Discussion tasks have 
to be carried out after voting in order to resolve any 
disagreements. The degree of consensus or disagreement 
an issue receives determines how it is handled in the 
discussion, with the moderator acting as a mediator. Of 
course, the nature of group discussions is always to 
some extent undefined and it is difficult to determine 
concrete rules. Therefore, a moderator with high 
psychological and didactic competence is required. 
Nevertheless, some general suggestions are made below 
to aid the moderator in this complicated task.  
 
It is suggested to address orange and red color items by 
questioning:  
 
Ask an individual member why he or she thinks that a 
point is important or not. The points that he or she 
mentions will certainly be agreed or disagreed with by 
several members, forming the basis for the discussion.  
 
Allow constructive interruptions but make sure to guard 
against domination by a few members (cf. Chapter 4.5, 
especially the problem of "majorities and minorities").  
 
If only one person has mentioned a specific issue, do not 
ask this person why he or she thinks that it is important. 
Instead ask another member in order to avoid the human 
130
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

tendency to wait for explanations (cf. Chapter 4.5); 
possibly he or she will bring up issues nobody has 
thought about.  
 
In the end a generally accepted solution/rating should be 
found. If this is not possible after an adequate amount of 
time, the only possibility for the moderator is to overrule the 
disagreeing parties with a compromise. This must be 
considered a last option and should be avoided whenever 
possible.  
 
 
TABLE II.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF TASK TYPES 
 
Brainstorming Task 
Evaluation Task
Selection/Discussion Task 
Executors 
Participants in a specific role (instance 
dependent). 
Participants in a specific role (instance 
dependent).
All participants. 
Input 
List of issues which have to be rated 
mathematically. 
The question what is imaginable for ... ; i.e., 
a brainstorming request. 
A list of issues from a prior voting task, 
containing items on which the participants 
do not agree or agree only in part.
Output 
List of numerical values assigned to issues. 
A list of written issues with a certain degree 
of consensus. 
Changes in the input list which represent a 
more accepted output list, and/or more 
sophisticated user. 
 
 
VII. THE AURUM WORKSHOP PROCESS 
This section explains the phases of the AURUM  Workshop 
in detail. Each step is described according to the three 
criteria of input, output, and sub-steps. The sub-steps list the 
necessary internal tasks and explain the reason and the type 
of task for each one, breaking down a quite complex process 
step into manageable and understandable topics.  
A.  Workshop Briefing 
After reviewing and selecting workshop participants 
according to their profile and the requirement definition in 
section 7.2, the members are briefed on the goals of the 
process: (i) Definition of the risk analysis context and goals: 
This first step aims at defining the scope of the workshop 
and its goals. This is required for the orientation of the 
process and the definition of criteria and to measure its 
success. (ii) Selection of workshop participants: In order to 
raise the efficiency of the workshop session in terms of 
quality and quantity of the workshop output, the moderator 
must select participants according to their knowledge, their 
suitability. Participants should be selected to cover the 
whole spectrum of security problems and include a manager 
in charge of the decisions to emerge from this process. (iii) 
Psychological issues: With knowledge of psychological 
dynamics in group decisions, the participants may be able to 
avoid typical problems. (iv) AURUM  Workshop process: 
Participants are informed about the process steps, especially 
input and expected output data. This has to happen in a way 
that ensures the members understand their roles and, 
therefore, their integration in the process, including issues 
such as voting mechanisms, group structuring, etc. (v) 
Terminology: For successfully conducting the workshop 
part of the process, it is essential to impart knowledge of 
basic security terms and how they relate.  
The following section outlines suggestions for briefing 
the workshop participants, especially concerning issues 
arising from related work. The main points of concern 
during the execution of the process are the following: 
 
Why the workshop is carried out: Which goals and 
prospects regarding process output exist and how this 
approach differs from previous ones.  
 
Characterization of the business unit: The participants 
have to be informed about affected business. If most 
participants (especially non expert members) have only 
limited knowledge about the field in question, a short 
introduction is suggested. It is assumed that sufficient 
knowledge about business concerns will help to 
understand problem complexity and needs. In case of a 
general information security safeguard evaluation this 
point can be ignored, focusing more generally on 
process goals.  
 
Explaining MOSEP workflow: Participants have to be 
informed about the individual steps (cf. chapter 8.6); in 
particular, input and expected output data are important 
for seeing the overall picture in terms of risk assessment 
(cf. chapter 3).  
 
Understanding of security terms and their mashing: It is 
essential for performing the workshop part of the 
process to impart knowledge of basic security terms (cf. 
chapter 2) and how they relate.  
 
Building security awareness: The awareness problem 
was discussed in chapter 6. Participants have to 
understand difficult terms, like "social engineering", 
"human asset" etc., to perform a more feasible 
evaluation.  
 
Building awareness of possible psychological influence: 
With knowledge of psychological dynamics in group 
decisions (cf. chapter 4.5), the participants may be able 
to avoid typical problems.  
 
The participants are asked to perform an interactive 
knowledge exchange through question/answer interaction. 
Each moderator uses different methods of interaction and 
communication, depending on personal experience and 
preferences. 
131
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Phase 1: Business Process Importance Determination 
Description: This step aims to identify the most relevant 
business processes. For this purpose, the expert group is 
asked to execute a brainstorming and evaluation task. Gross 
discrepancies (foremost red-colored items) have to be 
discussed by the workshop members, and result in an 
accepted list of processes ranked by their importance. 
Steps:  
 
Business Process Selection: The decision makers select 
the business processes to be evaluated. This step 
includes the discussion of the selected processes and 
their ranking in the event of a low degree of consensus. 
In order to resolve such problems, the moderator should 
discuss the following questions with the workshop 
participants: “Why were certain processes mentioned?” 
and “Why did certain members vote high and others low 
for the importance of an issue?”  
 
Business Process Importance Determination: The 
decision makers determine the importance of the 
selected business processes within the corporation, and 
their need for protection.  
Main Question: What should be protected?  
Output: An accepted list of business processes ranked by 
importance.  
C. Phase 2: Inventory 
Description: This step aims to identify the most relevant 
assets. For this purpose, the expert group is asked to execute 
a brainstorming and evaluation task. Gross discrepancies 
have to be discussed by the workshop members, and result 
in an accepted list of assets ranked by their importance. 
Note that this phase can be supported by the AURUM 
security ontology, which already contains a wide selection 
of assets. Thus, decision makers only need to review the 
assets proposed by the ontology and the discussion can 
focus on the issues where little consensus exists. 
Steps:  
 
Assets: This step includes the discussion of the assets 
corresponding to the selected processes.  
 
Asset Importance Determination: The decision makers 
determine the importance of the selected assets, and, 
thus, their need for protection. The decision makers can 
use a suggestion made by the system that is calculated 
based on the importance of the business processes 
(cf. [6]).  
 
Acceptable Risk Level: Level of risk judged to be 
outweighed by corresponding benefits or one that is of 
such a degree that it is considered to pose minimal 
potential for adverse effects.  
 
Attacker Capabilities: This step aims to evaluate and 
define the capabilities of potential attackers.  
 
Attacker Motivation: This step aims to evaluate and 
define the motivation of potential attackers.  
Main Question: Which assets exist, and which of them are 
really worth protecting?   
Output: An accepted list of assets ranked by their 
importance, the acceptable risk level for each business 
process, the attacker capabilities, and the attacker 
motivation. 
D. Phase 3: Threat Probability Determination 
Description: This step aims to determine and review 
vulnerabilities, threats and existing countermeasures. It aims 
to evaluate possible threats and their causes. The basic data 
for this purpose is the asset list assembled in process step 1. 
First, the possible threats for each asset have to be 
determined, which happens through group voting. The result 
is a list of threats, in which each threat has to be argued by 
listing dangers (also group voting), which produces a list of 
vulnerabilities for each threat. The vulnerability and the 
threat determination have to be concluded by a discussion 
task based on the degree of consensus in the two voting 
steps. For this purpose, the expert group is asked to execute 
a brainstorming and evaluation task. Gross discrepancies 
have to be discussed by the workshop members, and result 
in an accepted list of vulnerabilities and threats ranked by 
their importance. Note that this phase can be supported by 
the AURUM security ontology, which already contains a 
wide selection of vulnerabilities and threats based on 
established security standards such as ISO 27001 or NIST 
SP 800. Thus, decision makers only need to review the 
assets proposed by the ontology, and discussion can focus 
on the issues where little consensus exists. In this case 
voting can be limited to selection tasks, the vulnerabilities 
follow automatically and only have to be adapted to the 
specific business needs. 
Steps:  
 
Vulnerabilities: Based on the list of threats, the next step 
deals with determining the causes for each threat.  
 
Threats: This sub-step attempts to evaluate a set of 
corresponding threats for each asset. The execution as 
voting task requires brainstorming on behalf of the 
group and input concerning problematic circumstances. 
The moderator aggregates the data to obtain the list of 
threats for each asset that is the output of this sub-step.  
 
Existing countermeasures: This step aims to review and 
evaluate existing countermeasures.  
Main Question: Which dangers are the individual assets 
exposed to?  
Output: Accepted lists of threats and corresponding 
vulnerabilities. 
E. Phase 4: Control Evaluation 
Description: Based on the risk evaluation, the set of possible 
administrative, technical and physical controls required to 
avoid such incidents must be determined. This is achieved 
by voting, followed by a discussion. The output is a set of 
controls for each risk. Alternatively, it is possible to define 
only the requirements for control. Concrete products can be 
determined in the post-workshop evaluation step. 
Steps:  
132
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Criteria Definition: This step defines a set of criteria 
concerning business conditions and possibly related 
enterprise-wide controlling mechanisms.  
 
Interactive Selection: This step supports decision makers 
in determining the solution that best fits their ideas and 
objectives, choosing from the possibly hundreds (or 
even thousands) of Pareto-efficient alternatives of 
countermeasure portfolios identified previously. The 
procedure starts with an efficient portfolio and allows 
the decision maker to iteratively move in solution space 
towards more attractive alternatives until no “better” 
portfolio can be found. The system provides immediate 
feedback about the consequences of different choices in 
terms of the remaining alternatives and, thereby, allows 
the decision maker to evaluate different investment 
scenarios. The system provides the decision maker with 
ample information on the specific selection problem and 
ensures that the finally selected solution will be an 
optimal (i.e., Pareto-efficient) one.  
Main Question: Which countermeasures are possible?  
Output: Accepted lists of countermeasure portfolios for 
protecting the selected business processes. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Managers regularly have to cope with a wide spectrum of 
potential risks and, therefore, the decision of selecting the 
most appropriate set of security safeguards. Moreover, they 
are challenged by legal and economic requirements leading 
to the demand to carry out risk assessment on a regular 
basis. This paper proposed an approach called AURUM 
Workshop for integrating the advantages of workshops into 
the established risk management solution AURUM. It 
provides decision makers with a stepwise method for risk 
assessment by taking into account and mitigating typical 
psychological and social influence factors that usually occur 
in (group) decision processes. Decision makers are 
supported by a moderator who provides professional advice 
during the entire process and reduces the influence of 
individual opinions on the whole decision. AURUM 
Workshop is intended to not only evaluate data, but also to 
impart security awareness to the participants in order to 
build an understanding of relevant risks, and options for 
their mitigation. It supports decision makers in identifying 
and focusing on the most important risks and provides 
intuitive interactive decision support for evaluating different 
protection scenarios.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was performed at the Vienna University of 
Technology and the research center Secure Business Austria 
funded by the Federal Ministry of Economy, Family and 
Youth of the Republic of Austria, and the City of Vienna. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Workshop-Based Risk Assessment for the Definition of Secure 
Business 
Processes; 
Thomas 
Neubauer 
and 
Markus 
Pehn; 
International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge 
Management (eKNOW’10), IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 74-
79.  
[2] 
A. Garg, J. Curtis, and H. Halper, “Quantifying the financial impact 
of it security breaches,” Information Management & Computer 
Security, vol. 11/2, 2003, pp. 74–83. 
[3] 
A. Ekelhart, T. Neubauer, and S. Fenz, “Automated risk and utility 
management,” in 2009 Sixth International Conference on Information 
Technology: New Generations. IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 
393–398. 
[4] 
A. Ekelhart, S. Fenz, and T. Neubauer, “Ontology-based decision 
support for information security risk management,” in International 
Conference on Systems, 2009. ICONS 2009. IEEE Computer Society, 
March 2009, pp. 80–85. 
[5] 
------, “Aurum: A framework for supporting information security risk 
management,” in Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, HICSS2009Los Alamitos, CA, USA: 
IEEE Computer Society, January 2009, pp. 1–10, 978-0-7695-3450-3. 
[6] 
S. Fenz, A. Ekelhart, and T. Neubauer, “Business process-based 
resource importance determination,” in Proceedings of the 7th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Business 
Process 
Management 
(BPM’2009). Springer, 2009, pp. 113–127. 
[7] 
T. Neubauer 
and 
C. Stummer, 
“Extending 
Business 
Process 
Management to Determine Efficient IT Investments,” in Proceedings 
of the 2007 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, 2007, pp. 1250-
1256. 
[8] 
T. Neubauer, A. Ekelhart, and S. Fenz, “Interactive selection of ISO 
27001 controls under multiple objectives,” in Proceedings of the Ifip 
Tc 11 23rd International Information Security Conference, IFIPSec 
2008, vol. 278/2008. Boston: Springer, July 2008, pp. 477–492. 
[9] 
T. Neubauer and C. Stummer, “Interactive selection of web services 
under 
multiple 
objectives,” 
Information 
Technology 
and 
Management, vol. 11(1), 2010, pp. 25-41. 
[10] E. Kahle, Betriebliche EntscheidungenOldenburg, vol. 6, 2001. 
[11] M. Frech, Arbeit in und mit Gruppen in Kasper, H. and Maierhofer, 
W.(eds.) 
Personalmanagement-Führung 
- 
Organisation. 
Wirtschaftsverlag Ueberreuter, 1996. 
[12] W. Staehle, 
Management 
- 
Eine 
verhaltenswissenschaftliche 
Perspektive. München, 1991. 
[13] E. Saliger, Betriebswirtschaftliche Entscheidungstheorie. Oldenburg, 
2003. 
[14] H. Laux, Entscheidungstheorie. vol. 6 Springer, 2007. 
[15] R. Paschka, 
Multipersonalität 
bei 
Mehrfachentscheidungen. 
Deutscher Universitätsverlag, 1995. 
[16] J. Bidlingmaiyer, Unternehmerische Zielkonflikte und Ansätze zu 
ihrer Lösung. Zeitschrift für Betriebswirtschaft, 38, No.3, 1968, 
pp.149 - 179. 
[17] B. Roy, Decision Aid and Decision Making in Costa, C. A. Bana e 
(ed.): Readings in Multiple Criteria Decision Making. Berlin, 1990. 
[18] K. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior 4th 
Edition. Ohio, South Western/Thomson Learning, 2002. 
[19] J. Martirossian, Decision Making in Communities: Why Groups of 
Smart People Sometimes Make Bad Decisions. Community 
Association Press, A Division of Community Association Institute, 
2001. 
[20] W. Auer-Rizzi, Entscheidungsprozesse in Gruppen - kognitive und 
soziale Verzerrungstendenzen. Wiesbaden, DUV, 1999. 
[21] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Availability: A heuristic for judging 
frequency and probability.” Cognitive Psychology, vol. 5, 1973, pp. 
207–232. 
133
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[22] R. Nisbett 
and 
L. Ross, 
Human 
Inference: 
Strategies 
and 
Shortcomings of Social Judgment. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 
1980. 
[23] P. Slovic and S. Lichtenstein, “Comparison of Bayesian and 
Regression Approaches in the Study of Information Processing in 
Judgment,” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 
vol. 6, 1971, pp. 649 – 744. 
[24] M. McCloskey and M. Zaragoza, “Misleading postevent info and 
memory of events: Arguments and evidence against memory 
impairment hypothesis.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, vol. 114, 1985, pp. 1 – 16. 
[25] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “The framing of decisions and the 
psychology of choice,” Science, vol. 211, 1981, pp. 453 – 458. 
[26] D. Stahlberg, A. Maas, and D. Frey, “We knew it all along: Hindsight 
bias in groups.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, vol. 63, 1995, pp. 46–58. 
[27] L. Festinger, “Informal social communication,” Psychol. Rev., 
vol. 57, 1950, pp. 271–282. 
[28] S. Asch, “Studies of independence and conformity: a minority of one 
against an unanimous majority.” Psychol. Monogr., vol. 70, 1956, p. 
9. 
[29] S. Moscovici and C. Faucheux, Social influence, conformity bias and 
the study of active minorities, t. E. In: Berkowitz, L. Advances in 
experimental social psychology, Ed. Academic Press, New York-
London, 1972. 
[30] R. D. Mann, “A review of the relationships between personality and 
performance in small groups,” Psychol. Bull., vol. 56, 1959, pp. 241–
270. 
[31] R. F. Bales and P. Salter, “Role differentiation in small decision 
making groups” in Parsons, T. and Bales, R. F.: “Family, 
socialization, and interaction process,” Free Press, Glencoe/Illinois, 
vol. 1, 1995, p. 1. 
[32] P. Hart, Groupthink in government: A study of small groups and 
policy failure. Amsterdam, Swets & Zeitlinger, 1990. 
[33] I. Janis, Groupthink. Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and 
Fiascoes. Boston: Houghton Mufflin, 1982. 
[34] J. Stoner, “A comparison of individual and group decisions involving 
risk.” Ph.D. dissertation, School of Industrial Management, M.I.T., 
1961. 
[35] M. Wallach, N. Kogan, and D. Bem, “Group influence on individual 
risk taking.” J.Abnorm. Soc. Psychol., vol. 65, 1962, pp. 75–86. 
[36] B. Collins and H. Guetzkow, A social psychology of group processes 
for decision making. Wiley, New York, 1964. 
[37] Brown, R. (1965). Social psychology. New York: Free Press. 
[38] E. Burnstein and A. Vinokur, “Testing two classes of theories about 
group-induced shifts in individual choice.” J. Exp. Social Psychology, 
vol. 13, 1973, pp. 315–332. 
[39] H. Franke, 
Problemlösen 
in 
Gruppen: 
Veränderungen 
im 
Unternehmen zielwirksam realisieren, 3, Ed. Leonberg:Rosenberger 
Fachverlag, 1998. 
[40] S. Schulz-Hart, Realitätsflucht in Entscheidungsprozessen - von 
Groupthink zum Entscheidungsautismus. Ber: Verlag Hans Huber, 
1997. 
[41] P. Zimbardo, “The human choice: Individuation, reason and order 
versus deindividuation, impulse and chaos,” In: Arnold W. J. and 
Levin D. (Eds.): Nebraska symposium on motivation, University of 
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, vol. 17, 1969, p. 1. 
[42] Whyte, G., & Sebenius, J. K. (1997). The effect of multiple anchors 
on anchoring in individual and group judgment. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 69, 75–85. 
[43] J. Sniezek and T. Buckley, “Cueing and cognitive conflict in judge-
advisor decision making.” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, vol. 62, pp. 1995, 159–174. 
[44] R. Aldag and S. R. Fuller., “Beyond fiasco: A reappraisal of the 
groupthink phenomenon and a new model of group decision 
processes,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 113, 1993, pp. 533–552. 
[45] P. Gruenbacher and R. Briggs, “Surfacing tacit knowledge in 
requirements 
negotiation: 
Experiences 
using 
EasyWinWin,” 
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, vol. 34, 2001, pp. 1–8. 
 
 
134
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

