288
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
1
Threats to the Swarm:
Security Considerations for Swarm Robotics
Fiona Higgins, Allan Tomlinson and Keith M. Martin
Abstract—Swarm robotics is a relatively new technology that is
being explored for its potential use in a variety of different ap-
plications and environments. Previous emerging technologies have
often overlooked security until later developmental stages, when
security has had to be undesirably (and sometimes expensively)
retroﬁtted. This paper compares swarm robotics with related
technologies to identify their unique features where existing
security mechanisms can not be applied. We then review some
of the emerging applications where ineffective security could
have signiﬁcant impact. We conclude by discussing a number
of security challenges for swarm robotics and argue that now
is the right time to address these issues and seek solutions.
We also identify several idiosyncrasies of swarm robotics that
present some unique security challenges. In particular, swarms
of robots potentially (i) employ different types of communication
channels (ii) have special concepts of identity, and (iii) exhibit
adaptive emergent behaviour which could be modiﬁed by an
intruder. Addressing these issues now will prevent undesirable
consequences for many applications of this type of technology.
Index Terms—swarm robotics, security, autonomy, adaption,
emergent behaviour
I. INTRODUCTION
Swarm robotics is a relatively new area of research, and one
which is growing rapidly. As with many emerging technolo-
gies, there is no formal deﬁnition of the ﬁeld that engenders
universal agreement, however comprehensive reviews of the
state-of-the-art identify some characteristics that have been
generally accepted [1]–[3]. These characteristics include robot
autonomy; decentralised control; large numbers of member
robots; collective emergent behaviour and local sensing and
communication capabilities. Thus, from a security perspective,
it is reasonable to consider swarm robotics as a special type
of computer network with the aforementioned characteristics.
It has often been the case that the security of a new technology
is an afterthought rather than an explicit design objective. This
is not entirely surprising given the creative nature of research
and the diversity of disciplines investigating the technology.
Typically it is only as the technology matures, and begins to be
deployed, that the security implications then become apparent.
This was the case with, for example, mobile phone technology.
The ﬁrst generation of mobile phones were analogue, and easy
to clone since they broadcast their identity clearly over the
airwaves. It was also easy to eavesdrop on them by simply
tuning a radio receiver to pick up conversations. Subsequently
The authors are with the Information Security Group, Royal Holloway,
University of London, UK
f.l.higgins, allan.tomlinson, keith.martin@rhul.ac.uk
the underlying technology has been continuously modiﬁed in
order to address threats that became apparent after deployment.
The development of the Internet is another example of security
being retroﬁtted to the technology.
In the case of swarm robotics, the particular security re-
quirements of swarm robotic networks do not appear to have
been investigated in any detail so far. Thus, for the above
reasons, we believe that this is an opportune time to consider
these issues, before any wide-scale deployment. Deferring
security research until later in the technology’s evolution
could, depending on the application, be a risky strategy and
may lead to undesirable consequences.
As far as we are aware, this is the ﬁrst attempt to categorise
security challenges for swarm robotics. Very little prior work
appears to have been openly published. A notable exception
to this is the work of Winﬁeld and Nembrini [4] who identify
several threats to a swarm of robots, which they classify as
hazards. In identifying the main security challenges to swarm
robotic networks it is our hope that this paper, and the work
we presented at ICAS09 [5], will result in the development
of robot swarm technology that is reliable and safe to deploy
even in potentially hostile environments.
In Section II, we brieﬂy review technologies that are similar to
swarm robotics, highlighting the key differences and deﬁning
what we mean by a robotic swarm. In Section III we provide
examples of applications that potentially will make use of this
technology and show how vulnerabilities may exploited. In
Section IV we discuss security, commencing with a short high
level overview of security, and then cataloguing aspects of
the swarm robotic environment which present challenges to
security. Finally, in Section V we draw some conclusions.
II. SWARM ROBOTICS AND RELATED TECHNOLOGY
Before considering the security of swarm robotic networks
it is necessary to establish the scope of the type of system
we wish to secure. In other words, it is necessary to deﬁne
what we mean by a swarm robotic network. There are many
technologies which are similar to swarm robotic networks
in some respects but differ in particular aspects. It is useful
therefore to review how similar technologies, some of which
have been subjected to a degree of security analysis, relate
to robotic swarms. This will allow us to identify the unique
features of robotic swarms that may beneﬁt from closer
scrutiny in terms of security. It is these unique features that
we wish to focus on in order to identify vulnerabilities that are

289
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
particularly pertinent to swarm robotic networks and perhaps
to identify aspects of these systems that may be exploited to
enhance security.
In this section we consider four technologies closely related
to swarm robotic networks and then describe the unique
distinguishing features of the latter.
A. Multi-Robot Systems
Like robotic swarms, multi-robot systems are a collection
of robots, working together to achieve a common goal. To
accomplish this, multi-robot systems are typically managed by
a well–deﬁned command and control structure. Swarm robotic
systems differ from more traditional multi-robot systems in
that their command and control structures are not hierarchical
or centralised, but are fully distributed, self-organised and
‘inspired by the collective behaviour of social insect colonies
and other animal societies’ [6].
Self-organisation means that sometimes the collective beha-
viour, even if unpredictable, may well result in solutions
to problems that are superior to ones that could have been
devised in advance. The parallel drawn with social societies
in the animal world extends to communication – interactions
between the robots can be indirect as well as direct. Fault
tolerance, which is related to security, has already been ex-
tensively explored within the context of multi-robot systems
with hierarchical command and control, notably in the work
of Parker’s ALLIANCE control architecture [7].
B. Mobile Sensor Networks
Sensor networks consist of collections of devices, or nodes,
with sensors that typically communicate over a wireless net-
work. A mobile sensor network is a sensor network where
the nodes are either placed on objects which move [8] or
where the nodes may move themselves [9]. In the latter case
they are sometimes known as robotic sensor networks [10].
Hybrid systems also exist [11], where mobile robots work in
conjunction with static sensors.
Although mobile sensor networks exhibit many similarities
to swarm robotic networks, there are distinct differences.
For example, robotic swarms may utilise a wider range of
communications technologies, which extend to indirect com-
munication such as stigmergy, as described in Section IV-D.
Moreover, individual identity may be more signiﬁcant in a
sensor network if it is important to determine exactly where
the sensed data originated.
Perhaps the most important difference is that a sensor network
is not designed to have the collective emergent behaviour of
a robotic swarm.
C. MANETs
Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) consist of wireless
mobile nodes that relay each others’ trafﬁc, with the nodes
spontaneously forming the wireless network themselves. The
special properties of MANETs, such as the lack of infra-
structure, absence of trusted third parties, as well as pos-
sible resource constraints, make implementing security a very
challenging task. MANETs can consists of many types of
mobile devices and there is considerable existing work on
their security [12], [13]. Although MANETs do not exhibit
the emergent behaviour of swarms, some MANET security
techniques could have relevance to swarm robotics depending
on the communication method used by the swarm.
D. Software Agents
There is no universally agreed deﬁnition of a software agent,
but we take one proposed by Wooldridge [14]: ‘An agent is a
computer system that is situated in some environment, and that
is capable of autonomous action in this environment in order to
meet its design objectives’. A multi-agent system (MAS) [14],
[15] is a system composed of multiple autonomous agents,
where each agent cannot solve a problem unaided; there is no
global system control; data is decentralised; and computation
is asynchronous. A mobile agent is a particular class of agent
with the ability during execution to migrate from one host to
another where it can resume its execution [15]. Thus mobile
multi-agent systems may share many features with swarm
robotic systems, but in a virtual world.
Corresponding to the active interest in mobile software agents
and their rapid adoption, there has been much interest in their
security [15]. However this does not always translate easily
to robotic swarms because of the particular characteristics of
robotic swarms which differentiate them, such as their phys-
ical nature, diverse communication mechanisms and control
structure.
E. Swarm Robotics
From the brief discussion above it is clear that producing
a well–deﬁned taxonomy of mobile robotic networks will
require careful consideration. Instead we now attempt to deﬁne
what is meant by a swarm robotic network and show how this
differs from the above related technologies.
The term ‘swarm robots’ generally refers to a large collection
of mobile robots working on a single task [16], and the
development of this technology is growing very rapidly [6].
Some of the reasons for this can be found in the perceived
beneﬁts in the characteristic properties of problem solving by
social insects. The properties exhibited by social insects result
in ﬂexible, robust, decentralised and self-organised systems
[6] and it is the desire to imitate these natural systems that is
inﬂuencing research in swarm robotics.
Motivation
Social insects are regarded as highly effective and, some would
argue, the most successful life-form on the planet. There are

290
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
many reasons why they are so successful, and the properties
which make them so are highly desirable in a swarm of robots.
Some of these desirable properties are:
1) Redundancy, Reliability, and Scalability: Each entity
within a swarm is highly redundant. This redundancy
means that the loss of individual entities has little
impact on the success of the task at hand, unless all
or the vast majority of them are lost. As early as 1989,
Rodney Brooks at MIT proposed to NASA that teams
of hundreds of inexpensive ant-like reactive robots be
sent to Mars in an article entitled ‘Fast, Cheap and
Out of Control’. The rationale for this was, in part,
to provide a degree of fault-tolerance. Having a large
number robots meant that any robots damaged in transit
or during landing would not have a real impact on the
overall mission [17].
2) Decentralised Coordination: Coordination is completely
distributed, and the task in hand will be carried out
regardless of whether one or more of the individuals is
lost - there is no central point of control in the swarm.
3) Multiplicity of Sensing: In a swarm, many individuals
sense the same data. This means that the signal-noise
ratio is greatly increased.
4) Dynamic Adaptability to the Working Environment: A
swarm will adapt itself to the environment to meet the
needs of the swarm.
In addition to imitating the above characteristics of social
insects, there may also be practical reasons that a swarm of
robots working together may be desirable. For example:
• Some tasks may be too difﬁcult for a single robot, and
may require robots working in a team to complete them.
• Using several robots may increase the speed of perform-
ing tasks.
• Designing, building, and using several simple robots may
be easier, cheaper and more fault-tolerant than using a
single robot.
• Theories of self-organisation show that, sometimes, the
collective behaviour of a swarm results in patterns which
are qualitatively different from those that could be ob-
tained by a single entity. Randomness or ﬂuctuations in
individual behaviour, far from being harmful, may in
fact greatly enhance the system’s ability to explore new
behaviours and ﬁnd new solutions [6].
The foregoing has described some of the beneﬁts that may be
expected in systems that imitate swarms. However, as well as
the advantages outlined above, there are also some potential
challenges to be overcome. For example:
• Lack of global knowledge may mean that a swarm of
robots does not have the information required to perform
a task, and stagnates, unable to make any progress.
• Also, there is a ‘too many cooks spoil the broth’ effect.
Having more robots working on a task or in a team
increases the possibility that individual robots will unin-
tentionally interfere with each other, lowering the overall
productivity [16].
• Programming: The concept of a swarm robotic network
is that individual entities are autonomous. Nevertheless
their deployment implies that there is a task that they are
required to do. Often the solution to the task is emergent,
and it may be extremely complicated to program the
robots to perform the task [6]. Swarm engineering is a
new discipline proposed by Winﬁeld [18] which aims to
help solve this problem.
• Control and Mediation: Complex systems with swarm
intelligence might be very difﬁcult to control or mediate
if they started to exhibit undesirable behaviour. Such sys-
tems would therefore need to be designed and validated
for a high level of assurance that they exhibit intended
behaviours, and equally importantly do not exhibit unin-
tended behaviours [18].
Deﬁnition of Swarm Robotics
The preceding has identiﬁed the desirable properties of nat-
urally occuring swarms thus motivating research into artiﬁcial
swarms. The term ‘swarm’ as applied to robotics was coined
by Gerardo Beni and Jing Wang in 1988 at a NATO robotics
workshop in Italy [19]. At the time, the discussion was about
‘cellular robots’. This term ‘cellular robots’ was applied to
a group of robots that could work like cells of an organism
to assemble more complex parts. Beni was discussing a class
of cellular robots that could behave in an unpredictable way
and move and interact dynamically. For this application it
was generally agreed that the adjective ‘cellular’ was not
particularly descriptive, and that ‘swarm’ was much better.
Moreover, it more accurately portrayed the characteristics of
the robots that were under discussion, which were seen to
behave in a similar way to swarms occurring in nature..
When Beni and Wang introduced the term, the concept of
swarm robotics was largely theoretical, but now it is a fast-
evolving reality, with many research projects taking place
worldwide – examples being the EU ‘Guardians’ project [20],
‘Ultraswarm’ at the University of Essex [21], Maxelbot at
the University of Wyoming [22], Idaho National Laboratory
projects [23] and SYMBRION [24] which is a project funded
by the 7th Framework programme of the European Union.
At the 2004 Swarm Robotics workshop, Erol ¸Sahin has pro-
posed the following deﬁnition for swarm robotics, along with
a set of distinguishing criteria to differentiate this technology
from other multi-robot research:
“Swarm robotics is the study of how large numbers
of relatively simple physically embodied agents can
be designed such that a desired collective behaviour
emerges from the local interactions among agents
and between the agents and the environment.” [25]
Based on ¸Sahin’s deﬁnition a number of criteria may be
described that identify a robotic swarm. These are:
1) Autonomous Robots: They should have a physical em-
bodiment in the world, be situated and should be able
to physically interact with the world.

291
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2) Large Number of Robots: There should be a large
numbers of robots (or the studies should be applicable
to the control of large robotic swarms)
3) Few Homogeneous Groups of Robots: There should
be relatively few groups containing large numbers of
homogeneous robots.
4) Relatively Incapable or Inefﬁcient: The robots should
be relatively simple and incapable such that the tasks
tackled require the co-operation of the individual robots.
5) Robots with Local Sensing and Communication Capab-
ilities: The robots should only have localised and limited
sensing and communication abilities. This constraint
ensures that the coordination between the robots is
distributed. However, it is acceptable to use global com-
munication channels for a purpose such as to download
a common program onto the swarm, but not for co-
ordination among the robots.
This allows us to compare swarm robotic networks with the
more established technologies described at the beginning of
this section. Table I attempts to summarise and compare the
characteristics of swarm robotic networks deﬁned above with
the aforementioned more mature technologies. Where there is
no entry there is no clear answer to whether the technology
ﬁts the criteria or not Table II does the same for some of
the implicit characteristics not explicitly included in ¸Sahin’s
deﬁnition.
III. USE AND MIS-USE OF SWARM ROBOTICS
Section II described the scope of the systems we wish to study
and showed how swarm robotic systems differ from similar,
more mature technologies. Within this scope we may now
begin to look at the threats that may be unique to swarm
robotic systems, and perhaps identify unique features of swarm
robotic systems that may help mitigate these threats.
In analysing the threats to swarm robotic systems it is useful to
have an idea, ﬁrst of all, of how the systems may be used; and
then how the systems may be mis-used for malicious ends. In
order to describe how systems may be mis-used some security
terminology is introduced.
A. Basic Security Terminology
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has
provided deﬁnitions for a number of high level security
concepts and we will follow the nomenclature of ISO 13335-1
[26] in our discussion.
ISO 133335-1 deﬁnes a threat as ‘a potential cause of an
incident that may result in harm to a system or organization.’
In our case, this can be interpreted as any potential incident
that may adversely affect the intended objective of the swarm
robotic network. The threat may be a threat to the swarm itself
or to the information being processed by the swarm. Moreover,
the threat can be the result of deliberate or accidental actions.
The standard provides a number of examples of threats such as
eavesdropping; information modiﬁcation; malicious code; and
physical accidents. In the following we will expand on these
examples to illustrate the threats pertinent to swarm robotic
networks.
Threats that are not mitigated leave vulnerabilities in the
system. These threats may be then exploited, causing harm
to the system. In other words, although all threats deﬁne a
potential cause of harm, it is only the unmitigated threats
that leave vulnerabilities. In the remainder of this section we
consider the threats, rather than speciﬁc vulnerabilities.
We refer to the deliberate exploitation of a threat as an
attack and those that initiate their execution as attackers or
adversaries.
ISO 13335 also deﬁnes the notion of the impact of the
exploitation of a threat, and the risk of a threat being exploited.
While these are considerations that should be made in the
deployment of any system, our objective is not focused on the
speciﬁc details of a particular application and thus we will
focus on the threats.
An example of a threat could be that an unauthorised person
might see top secret information; a vulnerability could be that
trust is misplaced in a courier delivering this information in a
document. The courier may accidentally lose the document; or
an attack could be that someone steals the document in transit
and publishes it. The impact of a information loss will depend
on the content of the document.
Security in any environment, including swarm robotics, is
fundamentally about the provision of core security services.
These services can be deﬁned at a high level without binding
the service provision to a technology speciﬁc security mechan-
ism. The ISO standard for the security architecture of the OSI
reference model [27] identiﬁes a number of security services,
of which the following are relevant to swarm robotic networks.
Conﬁdentiality
The conﬁdentiality service protects data from un-
authorised disclosure. It may protect all data in a
message or selective ﬁelds. It may also be used to
prevent trafﬁc analysis.
Integrity
An integrity service prevents prevents data from
being altered in an unauthorised or unintended way;
for example, by modiﬁcation, insertion or deletion.
As with conﬁdentiality, it may be selective or apply
to the entire message. An integrity service may also
be used to detect data that has been replayed.
Authentication
Authentication services may be classed as peer entity
authentication services or data origin authentication
services. The former provides assurance that the peer
entity in the communication protocol is who they
claim to be. The latter provides assurance that data
came from its reputed source.
Availability
Although, strictly speaking, not a security service,
availability is deﬁned in ISO 7498-2 as the property

292
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
Table I: Comparison of Explicit Characteristics
Swarms
Multi-Robot
Mobile Sensor Networks
MANET
Multi Agent Systems
Autonomous
!
%
Large Number
!
!
Few Homogeneous Groups
!
!
%
!
Simple
!
!
!
Local Sensing and Comms.
!
!
!
!
!
Table II: Comparison of Implicit Characteristics
Swarms
Multi-Robot
Mobile Sensor Networks
MANET
Multi Agent Systems
Self Organising
!
%
%
Emergent Behaviour
!
%
%
%
Co-operate to accomplish task
!
!
%
!
Distributed Command/Control
!
%
%
!
Mobile
!
!
!
!
!
No ID Necessary
!
%
!
of being accessible and useable upon demand by an
authorised entity. The term denial of service is often
used in reference to loss of availability.
ISO 7498-2 deﬁnes two more services: access control, and
non–repudiation. Although these services are important in
the context of the OSI reference model, they are of less
relevance to swarm robotics. Entities in a robotic swarm are
typically simple devices that do not provide access to a service,
and which operate in a closed network where disclaiming a
previous transaction is not a high risk.
Security mechanisms used to provide the above services
include encryption, for conﬁdentiality, and digital signatures
and message authentication codes for integrity and data ori-
gin authentication. Entity authentication usually requires the
completion of a security protocol. The Handbook of Applied
Cryptography [28] provides a good introduction to these mech-
anisms. Mitigating denial of service attacks is more dependent
on the particular application. In any system, the provision of
security is a holistic process. This requires careful management
processes that oversee the use of speciﬁc security technologies
that can be applied to devices and networks. These include
ﬁrewalls, access control mechanisms and network security
protocols. At the heart of most security technologies is the
deployment of speciﬁc cryptographic primitives, which are
mathematical tools that can be applied to data to provide
the core security services. These normally rely on the careful
protection and maintenance of cryptographic keys, which are
critical data items that must be stored securely.
With this background we may now review several scenarios
where swarm robotic technology is being considered for use,
and look at the potential threats to these systems.
B. Military Applications
Swarm robotic networks are of particular interest to the
military, and in these applications the need for security is
perhaps self-evident. There is currently a great deal of research
taking place in the military use of robotic swarms. In the
United Kingdom in August 2008, a challenge called ‘The
Grand Challenge’ [29] took place, which was searching for
the best ideas in defence technology to help solve some of
the evolving threats facing front line troops. One prominent
entrant to this was ‘Swarm Systems’ [30], which used swarms
of micro air vehicles.
In the United States, US Army Research are funding and work-
ing with BAE Systems on the The Micro Autonomous Systems
and Technology (MAST) project, [31] which will ‘research
and develop advanced robotic equipment for use in urban
environments and complex terrain, such as mountains and
caves. The project will create an autonomous, multifunctional
collection of miniature intelligence-gathering robots that can
operate in places too inaccessible or dangerous for humans’.
Mine clearance is another example of where robotic swarms
may be deployed. Individual entities that constitute a swarm
robotic system are dispensable, making the system suitable for
domains that involve dangerous tasks. For instance, clearing
a corridor on a mining ﬁeld. Swarm systems would be better
than a single more complex and expensive mine clearing robot
because they can afford to be suicidal, and may be able to
cover the area more quickly.
The major threat to military systems is from deliberate attacks
on the robotic swarm. Such attacks may range from passive
eavesdropping on communications, or monitoring trafﬁc; to
more sophisticated attacks where malicious robots may be
injected into the swarm, much as viruses and Trojans are
deployed in computer systems. Such sophisticated attacks
may go un-noticed while the attacker manipulates data being
processed by the swarm and possibly affects the emergent
behaviour.

293
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
C. Monitoring
Robotic swarms are well–suited to environmental monitoring
and, since they have motor as well as sensor capabilities, they
could potentially provide solutions in the case of undesired
environmental events. For example, the Elimination Units for
Marine Oil Pollution (EU-MOP) project demonstrated that a
robotic swarm could be used to detect environmental pollutants
such as oil spillages, and subsequently clean them up [32].
At the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL) an
investigation has been completed into how swarm robotics
could be used for the autonomous inspection of complex
engineered structures [33].
Accidental malfunction of the entities that make up the swarm
is always a threat. The impact of this threat could be signi-
ﬁcant these applications if the swarm was the sole means of
monitoring.
In addition to malfunctions or accidents, active threats to
such robot swarms could arise from malicious organisations
such as terrorists or criminals. Such groups could target the
availability of the swarms, or the conﬁdentiality or integrity
of any information that they hold. For example, by injecting
malicious code or malicious robots, they could physically or
electronically hijack the system resulting in the loss of avail-
ability. As with current denial of service attacks on internet–
based services, the threat of such an attack is itself sufﬁcient
to meet the adversary’s requirements. As with internet–based
services a malicious organisation could potentially use such
a threat to extort money from the legitimate owners of the
swarm. Many such attacks have already been launched against
business websites on the Internet. The threat may even be
exploited, with the robots only being returned to use after a
ransom has been paid.
The data that a monitoring swarm holds could also be useful
to an unauthorised third party. For example the location and
extent of an oil spillage could be of interest to an environ-
mental group; the location of faults in an engineering structure
could be of great value to a competitor. Therefore, it is of
importance that such data is kept conﬁdential. Also, if such
data could be corrupted accidentally or deliberately, it could
lead to the swarm performing incorrectly, which could mean
that monitoring is not taking place properly or the swarm
is not trying to ﬁx something that it is meant to be. Thus
integrity protection would be a useful service to have in these
applications.
D. Disaster Relief
The deployment of robot swarms during disaster relief opera-
tions is another application area that is considered for swarm
robotic networks.
At the University of Utah, research has taken place into using
swarms of robots to aid ﬁrst responders in disaster situations
[34] and the European Union 6th Framework GUARDIANS
project [20] is addressing a similar application.
The GUARDIANS are a swarm of autonomous robots applied
to navigate and search an urban space in situations which
are dangerous and time-consuming for humans. The project’s
central example is an industrial warehouse in smoke, as
proposed by the Fire and Rescue Service. The job is time
consuming and dangerous since toxins may be released and
humans senses can be severely impaired. The robots warn of
toxic chemicals, provide and maintain mobile communication
links, infer localisation information and assist in searching.
They enhance operational safety and speed and thus indirectly
save lives
In situations such as these, availability becomes a primary
security requirement, as well as conﬁdentiality, integrity and
authentication/identiﬁcation. Availability is necessary so that
the swarm can respond as quickly as possible to the emergency
at hand. If robots are unavailable due to malfunction, accident
or because they have been hijacked either physically or elec-
tronically by an external agency, then they will be unable to
perform their critical task. The motivation for such an attack
may be difﬁcult to comprehend, however, as discussed above,
the threat of a denial of service attack may be sufﬁcient for
malicious groups to extort their demands.
Unauthorised access to data could also be a threat in this
application. Eavesdropping on the robots communications may
provide information to an attacker, for example about the
location and extent of the damage and about any entities
that the robots discover during the rescue operation. Such
information may be highly sensitive and would require the
protection of a conﬁdentiality service.
Perhaps more importantly, there exists a threat of data manip-
ulation. Integrity protection is necessary to ensure that the data
being passed around the swarm is accurate, so that the robots
respond correctly. In addition to integrity protection, data
origin authentication may be required to provide assurance
that information has come from a reliable source.
Threats arising from entity authentication failure are more
subtle. It may be necessary to ensure that sensitive information
obtained by the swarm is communicated only to legitimate
parties e.g. the rescue service. If robots are communicating
locally, problems could arise if the peer entity cannot au-
thenticate itself. This scenario could arise if multiple swarms,
perhaps with different goals, are operating in the same physical
area.
Many relevant current technologies already provide full sup-
port for strong security. Communications between human per-
sonnel in emergency situations often use Terrestrial Trunked
Radio (TETRA) [35] which is an open digital standard
deﬁned by the European Telecommunications Standard Insti-
tute (ETSI). Whether this technology is applicable to swarms,
however, will depend on the particular implementation.
E. Healthcare
The use of swarm robotics has been considered for a wide
range of healthcare services: from surgery and intrabody

294
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
diagnostics, to more routine tasks such as medication provi-
sion and patient monitoring. The European IWard project is
proposing to use swarms of robots to provide assistance to
healthcare workers [36].
Entity authentication will be very important for swarm robotics
in healthcare situations. For example, it will be of vital
importance that only legitimate robots are introduced into
a human body, or sent to deliver patient medicines or read
patient data from monitoring stations. Failure to authenticate
could result in the introduction of swarm robots that would
harm the patient surgically or whilst inside their body, by
delivering incorrect medicines or by reporting medical data
to unauthorised entities.
The conﬁdentiality or privacy of patient data is paramount,
and is protected by law in many countries. Apart from patients
wanting to be able to choose who knows their personal medical
history, it must be kept from organisations who may wish
to have it for reasons such as pharmaceutical research, or
to simply try and deny an individual access to insurance,
employment or services.
Integrity of medical information must be ensured. Otherwise
a swarm could damage a patient by responding to incorrect
information such as wrong organ position, elevated blood
pressure or blood sugar levels. Consequently, if a swarm
were to respond incorrectly, this could seriously damage the
patient’s health, maybe fatally.
Availability of swarm robots in a healthcare situation is
important, especially so where they are deployed in situations
with critically ill patients. If they are not available and able to
respond immediately then such patients could suffer greatly,
and maybe die as a result.
F. Commercial Applications
As the technology develops, the hope is that robotic swarms
will ﬁnd commercial use. Commercial uses could include some
of applications already discussed, for example monitoring or
healthcare, as well as many other routine tasks that are ‘dull,
dirty, or dangerous’ [16]. Unfortunately in any commercial
environment, the motivation to gain competitive advantage will
undoubtedly result in attempts to steal information, manipulate
data, and disrupt services.
For example, if an organisation can interrupt their competitors
service and make it unavailable or unstable, damaging its
reputation, then they will become the organisation of choice.
If they can steal information from their competitor then they
may be able to ﬁnd out their trade secrets for their own
commercial gain. If they can amend their competitors data then
they can make them operate unpredictably, again damaging
their reputation, and making themselves appear preferable.
Thus consideration of conﬁdentiality, integrity, authentication
and availability will be required for commercial applications
to be successfully adopted and deployed.
IV. SECURITY CHALLENGES IN SWARM ROBOTIC
ENVIRONMENTS
Section II described what we mean by swarm robotics and
discussed how this differs from related technologies. In the
preceding section we have described the threats that may arise
in the deployment of swarm robotic systems and identiﬁed the
security services that may be applied to mitigate these threats.
It is appropriate now to consider the challenges to providing
these security services in swarm robotic networks. It is clear
that some security problems are similar to those experienced
by other related technologies, and that some solutions from
these technologies may apply to swarm robotics. However,
not all of these shared problems have been fully solved. Fur-
thermore, the swarm robotic environment introduces particular
security challenges that do not exist in other technologies.
A. Resource Constraints
According to our deﬁnition of swarm robotics, the robots
should be relatively simple. The less complicated a device is,
the greater the challenge in providing security becomes. This is
due to resource constraints: storage for static and ephemeral
data is restricted; communication bandwidth is constrained;
and processing power is limited. Most importantly, where
mobile devices are concerned, power consumption has to be
minimised to preserve energy.
Resource constraints restrict the types of existing security
technologies that can be deployed and special cryptographic
mechanisms may be required to reduce the consumption of
resources on such devices [37]–[39]. However, attacks on the
provision of resources can still lead to the device becoming
inoperable – permanently so if the resource is not renewable
e.g. a battery. This would result in loss of availability of the
device and potentially the swarm.
B. Physical Capture and Tampering
Robotic swarms are unique in their combination of physical
entities with autonomous behaviour, mobility, and distributed
control. Consequently, the owner of a swarm may not know the
exact location of each device and what other entities may be
in the vicinity. Thus individual swarm robots may be captured
by an attacker.
Physical capture of a robot may lead to immediate loss of
availability. The attacker may also use the device to manipulate
data being reported, and may attack the device hardware to
extract any secret data.
In the worst–case scenario an attacker could modify the device
and re-introduce it to the swarm, enabling a number of other
attacks to be carried out. Such a rogue device may continue
to manipulate data as the swarm moves to new locations. It
may eavesdrop on communications. It may even be able to
introduce malicious code or commands to other devices. In
the worst case it would be able to alter the behaviour of the
swarm without the attack being detected. This capture and ‘re-
introduction attack’ is unique to swarm robotic technology.

295
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
C. Monitoring and Control
Systems employing swarm intelligence do not have a hierarch-
ical structure with speciﬁc points of monitoring and control.
Moreover, the individual entities within these systems take de-
cisions autonomously, based on local sensing and communica-
tions. With such systems it is evident that there could be many
risks if, for any reason, deliberate or accidental, they went ‘out-
of-control’. These risks include many security violations such
as loss of conﬁdentiality, integrity or availability. Monitoring
and control presents an interesting challenge to security within
swarm robotics.
D. Communication
Unlike the related technology discussed in Section II, robotic
swarms may be designed to interact either explicitly, or
implicitly [40].
Explicit communication can be achieved via broadcast or
directed messages. Radio frequency (RF) and infra-red (IR)
technologies have been widely used for explicit communic-
ations within swarms. Other technologies include coloured
LED display, body-language or sign-language, colour patterns
on a robot’s body, coil induction, haptics, audible sounding,
combination of LED display and audio signalling and acoustic
signalling in an underwater environment.
Implicit communication is unique, amongst the technologies
discussed in Section II, to swarm robotics. By considering
implicit communication, we include interaction via sensing
other robots and their behaviours, and interaction via the
environment. The latter acts as a sort of shared memory and
is known as stigmergy [6], [41], [42].
From a security perspective, any open implicit or explicit
communication method can be jammed, intercepted or oth-
erwise disturbed relatively easily by an attacker. The security
of RF and IR has been well–researched, but the security of
the remaining more ‘exotic’ interaction methods needs to be
thoroughly investigated and presents a fascinating security
challenge.
E. Swarm Mobility
Security is difﬁcult to provide in any mobile environment,
however the mobility of robot swarms, combined with the
autonomous behaviour, is quite unusual. This has some inter-
esting characteristics that might make some security services
easier to implement than for related technologies.
One example is entity authentication discussed below. Swarm
robots may be able to move towards the peer that they wish to
authenticate. The authentication service could then be provided
through visual sensing and physical data exchange. A similar
example is key distribution: robots may move within the
swarm to distribute shared keys.
However any constraint on the movement of swarm members,
for example to remain in the ‘bounds’ of the swarm, could
present additional security issues.
F. Entity Authentication and Identity
As discussed in Section III, in some applications it may be
very important for a swarm robot to determine whether it is
interacting with a legitimate entity or not. Data origin and
entity authentication often require some notion of identity.
This is a particular problem where individual identity within
a swarm is undesirable [43]. However, other work on robotic
swarms has used group identity [44], or individual identity
which is broadcast regularly [45].
If identity can be assumed or changed, then attacks can be
launched on entity authentication, conﬁdentiality, integrity and
availability. The notion of identity within a robotic swarm thus
presents an interesting challenge from a security standpoint.
G. Key Management
Security services deployed in a robot swarm inevitably require
the need to manage cryptographic keys [46]. These keys deﬁne
which pairs (or groups) of robots can apply security services.
As robots join and leave a swarm, it may be necessary to
update this keying material. Thus the dynamic and interactive
nature of a swarm presents sophisticated key management
challenges although the intelligent mobility of the swarm may
provide some novel solutions to this.
H. Intrusion Detection
When an unauthorised entity joins a network it is sometimes
called intrusion, and the ﬁeld of network intrusion detection
is well–established [47]–[49]. However, the physical nature of
the entities in a swarm robotic network means that intrusion
in a robotic swarm robotic network is not the same as
intrusion in a traditional data network. Deliberate intrusion
was alluded to in Section IV-B and accidental intrusion in
Section III-D, where several swarms may operate in the same
geographical location. In these cases the intrusion mechanism
is the physical insertion of a rogue agent into the swarm, which
is not addressed by the established network intrusion detection
systems.
Intrusion detection systems typically attempt to detect an-
omalous behaviour in the network. In a robotic swarm this
behaviour may extend to the physical behaviour of individual
robots. New mechanisms will be required to detect anomalous
physical behaviour. Moreover, the autonomous nature of robots
and collective emergent nature of the behaviour of the swarm
will make any anomalous behaviour difﬁcult to detect.
If undetected, one or more foreign robots could inﬁltrate the
swarm, either maliciously or accidentally, and ultimately affect
the desired emergent behaviour. The situation is illustrated
in ﬁgure 1 where the shaded nodes represent foreign robots
inﬁltrating the swarm. In ﬁgure 1a a single intruder has entered
the swarm. It is not unreasonable to expect the swarm to
be able to detect this intruder. If several foreign robots can
inﬁltrate the swarm, as shown in ﬁgure 1b, it may be easier
for the intruder to affect the behaviour of the swarm. As

296
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
(a) Single Intruder
(b) Multiple Intruders
(c) Overlapping Swarms
Figure 1: Intrusion of rogue robots into a swarm
more foreign robots inﬁltrate the swarm, 1c, it will become
more difﬁcult to distinguish the intruders from the original
swarm, particularly if the notion of identity within a swarm is
forbidden.
Once an intruder is detected, an appropriate response will need
to be formulated according to an Intrusion Protection System
[49]. Depending on the application the response could be to
simply ignore the rogue device, to monitor its behaviour, or to
ﬁnd a way to either disable it or remove it from the system.
In some scenarios it may even be desirable to manipulate the
behaviour of the intruder in a counter-attack.
Intrusion detection and protection looks to be particularly
challenging in a swarm of robots, and will need a speciﬁcally
tailored approach.
I. Managing Learning
Robotic swarms are designed to learn and react to environ-
mental changes by means of adaption. A malicious entity
might present changes to the environment which will cause a
swarm to adapt in an undesired way. For example, if anomaly
detection is used to detect intrusion based on learning and
monitoring typical behaviour, then a malicious entity could
manipulate the environment to change the pattern of ‘typical’
behaviour in order to gain entry to the network.
V. CONCLUSION
The development of swarm robotic technology has reached
a point where many new applications beginning to emerge.
Therefore, we believe that this is an opportune moment to
take a closer look at the security of swarm robotic systems -
before widespread deployment.
To that end we have identiﬁed several unique features of
swarm robotic networks that distinguish them from related
technology and consequently justify further study from a
security perspective. Most notable of these characteristics are
the autonomous behaviour of the swarm and the emergent
behaviour. Although much has already been accomplished to
provide security for related technologies, the characteristics of
autonomy and emergent behaviour, combined with mobility
and distributed control, make robotic swarms signiﬁcantly
different from these technologies to raise a number of new
security problems. These new security problems are not only
of theoretical interest but will have implications on many
practical applications of swarm robotic technology.
Bearing this in mind, we described a number of challenges
to robotic swarm security, many of which are unique to
this technology. For example, the application of stigmergic
communications may provide a new attack surface that will
require the development of new security mechanisms. The
notion of identity within a swarm may also necessitate research
into the provision of entity authentication within a swarm. And
ﬁnally the potential to modiﬁcation of emergent behaviour if a
malicious entity manages to inﬁltrate the swarm may require
further investigation into intrusion detection, especially where
the intruder is a physical mobile agent. We therefore believe
that an investigation of the above areas is timely.
REFERENCES
[1] E. ¸Sahin and W. M. Spears, Eds., Swarm Robotics: SAB 2004 Interna-
tional Workshop, ser. LNCS. Santa Monica, CA, USA: Springer Berlin
/ Heidelberg, Jul 2005, vol. 3342.
[2] E. ¸Sahin, W. Spears, and A. Winﬁeld, Eds., Swarm Robotics: Second
International Workshop, SAB 2006, ser. LNCS.
Rome, Italy: Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg, Sep 2007, vol. 4433.
[3] L. Bayindir and E. ¸Sahin, “A review of studies in swarm robotics,”
Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering, vol. 15, pp. 115–147, 2007.
[4] A. F. T. Winﬁeld and J. Nembrini, “Safety in numbers: fault–tolerance
in robot swarms,” International Journal of Modelling, Identiﬁcation
and Control, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 30–37, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://inderscience.metapress.com/link.asp?id=byu8g6fqm5g55v9x
[5] F. Higgins, A. Tomlinson, and K. Martin, “Survey on security challenges
for swarm robotics,” in Fifth International Conference on Autonomic and
Autonomous Systems (ICAS 2009), R. Calinescu, F. Liberal, M. Marin,
L. P. Herrero, C. Turro, and M. Popescu, Eds. Valencia: IEEE Computer
Society, April 2009, pp. 307– 312.
[6] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz, Swarm intelligence: from
natural to artiﬁcial systems.
Oxford University Press US, 1999.
[7] L. E. Parker, “Alliance: an architecture for fault tolerant multirobot
cooperation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 220–240, Apr 1998.
[8] T. Wark, C. Crossman, W. Hu, Y. Guo, P. Valencia, P. Sikka, P. Corke,
C. Lee, J. Henshall, K. Prayaga, J. O’Grady, M. Reed, and A. Fisher,
“The design and evaluation of a mobile sensor/actuator network for
autonomous animal control,” in IPSN ’07: Proceedings of the 6th
international conference on Information processing in sensor networks.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 206–215.
[9] K. Dantu, M. Rahimi, H. Shah, S. Babel, A. Dhariwal, and G. Sukhatme,
“Robomote: Enabling mobility in sensor networks,” in Proceedings of
Fourth International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor
Networks, 2005, pp. 404–409.
[10] (2008) Robotic sensor networks. Minnesota University. [Online].
Available: http://rsn.cs.umn.edu
[11] J. Reich and E. Sklar, “Toward automatic reconﬁguration of robot-
sensor networks for urban search and rescue,” in Proceedings of the 1st
International Workshop on Agent Technology for Disaster Management,
2006, pp. 18–23. [Online]. Available: http://users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/sdr/
atdm/ws34atdm.pdf

297
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
[12] L. Buttyán and J.-P. Hubaux, Security and cooperation in wireless net-
works: thwarting malicious and selﬁsh behavior in the age of ubiquitous
computing.
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[13] E. Hansson, A. Bengtsson, and A. Vidström, “Security solutions for
mobile ad hoc networks,” Swedish MOD, FOI Defence Research Agency
Command and Control Systems, Tech. Rep. FOIR-1694-SE ISSN 1650-
1942, Aug 2005.
[14] M. Wooldridge, An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems.
Wiley, 2002.
[15] N. Borselius, “Multi-agent system security for mobile communication,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Mathematics, Royal Holloway, Uni-
versity of London, 2003.
[16] R. R. Murphy, Introduction to AI Robotics.
MIT Press, 2000.
[17] R. A. Brooks and A. Flynn, “Fast, cheap and out of control - a robot
invasion of the solar system,” Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, vol. 42, pp. 478–485, 1989.
[18] A. F. T. Winﬁeld, C. Harper, and J. Nembrini, “Towards dependable
swarms and a new discipline of swarm engineering,” in Swarm Robotics:
SAB 2004 International Workshop, ser. LNCS, E. ¸Sahin and W. M.
Spears, Eds., vol. 3342.
Santa Monica, CA, USA: Springer Berlin
/ Heidelberg, Jul 2005, pp. 126–142.
[19] Beni and Wang, “Swarm intelligence in cellular robotic systems,” in
NATO Advanced Workshop on Robotics and Biological Systems, Il
Ciocco, Tuscany, Italy, 1989.
[20] EU. (2007) 6th framework programme: Guardians project. European
Union. [Online]. Available: http://www.guardians-project.eu/
[21] R. D. Nardi and O. Holland, “Ultraswarm: A further step towards
a
ﬂock
of
miniature
helicopters.”
in
Swarm
Robotics:
Second
International Workshop, SAB 2006, ser. LNCS, E. ¸Sahin, W. Spears,
and A. Winﬁeld, Eds., vol. 4433.
Rome, Italy: Springer Berlin /
Heidelberg, 2006. [Online]. Available: http://gridswarms.essex.ac.uk/
publications/DeNardi2006UltraswarmFurther.pdf
[22] W. M. Spears and D. F. Spears. Maxelbot project. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cs.uwyo.edu/~wspears/ap.html
[23] Idaho National Laboratory. [Online]. Available: http://www.inl.gov/
adaptiverobotics/robotswarm/index.shtml
[24] [Online]. Available: www.symbrion.eu
[25] E. ¸Sahin, “Swarm robotics: From sources of inspiration to domains of
application,” in Swarm Robotics: SAB 2004 International Workshop, ser.
LNCS, E. ¸Sahin and W. M. Spears, Eds., vol. 3342.
Santa Monica,
CA, USA: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, Jul 2005.
[26] Information technology – Security techniques – Management of in-
formation and communications technology security – Part 1: Concepts
and models for information and communications technology security
management, International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Std.
13 335, Rev. 1, 2004.
[27] Information processing systems – Open Systems Interconnection –
Basic Reference Model – Part 2: Security Architecture, International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) Std. 7498-2, Rev. 1, 1989.
[28] A. J. Menezes, P. C. van Oorschot, and S. A. Vanstone, The Handbook
of Applied Cryptography, 5th ed.
CRC Press, 1996. [Online].
Available: http://www.cacr.math.uwaterloo.ca/hac/
[29] (2008) The grand challenge. United kingdom ministry of defence.
[Online]. Available: http://www.challenge.mod.uk
[30] (2008, Aug) Swarm systems: providing swarms of micro air vehicles.
[Online]. Available: http://www.swarmsys.com
[31] BAE-Systems.
(2008,
April)
Mast
project.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.baesystems.com
[32] K. Gkonis, T. Pavlidis, N. Kakalis, and N. Ventikos, “Final project report
for the elimination units for marine oil pollution (eu-mop) project,”
European Union, 6th Framework Programme, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[33] N. Correll and A. Martinoli, “A challenging application in swarm
robotics: The autonomous inspection of complex engineered structures,”
Bulletin of the Swiss Society for Automatic Control, vol. 46, pp. 15–19,
2007.
[34] D. P. Stormont, “Autonomous rescue robot swarms for ﬁrst responders,”
in IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence for
Homeland Security and Personal Safety (CIHSPS 2005), Orlando, FL,
USA, Apr 2005, pp. 151–157.
[35] (2008) Terrestrial trunked radio. Tetra-Association. [Online]. Available:
http://www.tetra-association.com
[36] EU. (2007) 6th framework programme: Iward: Intelligent robot swarm
for attendance, recognition, cleaning and delivery. European Union.
[Online]. Available: http://www.iward.eu/
[37] S. Kumar and C. Paar, “Reconﬁgurable instruction set extension for
enabling ecc on an 8-bit processor,” in International Conference on
Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL) 2004,, Antwerp,
Belgium, 2004.
[38] L. Batina, J. Guajardo, T. Kerins, N. Mentens, P. Tuyls, and
I. Verbauwhede, “Public-key cryptography for rﬁd-tags,” in IEEE In-
ternational Workshop on Pervasive Computing and Communication
Security, New York, USA, 2007.
[39] A. Bogdanov, L. Knudsen, G. Leander, C. Paar, A. Poschmann, M. Rob-
shaw, Y. Seurin, and C. Vikkelsoe, “Present: An ultra-lightweight block
cipher,” in Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems - CHES
2007, 2007, pp. 450–466.
[40] L. E. Parker, “Current state of the art in distributed robot systems,” in
Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 4, L. E. Parker, G. Bekey,
and J. Barhen, Eds.
Springer, 2002, pp. 3–12. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cs.utk.edu/~parker/publications/DARS_2000_overview.pdf
[41] P.-P. Grassé, “La reconstruction du nid et les coordinations inter-
individuelles chez bellicositermes natalensis et cubitermes sp. la théorie
de la stigmergie: Essai d’interprétation du comportement des termites
constructeurs,” Insectes Sociaux, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 41–80, 1959.
[42] T. White, “Expert assessment of stigmergy: A report for the department
of national defence,” School of Computer Science, Carleton University,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, Tech. Rep., 2005. [Online]. Available:
http://www.scs.carleton.ca/~arpwhite/stigmergy-report.pdf
[43] P.
Flocchini,
G.
Prencipe,
N.
Santoro,
and
P.
Widmayer,
“Gathering
of
asynchronous
robots
with
limited
visibility,”
Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 337, no. 1-3, pp. 147–168,
2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
B6V1G-4FC37VR-1/2/119f08be923e94ddbdb49819df053e63
[44] R. A. Russell, “Visual recognition of conspeciﬁcs by swarm robots,” in
Australasian Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004. [Online].
Available: http://www.araa.asn.au/acra/acra2004/papers/russell.pdf
[45] J. Fredslund and M. Matari´c, “A general algorithm for robot formations
using local sensing and minimal communication,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, vol. 18, pp. 837–846, 2002.
[46] S. Dolev, L. Lahiani, and M. Yung, “Secret swarm unit reactive k –
secret sharing,” in Progress in Cryptology – INDOCRYPT 2007, ser.
LNCS, vol. 4859.
Chennai, India: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, Dec
2007, pp. 123–137.
[47] J. P. Anderson, “Computer security threat monitoring and surveillance,”
James P. Anderson Co., Tech. Rep., 1980.
[48] D. E. Denning, “An intrusion detection model,” in Proceedings of the
Seventh IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, May, 1986, pp. 119–
131.
[49] K. Scarfone and P. Mell, “Guide to intrusion detection and prevention
systems (idps),” National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Tech. Rep. SP 800–94, Feb 2007.
[Online].
Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-94/
SP800-94.pdf

