141
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Dichotomy of Decision Sciences in Information Assurance, Privacy, and 
Security Applications in Law and Joint Ventures 
Simon Reay Atkinson 
Centre for International Security Studies, 
 FASS, University of Sydney,  
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: simon.reayatkinson@sydney.edu.au 
Gregory Tolhurst 
Faculty of Law 
University of Sydney 
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: greg.tolhurst@sydney.edu.au 
                     Liaquat Hossain 
               Information Management  
Division of Information and Technology Studies,  
              The University of Hong Kong 
                        Hong Kong 
               e-mail: lhossain@hku.hk 
Abstract— Research and practice in decision sciences can be 
viewed from the dichotomy that exists in decision making and 
decision taking, where decision making is considered as 
consensus driven process and decision taking is considered as 
an act. We build upon a conceptual paper presented at 
INFOCOMP 2014 considering Law as different types of 
network and how an understanding of these networks, at the 
systems level, might assist in decision making and taking 
processes necessary for: information assurance; privacy; and 
security applications in Law – as may be applied in Cyber 
through emerging legal networks. We first identify the systems 
we might be working with before considering Law as a 
networked ecology. We then look at law beyond existing stable, 
more certain and ruled jurisdictions and how it might be 
applied to decision making and taking in Cyber. We consider 
an example of how law may apply in areas of uncertainty and 
where existing jurisdictional remits may no longer apply, e.g., 
in stateless jurisdictions or those impacted by instability and 
uncertainty following a disaster. We conclude by considering 
how Legal Networks may assist in the decision making, taking 
and social problem solving processes in Cyber and so 
contribute to system resilience. 
Keywords-Collaboration; Network Law; Stateless Jurisdictions; 
Fuzzy Logic; Ecologies; Good Faith. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper considers Law as comprising different 
networks and how an understanding of these networks at the 
systems level might assist in the decision making and taking 
processes with particular application in addressing complex 
problem solving such as recovery from recession and in 
Cyber [1]. We first identify the systems we might be 
working with before considering Law as a networked 
ecology. We note that Europe has two different types of 
jurisdictional systems identified as Common Law and 
Statutory / Codified Law. We suggest that in recovering from 
recession, both these ‘conceptual and normative tools [will 
be necessary] to [re]connect…Europe to its institutional 
design’ [2]. Furthermore, having both Common and Statutory 
Law may provide a unique European co-adaptive [3] 
advantage by providing the essential variety [4] for complex 
problem solving. Regeneration of Europe without enabling 
interaction between the two codes would potentially ‘exclude 
large groups of citizens from the political process, but also, 
in the long run, destabilize and delegitimize 
the 
European…project’ [2]. As John Dunne [5] comments, ‘if a 
clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less’. This 
paper looks at law as networks and the lacunae that exist 
between and beyond largely state-based jurisdictions, e.g., in 
Cyber. We consider how such an approach might be applied 
to better managing instabilities, such as containing or 
preventing an epidemic or recovery from recession. We 
identify examples of how law and civil infrastructures and 
their associated networks may interact. We conclude by 
considering Jurisprudential Networks and Network Law and 
how their ecology may exist with similarly entangled legal 
networks. 
Combined, the authors are thematic leads in the areas of 
complex systems, contract law, digital and cyber ecologies, 
the management of knowledge including commercial law, 
restitution and dynamic social networks. The authors bring 
this knowledge to bear in the emerging area they posit to be 
‘Network Law’ and ‘Jurisprudential Networks’. Section II 
identifies the legal statutory and network systems and 
structures we may be working within before in the next 
section examining law as a network. We then consider Law 
where it presently stands and as it may be applied in areas 
beyond the state and thereby more certain jurisdictional 
controls and enforcement. Finally, we consider what may be 
termed ‘Cyber-in-Law’ and scope how such legal ecologies 
may emerge and may assist the decision making and taking 
process. 
II. SYSTEMS IDENTIFICATION 
Communications literature maintains that hierarchical 
structures provide a superficial representation of how work 
actually gets done [6]. Similarly, Stacey [7] posits that 
dynamic organizations should be viewed as a collection of 

142
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
informal social networks (i.e., shadow structures beneath the 
formal structures); so allowing their elasticity to sustain 
continuous innovation and learning [8]. Also, taking 
Granovetter’s [9] notion of the importance of strong and 
weak ties, we suggest the economic sociology of system 
identification and argue that weak signal detection could 
serve as proactive strategy for exploring ‘Network Law’ and 
‘Jurisprudential Networks’ in cyber. Using this as a basis for 
system identification, we consider decision making and 
taking as to ‘how work gets done in networks’; ‘how work 
may be organizationally gradated within Law’, and finally, in 
terms of the two predominant ‘codes’ of law. 
A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
Within organizations and networks, we consider one of 
the underlying principles to be that of trust and the trusts 
established between networks to allow systems to work 
without being ordered to do so. These systems we contend 
extend to include Law and its application. As identified by 
Shaw [10]: 
Perhaps 
the 
most 
important 
general 
principle, 
underpinning many international legal rules is that of 
good faith. This principle is enshrined in the UN 
Charter, which provides in Article 2(2) that “all 
Members…shall fulfill in good faith the obligations 
assumed by them in accordance with the Charter”. 
 
Similarly, the International Court declared in the Nuclear 
Tests case [11], inter alia: 
One of the basic principles governing the creation and 
performance of legal obligations, whatever their source, 
is the principle of good faith. Trust and confidence are 
inherent 
in 
international 
co-operation 
[we 
call 
collaboration], in particular in an age when this co-
operation in many fields is becoming increasingly 
essential. Just as the rule of pacta sunt servanda 
[agreements must be kept] in the law of treaties is based 
on good faith, so also is the binding character of an 
international obligation assumed by unilateral obligation 
[12]. 
 
These understanding of trust are very similar to those 
developed by Augustin José Menéndez where he states, inter 
alia: 
The first [instrument] is the instrumental inclusion of 
trust. From the political perspective, trust needs to be 
developed in the EU, to legitimize majoritarian and 
redistributive politics and strengthen center-periphery 
relations. Trust both enhances societal compliance with 
transnational norms of cooperation and conformity, and 
at the same time provides the common framework in 
which transnational cooperation enables the construction 
of social institutions. This is…the implicit trust and 
understanding that comes from a continent full of 
citizens that interact, on a continuous and intuitive basis. 
And that sense of mutual trust that comes from 
communication, and communication alone, can further 
stabilize both the European space and legitimize the 
Union’s position in it [2]. 
Mumford [13] considered an important risk factor to be 
trust: ‘because innovation is frequently a journey into the 
unknown, trust is a major factor in its successful 
assimilation’. Contrastingly, Giddens [14] defines trust as 
‘confidence in the reliability of a person, or system, 
regarding a set of outcomes or events’ and Mumford further 
observes ‘risk and trust are inextricably intertwined’. 
Considering good faith as combining trust and confidence 
and taking forward Mumford, Giddens and Mintzberg’s 
[13]-[15] understanding, it is suggested that:  
‘Trust may be a function of the Likelihood of a person or 
system being able to comprehend, explain, understand 
[risk] by logic and deal with a set of outcomes or events’ 
[16]. 
Therefore, Risk may be considered as obverse to Trust: 
‘Risk may be a function of both the Likelihood of an 
adverse event occurring and a system or person’s ability 
to comprehend, explain and understand [risk] by logic’ 
[16]. 
We posit (after Hossain & Wigand [12]) that 
organizations need to be seen as dynamic (elastic and plastic) 
social-influence networks (SINners!) In these collaborative 
[16] 
networks, 
complex 
operations 
(requiring 
tacit 
knowledge exchange [17]), are achieved through social (and 
in this respect, also cyber-) interactions beneath the formal 
hierarchical control structures. Co-adaptive [3] viability in 
maintaining operational effectiveness and efficiency [18] 
may therefore depend more on how we socialize and 
capitalize ‘our’ formal (hierarchical) and informal (social) 
networks to achieve shared common goals. In this paper, we 
consider law as a network applying both formal coordination 
by control and rule (CRC) and informal collaborative social 
influence (CSI) networks [19].  We further identify, building 
on work by Harmaakorpi et al. [20] a ‘techno-socio-
economic paradigm’, 
aligning 
significantly 
to 
CRC 
networks, in which: 
‘Info/Techno-Socio (ITS) systems seek to program (as 
opposed to programme) the relationship between 
technical 
processes 
and 
humans 
by 
digitizing 
performance fidelity and coding for repeatable risk free 
procedures in computer-control-spaces so that data and 
communication do not [temporally] contradict each 
other’ [16]. 
 
Info/Techno-Systems [21] are seen to be ideal for 
achieving “in time” coordination by control and rule (CRC). 
By contrast Socio-Info/Techno systems are seen to be 
capable of enabling collaboration (CSI), “over time”, in 
which:  
‘Socio-Info/Techno (SIT) systems stress the reciprocal 
interrelationship between humans and computers to 
foster improved shared awareness for agilely shaping 
the social programmes of work, in such a way that 
humanity and ICT [control] programs do not contradict 
each other’ [18]. 
 
Based on this understanding of the Cyber combining both 
CRC / ITS and CSI / SIT networks, it is considered Cyber- 
may be defined as:  

143
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
‘A technologically bounded, largely immeasurable, 
strongly scientific, stochastic control space; comprising 
virtual-media and the display of data dealing with the 
real communication of facts and the conceptualization 
of other plausible possibilities, themselves capable of 
generating strong physical and weaker more social 
effects and influencing them’ [22]. 
III. JURISDICTION AND JURISPRUDENCE 
We consider Jurisdiction (from the Latin ius, iuris 
meaning ‘law’ and dicere meaning ‘to speak’) as the 
practical authority granted to a formally constituted legal 
body to make pronouncements on legal matters and to 
administer justice within a defined legal environment. It also 
refers to the inherent authority of a court to hear a case and 
to declare a judgment and the [sovereign] power to govern or 
legislate; make or enforce laws and the power / right to 
exercise authority in that environment. 
We take a more specific understanding of Jurisprudence 
(juris prudentia) as being about the ecology of law, including 
its cultural and social underpinnings. In this understanding, 
we consider jurisprudence as acting in two interconnected 
ways:  
1. Interstitial issues of law as a social organization and 
legal instrument relating to the local political, sûréte 
(considered in the French as including assurance, 
sureness, trusts, reassurance, safety and security) and 
economic (PŜE) [23] global social ecology in which it 
functions. 
 
2. Existential issues of law as a social institution and 
legal system relating to the global political, sûréte and 
economic social ecologies in which it functions. 
A. Statutory / Codified (Roman) Law and Common Law 
We identify two predominant systems of law: 
1. Common (Customary) Law is a system of laws 
originating from the English Commonwealth (or 
‘common weal / good’) and based on court decisions, on 
the doctrines implicit in those decisions, and on customs 
and usages rather than on codified written laws. It is 
underpinned by a jurisprudential body of law 
responsible for socializing judicial decisions and 
customs, as distinct from those of statute law. Common-
law courts base their decisions on prior judicial 
pronouncements rather than on legislative enactments. 
Under the doctrine of stare decisis, common-law judges 
are obliged to adhere to previously decided cases, or 
precedents, where the facts are substantially the same. 
Customary practice allows common law to adapt to the 
local ecology; at the same time, stare decisis provides 
certainty, uniformity, and predictability and makes for a 
stable jurisdictional environment; 
 
2. Civil / Codified (Statutory) or Roman (Latin) Law is 
a legal system originating in Western Europe, 
intellectualized within the framework of ‘late Roman 
law’ (the Code of Justin overlaid by Germanic law and 
local environmental practices). The most prevalent 
feature is that its core principles are codified into a 
referential jurisdictional system, which serves as the 
primary source of law. This contrasts with ‘common law 
systems’ whose intellectual framework comes from 
judge-made decisional law giving precedential authority 
to prior court decisions. Codified or Statutory law is 
written (as opposed to oral or customary); set down by a 
legislature / legislator and approved by its law creating 
jurisprudential 
body. 
Conceptually, 
codified 
law 
proceeds from social abstractions; to formulate general 
environmental principles that distinguish substantive 
(formal / statutory) from procedural (informal / 
customary) rules. It holds case law to be secondary and 
subordinate to statutory law. Consequently, the judicial 
ecology is socially inquisitorial and unbound by 
precedent. 
IV. LAW AS NETWORKS 
From the above systems analysis it is possible to consider 
three different network ecologies operating across the law: 
1. Network Law we consider to be: programmable / 
downloadable and to exist within current jurisdictions; 
connecting 
between 
existing 
jurisprudences 
and 
jurisdictions. It is codified / programmed entirely or 
largely by CRC / ITS systems, in which the main 
interaction is between IT, and IT and human users – with 
minimal involvement from the legal system, lawyers and 
solicitors. 
 
2. Jurisdictional Networks we consider to ‘have the 
authority and responsibility for making pronouncements 
on legal matters; administering justice within a defined 
jurisdiction; 
declaring 
judgments; 
legislating 
and 
enforcing laws in time within that environment. They are 
a distinct entity or being contained within existing 
jurisdictions and connecting between them and different 
jurisprudences – and which may create and have value 
by combining / synthesizing the existing historical legal 
codes, for example Common and Customary Law’.  
 
3. Jurisprudential Networks we consider to be: ‘entities 
and beings with a responsibility for understanding the 
social and cultural underpinnings of the law. Over time 
these networks influence law and allow it to adapt to 
change, they promote collaboration. The concern of 
such networks is with law as a social organization and 
law as a social institution’. 
   
A. Jurisdictional Networks 
We consider legal networks as they may be applied 
through Common and Statutory legal systems through the 
associated executive, legislative, judicial and enforcement 
bodies.  In this respect, we identify four hard coordination, 
rule and control jurisdictional networks: the executive; the 
legislative; the judicial and enforcement.  In democracies, the 
executive is provided by the elected ruling party and the 
legislative by parliaments elected to hold the ruling party to 
account and to legislate. This forms the legislative 

144
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
jurisprudence. Responsible for implementing (the statutory 
legal system) and interpreting (the customary legal system) 
laws and connecting between the executive, the legislative 
and enforcement bodies is the judiciary. This forms the 
judicial jurisprudence. The third jurisprudence is provided by 
those responsible for enforcing civil legislation – which in 
most states includes policing, taxation, border, health, 
defense and social services administration. This is suggested 
to be the enforcement jurisprudence. Figure 1 situates the 
different legal ‘beings’ as vertically integrated, with the 
public jurisprudence – the conversation of public opinion and 
consent – lowermost. Also shown are the two different codes 
of law: one, Codified / Statutory Law, which is more top 
down; the other, Common / Customary Law, which is more 
rhyzomic. Significantly, the judicial jurisprudence in both 
codes interprets and makes social sense of the law either 
through inquisition (Codified) or precedence (Common).      
 
Figure 1. Jurisdictional and Jurisprudential Bodies 
B. Jurisprudential Networks  
We can identify three principal jurisprudential networks, 
the legislative, the judicial and enforcement, see Figure 2. At 
first glance this appears similar to the jurisdictional networks 
we identified. We do recognize that their responsibilities 
overlap. However, the jurisdictional networks are concerned 
with 
coordination 
and 
control 
(rank), 
while 
the 
jurisprudential networks are concerned with collaboration 
and influence (position). Examined from a horizontal 
perspective, 
jurisprudential 
responsibilities 
may 
be 
considered more in terms of position (than rank) and 
overlapping areas of responsibility. Significantly, this view 
also situates the Law within its civil, public and social 
settings. The inquisitorial and precedential interpretative 
roles of judicial jurisprudence also become clearer. Judicial 
jurisprudence connects between both legislative and 
enforcement jurisprudences. Specialist soft (informal) 
jurisprudence networks are identified to exist between the 
legislative and the judicial and the judicial and enforcement 
networks. We call these Statutory and Customary 
Jurisprudences. From a Customary and Statutory Law 
position, this analysis also identifies the priority given to the 
different judicial environments. Under Statutory Law, 
precedent is given to formal / codified rules and then to 
informal / customary ones. The position is reversed under 
Common Law, which gives precedent to informal customs 
and then to formally codified laws (the principle of stare 
decisis).  
This 
research 
reinforced 
the 
position 
that 
‘for 
understanding 
and 
implementing 
cross-jurisdictional 
decision making and taking one needs to understand the 
different jurisprudences’.  More precisely, one needs to 
interact at the jurisprudential level between both codes and 
specifically with the statutory and customary jurisprudences. 
This is not always well understood – for example, the 
continuing struggle between the English Courts and British 
Parliament in implementing European Court of Human 
Rights statutes. Most significantly, it is the social and 
collaborative jurisprudential networks that enable the Law to 
be seen as, shared and practiced justly. 
 
Figure 2. Jurisprudential Networks  
V. DECISION MAKING AND TAKING 
At its heart, decision-taking is about the decision-making 
process – how, who, what, where and when. In this ideal 
world, strategy is primarily about ‘observation’ and 
‘orientation’, while ‘decision’ and ‘action’ are best left to 
tacticians and operatives. However, in the ‘real’ world, 
strategists have to take account of all the factors impinging 
upon their strategic environment and no strategist can 
possibly operate in isolation – there is a social and network 
component to their knowledge, underpinned by the (social) 
strategic planning processes and the (personal) cognitive 
ones [24].  
As connectivity and the availability of information has 
increased, this has often impacted negatively upon the ability 
to take and to make effective decisions. The science of 
decision making and taking examines the basis of effective 
decision-making and decision-taking in complex systems so 
as to adequately differentiates between the two [24]. 
There is a morality / ethicality to the decision making and 
taking process that is not always understood and rarely 

145
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
articulated [24]. Considering Boyd’s simple OODA Loop 
(Observe, Orient, Decide, Act) [25] there are essentially two 
loops contained within the one. One loop (Loop 1) is the 
observe-orient-decision-make loop; the other the decision-
take-act loop (Loop 2). Together, arguably, they preserve a 
moral and ethical basis with decisions being made and taken 
based upon the available facts and the three relatives (3Rs: 
time, timing and tempo):  
Loop 1 may be the home of the diplomat, the public 
servant, the researcher, designer and planner [26]. Loop 1 
can be described in terms of its focus upon the 
methodology, on managing the loop from observation 
(experimentation, for example) through to orienting the 
structure appropriately for a decision to be made. The 
danger in Loop 1 is its focus on the levers and structures 
of power not necessarily the agency / and agents 
necessary to implement and carry out its decisions or 
inform its designs [24]. 
Loop 2, by contrast, concentrates on decision-taking and 
action with no previous research or observation, scant 
regard for theory and philosophy and believes largely in 
the delivery of action through agency / agents in order to 
exploit the results. This is the home of the Neo-Cons 
(advocates of the use of force, manipulation and 
deception of national / international affairs to promote 
rapid (democratic) political change / adoption of free-
market policies; including by military means), who 
focus on action as a means of changing the status quo in 
their favor and breaking existing structures, methods and 
processes they see as constraints to their behavior. Their 
emphasis is on controlling the perception and the 
narrative as a means of coordinating and dictating the 
process and methodology [24].  
In an adaptive ecology, one would expect the decision 
making and taking process to be continuous. After Bunge 
[27] (who considers knowledge as social), the collaborative 
social, decision making phase may be described more by CSI 
/ SIT networks, while the decision taking phase may be 
described more by coordination, rule and control (CRC / 
ITS) networks. In a legal setting, it may be suggested that the 
jurisprudential 
networks 
provide 
for 
reflection 
and 
adaptation and the jurisdictional networks the necessary 
order for coordination and control. This recognizes work by 
Gray [28] and Luttwak [29] ‘that places emphasis on the 
importance of strategic culture in networked social 
processes and which underpin planning, decision-making 
and so decision-taking: good decisions are not capability 
driven’ [30]. It is often these reflective, social networks that 
are sacrificed to optimization regimes that concentrate on 
objective metrication [18]. 
VI. CYBER-IN-LAW 
Zadeh [31] noted decision making and taking has been 
dominated by Probability Theory, while Clark et al. [32] 
suggested that ‘a new mathematical model, based upon 
vagueness, fuzzy sets and partial possibilities [dealing with 
uncertainty], may be required to advance the science’. 
Additionally, Pólya recognized the relative ease of statistical 
programming for verification ‘has tended to favor the 
heuristic [evidence based] reasoning of the mathematician 
rather than the inductive reasoning of the physicist’ [33]. 
Cyber may be seen to consist of both the internet and the 
social networks that the internet supports; connecting 
between two poles. One sub-system may be identified and 
classified as being by “Coordination Rule and Control 
(CRC)” (akin to Network Law) (explicit); the other described 
as being through “Collaboration and Social Influence (CSI)” 
(akin to Jurisprudential Networks) (implicit) [34], [35]. 
These system attributes provide the necessary and “requisite 
variety” [4] to enable both control, “in time”, e.g., Just In 
Time (JIT), and influence [36]-[40], “over time”.  
Our research indicates that understanding the connections 
between these poles involves Fuzzy Logic (FL). Emerging 
from Probability Theory (PrTh) with its binary logic-sets 
Zadeh [41] put forward Fuzzy Logic where ‘linguistic 
variables with a truth value ranging in degree between 0 and 
1 may be ‘managed by specific functions’. Its main 
conceptual difference with PrTh, is that Fuzzy Logic 
considers degrees of truth; vagueness (in terms of lack of 
specificity and not knowing precisely); partial truth; partial 
possibility 
[42] 
and 
uncertainty. 
Whereas, 
standard 
Probability Theory deals with the stochastic – thereby global 
– partitioning of certainties; not the understanding of partial 
possibilities or partial truths:  
‘Viewed through the prism of partiality, probability 
theory is, in essence, a theory of partial certainty and 
random behavior. What it does not address – at least not 
explicitly – is partial truth, partial precision and partial 
possibility – facets, which are distinct from partial 
certainty and fall within the province of fuzzy logic. This 
observation explains why PrTh and FL are, for the most 
part, complementary rather than in competition’ [31].  
Noting the linkage between PrTh and FL since the 1990s 
Zadeh [31], recognized: ‘the concerted drive toward 
automation [and control] of decision-making in a wide 
variety of fields [e.g., Cyber]…A side effect…is the 
widening realization that most real-world probabilities are 
far from being precisely known or measurable numbers’. 
Tong [43] had previously concluded that: ‘Fuzzy models can 
be made to work…and, even in more complex situations 
(more variables or less data for example) they could capture 
basic behavior’. He considered them relatively simple to 
construct, being themselves quite simple structures whose 
greatest value lay in communicating process to others, where 
the linguistic value of a highly complex [Bayesian] model is 
doubtful. Tong went onto to suggest that fuzzy models are 
perhaps ‘most valuable as tools for understanding basic 
characteristics rather than as detailed descriptions of process 
[and control] behavior’.  
In law we may consider a road speed limit as an example 
of compliance / control by reason of certain sanction. 
Generally, people obey for fear of a fine if caught going over 
the limit [44], and the speed limit may result in a reduced 
number of accidents caused by speeding. We do not question 
the need for formal hard rules; every network needs such 
rules to operate efficiently [45]. A concern may be the extent 
to which it is possible to promote good behavior, including 

146
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in Cyber and beyond state-based jurisdictions, based simply 
on Law. The set speed limit may not promote responsible 
driving; it may simply ensure people do not go over the 
speed limit; indeed, it may simply promote driving at the 
speed limit in all situations, regardless. Traffic conditions 
vary for many different reasons requiring drivers to make 
and take decisions about speed. In this case we are dealing 
with a complex system, for which a hard rule cannot regulate 
behavior. Hence, as noted, the resort to more fuzzy concepts 
[46] for dealing with uncertainty in more complex ecologies, 
such as exists in Cyber. We posit that it is the trust and 
confidence of CSI principles that are central to influencing 
people to act in a good and collaborative way – particularly 
in areas of uncertainty where reflective learning plays a key 
role. In saying this, we do not doubt that well-formed 
principles of CRC / ITS may help, particularly as regards to 
enforcement and providing guidance as to fail-safe protocols 
and procedures. We also note, though, that even enforcement 
agencies are influenced by CSI / ITS principles as they, too, 
are parts of the jurisprudential networks. 
VII. STATELESS JURISDICTIONS AND CHANGING 
ECOLOGIES  
Strong signal controls drown out the weaker signals 
necessary for innovation and adaptation in a number of 
ways. The most significant way they do this is to create 
norms-of-behaviour that tend to award compliance to rules 
and conformity and punish those who think differently, are 
awkward and challenge the consensus [24]. This is where 
managed diversity (for all its obvious goods) trumps the 
requirement for complex variety [35], necessary to 
innovatively problem solve and control [4], [47], [48].  
A weak signal decision mathematically can have the 
same strength as a strong signal decision; however, it also 
has some very different and unique characteristics [24]. 
Because of the lack of resistance, questions of time, timing 
and tempo vary – in other words, there is limited resistance 
to be overcome and, indeed, the main challenge is to allow 
for reasoning and the reflective capacity [49] – necessary for 
episteme (making possible the structures / apparatus 
necessary for taking a decision) based, not on the separation 
of the true from the false, but upon what may, or may not, be 
characterized as empirical [50].  
Because of the lack of knowing, it is not so much about 
providing persuasion as providing the reasoning for making 
a decision, informed very often more by intuition (the ability 
to comprehend without inference and / or the use of reason). 
Because of the weak signals and potentially fleeting nature of 
the decision to be taken, it is not a question (as for strong 
signal decisions) of doing one activity in isolation / or by 
constraining the other, e.g., freezing persuasion and reducing 
resistance. Decisions in the weak signal context need to have 
in place the structure, agents and agency necessary for 
reasoning – and for both episteme and intuition [24].  
In two recent areas of research, the authors applied 
principles of uncertainty, instability, and good faith in 
relation to statelessness in terms of a Joint Venture case 
analysis and a green star accreditation system for building 
processes. In this respect, we see statelessness relating to the 
law; to nation states; the cyber and social / physical states of 
matter – or Metaphysics. In conditions of statelessness and of 
high uncertainty and instability, there exists the possibility of 
phase changes as new emergent structures condense to 
articulate and define new beings. 
Uncertainty applies to probabilities, as in a Risk Register 
and to physical measurements that are already made, or to 
Donald Rumsfelds’ known-unknowns, unknown-knowns and 
unknown-unknowns (US DOD news briefing, 12 Feb. 2002). 
Specifically, we consider Uncertainty to: 
‘Arise in partially observable, opaque, stochastic 
environments / non-ergodic (complex) ecologies, overly 
prescribed, ruled or controlled (ergodic) regimes as well 
as due to lack of assurance, instability, ignorance and / or 
lack of caring and shared awareness; including 
indolence’ [51], [52]. 
 
Instability can create Uncertainty and Uncertainty can 
create Instability but they are not the same thing, Instability 
may be considered as: 
‘The quality or state of being unstable and / or the 
tendency to behave in an unpredictable, changeable, 
uncertain, or erratic manner’ [51], [52]. 
  
We suggest that the entangled nature of trust, risk, 
uncertainty and instability become apparent through the 
lenses scoped above. With respect to a joint venture (JV) or 
collaborative process, we may consider it as a journey into 
the unknown, where exploration and innovation is required 
that may not be prescribed, ruled or controlled. At its heart, 
therefore, a JV collaboration may necessarily be based upon 
good faith which we posit (in this regard) as being: 
An expression of implied intent to explore the 
establishment of a trusting, collaborative, shared aware 
relationship between one or more parties involving the 
temporal suspension of disbelief that one party may have 
towards another party’s raison d'être, rationale, modus 
operandi, concepts or ideas. It especially involves having 
all parties thinking that the other party’s intentions are 
certain (within the kirk established), benevolent, trust-
worthy, competent, good, honest or true. 
 
We reconstructed a famous case in New South Wales, 
Australia involving a Joint Venture, Coal Cliff Collieries Pty 
Ltd v Sijehama Pty Ltd [53]. The case involved a number of 
negotiations commencing in the mid-1980s and culminating 
in an ultimately unsuccessful JV some 5 years later. Our 
reconstruction of events was based upon factors and 
relationships considered to influence a given joint venture 
(represented by a matrix, S), the permanent function of the 
matrix is an indicator of the level of uncertainty associated 
with a specific stage the process [54], [55]; based upon 
similar work by several researchers [56] used in calculating 
the uncertainty of a Performance Measurement (PM).  
With relation to this Coal Cliff Collieries, a 5×5 matrix, 
S, was developed using a Likert type [57] scaling to 
represent the major parties and their partners in the joint 
venture along with the existential factors that we presume 
created the conditions for seeking such an agreement in the 

147
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
first instance. From this a Decision Measurement (DM) was 
assessed based upon levels of uncertainty at each stage of 
negotiation for the Heads of Agreement (HoA) and the Joint 
Venture, the HoA was expected to deliver, see Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Longitudinal Concurrent Heads of Agreement and Joint 
Venture processes with downstream appointment of Joint Venture Designer; 
Joint Director and Project Manager (read bottom to top) 
 
We determined that the JV negotiations broke down not 
through lack of rules and processes but due to the lack of 
trusts necessary to enable collaboration and shared 
awareness and so collaboration through an uncertain 
decision making / taking exploratory process.  
By inserting trusted agents at key moments of the 
negotiation to better represent all parties (rather than 
applying rules and processes) it was found that uncertainty in 
the process could be ‘brought under control’ and, as a result, 
a satisfactory conclusion arrived at. In this instance, rather 
than collapsing to high degrees of uncertainty, the JV may 
have ended successfully in a new company / enterprise entity 
forming, see Figure 4. 
In a separate study [58], see Figure 5, we considered two 
parallel (essentially disconnected) processes in the building 
industry, the build process; and, the Green Building Council 
for 
Australia 
(GBCA) 
Green 
Star 
programme 
for 
‘developing a sustainable property industry for Australia by 
encouraging the adoption of green building practices’. The 
aim (or mission) of the GBCA is to: ‘develop a sustainable 
property industry for Australia and drive the adoption of 
green building practices through market-based solutions’1.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Heads of Agreement and Joint Venture Concurrent Processes 
Uncertainty Index, read left to right 
Research was supported through the interview of over 25 
building industry subject matter experts, considered levels of 
uncertainty at each Decision Measurement (DM) stage. 
From Figure 6, it will be seen that, whereas the build 
process commences with a relatively high DM Uncertainty 
Index and that this increases initially, uncertainty in the 
process then reduces to a more manageable banding around 
the 15-20% uncertainty level.  
The GBCA process, by contrast to build and design, 
appears much more unstable, with wide uncertainty swings 
of between 10-75% and with limited stability from one stage 
to the next. For planning purposes, this suggests that the 
current system may be unmanageable – without a foundation 
to predict (due to its inherent uncertainty) and / or to 
influence 
(since 
there 
is 
limited 
opportunity 
for 
collaboration) outcomes. For example, the GBCA Design 
Award is assessed at 50% Uncertainty – a basis of prediction 
that would be as precise for tossing a coin as following due 
process. 
Unlike 
the 
Build 
process, 
which 
creates 
opportunities 
for 
local, 
collaborative 
delegation 
of 
responsibility and authority, the GBCA process holds control 
                                                           
1
 Green 
Building 
Council 
for 
Australia 
(GBCA) 
Website, 
http://www.gbca.org.au/ visited Aug 2014. 

148
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
through a limited number of players that largely disables 
feedback, while requiring reach-back to individuals and 
records (not held by the process) as the project develops.   
 
 
Figure 5. Build and GBCA System Processes (read top to bottom) 
In addressing the failures of government and collective 
(collegial) intelligence prior to 9/11 and the Iraq War, the US 
9/11 Commission [59] and the (Lord) Butler Enquiry [60] 
identified that overly controlled or formalized organizational 
structures such as those existing before 9/11 had not simply 
atrophied but had become ‘tuned out’ – no longer able to 
select between the vital weak-signals of innovation, 
adaptation [61] and change [62] (as threat or opportunity) [9] 
and the strong-signals of method [63] and process [64]. 
Recommendations arising from 9/11 [59] and the Global 
Financial Crisis were three fold: first has been to require 
greater transparency, for example, between the banks, 
investors, borrowers and governments; secondly, has been to 
demand greater regulation and thirdly, to move away from 
the need to know control model towards what has been 
described as the three needs model – need to know; need-to-
share; need-to-use (3NM) [17]. 
 
Figure 6. Build and GBCA System Uncertainties, read right to left 
A control system identifies noise as risk and seeks then to 
remove it. Similarly, administrative processes and legal 
constructs based upon certainties seek to remove the noise – 
or uncertainty – from the system to achieve a degree of 
certainty against which legal judgments – based upon facts 
after the event – have been established. In a social setting, 
however, these same uncertainties can represent both noise 
but also the weak signals of innovation and change – 
potentially, as in 911, of threat also. Uncertainty – or rather 
manageable levels of uncertainty – can consequently be a 
good; enabling change and adaptation over time by testing 
the organization. If that ability to adapt or change by testing 
the ecology – in this case the ecology of a coal mine – are 
removed or constrained, then the ability for innovation, 
exploration, change and adaptation may also be impaired. 
We readily accept that there are many examples of where 
people obey hard legal rules with the clear intention to 
comply with the law either because it is the law or because of 
the sanctions that may be imposed on them for contravening 
the law. Indeed such compliance may produce good results. 
A road speed limit is a typical example of such compliance 
by reason of sanction, people generally obey the limit for 
fear of a fine if caught going over the limit [44] and the 
speed limit may result in a reduced number of accidents 
caused by speeding than would be the case if people were 
left to judge for themselves the speed they should drive at in 
any particular circumstance. Moreover, we do not question 
the need for formal hard rules; every network needs such 
rules to operate efficiently [45]. Our concern is with the 
extent to which it is possible to promote good behavior 
through law. The set speed limit may not promote 
responsible driving; it may simply ensure people do not go 
over the speed limit, indeed it may simply promote driving at 
the speed limit in all situations. Traffic conditions vary for 
many different reasons requiring drivers to make decisions 
about speed, a hard rule cannot regulate behavior here as it is 
a complex environment and hence, as noted, the need to 
resort to more fuzzy concepts to promote thoughtful and 
good behavior whether it be driving or regulating a joint 
venture [46]. 

149
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Collaborative processes, such as JVs, are a journey into 
the unknown and therefore require a degree of trust, stability 
and certainty in the proceedings. At the same time, an 
overly-prescriptive legal context may well deny those trusts 
forming in the first place and so the stabilities necessary to 
‘let go’ and move to the next stage. As a result, the joint 
venture becomes fixed and frozen and can no longer move 
up or down – like a sailor afraid of heights clinging to the 
mast as their ship closes the rocks. We suggest that inherent 
within leadership and management is the ability to manage 
uncertainty and to identify those points of stability and 
agreement against which progress can be safely navigated 
[45]. 
Uncertainty 
above 
50% 
would 
appear 
to 
be 
unmanageable and so, if not already, an unstable basis upon 
which to negotiate [54], [58]. Particularly a negotiation that, 
at some point, needs to focus on the identification and 
classification of its ecology; its standardization and 
ultimately upon the optimum and efficient delivery of a new 
company or organization – in this case a colliery. Optimizing 
upon uncertainty would simply be nonsensical and highly 
unstable – like our sailor letting go of three limbs and 
holding on with the fourth! At the same time, absolutely no 
uncertainty and no noise or dynamics within the system 
would appear to rule out any opportunity for innovation, 
from which change and adaptation might occur. This would 
suggest, empirically, that successful joint venture / 
collaborative processes may be those that seek to allow for 
uncertainty between, say, 15 and 40% and establish the 
structures necessary to allow for trusted debate in such a 
context [54], [58].  
In management settings, we can identify two forms of 
leadership and management structures: the one more vertical 
and aligned with control type hierarchies typical of industrial 
/ clockwork armies, such as fought in 1914; the other more 
horizontal, based upon trust and collaboration [24], [45]. In 
joint venture / award processes (such as GBCA), there is a 
need for a higher degree of collaboration and trusts to deal 
with the uncertainty and so create points of stability against 
which a successful venture may be founded. In other 
management structures, this might count as noise and so 
disrupt highly optimized manufacturing processes. The 
problem appears not to be controls or the law, per se, but 
who, where and when we choose to apply it. 
The problems to be solved are very often not static and 
do not yield to a technique of ‘thinking about it for a long 
period of time’ because the ground upon which it sits 
continuously shifts. The application of complex theory 
provides valuable insights to how decisions are made and 
taken and importantly how to influence decisions. This is of 
vital importance in areas of human endeavor that defy 
regulation solely by command and control type regimes / 
processes. In particular, we are thinking of spaces that might 
be termed ‘Stateless Jurisdictions’ and which we see as 
operating according to principles of ‘Network Law’. In these 
conditions of statelessness and of high uncertainty and 
instability, there exists the possibility of phase changes as 
new emergent structures condense to articulate and define 
new beings. Beings such as a successful joint venture that 
form from stateless or near stateless combinations to create a 
new entity. We maintain that the mathematics and legal 
conditions / rule-based processes enabling the emergence of 
such entities is entirely antithetical to those pertaining for 
‘steady state’, stable type regimes. In fact, as argued in this 
paper the rigid application of ‘steady-state’ conditions and 
constraints can destroy the bases for such condensations to 
form. It is in these stateless spaces that we need to be able to 
encourage good behavior and trusts to form in a way that is 
to the benefit of the whole rather than simply forever 
punishing bad behavior and, ultimately, encouraging further 
the ‘flight to cyber’.  
In studies (one dynamic (GBCA) and one retrospective 
(Coal Cliffs)), it was possible to identify when and where 
uncertainty and thereby instability might occur [54]. In the 
event of the Coal Cliffs JV, it was shown that by introducing 
collaborative agents at a key point in the negotiations, that 
this could be instrumental to successful delivery of the JV 
and completion of the Heads of Agreement.  In this respect, 
it may be possible to instrument negotiations in such a way 
as to forecast or even predict when interventions may be 
necessary to reduce uncertainty and so improve instability. In 
the GBCA study [58], through dynamic social network 
(DsN) and uncertainty analysis, it was possible to examine 
both the build and GBCA Networks and to make 
recommendations to improve collaboration / shared 
awareness. This would involve sharing trusts and thereby 
risks between both parties and, at the same time, creating a 
knowledge hub or Librarian type position that would retain 
knowledge of the process and previous builds, over time – 
rather than re-inventing the wheel, every build. This was 
contrary to industry expectations, which had posited 
improvements might be required within their communities, 
alone [58]. Research also pointed to an interesting dynamic 
relationship between uncertainty and efficiency. Industry was 
looking for efficiency gains and not understanding why the 
process could not be made more efficient. Research indicated 
that uncertainty in the process (see Figure 6) simply made 
any attempt at optimization untenable – it would be a bit like 
optimizing on moving ground. The process could only be 
made more stable and less uncertain by improving 
collaboration between the parties [58]. Only then, the system 
could be optimized and so made more efficient. Provided, of 
course, optimization did not remove the agents responsible 
for the retention and management of knowledge (which is 
not the same as KM!), so typical of Performance 
Management regimes. 
The science dictates that hard controls and rules will 
always fail as emergent networks are too fluid and their rapid 
ability to adapt and change will simply by-pass static rules 
and regulations [54]. Regulation of behavior in such 
jurisdictions or the influencing of behavior that promotes the 
making and taking of good decisions for the individual and 
the network requires the harnessing of legal / process 
standards that promote reflection and an understanding of 
how they can be deployed throughout a network. This is the 
subject of future work. 

150
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VIII. NEW ECOLOGIES 
We consider that in an adaptive system, the decision 
making and taking processes are continuous and part of an 
ecology constantly testing for both success and failure – so 
as to avoid catastrophic degradation (the deleterious / 
undesirable deterioration of a ecology; including destruction 
of ecosystems and extinction of system-networks). The law 
and certain process regimes (often used / applied by 
Government on industry / the private sector) can be seen as a 
fixed immovable, post-hoc (after the event), metricable 
[measurable] object, like a castle. Examined from a 
jurisdictional point of view, the objective of law / processes 
such as the GBCA [54], [58], can be seen as ‘controlling in 
order to rule’ based upon the representation of evidence 
(data). The means have become the ends and the jurisdiction 
drives the strategy. What constitutes jurisdictional or process 
knowledge in law and control-engineering is not the same as 
what constitutes knowledge in strategy and so decision 
making and taking [24]. Strategic knowledge in Law is 
vested within its jurisprudential social networks as it is 
within the social techné (expert ‘know how’; subjective 
knowledge of how to ‘changes things’) and phronesis 
(reflective wisdom, which provides plausible explanation 
and guidance in times of uncertainty’) contained within any 
successful organization [54]. It is this co-adaptive knowledge 
that is so important in understanding decision making and 
taking [24]. 
We contend that there is a need in the 21st Century, to 
‘put humanity back in the loop’, and that people will be 
employed more often in those complex lacunae where no 
amount of control, rule or coordination will make sense. We 
also see these as being the vital decision making and taking 
commons fundamental to delivering timely laws; design; 
strategies; and, policies that will prevail / pervade ‘over 
time’. We also recognize that resilience does not come from 
the info-techno-socio control type networks but from 
investment in socializing and capitalizing our socio-info-
techno influence networks. One cannot understand these 
complex systems without understanding their underpinning 
networks and how they are managed and controlled; 
influenced and led [24]. Understanding how Law interacts at 
the project, unit, jurisdictional and systems influence and 
jurisprudential levels is therefore important.  Not simply to 
aid understanding in times of crises, but to provide 
sustainable future programmes and to enable timely, 
collaborative, social responses to shocks and uncertainties, 
be they human-made or natural.  
We consider Network Law as a hard entity contained 
within existing Jurisdictional Networks and connecting 
through IT between them and different jurisprudences [54]. 
We suggest that they may have specific value in combining 
and synthesizing historical legal codes, such as Common and 
Codified Law. We do not advocate new laws, for example, 
for Cyber, but for improved understanding and the 
establishment of connecting soft networks – hence, 
Jurisprudential Networks – to better socialize connections 
between existing jurisdictions, Network Laws and the cyber-
internet – specifically in areas of uncertainty and potential 
instability, for example, a collaborative process of Joint 
Venture [54], [58]. It is in the area of Cyber and Law that 
this paper makes a contribution and which, based upon the 
principles derived and outlined in this paper including for 
Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy Law, which the authors are taking 
forward for application and future development. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge Lend Lease and the Royal Australian 
Navy and in particular the Faculties of Law, Arts and Social 
Science, the Centre for International Security Studies and 
Engineering and Information Management & Technology at 
the Universities of Sydney and Hong Kong.  
REFERENCES  
[1] 
S. Reay Atkinson, G. Tolhurst, and L. Hossain, “Decision 
making and taking in changing ecologies considering 
network law,” The Fourth International Conference on 
Advanced Communications and Computation, INFOCOMP, 
July 20 – 24, 2014, Paris, France: IARIA, pp. 76-82.  
[2] 
A.J. Menéndez, “Review of Developments in German, 
European and International Jurisprudence,” Special Issue – 
Regeneration Europe M. Hartmann, and F. de Witte, Eds., 
German Law Journal: Berlin, pp. 441-712, 2013. 
[3] 
A.-M. Grisogono, “Co-adaptation,” Proceeedings of SPIE – 
the International Society for Optics and Photonics, 16 
January, 2006, vol. 6039, article no. 603903.  
[4] 
R. Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: 
Chapman and Hall,1957. 
[5] 
J. Dunne, “Meditation XVII: nunc lento sonitu dicunt, 
morieris,” John Dunne (1572-1631), English, Roman 
Catholic convert to Protestantism, Lawyer, Diplomat, Poet, 
Vicar and Prolocutor to King Charles the First (of England). 
England: unknown, 1632. 
[6] 
E. 
Stacey, 
“Collaborative 
Learning 
in 
an 
Online 
Environment,” Journal of Distance Education. 14(2), pp. 14-
33, 1999. 
[7] 
R.D. Stacey, Complexity and Creativity in Organizations. 
San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 1996. 
[8] 
L. Hossain and R.T. Wigand, “Understanding virtual 
collaboration through structuration,” in Proceedings of the 
4th European Conference on Knowledge Management, 2003, 
pp. 475-484. 
[9] 
M. Granovetter, “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American 
Journal of Sociology, 1973, vol. 78, iss 6, pp. 1360-1380. 
[10] M.N. Shaw, International Law. 4th Edition. Cambridge, 
England: CUP, 1997. 
[11] I.C.J., “International Court of Justice (I.C.J.) reports,” ICJ 
Reports quoting International Law Research (ILR), pp. 253, 
257-267, ILR p. 398 and p. 412. 1974. 
[12] L. Hossain and R.T. Wigand, “ICT Enabled Virtual 
Collaboration through Trust,” Journal of Computer Mediated 
Communication, JCMC 10 (1) November, pp.22-31, 2004. 
[13] E. Mumford, “Risky Ideas in the Risk Society,” Journal of 
Information Technology, vol. 11, pp. 321-31. 1996. 
[14] A. Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge, 
England: Polity Press, 1990. 
[15] H. Mintzberg, D. Dougherty, J. Jorgensen, and F. Westley, 
“Some surprising things about Collaboration - knowing how 
people connect makes it work better,” Organizational 
Dynamics. Spring, pp. 60-71, 1996. 
[16] S. Reay Atkinson, A.M., Maier, N.H.M., Caldwell, and P.J. 
Clarkson, “Collaborative trust networks in engineering 
design adaptation,” International Conference of Engineering 
Design, ICED11, 2011. Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby.  
[17] S. Reay Atkinson, S. Lesher, and D. Shoupe, “Information 
capture and knowledge exchange: The Gathering Testing and 

151
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
assessment 
of 
Information 
and 
Knowledge 
through 
Exploration and Exploitation,” 14th ICCRTS: C2 and 
Agility, CCRP, 2009, Washington.  
[18] S. Reay Atkinson, A. Goodger, N.H.M Caldwell, and L. 
Hossain, “How Lean the Machine: how Agile the Mind,” 
The Learning Organization. vol. 19, iss. 3, pp. 183 – 206, 
2012. 
[19] D. 
Walker, 
S. 
Reay 
Atkinson, 
and 
L. 
Hossian, 
“Counterinsurgency through civil infrastructure networks,” 
Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics 
(SOTICS) October 21 – 26, 2012, SOTICS: Venice. 
[20] V. Harmaakorpi, I. Kauranen, and A. Haikonen, “The shift in 
the 
techno-socio-economic 
paradigm 
and 
regional 
competitiveness,” 43rd  Conference of European Regional 
Sciences Association (ERSA), 27-31 Aug 2003, Helsinki 
University of Technology: Lahti Center, Jyväskylä, Finland.  
[21] G. Ropohl, “Philosophy of Socio-Technical Systems,” 
Society for Philosophy and Technology. vol. 4, Virginia 
Tech: Blacksburg, VA, 1999. 
[22] S. Reay Atkinson, Cyber-: “Envisaging New Frontiers of 
Possibility,” UKDA Advanced Research and Assessmnent 
Group, unpublished, Occasional Series, 03/09, 2009. 
[23] S. Reay Atkinson, I. Hassall, N.H.M. Caldwell, M. Romilly, 
and R. Golding, “Versatile modular system (VMS™) designs 
for a versatile modular fleet (VMF™),” paper presented at 
EAWWIV Conference, 2011, Old RN College, Greenwich, 
London. 
[24] S. Reay Atkinson, A. Vakarau Levula, N.H.M. Caldwell, 
R.T. Wigand, and L. Hossain, “Signalling decision making 
and taking in a complex world,” International Conference on 
Information Technology and Management Science (ICITMS 
2014), May 1-2, 2014, Hong Kong: WIT Transactions on 
Engineering Sciences.  
[25] D.S. Fadok, John Boyd, and John Warden: Air Power’s 
Quest for Strategic Paralysis, ed. Air-University, Maxwell 
Air Force Base, Alabama: Air University Press, 1995.   
[26] S. Reay Atkinson, “Returning Science to the Social,” The 
Shrivenham Papers, UK Defence Academy, Number 10, July 
(July), 2010. 
[27] M.A. Bunge, “Ten Modes of Individualism - None of Which 
Works - And Their Alternatives,” Philosophy of the Social 
Sciences, 30(3), pp. 384-406, 2000. 
[28] C.S. Gray, “Weapons don’t make war,” in Policy, Strategy 
and Military Technology, Editor: Lawrence, University 
Press: Kansas, 1993. 
[29] E.N. Luttwak, The Logic of War and Peace. Revised Edition, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001. 
[30] S. Reay Atkinson and A. Goodman, “Network strategy and 
decision taking,” ARAG Occasional, UK Defence Academy, 
11 / 08, 2008. 
[31] L.A. Zadeh, “Toward a Perception-based Theory of 
Probabilistic Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities,” 
Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, vol. 105, pp. 
233-26, 2002. 
[32] T.D. Clark, J.M. Larson, J.N. Mordeson, J.D. Potter, and 
M.J. Wierman, “Applying Fuzzy Mathematics to Formal 
Modelling in Comparative Politics,” Studies in Fuzziness 
and Soft Computing, vol 225, Springer, 2008. 
[33] G. Pólya, “Heuristic reasoning in the theory of numbers,” 
reprinted in: The Random Walks of George Pólya, Ed., G.W. 
Alexanderson. Mathematical Association of America: 
Washington, DC, 1959 (2000). 
[34] D. 
Walker, 
S. 
Reay 
Atkinson, 
and 
L. 
Hossain, 
“Collaboration without rules - A new perspective on stability 
operations,” presented at IEEE Cyber Conference, 14-16 
Dec, 2012, IEEE: Washington. 
[35] S. Reay Atkinson, S. Feczak, A. Goodger, N.H.M. Caldwell, 
and L. Hossain, “Cyber-internet: a potential eco-system for 
innovation 
and 
adaptation,” 
European 
Alliance 
for 
Innovation: Internet as Innovation Eco-System Summit and 
Exhibition, 4-6 Oct., 2012, EAI, Riva del Garda: Italy. 
[36] D. Cartwright, Influence, Leadership, Control, in Handbook 
of Organizations, J.G., March, Editor, Rand McNally: 
Chicago, pp. 1-47, 1965. 
[37] P.A. David, “Path Dependence - A Foundational Concept for 
Historical Social Science,” Cliometrica -The Journal of 
Historical Economics and Econometric History, 1(2), 
Summer, 2007. 
[38] R.A. Dahl, “The Concept of Power”. Behavioral Science, 
2:3, July, p. 201, 1957. 
[39] L. Hossain, M. D’Eredita, and R.T. Wigand, “Towards a 
product process dichotomy for understanding knowledge 
management, sharing and transfer systems in Organizations,” 
submitted to Information Technology and People, 2002. 
[40] D.H. Wrong, “Some Problems in Defining Social Power,” 
The American Journal of Sociology. vol. 73, No. 6, May, pp. 
673-681, 1968. 
[41] L.A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy Sets,” in Information and Control, vol. 
8(3), pp. 338-353, 1965. 
[42] T.J. Ross, J.N. Booker, and W.J. Parkinson, “Fuzzy logic and 
probability applications: bridging the gap,” Fuzzy Logic and 
Probability Applications. Philadelphia, PA: Society for 
Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), p. 209, 2002. 
[43] R.M. Tong, Analysis of Fuzzy Control Algorithms using the 
Relating Matrix. PhD Thesis, in CUED, Cambridge 
University: Cambridge, 1976, 
[44] F. Schauer, “Do people obey the law?,” in Julius Stone 
Address, 13 March, 2014, Sydney University Faculty of Law 
(unpublished): Sydney University. 
[45] S. Reay Atkinson, and J. Moffat, The Agile Organization, 
Washington: CCRP Publications, 2005. 
[46] W. Waldron, “Vagueness and the Guidance of Action,” 
Philosophical Foundations of Language and the Law. A. 
Marmor, and S., Soames Eds., 2011, Oxford Scholarship 
Online, www.oxfordscholarship.com: Oxford, retrieved 
March 2014. 
[47] E. Mumford, “Problems, Knowledge, Solutions: solving 
Complex Problems,” Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, vol. 7, pp. 255-269, 1998. 
[48] R.B. Warren and D.I. Warren., The Neighborhood 
Organizer’s Handbook. South Bend, Ind: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1977. 
[49] S. Reay Atkinson, Engineering Design Adaptation Fitness in 
Complex Adaptive Systems. PhD Thesis, CUED EDC. 
Cambridge University Engineering Department: Cambridge, 
UK, 2012. 
[50] S. Reay Atkinson, M. Mitchell, A. Wehbe, I. Wahlet, H. 
Ainsworth, M. Harré, and S. Sousa, “Classifying and 
systemising uncertainty and instability - a dynamic social 
network approach to risk,” in RISK Conference, 2014, 
Brisbane,  28-30 May, Engineer Australia. 
[51] S. Reay Atkinson, “Risk, Recovery and Creating Resilience - 
research into the Blue Mountains Fires, Oct., 2013,” 
Productivity Commission submission on Natural Disaster 
Funding, B.M.C.C., S. Reay Atkinson, The Lions Club of 
Winmalee, NRMA Insurance, RHoK (Sydney), ENGG 3853 
Risk Managment Students, Ed. S. Reay Atkinson, University 
of Sydney, CCSRG: Sydney. 2014. 
[52] N.S.W.L.R., “Coal Cliff Collieries Pty Ltd v Sijehama Pty 
Ltd.,” New South Wales Law Report (N.S.W.L.R.), Law: 
vol. 1, iss. 24, Sydney, 1991. 
[53] M. Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the 
Human Sciences, New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1994. 
[54] S. Reay Atkinson and G. Tolhurst, “Certainty in joint venture 
negotiations: a case study,” Commercial Law Quarterly, 
March-May, vol. 3, The Commercial Law Association of 
Australia: Sydney, pp. 3-21, 2015. 
[55] S. De Sousa, I. Lopes, and E. Nunes, “On the quantification 
of uncertainty of performance measures,” Third International 
Conference on Business Sustainability, November 20-22, 
2013, 
Management, 
Technology 
and 
Learning 
for 
Individuals, Organisations and Society in Turbulent 
Environment, Ed. Goran Putnik. Póvoa de Varzim, Portugal. 

152
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[56] R.V. 
Rao, 
Decision 
Making 
in 
the 
Manufacturing 
Environment: using Graph Theory and Fuzzy Multiple 
attribute Decision Making methods, London: Springer. 2007. 
[57] R. Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes,” 
Archives of Psychology, vol. 140, 1932. 
[58] A. Atwani, N. Tohver, and S. Reay Atkinson, “Application 
of Concurrent Engineering to Decision Making and Taking: 
delivering Sustainability Standards in Construction Projects,” 
Atkinson SR (ed), Interim Report to Lend Lease. Sydney: 
FEIT and CCSRG, 2014. 
[59] U.S.-N.C.T.A. “National Commission of Terrorist Attacks 
(N.C.T.A.),” 9/11 Commission Report, 2004,  [cited 2007 
June]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.9-
11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf. 
[60] Lord Butler, “Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass 
Destruction,” Report of a Committee of Privy Counsellors, 
Chairman: The Rt Hon The Lord Butler of Brockwell KG 
GCB CVO, 2004, Ordered by the House of Commons, 14th 
July: London. 
[61] H.I. Ansoff, “Managing Strategic Surprise by Response to 
Weak Signals,” California Management Review, vol. XVIII, 
no. 2, pp. 21-33, 1975. 
[62] B. Coffman, “Weak Signal Research, Part I: Introduction,” 
1997 
 
[cited 
2010 
13 
Oct]; 
available 
from: 
http://www.mgtaylor.com/mgtaylor/jotm/winter97/wsrintro.h
tm. 
[63] M. Hansen, “The Search-transfer Problem: the Role of Weak 
Ties in Sharing Knowledge across Organization Subunits,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly, pp. 82-111. 1999. 
[64] E. Hiltunen, Weak Signals in Organizational Futures 
Learning. PhD Thesis. Helsinki School of Economics, vol. 
A-365, 2010. 
 

