93
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Evaluation Framework for Adaptive Security for the IoT in eHealth
Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
wolfgang.leister@nr.no
Stefan Poslad
Queen Mary University
London, UK
stefan.poslad@qmul.ac.uk
Mohamed Hamdi
School of Communication Engineering
Tunisia
mmh@supcom.rnu.tn
Habtamu Abie
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
habtamu.abie@nr.no
Arild Torjusen
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
arild.torjusen@nr.no
Abstract—We present an assessment framework to evaluate
adaptive security algorithms speciﬁcally for the Internet of
Things (IoT) in eHealth applications. The successful deployment
of the IoT depends on ensuring security and privacy, which need
to adapt to the processing capabilities and resource use of the IoT.
We develop a framework for the assessment and validation of
context-aware adaptive security solutions for the IoT in eHealth
that can quantify the characteristics and requirements of a
situation. We present the properties to be fulﬁlled by a scenario
to assess and quantify characteristics for the adaptive security
solutions for eHealth. We then develop scenarios for patients
with chronic diseases using biomedical sensors. These scenarios
are used to create storylines for a chronic patient living at home
or being treated in the hospital. We show numeric examples
for how to apply our framework. We also present guidelines
how to integrate our framework to evaluating adaptive security
solutions.
Keywords—Internet of Things; evaluation framework; scenarios;
assessment; eHealth systems; adaptive security.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Body Sensor Networks (WBSNs) improve the
efﬁciency of eHealth applications by monitoring vital signs of
a patient using low-rate communication media and constitute
an important part of the Internet of Things (IoT) by bringing
humans into the IoT. However, the successful deployment of
the IoT depends on ensuring security and privacy, which need
to adapt to the processing capabilities and resource use of
the IoT. To evaluate such adaptive mechanisms we introduced
evaluation scenarios speciﬁcally designed for applications in
eHealth and proposed an evaluation framework [1]. This eval-
uation framework is extended in this study with a quantitative
component that allows us to quantify the quality of security
solutions.
The “Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of Things in
eHealth” (ASSET) project researches and develops risk-based
adaptive security methods and mechanisms for IoT that will
estimate and predict risk and future beneﬁts using game
theory and context awareness [2]. The security methods and
mechanisms will adapt their security decisions based upon
those estimates and predictions.
The main application area of ASSET is health and wel-
fare. Health organisations may deploy IoT-based services to
enhance traditional medical services and reduce delay for
treatment of critical patients. In a case study, we evaluate the
technologies we developed for adaptive security using both
simulation and implementation in a testbed based upon realis-
tic cases. Blood pressure, electrocardiogram (ECG) and heart
rate values can be gathered from patients and anonymised.
The sensor data can be stored in different biomedical sensor
nodes that are capable of communicating with any of the
following connectivity options ZigBee, Wi-Fi, 3G, GPRS,
Bluetooth, and 6LoWPAN. For instance, a smartphone with
a suitable transceiver could act as an access point between
sensor nodes and a medical centre. For the evaluation, we
developed a set of scenarios to assess the adaptive security
models, techniques, and prototypes that will be introduced in
ASSET. These scenarios describe the foreseeable interactions
between the various actors and the patient monitoring system
based on IoT.
In computing, a scenario is a narrative: it most commonly
describes foreseeable interactions of user roles and the techni-
cal system, which usually includes computer hardware and
software. A scenario has a goal, a time-frame, and scope.
Alexander and Maiden [3] describe several types of scenarios,
such as stories, situations (alternative worlds), simulations,
story boards, sequences, and structures. Scenarios have inter-
action points and decision points where the technology under
consideration can interact with the scenario. This means that
the scenarios developed for a particular situation have to take
into consideration the technologies used by the different actors.
The importance of scenarios in the assessment of security
solutions has been discussed in the literature [4], [5]. This
work focuses on the development of scenarios that support
the evaluation of adaptive security techniques for the IoT in
eHealth.
There are many deﬁnitions of the IoT. For instance, while
the ITU-T [6] deﬁnes the IoT as “a global infrastructure
for the information society, enabling advanced services by
interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based on existing
and evolving interoperable information and communication
technologies”, the European Research Cluster on the Internet
of Things (IERC) deﬁnes the IoT as “A dynamic global
network infrastructure with self-conﬁguring capabilities based
on standard and interoperable communication protocols where

94
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
physical and virtual things have identities, physical attributes,
and virtual personalities and use intelligent interfaces, and
are seamlessly integrated into the information network” [7].
For our purposes we use Abie and Balasingham’s shorter
deﬁnition: “IoT is a network of things” [2]. Habib and Leister
[8] present a review of IoT layer models, including the ITU-T
IoT reference model [6].
The primary contributions and advances of this study are the
development of a quantitative framework for the assessment
of adaptive security solutions on the basis of security, privacy,
Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, and costs.
In Section II, the requirements and the proposed assess-
ment framework are described including metrics that make
this framework quantiﬁable in order to enable comparison
of various situations. We deﬁne the properties that must be
fulﬁlled by a scenario to assess adaptive security schemes for
eHealth. We show the interaction between the scenarios, the
threats, and the countermeasures in an assessment framework
for the ASSET project.
In Section III, we describe the extension of a previously
developed generic system model, which is used for the struc-
ture of the scenarios in Section III-A with different QoS
requirements, contexts and adaptive security methods and
mechanisms. These scenarios, ﬁrst proposed by Leister et al.
[9], include a patient monitored at home scenario, a hospital
scenario, and an emergency scenario. These scenarios are
reviewed and their adequacy to the evaluation of adaptive secu-
rity techniques for the IoT is analysed. We propose storylines
that can support requirements analysis, as well as adaptive
security design, implementation, evaluation, and testing.
Further, in Section IV, we present storylines for both the
home monitoring scenario and the hospital scenario. These
storylines are used in Section V to show how our framework
can be applied to selected episodes of the home scenario and
storyline. In Section VI, we show how to use our framework in
the context of adaptive security as deﬁned by Abie and Balas-
ingham [2]. Finally, Section VII discusses our framework and
relates it to other work before Section VIII offers concluding
remarks and future prospects.
II. THE ASSET EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
Designing the scenarios is of central signiﬁcance for the
ASSET project. They depict the operation of systems, here ap-
plied to IoT-based eHealth systems, in the form of actions and
event sequences. In addition, scenarios facilitate the detection
of threats and the identiﬁcation of the solutions to cope with
these threats. In a scenario-based assessment, a set of scenarios
is developed to convey the design requirements. With regard
to the speciﬁc objectives of IoT-based systems, the scenarios
should capture two types of requirements:
1) Security requirements: Novel adaptive security and pri-
vacy mechanisms and methods are required to adapt to the
dynamic context of the IoT and changing threats to them.
Thus, the scenarios should be generic enough to capture
the security needs for the data processed and exchanged
within a patient monitoring system. This is particularly
challenging because this system encompasses multiple
networking technologies, data, users, and applications,
addressing varying processing capabilities and resource
use.
In an assessment context, privacy and security require-
ments are related. Privacy addresses the ability to control
the information one reveals about oneself over the Inter-
net and who can access that information.
2) QoS requirements: QoS addresses the overall perfor-
mance of a system regarding technical parameters. Unlike
many traditional applications and services relying on
communication networks, eHealth applications have strin-
gent QoS requirements. Items such as the communication
delay, the quality of the communication channels, and
the lifetime of the self-powered sensor nodes are crucial
context parameters that have signiﬁcant impact on the
safety of the patient. The scenarios should highlight the
needs in terms of QoS requirements and illustrate the
dynamic interplay between these needs and the security
requirements.
Security and QoS mechanisms are interrelated. Adaptation
of security mechanisms may impact the QoS and vice-versa.
QoS requires adaptive security mechanisms to ensure appro-
priate level of QoS. While adapting poor security mechanisms
can hamper the performance of QoS, an inappropriate QoS
level can leak sensitive information about the importance of
the service in question. Therefore, adaptation must consider
both security and QoS together to achieve the best possible
security and QoS levels. Otherwise, weaker security and/or
less effective QoS guarantees may be the result. For example,
the requirement of using stronger cryptographic algorithms
could have negative impact on the performance or battery
consumption.
A. Requirements and Sets of States
The ASSET scenarios appear as a component of an assess-
ment framework that will serve to improve the applicability of
the security techniques proposed in the frame of the project.
The other components of the assessment framework are (i) a
set of threats describing the actions that violate the security
requirements, (ii) a set of security solutions that mitigate the
threats, and (iii) a set of system states representing the dynamic
context in which the patient monitoring system operates. Fig. 1
illustrates the ASSET assessment framework. The security
and QoS requirements are the output of the scenario design
activity. In other terms, the scenarios should give information
about the set of reliable states from the security requirements,
here denoted as S, and the set of states where the QoS
is acceptable, here denoted as Q. The intersection of these
sets is the set of desirable states, denoted in Fig. 1(a) by
D (Desirable), where the security and QoS requirements are
balanced.
One of the intrinsic features of the ASSET scenarios is
that the sets of security requirements and QoS requirements
could vary in time and space. This will make the threats and
the security solutions also vary in time and space. Threats

95
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
System states (Context)
Scenarios
S
Q
D
(a)
System states (Context)
Scenarios
S
Q
D
Threats
I
(b)
System states (Context)
Scenarios
S
Q
D
Threats
I
Security solutions
M
C
(c)
Fig. 1: The ASSET assessment framework.
are viewed as potential events that may generate insecure
system states, while countermeasures are intended to thwart
the effects of these threats. The realisation of a threat reduces
the set of secure states in the scenario of interest and affects
the QoS. This is represented by the region I (Impact) in
Fig. 1(b). This region represents a set of states that will not
fulﬁl the security or QoS requirements if a threat is realised.
The countermeasures or controls [10] will reduce both the
likelihood of a threat being realised and the impact of an
emerging threat. Hence, the size of the set of potentially
insecure states is decreased. Fig. 1(c) illustrates the effect
of the countermeasures through the Region M (Mitigate).
This region extends the set of secure states. Nonetheless,
the countermeasures can have a negative effect on the QoS,
represented by the region C (Cost), consisting of power,
processing resources, memory, communication overhead, and
cases where QoS requirements may not be fulﬁlled.
These elements are used in a scenario-based assessment
framework to evaluate the strength of the adaptive security
solutions. For instance, the scenarios allow us to evaluate the
strength of the security controls to minimise the impact of
threats in a given context.
For adaptive security solutions, the proposed protection
techniques will vary in time and space according to the
context. This is not conveyed by the scenario representation
of Fig. 1. To overcome this issue, we derive a set of storylines
from the ASSET scenarios. These can be viewed as a sequen-
tial application of the scenarios in a way that the selection of
the appropriate countermeasures must take into consideration:
• The space transition between scenarios. Space encom-
passes much useful information that affect the security
decision-making process. For instance, the location of the
WBSN may increase/decrease its vulnerability. Moreover,
mobility introduces signiﬁcant challenges including hori-
zontal and vertical handover management, i.e, managing
handover on the same layer or within the same access
technology and between different layers or different ac-
cess technologies, respectively.
• The time transitions between scenarios (with its implica-
tions on the context). The time interplay between the
Fig. 2: Illustration of context changes during the execution of
a storyline. The use of the different shaded regions follows
that of Fig. 1
threats and countermeasures has a substantial and dy-
namic impact on the environment where the patient
monitoring system is deployed. The amount of energy,
memory, and processing resources are crucial parameters
from the QoS perspective and the security solutions
have to adapt accordingly. In addition, the state of the
communication channel and the proper temporal interplay
in all these contexts are important in the selection of the
appropriate security decisions.
Fig. 2 illustrates the evolution of the storyline and the un-
derlying impact on the context. Of course, the sequence of
scenarios forming a storyline should be consistent so that it
translates to a real-case situation.
B. Making the ASSET Framework Quantiﬁable
Assessing the qualities of a given system state can be
done by means of data given by human assessors and by
means of objective data from measurements. Our goal is to
establish an estimation function that takes measured data as
input and which is a prerequisite to implement functionality
for adaptive security. To establish such an estimation function
the assessment a panel of users and specialists is queried to
calibrate a function that uses measured data as input. Similar
methodology has been used to estimate the quality of streamed
video [11]. In the following we present how to assess a given
system state by using human assessors.
To make the ASSET framework quantiﬁable we deﬁne a
real function 0 ≤ q(system state) ≤ 1 that shall express

96
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the degree of how well the requirements are fulﬁlled in the
system state in question. A low value, below a given threshold,
denotes that the system state in question is unacceptable, while
a value close to 1 denotes that most requirements are well
fulﬁlled.
The function q is composed of three parts: 1) security
requirements that need to be fulﬁlled, expressed in the function
qS; 2) degree of fulﬁlled QoS requirements, expressed in the
function qQ; and 3) costs that occur due to mitigation of
threats. The function q is then composed of a product of all
partial functions of qi∈{S,Q,C}: q = Q
i qiwi. The weights
are real numbers 0 ≤ wi < ∞ and express the importance
of a single qi, large values indicating more importance. A
weight wi = 1 is considered neutral. The importance of each
parameter is deﬁned by the assessor according to the nature
of the requirement before assessing the qi values.
The above deﬁnition has the disadvantage that the resulting
q is sensitive to the number k of factors qi that are used to
deﬁne it. To mitigate this we propose to replace the weights
by vi =
wi
Pk
j=1 wj resulting in ˆqi = qi
wi
Pk
j=1 wj . Thus, the value
q is expressed by:
q =
Y
i
ˆqi =
Y
i
qi
wi
Pk
j=1 wj
(1)
1) Security Requirements: Deﬁne GS = (S \ I) ∪ M as a
set of states where security requirements are fulﬁlled or threats
are mitigated. For states j outside GS we deﬁne a deviation
from the ideal requirements and a normalised distance dSj :
0 ≤ dSj ≤ 1 according to a suitable metric to denote how far
the current state is from ideal fulﬁlment of the requirement.
We set dSj = 1 when deviations cannot be tolerated. Thus,
we deﬁne the following function:
qSj =

1
if state ∈ GS
1 − dSj
if state /∈ GS
2) QoS Requirements: Deﬁne GQ = Q \ C as a set of
states where all QoS requirements are fulﬁlled and possible
effects from the mitigation are tolerable. For states j outside
GQ we deﬁne a deviation from the ideal QoS requirement
and a normalised distance dQj : 0 ≤ dQj ≤ 1 according to
a suitable metric to denote how far the current state is from
ideal fulﬁlment of the requirement. We set dQj = 1 when QoS
requirements are insufﬁciently fulﬁlled.
QoS requirements may be unfulﬁlled due to inﬂuences from
the environment, or become unfulﬁlled due to adaptation. The
latter could, for instance, happen if a security requirement
to avoid eavesdropping was met by reducing signal strength,
which could impact the available bandwidth or even data
availability.
Thus, we deﬁne the following function:
qQj =
 1
if state ∈ GQ
1 − dQj
if state /∈ GQ
3) Mitigation Costs: Besides the effect on QoS there may
be other costs implied by mitigation, e.g., real costs in payroll
or material, changes to the environment, costs for the patient,
virtual costs for a lower QoS, and so on. States with unaccept-
able costs are included in the area C. For costs outside C we
deﬁne relative costs on a normalised scale dC : 0 ≤ dC ≤ 1.
We deﬁne the following function:
qC =
 1 − dC
if costs /∈ C
0
if costs ∈ C
C. Assessment to deﬁne the qi values
To aid human assessors in assessing the values for qi (i.e.
the value indicating how far a given requirement is from the
ideal fulﬁlment) we propose to base the assessment on a set
of questions that are evaluated based on a Likert scale [12].
A Likert scale is a psychometric scale commonly involved in
research that employs questionnaires where the questions are
to be answered from best to worst on a scale of n steps, where
n is an odd integer number.
If the questionnaire to be ﬁlled out by an assessor is
designed so that each qi corresponds to one question on a
Likert scale we propose to use a function e that takes the
response ˜qi ∈ N for 0 ≤ ˜qi ≤ n − 1 as an argument. We use
two approaches to express the qi.
1) Linear Approach:
qi = eα(˜qi) =
˜qi
n − 1
(2)
2) Logarithmic Approach:
qi = eβ(˜qi) = logn (˜qi + 1)
(3)
Using the logarithmic approach leaves less impact of bad
values than the linear approach. There are some caveats on
using a logarithmic function for values on a Likert scale, as
noted by Nevill and Lane [13]. Particularly, the values on the
Likert scale should express a continuous and rather equidistant
increase of quality.
3) Other Methods: In case the questionnaire is designed in
a way that several independent questions result in one value
for qi, Bayesian networks developed by Perl and Russell [14]
can be employed. However, we consider the design of the
questionnaires and the use of Bayesian networks as future
work. Note also that for Bayesian networks more data from
an assessment are necessary than for the above mentioned
methods.
While the Likert scale is useful for assessing opinions on
a psychometric scale, i.e., subjective data, we need, as well,
to be able to assess objective data. In these cases, we set up
a scale where discrete choices on a questionnaire are mapped
to a similar scale as the Likert scale to reﬂect the quantity
of data based on an objective value. This way of creating
assessment data are quite common for assessments, such as
in the estimation of the quality of software products in the
OpenBRR [15, 16].
When objective data are used as input, e.g., as the result of
measurements, these data on a continuous scale can be mapped

97
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 3: Generic eHealth framework indicating the use cases in
ﬁve levels (Extended from [17]).
into the value range 0 ≤ qi ≤ 1 and used in eq. (1). Note,
however, that the mapping function does not necessarily need
to be linear, and a speciﬁc assessment phase may be necessary
to develop a suitable function that maps the values into the
value range 0 ≤ qi ≤ 1.
4) Assessment by Subject Panels: For an assessment often
several individuals are put into an assessment panel. These
subjects perform the assessment individually while the results
are put together into one assessment result. Further work needs
to show whether it is more practicable to calculate individual q
values and then calculate some mean value of these or whether
to calculate mean values for each ˜qi.
III. EXTENDED GENERIC MODEL FOR EHEALTH
SCENARIOS
In the following sections, we develop the scenarios of the
ASSET project and show how storylines can be extracted. We
also underline the role of the storyline in the assessment of
adaptive security techniques for eHealth. Before delving into
the details of scenario and storyline engineering, we highlight
the major properties that a scenario should have in order to
be useful for evaluating adaptive security.
Patient monitoring systems are a major data source in
healthcare environments. During the last decade, the develop-
ment of pervasive computing architectures based on the IoT
has consistently improved the efﬁciency of such monitoring
systems thereby introducing new use cases and requirements.
It is important that these monitoring systems maintain a certain
level of availability, QoS, and that they are secure and protect
the privacy of the patient. Previously, we have analysed the
security and privacy for patient monitoring systems with an
emphasis on wireless sensor networks [17] and suggested
a framework for providing privacy, security, adaptation, and
QoS in patient monitoring systems [18]. We divided patient
monitoring systems into four Generic Levels (GLs): (0) the
patient; (I) the personal sensor network; (II) devices in the
closer environment following several scenarios; and (III) the
healthcare information system.
We review the generic model presented by Leister et al.
[18] and extended by Savola et al. [19]. This extended generic
model contains three new levels related to the monitoring
of chronic diseases, the communication between multiple
healthcare providers, and the communication between health-
care providers and medical research institutions, respectively.
Consequently, the extended generic model is composed of ﬁve
levels numbered from (0) to (IV) depending on the logical
distance to the patient to whom Level (0) is assigned. Multiple
types are considered at Level (II). Note that only one of these
types applies at a time. However, it must be possible to switch
between the types in Level (II) depending on the activity
of the patient. To this purpose, the communication between
Levels (II) and (III) is two-way. The key levels of our extended
generic model are as follows, as shown in Fig. 3:
(0)
Patient. This is the actual patient.
(I)
Personal sensor network. The personal sensor net-
work denotes the patient and the sensors measuring
the medical data. These sensors are connected to each
other in a WBSN. While this sensor network can
be connected randomly, in most cases one special
WBSN node is appointed to be a Personal Cluster
Head (PCH), which forwards the collected data out-
side the range of the WBSN.
(IIa)
Smart home. The patient is in a smart-home envi-
ronment where the personal sensor network interacts
with various networks and applications within this
environment. The smart home infrastructure may be
connected to a healthcare enterprise infrastructure
using long-distance data communication.
(IIb)
Mobility. The patient is mobile, e.g., using public
or personal transportation facilities. The personal
sensor network of the patient is connected to the
infrastructure of a healthcare enterprise via a mobile
device, e.g., a mobile Internet connection.
(IIc)
Paramedic. The WBSN is connected to the medical
devices of an ambulance (car, plane, and helicopter)
via the PCH. The devices of the ambulance can work
autonomously, showing the patient status locally.
Alternatively, the devices of the ambulance can com-
municate with an external healthcare infrastructure,
e.g., at a hospital.
(IId)
Intensive care/surgery. During an operation the
sensor data are transferred to the PCH or directly to
the hospital infrastructure over a local area network.
The sensors are in a very controlled environment,
but some sensors may be very resource limited due
to their size, so extra transport nodes close to the
sensors may be needed.
(IIe)
Pre- and postoperative. During pre- and postoper-
ative phases of a treatment, and for use in hospital
bedrooms, the sensor data are transferred from the
sensor network to the PCH and then to the healthcare
information system.
(IIf)
Chronic disease treatment. The WBSN data are

98
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
used by healthcare personnel in non-emergency treat-
ment of individual patients with a chronic disease.
(III)
Healthcare information system. This is considered
a trusted environment. It consists of the hospital
network, the computing facilities, databases, and
access terminals in the hospital.
(IVa) Inter-healthcare provider. Information is shared
between different healthcare providers concerning
medical information of an individual patient.
(IVb) Healthcare provider and research. Information is
shared between healthcare providers and medical
research organisations for the purposes of research,
new solutions development, etc.
A. The Structure of the Scenarios
Through the potential interactions between these levels,
notice that the model can support the elaboration of multiple
scenarios where the actors interact by switching from a level
to another. The scenarios in healthcare using biomedical
sensor networks are quite complex. Therefore, they need to
be efﬁciently structured. We consider three main scenarios
(hereafter denoted as overall scenarios) and we decompose
them into sub-scenarios (hereafter denoted as core scenarios).
A particular interest is given to the transitions between the core
scenarios since these transitions constitute substantial sources
of threats. Here, we consider three scenarios, a home scenario
A shown in Fig. 4, a hospital scenario B shown in Fig. 6, as
well as an emergency scenario C.
Each of these overall scenarios contain a set of core sce-
narios which are denoted by the scenario identiﬁer A, B, or
C, followed by a dash and the core scenario numbering using
roman numbers. The transitions between these core scenarios
model the interaction between the various components of the
patient monitoring system. In this paper, we focus mostly on
Scenario A where the patient is supposed to be monitored
outside the hospital while performing normal daily actions.
To extract useful technical cases for the evaluation phase we
need to structure the scenario according to the patient’s actions
and situation.
TABLE I shows a list of core scenarios used in our work,
which overall scenario they belong to, and which transitions
are useful. Note that other transitions are theoretically possible,
but these are either unlikely or can be achieved by combining
a series of transitions, e.g., taking Core Scenario A-ii (moving)
as an intermediate for Overall Scenario A. Omitting unlikely
transitions helps to reduce the number of states when mod-
elling the scenarios.
B. The Structure of the Home Scenario
In Scenario A, a monitored patient can be in various
contexts performing normal daily actions. For example, for
a patient with diabetes the following situations apply:
• The patient is at home or a nursing home using monitor-
ing equipment.
• The patient uses sensors and communicates electronically
with the doctor’s ofﬁce.
TABLE I: Overview of core scenarios. The bullets mark
scenarios that are part of the respective core scenario.
scenario
transition to
core scenario & name
A
B
C
core scenario
i
home monitoring
•
ii, xiv
ii
moving
•
i, iii, iv, viii, vi, v
iii
public transport
•
ii
iv
vehicle transport
•
ii
v
shop
•
ii
vi
caf´e
•
ii
vii
doctor’s ofﬁce
•
ii, xiv
viii
waiting room
•
•
vii, ix, ii
ix
diagnosis
•
•
x, xi, xii, ii
x
operation
•
xi
xi
intensive care
•
xii
xii
observation
•
ii, xi, ix
xiii
accident
•
xiv
xiv
ambulance
•
ix
A-i
home
situation
A-ii
moving
A-v
shop
A-vi caf´e
visit
A-xiv
ambu-
lance
A-iii
publ.
transp.
A-iv
vehicle
transport
A-viii
waiting
room
A-vii
doctor’s
ofﬁce
B
B
B
Fig. 4: The Home Scenario with the underlying core scenarios
and their transitions.
• The patient uses speciﬁc monitoring equipment for dia-
betes.
• The patient visits the doctor’s ofﬁce regularly and uses
public transport or a car to get there.
• At the waiting room the patient can communicate data to
the health care infrastructure of the doctor’s ofﬁce.
• The patient regularly takes walking or jogging trips.
• The patient regularly visits a caf´e with friends; this
includes walking or commuting with public transport.
• In case of an emergency or planned surgery, not neces-
sarily related to her condition, the patient may be sent to
a hospital with an ambulance.
This list of situations is not yet a useful narrative. It
needs to be structured and enriched with the speciﬁc context
information, such as the necessary devices of the IoT, the
communication channels, and actions of the involved actors.
This is done in the core scenarios that describe a speciﬁc part
of an overall scenario; e.g., a situation a patient experiences.
Each core scenarios can be part of several overall scenarios.
1) Home Situation (monitored at home) (A-i): Biomedical
sensors are employed in an environment where the patient is
at home or in a nursing home. The patient is monitored by
a WBSN, and the sensor data and alarms can be transmitted
to medical centres and emergency dispatch units. The patient
uses a smartphone with health-diary software that also imple-

99
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A-i:2
sleep
A-i:1
default
home
sit.
A-i:3
kitchen
A-i:6
training
A-i:4
bath-
room
A-i:5
shower
A-i:7
visitor
A-i:8
home
care
A-i
Fig. 5: The detail-scenarios of the home-situation.
ments personal health records (PHR) and stores measurements
continuously.
Here, the sensors may not be monitoring or transmitting
the physiological patient data continuously in order to reduce
battery power consumption. Instead, depending on a prede-
ﬁned algorithm, abnormal sensor data from certain sensors
may activate an alarm that is sent to a central monitoring unit.
On a regular basis, the patient transmits measurements to
the medical information system at the doctor’s ofﬁce, thus syn-
chronising the PHR with the medical information system; the
patient also has an audio-/video-conversation where medical
questions are discussed. During these sessions the patient may
take pictures with the smart phone camera or perform other
measurements.
In this scenario, the following characteristics are given:
1) Ease of use and non-intrusiveness are important issues.
2) Very low power consumption, enabling a long life span
of the batteries, is required.
3) A network infrastructure is available, such as access to
the Internet via LAN, WLAN, or mobile networks.
4) Limited mobility, handoff is possible, but infrequent.
5) Privacy and observability of signals are important require-
ments.
Core Scenario A-i can be split up into several detail-
scenarios that may depend on the patient’s activities, time of
the day, or context, as shown in Fig. 5. These sub-scenarios
may include the generic scenario (A-i:1), sleeping (A-i:2),
kitchen work (A-i:3), visiting the bathroom (A-i:4), taking
a shower (A-i:5), training (A-i:6), receiving a visitor (A-
i:7), or receiving a home care nurse (A-i:8). All these detail
scenarios create different challenges regarding security and
QoS that need to be addressed by adaptive security methods.
For example, when taking a shower, the sensors may need to
be unmounted, while receiving visitors may create the need to
give access to selected data or devices.
2) Moving (Walking, Jogging, Cycling) Scenario (A-ii):
The patient does daily training, i.e., jogs in the nearby park,
or does shorter walks from the home to the public transport, to
the caf´e, shop, or doctor’s ofﬁce. A common feature in these
situations is that the patient needs to use a smartphone as a
device that collects sensor data, using the mobile networks to
transmit the data. When walking, jogging, or taking a bicycle
ride in the park many other people and their devices may
interfere with the communication of the smartphone.
When walking in the woods, there may be several spots
which are not covered by a mobile network. In this case,
the signal is so weak that only emergency calls from another
provider will work. While data trafﬁc is not possible, SMS
messages can be used to send data with very low bandwidth,
possibly after several retries. For an average walking trip,
this outage may last for some minutes. However, SMS is
asynchronous and messages may take minutes to days to
arrive. Thus, it may be quicker to wait until the user, if still
mobile, moves to a region where there is network coverage.
3) Transport Scenarios: We consider two transport scenar-
ios, one with public transport, and one with commuting by
car.
Core Scenario A-iii presents a situation where a patient
commutes to a doctor’s ofﬁce or to a caf´e using public
transport. Here, the patient needs to use a smartphone as a
device that collects sensor data, using the mobile networks to
transmit the data. Blind spots without connectivity to a mobile
network, roaming, varying data transmission quality, etc., are
parts of this scenario. This scenario can be applied to long-
distance trains, planes, etc.
In Core Scenario A-iv the patient uses her own or another’s
(private) car to commute to a shop, a caf´e, or the doctor’s
ofﬁce. Here, the patient needs to use a smartphone as a
device that collects sensor data, using the mobile networks
or networks installed or used in the car to transmit the
data. Blind spots without connectivity to a mobile network,
roaming, varying data transmission quality, etc., are parts of
this scenario.
4) Shop Scenario (A-v): Another situation deﬁned by Core
Scenario A-v is when the patient is in a shop. In addition to
the conditions of A-vi, the patient is given the opportunity to
check groceries to be compliant with the patient’s diet and
allergy-prohibition plans, access information from the shop,
and use a shopping list.
5) Caf´e Scenario (A-vi): The patient visits a caf´e. Here,
the patient needs to use a smartphone as a device that collects
sensor data, using mobile networks or caf´e’s WLAN zone
for data transfer. Switching between the WLAN and mobile
networks may occur, the WLAN may be of varying quality,
many other caf´e visitors may interfere, or the WLAN may not
actually be connected to the Internet.
6) Doctor’s Ofﬁce Scenario (A-vii): The patient is in the
doctor’s ofﬁce, usually after some time in a waiting room
(A-viii). Here, the patient can have extra sensors attached.
These extra sensors, as well as the existing sensors, can
communicate with the doctor’s infrastructure either through
the smartphone of the patient, or directly, depending on the
needs. A doctor can change a sensor’s characteristics, which
requires the possibility to re-program the sensor devices.
7) Waiting Room Scenario (A-viii): The patient is in a
waiting room at a doctor’s ofﬁce or a hospital. Patients that are
known to the healthcare system can be connected from their
smartphone to the healthcare network; here, speciﬁc actions
for collecting data from the device or other preparations can

100
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be performed. Once the patient is in the range of the waiting
room, the smartphone can transfer large amounts of stored
patient data directly to the infrastructure of the medical centre
via short-range communication, instead of using long-range
mobile communication.
8) Other scenarios: In the scenario structure we foresee
that the patient can undergo a transition to other core scenarios
in a different overall scenario in order to cover situations that
else would be outside the scenario structure. For instance, a
patient could get ill and be brought to a hospital in an ambu-
lance (B-xiv) or an emergency situation happens (Scenario C).
Note that the use of devices in the IoT could be different
in Scenarios A, B, and C: as an example, in an emergency
situation the use of one of the patient’s own sensors would
not be possible in all cases.
C. The Structure of the Hospital Scenario
In Scenario B, the biomedical sensors are used in a hospital
environment. Here, the patient is located in an operating room
(OR) or intensive care unit (ICU) while undergoing intensive
monitoring of vital physiological parameters. Additional sen-
sors may be required during this procedure to monitor other
physiological parameters. The patient may be moved between
different rooms during the treatment, e.g., from the OR to the
ICU, but monitoring must continue. The sensor data may need
to be transferred over different wireless networks. The system
should be able to cope with a breakdown in sensor nodes,
new software updates, wireless network trafﬁc congestion, and
interferences from other wireless networks and biomedical
devices.
In Scenario B, a ﬁxed network infrastructure is available
between Levels (II) and (III) which can be accessed by the
sink nodes of the biomedical sensor network. The scenario
includes a complex communication environment. Interference
from co-existing wireless networks, mobile networks, and
various medical facilities is possible; this may reduce the
performance of the transmission. The network topology in this
scenario is ﬁxed, but changes to the network topology may
happen while patients are moving or being moved from one
place to another, possibly causing handoff to other gateways.
However, roaming to other networks is not part of this scenario
in order to stay within the hospital domain.
Note that scenarios that seem to be similar in Scenario B
and in Scenario A may have differences that are not obvious.
Thus, one cannot use reasoning performed in one scenario
in another without checking the context and other conditions.
For instance, A-vii (doctor’s ofﬁce) could be different from
a similar situation in a hospital (B-ix) since the hospital
is connected to a different kind of network infrastructure.
Usually, the primary healthcare points (doctor’s ofﬁce) and
hospitals have different security requirements and policies.
1) Hospital Diagnosis Scenario (B-ix): The patient is ex-
amined; extra sensors are attached, and existing sensors on
the patient may be accessed both directly and via the patient’s
smartphone. In addition, NFC tags are used to identify objects.
B-ii
moving
B-viii
waiting
room
Ov.Sc. A
B-xiv
ambu-
lance
B-ix di-
agnosis
B-x op-
eration
B-xi
intensive
B-xii
obser-
vation
A
A
A
Fig. 6: The Hospital Scenario with the underlying core sce-
narios and their transitions.
The medical personnel can re-conﬁgure and re-program the
sensors during diagnosis.
2) Hospital Operation Scenario (B-x): The patient is under-
going surgery; extra sensors are attached, and existing sensors
on the patient are accessed directly by the hospital system
rather than through the smartphone of the patient. In this
scenario, the QoS is set very high, while security-wise the
sensors are in a protected zone. The medical personnel can
re-program the sensors during the operation.
3) Hospital Intensive Care Scenario (B-xi): The patient is
in intensive care after an operation. Extra sensors are attached,
and existing sensors on the patient may be accessed both
through the patient’s smartphone, and directly through the
hospital infrastructure. In addition, NFC tags are used to
identify objects. In most cases, the smartphone will be used
as PCH. The medical personnel can re-program the sensors
during intensive care.
4) Hospital Observation Scenario (B-xii): The patient is in
a room under “normal” observation; in contrast to the home
situation, the patient’s smartphone has direct access to the
hospital systems and will deliver data directly with higher QoS
through the secured hospital systems.
D. The Structure of the Emergency Scenario
The Emergency Scenario (C) presents an emergency situ-
ation where victims are provided with sensors, patients are
transported with an ambulance (car, helicopter, plane) and
delivered to the emergency reception at a hospital. In Sce-
nario C the use of sensors is not planned beforehand, health
personnel must improvise, the identity of the patient may be
unknown, and the infrastructure may be partially unavailable.
Despite this, the expectation is that severely injured patients
are stabilised, and they survive the transport to the emergency
reception in the best condition possible.
We include the ﬁrst scenario of the Hospital Scenario, the
diagnosis phase when the patient arrives in Core Scenario C-
ix. Here, the rather unplanned interventions at the emergency
site are adapted to the routines at the hospital.
1) Accident Site Scenario (C-xiii): This scenario is a disas-
ter and accident response scenario where biomedical sensors
are deployed to measure values such as blood pressure, tem-
perature, pulse and ECG in an ad-hoc network at the site of
an accident. Wired or wireless communications infrastructures

101
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
may be damaged or unavailable, and a large number of
severely injured people may overwhelm the emergency ﬁeld
personnel. This could prevent them from providing efﬁcient
and effective emergency rescue. Biomedical sensor networks
can be quickly deployed to monitor vital signs. A large number
of injured can be monitored simultaneously.
In this scenario, the following characteristics are given:
1) The sensor network must operate autonomously, and
needs a high degree of self-organisation. The network
topology is highly dynamic. Therefore, the sensor nodes
should be able to discover each other and setup a sensor
network autonomously.
2) A ﬁxed network infrastructure is not available; data
transferred from Level (II) to Level (III) must use a
mobile network or other speciﬁc wireless network, such
as microwave, or digital trunk communication.
3) The radio link may be unstable and the radio link quality
may vary. Additionally, the communication environment
is rather complex, since many sensor nodes may be
deployed in a small area, possibly causing severe channel
competition.
4) High degree of mobility. Handoffs are possible and may
be frequent.
5) Blue-light functionality. That is, being able to re-use
sensors on short notice with high ﬂexibility (short-cutting
some of the usual procedures).
2) Ambulance Scenario (C-xiv): The patient is in an am-
bulance. The sensors on the patient are connected to the
ambulance’s information system, which is connected to a
hospital infrastructure via a mobile network connection. The
communication between the patient’s sensors is either directly
to the ambulance infrastructure, or via the mobile phone. The
ambulance and the patient’s mobile phone may use different
carriers. Some properties in this scenario are common with
Scenario iv (vehicle transport).
Note that once the patient is inside the ambulance, sensors
should communicate with devices in the ambulance without
involving the mobile carrier.
IV. STORYLINES FOR THE SCENARIOS
The set of overall scenarios, core scenarios, and transitions
can be used to create storylines that can be used as case
studies in ASSET. We present the storylines developed for
the Scenarios A and B. Parts of these storylines will be used
in the following analysis to evaluate the diverse functions in
the IoT. We have not yet developed a storyline for Scenario C.
A. Storyline for the Home Scenario
We developed the storyline for the home scenario as follows:
Petra has both a heart condition and diabetes. In a hospital, she
had two sensors placed in or on her body: one heart sensor and
one blood sugar sensor. In addition, she uses external sensors
to measure blood pressure, heart beat, inertial sensors, etc.,
as well as a camera. Inertial sensors can be used to detect if
Petra falls in order to automatically call for help while cameras
could be used to assess her mood [20]. Petra is living in her
home that has been prepared for the monitoring system and
is commissioned with the necessary data connections so that
her vital signs can be periodically reported to the healthcare
personnel in levels (II) (nurse or doctor) or (III) (patient
records) as introduced in Fig. 3; several technologies can be
applied to achieve this.
The patient monitoring system is set up so that the sensor
data are transmitted wirelessly (several transmission technolo-
gies are possible) to a smartphone that acts as PCH. The PCH
communicates with the hospital infrastructure (Level (III)).
1. Petra is now being monitored at home but data are acquired
remotely (A-i); the following requirements are important:
a. Petra wants the data related to her medical condition
to remain conﬁdential from neighbours, i.e., people
close-by, but outside her home. The conﬁdentiality
requirement includes physiological data, location data,
data retrieved from a smart-home environment, such as
temperature and humidity, as well as other metadata and
health records.
b. Petra wants her data to remain conﬁdential from visitors,
i.e., people inside her home.
2. Petra takes a bath in her home (planned sensor acquisition
disruption; A-i);
a. the sensors are water-proof; the PCH is close enough to
receive signals;
b. the sensors need to be removed;
i. a change in the values implicitly indicates the sensor
removal; or
ii. patient must notify the PCH about the sensors going
off-line;
3. Petra is sleeping and sensors fall off (unplanned sensor
acquisition disruption; A-i).
4. Petra leaves her home for training outdoors or a stroll in
the park nearby (A-ii);
a. she is walking alone with her sensors communicating to
the PCH;
b. she meets an acquaintance, Linda who has similar sensor
equipment; note that Petra’s sensors could communicate
through Linda’s sensor network; they continue walking
together;
c. when they walk further, Petra looses the communication
channel to the health care institution because of the
terrain. She could either connect through the open,
mobile WLAN-zones that are offered or use Linda’s
PCH as communication channel.
5. Petra leaves her home to visit her friends in a caf´e (A-vi,
A-ii, A-iii, A-iv).
6. Petra visits her regular doctor for a check-up; the doctor’s
ofﬁce is within walking distance from her home (A-ii, A-
vii, A-viii).
7. Petra becomes ill and is transported by an emergency
ambulance to the hospital (B-xiv); transition to the Overall
Hospital Scenario B.

102
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Storyline for the Hospital Scenario
We developed the storyline for the hospital scenario as
follows: Petra has both a heart condition and diabetes. One
year ago, she had two sensors placed in or on her body: one
heart sensor and one blood sugar sensor that both communicate
wirelessly. In addition, she uses external sensors as described
for the storyline of Scenario A. Petra suddenly gets ill while
being at home. This is detected by the patient monitoring
system installed at her home.
1. Petra is taken in an ambulance to the hospital (B-xiv). In
addition to the sensors she is using, the paramedics use
EEG and ECG sensors. The information from all sensors
is available in the ambulance from three possible sources:
a. information received directly from the sensors, available
on the displays in the ambulance;
b. information received from the PCH that Petra is using;
c. information received from the healthcare records.
2. After the ambulance arrives at the hospital, Petra is moved
to a room where diagnosis of her condition is performed
(B-ix). Different sensors are used to ﬁnd out her condition.
These sensors are removed after diagnosis.
3. It becomes clear that Petra needs to undergo surgery (B-
x). During surgery sensors are used to measure certain
biomedical values. However, the medical procedure also
creates electromagnetic noise in the same band as the data
transmission between sensors uses.
4. After the surgery, Petra is moved to intensive care (B-
xi) where a variety of sensors are used to observe her
biomedical values.
5. After two days, Petra is moved to a recovery room with
three other patients to allow time for her surgery wound
to heal and for observation (B-xii). In addition to the heart
and blood sugar sensors, two additional sensors are now
used, but these will be removed after the observation phase
is over. The two other patients in the same room are using
the same kind of sensors.
a. The sensors Petra is using transmit their readings to her
PCH.
b. Petra’s additional sensors transmit their readings to a
base station in the patients’ room, while her ordinary
sensors are still report to her PCH.
6. Petra is discharged from hospital; transition to Overall
Scenario A.
C. Applying the Storylines
As described by Savola and Abie [21] and Savola et al.
[19] the data integrity, privacy, data conﬁdentiality, availability,
and non-repudiation requirements should be met for all core
scenarios and communication levels presented in Section III,
speciﬁcally end-user authentication and authorisation for sce-
narios in Levels (0)-(II), sensor and WBSN authentication for
scenario in Level (I), service provider user authentication for
scenarios in Levels (III) and (IV), and service provider user
authorisation in Levels (III) and (IV). This is also true for
both storylines described above since these scenarios apply
to both storylines but in varying situations and contexts. The
adaptive security requirements for both storylines therefore can
be summarised as follows:
1) End-user authentication and authorisation: The adap-
tive authentication mechanisms must cope with changing
context of use, security threats and the user behaviour in
order to enforce context-aware authentication mechanisms in
an efﬁcient and usable manner.
2) Sensor and WBSN authentication: Adaptive authentica-
tion mechanisms must cope with critical decisions to be made
by the end-user and the service provider user based on the
sensor input in order to minimise the possibility of fake sensors
in possibly varying situations.
3) Service provider user authentication: Adaptive authenti-
cation mechanisms must cope with changing demands depend-
ing on the privacy level and the ofﬁcial authorisation level for
making treatment decisions.
4) Service provider user authorisation: Adaptive authorisa-
tion techniques must cope with setting the adequate require-
ments and enforcing the sufﬁcient authorisation mechanisms
based on the strength of the authentication, context, and user
role.
5) Data integrity (all levels): Adaptive data integrity tech-
niques must maintain adequate data integrity especially during
alarm situations allowing patients health security and longer-
time treatment decisions
6) Privacy and data conﬁdentiality (all levels): Adaptive
security decision-making must adapt to privacy and data
conﬁdentiality requirements based on the data processing
needs, roles of stakeholders, regulations and legislation, and
the privacy level of data indicated by privacy metrics. Since
context can affect privacy, adaptive security must be able
to adapt to different types of context such as time, space,
physiological parameter sensing, environmental sensing, and
noisy data. The context must also be collected and evaluated
in real time in a secure and accurate manner.
7) Availability (all levels): Adaptive techniques must bal-
ance the load in the system and use resilience solutions to
maintain adequate availability, which is critical for health and
life.
8) Non-repudiation (all levels): Adaptive authentication
mechanisms must ensure the adequate non-repudiation level
despite of changing conditions and selection of security con-
trols.
Walking through these story lines or threat analysing them
will show that the above adaptive security requirements must
be met for their success and proper functioning. For example,
the security requirement pointed out in Step 1.a of the storyline
is related to conﬁdentiality and privacy, which are often
emphasised in healthcare. Strong conﬁdentiality algorithms,
key distribution, associated processes, and compliance to ap-
propriate privacy legislation and regulations are crucial.
V. EVALUATING THE HOME SCENARIO
We use selected parts of Scenario A to illustrate how
to use the ASSET framework. We go through the scenario

103
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II: Numeric results for Example 1: applying the ASSET framework using the logarithmic approach from eq. (3)
S1
S2
S3
S4
Q1
Q2
C
qtotal
wi
0.4
0.8
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.0
P = 7.4
˜q
ˆq
˜q
ˆq
˜q
ˆq
˜q
ˆq
˜q
ˆq
˜q
ˆq
˜q
ˆq
qtotal
Case I
6
0.997
8
0.991
8
0.977
10
1.000
10
1.000
10
1.000
10
1.000
0.965
Case II
6
0.997
10
1.000
8
0.977
10
1.000
10
1.000
10
1.000
1
0.846
0.824
Case III
7
0.998
9
0.996
8
0.977
9
0.995
8
0.988
10
1.000
10
1.000
0.954
Case IV
6
0.997
8
0.991
10
1.000
10
1.000
8
0.988
9
0.992
10
1.000
0.968
Case V
6
0.997
8
0.991
9
0.989
10
1.000
9
0.995
10
1.000
10
1.000
0.972
Case III+IV
6
0.997
9
0.996
10
1.000
10
1.000
9
0.995
10
1.000
10
1.000
0.987
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
I
II
III
IV
V III+IV
Fig. 7: Visualising the results for qtotal from Example 1.
The dark blue bars represent the results using the logarithmic
function eβ, as shown in eq. (3), while the light blue bars
represent the results using the linear function eα, as shown in
eq. (2).
description, and comment on the use of the framework.
Note, however, that the numerical values are for illustration
purposes. These values are based on rough estimates instead
of a careful assessment. Different methods for assessment were
proposed above in Section II-C, but applying and evaluating
the different methods remain future work.
A. Conﬁdentiality and Observability
In the storyline of the Home Scenario, Petra is monitored
at home with the requirement that she wants her data to
be conﬁdential for people inside and outside her home. Let
us assume that the properties of data observability and data
conﬁdentiality are essential in this ﬁrst case, i.e., are in S.
Here, data observability means that a third party can observe
the signal sent from a device and, thus, deduce the existence
of this device and some meta-data. For instance, neighbours
of Petra may observe the signals from her sensors and make
assumptions about her health conditions from this. As counter-
measures the apartment could be shielded or the signal strength
of the sensors could be reduced. While shielding the apartment
is too expensive, reducing the signal strength, however, could
have an impact on the data availability since some corners in
Petra’s apartment would not be covered.
Data conﬁdentiality means that a third party cannot interpret
the received signals. Cryptographic methods and authentica-
tion are often used to assure data conﬁdentiality. Countermea-
sures when threats occur could use a different cryptographic
method or authentication protocol. However, using a different
cryptographic method could have a negative impact on the
performance or battery consumption.
For a numeric example, here denoted as Example 1, we
use the following variables: qS1 is the value for observability
TABLE III: The 11-value scale for ˜qS2 of Example 1
˜qS2
Description
10
not observable outside apartment
9
barely observable in adjacent apartments; cannot be inter-
preted
8
barely observable in adjacent apartments; need advanced
equipment to interpret
7
observable in parts of adjacent apartments, but not beyond
6
well observable in adjacent apartments, but not beyond
5
observable in range > 30m; on street
4
observable in range > 50m on street
3
observable in range > 100m on street
2
observable on street from running car
1
observable through wide-range network
0
n/a
inside the apartment; qS2 is the value for observability outside
the apartment; qS3 is the value for conﬁdentiality; qS4 is the
value for availability; qQ1 is the value for bandwidth; qQ2 is
the value for battery consumption; and qC are other mitigation
costs. Recall that the value of qi indicates how far a given
requirement is from the ideal fulﬁlment, where 1 is complete
fulﬁlment of the requirement. We use the following cases:
I) the base case, i.e., the apartment is not shielded, rather
simple encryption algorithms and authentication protocols are
used, and sensors transmit at normal power; II) shielding the
apartment; III) reducing transmission power; IV) using differ-
ent encryption algorithm; and V) using different authentication
protocol.
As outlined in in Section II-B, for objective assessment we
need to establish a scale using n steps similarly to the Likert
scale. For an example, we present a possible scale for the
requirement ˜qS2 (observability outside apartment) on a scale
with 11 values in TABLE III. The value of ˜qS2 = 0 is marked
as not applicable to indicate that for observability outside the
apartment no situation is considered totally unacceptable. Note
that marking ˜qS2 = 0 implies q = 0 for this alternative, i.e.,
it would be marked as totally unacceptable.
In an experiment, we assessed the values for ˜qSi=1...4,
˜qQi=1...2, and ˜qQC by using a rough estimate. We also assigned
values for the weights wi using intuition; we are aware that
these values need to be assessed more thoroughly at a later
stage. The assessment values, weights, and results for ˆqi and
qtotal are shown in TABLE II for the logarithmic approach
from eq. (3). We also applied the linear approach from eq. (2)
to the same data. Both results for qtotal are visualised in Fig. 7.
In our example we see that the logarithmic approach and the
linear approach show similar behaviour with respect to ranking

104
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
I
II
III
IV
V
Fig. 8: Visualising the results from Example 2. The dark blue
bars represent the results using the logarithmic function eβ, as
shown in eq. (3) while the light blue bars represent the results
using the linear function eα, as shown in eq. (2).
TABLE IV: Example 2 for applying the ASSET framework
using the logarithmic approach from eq. (3)
qi
S1
S2
S3
S4
Q1
Q2
C
qtotal
wi
1
1
2
1
1
1.5
1
P = 8.5
Case I
7
6
8
9
8
9
10
0.919
Case II
7
6
4
9
8
9
9
0.850
Case III
7
5
4
1
1
8
9
0.633
Case IV
7
5
3
9
7
7
8
0.789
Case V
7
6
4
9
6
8
8
0.827
the alternatives. However, the logarithmic approach results in
higher values and less differences for the values in-between.
In this particular example, a combination of cases III and IV,
gives the best result while case II delivers the lowest result,
which is reasonable.
B. Assessment of Changes in Time
As Example 2 we use the part of the storyline where Petra
is taking a stroll in the park. We assume that her sensors
are connected wirelessly to her smartphone in its function as
a PCH, and the PCH is communicating through a wireless
network with the health care infrastructure through a public
wireless network offered by a telephony provider. Further, we
assume that her smartphone can connect using a WLAN.
In this example, we use different deﬁnitions for qS1 and qS1
by using the observability of the sensors and the PCH, respec-
tively. We take into account effects for wide area networks that
indicate that battery consumption is higher when the signal
strength from the base station is weak or the connection is
lost.
For a numeric example we use the following variables: qS1
is the value for observability of the sensors; qS2 is the value for
observability of the PCH; qS3 is the value for conﬁdentiality;
qS4 is the value for availability; qQ1 is the value for bandwidth;
qQ2 is the value for battery consumption; and qC are other
mitigation costs. We use the following cases from the storyline
of Scenario A: I) walking alone in the park; II) meeting Linda;
III) loosing connection; IV) connect to open, mobile WLAN;
and V) using Linda’s PCH as communication channel.
In an experiment, as above, we assessed the values for
˜qSi=1...4, ˜qQi=1...2, and ˜qC by using a rough estimate and
assigned values for the weights wi using intuition. The assess-
ment values ˜qi, weights, and qtotal are shown in TABLE IV
for the logarithmic approach from eq. (3). We also applied the
Fig. 9: The Adaptive Security concept, adapted for the IoT by
Abie [24].
linear approach from eq. (2) to the same data. Both results for
qtotal are visualised in Fig. 8.
In this example we see how the security situation changes
due to changes of the context (I–II–III), i.e., when Petra meets
Linda or Petra looses connection. This example also shows
that the assessment can give a hint which one of two possible
actions (IV or V) would promise a better security situation.
VI. APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK TO ADAPTIVE SECURITY
Abie and Balasingham [2] deﬁne the term adaptive security
as “a security solution that learns, and adapts to changing envi-
ronment dynamically, and anticipates unknown threats without
sacriﬁcing too much of the efﬁciency, ﬂexibility, reliability, and
security of the IoT system”. Abie and Balasingham present the
Adaptive Risk Management (ARM) framework that is based
on a feedback loop known from cybernetics [22] with the ﬁve
measures (i) identify, (ii) analyse, (iii) plan, (iv) track, and
(v) control. This results in four steps in the adaptation loop,
aligned to ISO/IEC 27005:2008 [10] and the Plan–Do–Check–
Act (PDCA) model of ISO/IEC 27001:2005 [23].
Abie [24] presented a functional description on the concept
of adaptive security for a message-oriented infrastructure;
he adapted this concept to the IoT, as shown in Fig. 9.
He identiﬁed the following functionality to be essential for
adaptive security to be implemented: a) being self-aware using
a feedback loop and a history database; b) being context-
aware using sensors and feedback from other nodes in the IoT;
c) using security metrics to process the data from the sensors
and the other nodes; d) using risk and threat estimation and
prediction; e) using security metrics as deﬁned by Savola et al.
[19]; f) using methods such as Bayesian networks [25], game
theory, Markov chains, etc. to support the threat estimation
and prediction; g) using a decision making module to enforce
appropriate security and privacy level; and h) communicating
data to other nodes in the IoT.
A. Integrating the Estimation Function to Adaptive Security
In the adaptive security concept, the Monitor receives data
from sensors, detectors, and other sources that are further
used in the Analyser/Learner to make adaptive decisions. In
this context, the ASSET evaluation framework can be used to

105
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 10: Integration of the estimation framework into the
adaptive security model.
provide the ground truth data a) to train the learning algorithms
employed in the evaluation loop, and b) to evaluate whether
the behaviour of the adaptive algorithms is reasonable.
For this we follow the following recipe: We use the sto-
rylines similarly as done in Section V where we assess the
values qi for all useful cases that can appear and calculate
q with the suitable weights. On the other hand, the Monitor
receives k measured values from diverse sensors and detectors.
These measurements are denoted as sk.
We postulate a function u(sk) that ideally is designed such
that u(sk) = q for q as deﬁned in eq. (1) for all relevant
situations from the scenarios. In that way, using the function
u, the input from the sensors and detectors will generate the
same value as the assessment suggests. Alternatively, we can
postulate functions ui(sk) where ui(sk) = qi for all relevant
situations. It is intended that the function ui will generate the
same value for each partial product as the assessment suggests.
The functions u(sk) and ui(sk) could be instantiated in
a learning phase. However, the adaptive security model can
also handle this dynamically, so that the deﬁnition of these
functions can vary over time.
The evaluation of the functions u(sk), respectively ui(sk),
will be handled in the Analyser and Learner components using
regression, Bayesian networks, game theory, or similar. On
the basis of the evaluated values from these functions, the
Adaptor takes the necessary decisions. Fig. 10 illustrates how
the estimation function can be integrated into the adaptive
security model.
Based on the sets of system states the assessment of the
values q, qSi, qQi, and qC is performed using a panel of users
and specialists. This is shown on the right side of Fig. 10.
These values are used to calibrate the estimation model. When
the estimation function is established, these values can also
be used to be compared with the estimation function for
validation purposes. On the left side of Fig. 10, a part of
the adaptation loop is shown with the components Monitor,
Analyzer, and Adaptor. The Monitor component retrieves data
from sensors and adaptors to a set of measured parameters.
Using the estimation model, the Analyzer performs its tasks,
and forwards the calculated values to the Adaptor component.
B. Evaluation Methods
For the purpose of evaluating the behaviour of the adaptive
security methods we intend to employ the scenarios and
storylines presented in Section V above together with imple-
mentations in a lab [26], simulation, and formal reasoning
[27]. In an evaluation, we will go through each situation of
the storylines, and assess or calculate the values q, qSi, qQi,
qC, u(sk), and ui(sk) as necessary.
Using a lab one could build all necessary equipment that
contains all necessary functionality. According to the evalu-
ation method, one will go through all states and situations
deﬁned by the storyline and assess or calculate all relevant
values according to our framework. Thereafter, the adaptation
algorithm will be applied, resulting in new states that are
evaluated by assessing and calculating the relevant values.
Comparing the calculated values u(sk), and ui(sk) after each
adaptation step with the desired and assessed values for q,
qSi, qQi, and qC will give evidence on the behaviour of
the adaptation algorithm. The goal is to evaluate whether
the behaviour of the adaptation loop is close to the “right”
decisions deduced from the assessment.
Note that in the absence of a lab, simulations or the use
of formal methods can be considered. Here, instead of imple-
menting the devices in real hardware the essential functionality
is implemented in a model, and simulation and model checking
techniques are used [27], [28].
VII. DISCUSSION AND RELATED WORK
Our framework supports the evaluation of security solutions
and provides a means to assess data for development and
calibration of the estimation model. In this section, we discuss
several issues regarding our framework. We also relate our
work to frameworks that are described in the literature.
A. Issues and Concerns
The estimation model’s design and the function u(sk) are
not the focus here, but our framework can calibrate an esti-
mation model. In principle, methods from machine learning,
such as regression analysis, Bayesian networks, fuzzy logic,
or game theory can be used to develop the function u(sk)
introduced in Section VI. The assessed data will be used as
training data while only the measurable data from sensors will
be used in the adaptive security concept.
Using this concept, the estimation model and the function
u(sk) will respond with a sufﬁciently correct estimate as long
as the particular case has been part of the scenarios and
storylines used in the assessment. Cases that are not covered in
the assessment can still be estimated, but we cannot predict the
appropriateness of the estimate. Thus, the framework needs to
monitor continuously whether all relevant cases are covered,

106
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and reﬁne the estimation model with new assessments when
missing cases are discovered.
In contrast to the adjustment of the estimation model, the
evaluation of the function u(sk) can be performed in near real-
time. Depending on the estimation principle, the evaluation can
be done using partial evaluation when only a few parameters
are updated at a time. Metrics for evaluation of such estimation
models can be found in the literature for the chosen estimation
principle [29].
One concern of our assessment model is that we use human
assessment, which introduces subjectivity into the assessment.
While it is viable to check objectively whether a system state
fulﬁls a catalogue of guidelines or requirements, the severity
of deviations from the ideal state are subjective. For instance,
in healthcare applications, patients or health personnel might
need to make choices whether to accept deﬁciencies in privacy
or security to use a service.
There are assessment methods that make use of evaluation
panels consisting of both laymen and experts in other applica-
tion areas. For example, the estimation of video and audio
quality [11] can be performed using subjective evaluations
with user panels where each panel member evaluates content
under well-deﬁned conditions. Another example is the evalua-
tion of the quality of open source software [15] where methods
using a user-based rating have been related to more objective
methods. It has been shown that the subjective methods give
an appropriate estimate of the software quality, despite their
simplicity [16]. Hence, we argue that subjective assessment
can be applied also for security, privacy, QoS, and costs.
In healthcare applications, the balance between security, pri-
vacy, and QoS needs to be addressed. For instance, non-critical
information could be made available with lower security to
a user or security could be lowered when emergency access
to the medical data is necessary. Our assessment framework
can address such issues by modelling these as cases into
the scenarios and storylines. The evaluation will then show
whether the qtotal is within acceptable borders.
Similarly, our assessment method is also suitable to assess
alternative security methods for speciﬁc target groups, such
as people with disabilities. For instance, Scenario A could be
extended by Petra using an alternative authentication method,
e.g., the one described by Fuglerud and Dale [30].
B. Security Metrics
Security metrics [31] provide a comprehensive approach
to measuring risk, threats, operational activities, and the ef-
fectiveness of data protection in software systems. They also
provide the means to compare different solutions and obtain
evidence about the performance of operational security in
adaptive security [32]. Some often-used metrics include the
number and frequency of vulnerabilities or actual attacks.
These are based on appropriate security and privacy goals.
Savola and Abie [33] present a methodology for developing
security metrics using a risk-driven process; this starts from an
analysis of threat and vulnerability of the system and aims to
achieve a collection of security metrics and related measure-
ment architecture. This concept has been extended to include
adaptive security management for healthcare applications [19].
Weiß et al. [34] propose security metrics built on a risk man-
agement approach. Jafari et al. [35] develop security metrics to
assess security posture of healthcare organisations. Abie and
Balasingham [2] integrate security metrics into the validation
of risk-based adaptive security for deployment in the IoT
under changing threat models. Our work complements these
proposals with a scenario-based framework for the assessment
and validation of context-aware adaptive security solutions.
The security metrics described by Weiß et al. and Jafari et al.
are well suited as objective data described in Section II-C3.
C. Security Evaluation Frameworks
Frameworks for evaluating security and privacy in eHealth
include a Common Criteria framework for the evaluation of
information technology systems security [36], a framework
for information security evaluation [37], a requirement-centric
framework for information security evaluation [38], a scenario-
based framework for the security evaluation of software archi-
tecture [39], and the OWASP risk rating methodology [40].
Recently, Shoniregun et al. [41] proposed a uniﬁed security
evaluation framework for healthcare information systems by
exploring the solutions and technologies currently available
for evaluating security and privacy problems in such systems.
The authors acknowledged the limitations of nearly all major
efforts to measure or assess security such as Trusted Computer
System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), Information Technol-
ogy Security Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC), Systems Security
Engineering Capability Maturity Model (SSE-CMM), and
Common Criteria. The authors also reviewed approaches to
evaluation of healthcare information security and privacy, such
as standards-based, privacy policy-based, ontology-based, se-
curity and privacy metrics-based, and model-based approaches
to security and privacy evaluation.
Torjusen et al. [28] present a formal approach to veriﬁcation
of an adaptive security framework for the IoT, with integration
of run-time veriﬁcation enablers in the feedback adaptation
loop and the instantiation of the resulting framework with
Coloured Petri Nets for formally evaluating and validating
self-adaptive security behaviour. Our work complements this
concept by providing a scenario-based assessment to convey
the design requirements.
D. eHealth Evaluation Frameworks
There are multiple evaluation frameworks for security and
privacy in eHealth available, including the analysis of different
parts, such as patient monitoring systems or electronic health
record (EHR) systems. Note that an EHR can be part of the IoT
in the sense that it is the data sink in a heath care organisation.
Fern´andez-Alem´an et al. [42] conducted a comparative
literature review of the security and privacy of the current
EHR systems based on ISO 27799 [43]. They identiﬁed and
analysed critical security and privacy aspects of EHR systems,
such as the need for harmonisation of compliance standards to

107
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
resolve possible inconsistencies and conﬂicts among them, the
use of efﬁcient encryption scheme for the acquisition, develop-
ment and maintenance of information systems, access control,
communication and operational management, and the security
of human resources. They have also discovered that although
most EHR systems deﬁned security controls these arent fully
deployed in actual tools. Note also that their emphasis is not
on wireless communication which is often used in the IoT. The
research framework by Fern´andez-Alem´an et al. is based on a
literature review that is static by nature, while our framework
is able to assess values that change dynamically.
Malin et al. [44] described the problems, perspectives and
recent advances in biomedical data privacy by illustrating the
space of data privacy in the biomedical domain as multi-
disciplinary; it crosses ethical, legal, and technical boundaries.
This demonstrates that appropriate socio-technical solutions
can be deﬁned for emerging biomedical systems that can
balance privacy and data utility and system usability. At the
same time this highlights cloud computing as new computing,
high-throughput technology that creates new challenges to
privacy that biomedical community will need to handle in the
future. Malin et al.’s work addresses more policies in different
domains than assessing the security and privacy characteristics.
Kierkegaard [45] highlights the beneﬁts and the key con-
cerns of a centralised supranational health network that allows
access to health information anyplace and anytime by en-
hancing efﬁciency, effectiveness, accuracy, completeness and
accessibility, and generally improving the quality of healthcare
services. These beneﬁts lead to an increase of the amount
of information collected, processed, ﬁltered, transferred or
retained. In in turn, this increases the potential abuse and
privacy threats to such information. Thus, privacy and data
protection need to be embedded within the infrastructure. Note
that a potential single point of failure of such an infrastructure
is a major concern. Also Kierkegaard’s work addresses more
policies in different domains than assessing the security and
privacy characteristics.
Boxwala et al. [46] proposed statistical and machine learn-
ing methods to help identify suspicious, i.e., potentially in-
appropriate, access to EHRs using logistic regression training
and support vector machine models and concluded that such
methods can play an important role in helping privacy ofﬁcers
detect suspicious access to EHRs. While their methods and
ours can predict suspicious accesses (threats), our framework
goes further by identifying a set of security solutions that
mitigate these threats and a set of system states that represent
the dynamic context in which the patient monitoring system
operates and adapts specialised to the type of scenarios and
story lines used.
Peleg et al. [47] presented a framework for situation-based
access control for privacy management through modelling
using object-process methodology to structure the scenarios
and conceive a situation-based access control model. The
framework is intended for traditional role-based access control.
Their work and ours are similar in expressing scenarios of
patients data access as a basis of preserving of patients security
and privacy. They differ in that their solution is access control
speciﬁc while ours is applicable to any security or quality
of service requirements. The framework by Peleg et al. is
qualitative while we have added quantitative components in
our framework.
Note that the above described frameworks by Boxwala et al.
and Peleg et al. can produce values that can be used as input
values qi for our framework, as described in Section II-C3.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We presented an evaluation framework for adaptive security
to be applied for the IoT in eHealth applications. We high-
lighted the role of the scenarios in the evaluation framework.
The framework is based on a generic system model, security
and QoS requirements for eHealth applications, and a generic
assessment framework. Further, the framework uses sets of
states that are used to estimate how well the security and QoS
requirements are fulﬁlled.
For evaluation purposes we presented three scenarios, a
home scenario, a hospital scenario, and an emergency sce-
nario. These scenarios are annotated with requirements and
outlined as storylines which can be used to evaluate adaptive
security algorithms. Our evaluation methodology is designed
to compare results from lab experiments and simulations with
the assessment by human observers.
The scenarios cover multiple core scenarios representing
a range of eHealth IoT situations. These address speciﬁc
requirements related to the context, the data-communication,
the devices, and the actions of the involved actors. The
core scenarios are speciﬁc to the eHealth case, and make it
possible to identify relevant cases that need to be evaluated,
such as situations where IoT devices need to be removed or
disconnected, the use of ample communication channels, or
the impact of mobility.
Storylines for a patient with chronic diseases have been
described and analysed. In the future, the overall scenarios,
as well as the underlying core scenarios and storylines will be
used in the ASSET project to evaluate the adaptive security
algorithms. We posit that the framework, methodologies, and
scenarios presented here can be used as a blueprint for
evaluations of adaptive algorithms beyond the analysis of the
adaptive algorithms of the ASSET project.
IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented here has been carried out in the project
ASSET – Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of Things
in eHealth (2012–2015) funded by the Research Council of
Norway in the VERDIKT programme. We wish to thank
our colleagues involved in this project for helpful discussions
that made this study possible. Particularly, we want to thank
Ragnar Hauge for discussions while developing this work.
We also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for valuable
comments.

108
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES
[1] W. Leister, M. Hamdi, H. Abie, and S. Poslad, “An
evaluation scenario for adaptive security in eHealth,” in
PESARO 2014 – The Fourth International Conference
on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex
Systems and Applications.
IARIA, 2014, pp. 6–11.
[2] H. Abie and I. Balasingham, “Risk-based adaptive se-
curity for smart IoT in eHealth,” in BODYNETS 2012
– 7th International Conference on Body Area Networks.
ACM, 2012.
[3] I. F. Alexander and N. Maiden, Eds., “Scenarios, Stories,
Use Cases: Through the Systems Development Life-
Cycle”.
John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[4] S. Faily and I. Flechais, “A meta-model for usable secure
requirements engineering,” in SESS – ICSE Workshop on
Software Engineering for Secure Systems.
Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2010.
[5] H. Mouratidis and P. Giorgini, “Security attack testing
(SAT)–testing the security of information systems at
design time,” Information Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, Jan.
2007, pp. 1166–1183.
[6] ITU-T,
“Overview
of
the
Internet
of
Things,”
International
Telecommunication
Union,
Recom-
mendation
Y.2060
(06/2012),
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/recommendations/
rec.aspx?rec=11559 [Accessed: 13. Nov. 2014].
[7] O. Vermesan, P. Friess, P. Guillemin, H. Sundmaeker,
M. Eisenhauer, K. Moessner, F. L. Gall, and P. Cousin,
“Internet of things strategic research and innovation
agenda,” in Internet of Things–Global Technological and
Societal Trends.
River Publishers, 2011, pp. 7–151.
[8] K. Habib and W. Leister, “Adaptive security for the In-
ternet of Things reference model,” in Proceeding of Nor-
wegian Information Security Conference, NISK 2013,
C. Rong and V. Oleshchuk, Eds., 2013, pp. 13–24.
[9] W. Leister, H. Abie, and S. Poslad, “Deﬁning the
ASSET
scenarios,”
Norsk
Regnesentral,
NR
Note
DART/17/2012, Dec. 2012.
[10] “ISO/IEC 27005:2008 Information technology–Security
techniques–Information security risk management,” In-
ternational Organization for Standardization and Interna-
tional Electrotechnical Commission, standard, 2008.
[11] W. Leister, S. Boudko, and T. H. Røssvoll, “Adaptive
video streaming through estimation of subjective video
quality,” International Journal on Advances in Systems
and Measurements, vol. 4, no. 1&2, 2011, pp. 109–
121. [Online]. Available: http://www.iariajournals.org/
systems and measurements/ [Accessed: 1. Nov 2014].
[12] R. Likert, “A technique for the measurement of atti-
tudes.” Archives of Psychology, vol. 22, no. 140, 1932,
pp. 1–55.
[13] A. Nevill and A. Lane, “Why self-report likert scale
data should not be log-transformed,” Journal of Sports
Sciences, vol. 25, no. 1, 2007, pp. 1–2.
[14] J. Perl and S. Russell, “Bayesian networks,” in Handbook
of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, M. Arbib, Ed.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003, pp. 157–160.
[15] A. Wasserman, M. Pal, and C. Chan, “The business
readiness rating model: an evaluation framework for open
source,” in Proc. EFOSS Workshop, Como, Italy, Jun.
2006.
[16] A.-K. Groven, K. Haaland, R. Glott, and A. Tannenberg,
“Security measurements within the framework of quality
assessment models for free/libre open source software,”
in Proc. Fourth European Conference on Software Ar-
chitecture: Companion Volume, ser. ECSA ’10.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 229–235.
[17] W. Leister, T. Fretland, and I. Balasingham, “Security
and authentication architecture using MPEG-21 for
wireless
patient
monitoring
systems,”
International
Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 2, no. 1, 2009,
pp. 16–29. [Online]. Available: http://www.iariajournals.
org/security/ [Accessed: 1. Nov 2014].
[18] W. Leister, T. Schulz, A. Lie, K. H. Grythe, and I. Bal-
asingham, “Quality of service, adaptation, and security
provisioning in wireless patient monitoring systems,” in
Biomedical Engineering Trends in electronics, commu-
nications and software.
INTECH, 2011, pp. 711–736.
[19] R. M. Savola, H. Abie, and M. Sihvonen, “Towards
metrics-driven adaptive security management in e-health
IoT applications,” in BODYNETS 2012 – 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Body Area Networks. ACM, 2012.
[20] J. Hernandez, M. E. Hoque, and R. W. Picard, “Mood
meter: large-scale and long-term smile monitoring sys-
tem,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2012 Emerging Technologies,
ser. SIGGRAPH ’12. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012,
pp. 15:1–15:1.
[21] R. M. Savola and H. Abie, “Metrics-driven security
objective decomposition for an e-health application with
adaptive security management,” in ASPI 2013 – In-
ternational Workshop on Adaptive Security & Privacy
management for the Internet of Things.
ACM, 2013.
[22] W. R. Ashby, “An Introduction to Cybernetics”. London:
Chapman & Hall, 1957.
[23] ISO, “ISO/IEC 27001:2005 Information technology –
Security techniques – Information security management
systems – Requirements,” International Organization for
Standardization and International Electrotechnical Com-
mission, standard, 2005.
[24] H. Abie, “Adaptive security and trust management for
autonomic message-oriented middleware,” in IEEE Sym-
posium on Trust, Security and Privacy for Pervasive
Applications (TSP 2009).
Macau, China: IEEE, 2009,
pp. 810–817.
[25] J. Pearl, “Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems:
Networks of Plausible Inference. Representation and
Reasoning Series”.
Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[26] Y. B. Woldegeorgis, H. Abie, and M. Hamdi, “A testbed
for adaptive security for IoT in eHealth,” in ASPI 2013 –
International Workshop on Adaptive Security & Privacy
management for the Internet of Things.
ACM, 2013.

109
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[27] W. Leister, J. Bjørk, R. Schlatte, E. B. Johnsen,
and A. Griesmayer, “Exploiting model variability in
ABS to verify distributed algorithms,” International
Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol. 5,
no. 1&2, 2012, pp. 55–68. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/ [Accessed:
1. Nov 2014].
[28] A. B. Torjusen, H. Abie, E. Paintsil, D. Trcek, and
A. Skomedal, “Towards run-time veriﬁcation of adaptive
security for IoT in eHealth,” in Proc. 2014 European
Conf. on Software Architecture Workshops, ser. ECSAW
’14.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 4:1–4:8.
[29] B. G. Marcot, “Metrics for evaluating performance and
uncertainty of Bayesian network models,” Ecological
Modelling, vol. 230, 2012, pp. 50–62.
[30] K. S. Fuglerud and Ø. Dale, “Secure and inclusive
authentication with a talking mobile one-time-password
client,” IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 9, no. 2, 2011,
pp. 27–34.
[31] S. C. Payne, “A guide to security metrics,” SANS In-
stitute Information Security Reading Room, whitepaper,
June 2006.
[32] A. Evesti, H. Abie, and R. M. Savola, “Security measur-
ing for self-adaptive security,” in Proc. 2014 European
Conf. on Software Architecture Workshops, ser. ECSAW
’14.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 5:1–5:7.
[33] R. M. Savola and H. Abie, “Development of measurable
security for a distributed messaging system,” Intl.
Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 2, no. 4, 2009, pp.
358–380. [Online]. Available: http://www.iariajournals.
org/security/ [Accessed: 1. Nov 2014].
[34] S. Weiß, O. Weissmann, and F. Dressler, “A comprehen-
sive and comparative metric for information security,” in
Proc. IFIP Intl. Conf. on Telecommunication Systems,
Modeling, and Analysis 2005 (ICTSM2005), Dallas, TX,
USA, 2005, pp. 1–10.
[35] S. Jafari, F. Mtenzi, R. Fitzpatrick, and B. O’Shea,
“Security metrics for e-Healthcare information systems:
A domain speciﬁc metrics approach,” Intl. Journal of
Digital Society (IJDS), vol. 1, no. 4, 2010, pp. 238–245.
[36] R. Kruger and J. H. P. Eloff, “A common criteria
framework for the evaluation of information technology
systems security,” in Information Security in Research
and Business, Proceedings of the IFIP TC11 13th In-
ternational Conference on Information Security (SEC
’97), 14-16 May 1997, Copenhagen, Denmark, ser. IFIP
Conference Proceedings, L. Yngstr¨om and J. Carlsen,
Eds., vol. 92.
Chapman & Hall, 1997, pp. 197–209.
[37] R. von Solms, H. van de Haar, S. H. von Solms, and
W. J. Caelli, “A framework for information security
evaluation.” Information & Management, vol. 26, no. 3,
1994, pp. 143–153.
[38] R. Savola, “A requirement centric framework for infor-
mation security evaluation,” in Advances in Information
and Computer Security, First International Workshop
on Security, IWSEC 2006, Kyoto, Japan, October 23-
24, 2006, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, H. Yoshiura, K. Sakurai, K. Rannenberg, Y. Mu-
rayama, and S. Kawamura, Eds., vol. 4266.
Springer,
2006, pp. 48–59.
[39] A. Alkussayer and W. Allen, “A scenario-based frame-
work for the security evaluation of software architecture,”
in 3rd IEEE Intl. Conf. on Computer Science and In-
formation Technology (ICCSIT), vol. 5, July 2010, pp.
687–695.
[40] “The
OWASP
risk
rating
methodology.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP
Risk Rating Methodology
[Accessed:
17
November
2014].
[41] C. Shoniregun, K. Dube, and F. Mtenzi, “Towards a
uniﬁed security evaluation framework for e-healthcare
information systems,” in Electronic Healthcare Infor-
mation Security, ser. Advances in Information Security.
Springer US, 2010, vol. 53, pp. 151–172.
[42] J. L. Fern´andez-Alem´an, I. C. Se˜nor, P.
´A. O. Lo-
zoya, and A. Toval, “Security and privacy in electronic
health records: A systematic literature review,” Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, vol. 46, no. 3, 2013, pp. 541–
562.
[43] “ISO/IEC 27799:2008. Health Informatics–Information
security management in health using ISO/IEC 27002”.
Geneva,
Switzerland:
International
Organization
for
Standardization, 2008.
[44] B. A. Malin, K. E. Emam, and C. M. O’Keefe, “Biomed-
ical data privacy: problems, perspectives, and recent
advances,” JAMIA, vol. 20, no. 1, 2013, pp. 2–6.
[45] P. Kierkegaard, “Electronic health record: Wiring europes
healthcare,” Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 27,
no. 5, 2011, pp. 503 – 515.
[46] A. A. Boxwala, J. Kim, J. M. Grillo, and L. Ohno-
Machado, “Using statistical and machine learning to help
institutions detect suspicious access to electronic health
records,” JAMIA, vol. 18, no. 4, 2011, pp. 498–505.
[47] M. Peleg, D. Beimel, D. Dori, and Y. Denekamp,
“Situation-based access control: Privacy management via
modeling of patient data access scenarios,” Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, vol. 41, no. 6, 2008, pp. 1028–
1040.
[48] M. Peleg, S. Keren, and Y. Denekamp, “Mapping
computerized clinical guidelines to electronic medical
records: Knowledge-data ontological mapper (KDOM),”
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 41, no. 1, 2008,
pp. 180–201.

