256
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
An Integrated System for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) 
 
Barbara Essendorfer, Eduardo Monari, Heiko Wanning 
Fraunhofer IITB 
{essendorfer, monari, wanning}@iitb.fhg.de
 
 
Abstract—Connecting systems that are responsible 
for gathering information of any kind (e.g., images 
(optical/infra red/radar), video streams, vehicle tracks, 
etc.), processing stations (merging images series, 
stabilizing videos, etc.)  and exploitation systems in a 
large (e.g., multinational) environment is a difficult 
task. Currently those stations tend to be operating 
independently irrespective of the vast amount of other 
systems available.  
As cooperation between different nations and 
different operating entities (civil and military) is 
increasingly important the sharing of information to 
generate a common awareness is vital. 
This paper describes a solution towards this goal by 
introducing a system capable of dealing with the 
ingestion and distribution of data and the fusion 
perspectives/possibilities that arise when a multitude of 
stations report a single event from many viewpoints. 
 
Keywords: 
client-server 
architecture, 
sensor/ 
exploitation/ information system, information/ data 
fusion, ISR 
 
1. Introduction 
 
ISR (Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance) 
in 
civil 
and 
military 
environments is 
often 
accomplished using separated stove-piped systems, 
therefore 
data 
accumulated 
from 
multiple 
heterogeneous sensors can’t be shared and the 
capabilities to fulfill missions are limited. Services, 
like data/information collection and analysis, are not 
performed by the best but by the only system 
available, 
resource 
management 
is 
therefore 
suboptimal. To overcome this problem a concept to 
share data has been developed and implemented: A 
Coalition Shared Data (CSD) Server is used to store 
standardized data. It allows the dissemination 
according to user requirements, network and security 
settings. Tasking elements, sensor and exploitation 
systems store relevant metadata and products in 
common (standardized) formats in a shared database. 
The data model and interfaces of the database are  
 
 
based on established military standards (STANAGs). 
Instead of “only” collecting and distributing data an 
integrated data processing approach also should 
evaluate 
the 
incoming 
information, 
preselect 
interesting events for the human operator and, by 
using fusion algorithms, summarize complementary 
information and sort out redundant data to reduce the 
amount of information. This fusion aspect will be 
shown exemplary in the domain of image and video 
fusion. 
The CSD concept was deployed in a rather restricted 
environment where legacy systems are in place that 
have to be reliable and secure. These systems are 
developed by different nations and by different 
companies. The challenge in such a context is “real” 
interoperability. To achieve this  some constraints 
were put externally on properties of the final 
architecture (e.g. using STANAGs for the description 
of 
data, 
meta 
data 
and 
the 
client-server 
communication “language”), that our solution had no 
way to circumvent. Therefore the result and described 
work here is the output of those design decisions 
giving in our opinion the best possible solution 
solving the given problem under the mentioned 
restrictions. The design and implementation phases 
were and still are a long continuing process. 
This paper is based on a conference paper that 
focused on border surveillance [1]. Here not only 
civil applications are taken into account, but the full 
aspect of civil and military ISR. 
It is structured as follows: in Section 2 the task of 
information sharing within ISR is introduced and 
described. In the following section, the requirements 
for standardized data formats, which are highly 
important for information sharing, are discussed. 
Next, in Section 4, our system architecture for 
integrated ISR systems is presented. Finally, 
exemplary deployments of the developed system, 
which have been used in different military exercises 

257
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
and demonstrations on civil security are described. 
 
2. Information Sharing within ISR 
 
ISR are different aspects of information gathering 
with human and technical sources to enhance 
situation awareness. This happens on different 
organizational and administrative levels.  
Within (civil) surveillance on a local level, immediate 
measures have to be found to enable a quick and 
efficient reaction to an imminent danger. On a 
regional level relevant information has to be shared to 
be able to exercise precautionary measures and avoid 
an escalation of a crisis. If the local authority is not 
able to handle the crisis, reinforcement has to be 
provided. If a crisis affects more than one region or 
even country then national and transnational 
decisions have to be made and information has to be 
shared. 
Another (military) differentiation is information 
gathering on a tactical, functional or strategical level. 
On a tactical level decisions have to be made within 
operations based on information on current events 
and immediate decisions on an appropriate reaction 
have to be made (short term decisions). On a 
functional level situation awareness is generated to 
enable the planning of current military operations 
(mid term decisions). On a strategical level situation 
awareness 
is 
generated 
with 
security-relevant 
information to enable decision makers (on a political 
and military level) to predict long term developments 
in critical areas. 
The use of a mix of sensor and information systems is 
key to adequate situation awareness on the different 
levels. 
 
2.1 Integrated ISR Systems 
 
Within 
an 
integrated 
ISR 
system, 
disparate 
technologies that complement one another are 
installed, the interaction of the data output is 
essential.  
An integrated ISR system consists of sensors 
(technical systems and humans), exploitation systems 
(that might also be deployed as situational awareness 
displays) and external information systems. 
In Figure 1 a critical area, e.g. a border is monitored 
by a range of different sensor types. Those sensors 
deliver data to a surveillance unit (SU). However, the 
areas that are monitored intersect and data that is of 
interest for one surveillance unit may also be of 
interest for adjacent units. Our architecture allows the 
necessary data sharing and accommodation of 
additional 
information 
from 
external 
systems 
resulting in enhanced situation awareness. 
BSU1
BSU2
Sensor 
IR Video
Sensor 
Track
Sensor EO 
Image
Sensor IR 
Video
Sensor 
Sonar
Sensor 
SAR
Border
External 
Information 
System
BSU: Border Surveillance Unit
 
Figure 1: Surveillance System  
 
2.1.1 
Sensor Systems 
 
Sensor systems normally consist of the sensor and a 
ground station that does the primary data processing 
and possibly some exploitation. Combined sensor 
systems that consist of different sensors might use 
some sensors as triggers for others and only the 
secondary information is passed on to an “outside” 
exploitation system. Depending on the sensor type 
and the processing a proprietary (raw) data stream 
may be created. To observe different types of critical 
areas it is necessary to make use of different sensor 
types with differing ranges and tasks [2]:  
• 
Long-range surveillance conducted by space 
borne and airborne systems is of interest for an 
all-weather and 24 hour detection of threats that 
harm a wide area (e.g., oil slicks that indicate an 
attack on the environment and/or on nations 
resource supply). The sensors can deliver all 
kinds of imagery such as IR (infrared), EO 
(electro optical) and SAR (synthetic aperture 
radar) as well as motion imagery (video), 
SIGINT (signal intelligence) or radar data.  
• 
Airborne sensors, including the use of balloons 
or zeppelins can be used for medium-range 
surveillance. 
• 
Ground-based or seaborne sensors are mainly 
used for short-range surveillance. Real time 
information can be provided on critical areas, 
objects and people. Seaborne sensors can be 
installed above (cameras, radar) or under water 
(e.g., sonar, metal detection).  
The display of sensor data in a common picture only 
makes sense if the operator/analyst is able to interpret 

258
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
that information correctly. Raw sensor data have to 
be interpreted by specialists. Therefore sensor data 
are only provided on system, local or at the most the 
regional level. 
 
2.1.2 
Exploitation Systems 
 
Exploitation Systems are used for the exploitation of 
preproduced data. Exploitation can be done in 
different contexts and can be specific to the system, 
data type, area or task. For exploitation systems that 
work on products that are produced from multiple 
sensors it is important that data are available in an 
inter-coordinated data format (see section 4.2 for how 
it was implemented in our case). Exploited data 
normally already contain more enhanced information. 
Similar to the sensor data it has to be integrated 
adequately into a common picture. This type of 
information is of interest for upper decision bodies. 
Still some special expertise is needed to read and 
decide upon it. On a national level only the result of 
an analysis would be provided. The main effort on 
this level would be to fuse information from different 
sources. (more on fusion in section 3.3) 
 
2.1.3 
Information Systems 
 
Information systems are relevant for the rating/ 
evaluation of derived data and information. Weather 
data can give essential advice which product sources 
are of interest in certain circumstances, systems such 
as the “Schengen Information System” (SIS) provide 
data 
on 
detected 
persons 
or 
goods 
and 
databases/information services freely available on the 
Internet can provide background information for all 
kinds of questions (provided it is understood that this 
is in general low grade intelligence). Public 
information sources are subject of data protection and 
the usage of this data has to be legally defined across 
borders. The system type, structure, language and 
concepts that are used within those systems differ 
from region to region and nation to nation. This is 
why an integration and combined usage of such 
system information is extremely complicated. Apart 
from legal regulations, aspects of intelligent data 
discovery and sharing are subject to research and 
discussion here. 
 
2.2 Situation Awareness 
 
Situation awareness means that threats and suspicious 
behavior have to be perceived, the threat has to be 
understood and an appropriate reaction has to be 
performed [3]. To perceive threats, products from 
different sources (information systems, sensors, 
exploitation systems) have to be available. The data 
has to be accessible with respect to time and location 
of the product as well as to other decision-relevant 
(e.g., urgency) information. Relevant sources of 
knowledge 
should 
be 
incorporated. 
Integrated 
systems achieve enhanced situation awareness by 
developing a common picture of the tasked area. To 
support analysts, operators and decision makers it is 
important to integrate the correct i.e. temporally 
relevant information in this common picture in a 
user-friendly manner [4]. 
 
2.3 Information Fusion 
 
In general, the usage of multiple and heterogeneous 
sensors increases the possibilities and functionalities 
of the superior system and therefore improve the 
quality of the surveillance task. Especially for 
security applications (i.e. monitoring) state of the art 
multi-sensor-systems enable the surveillance of large 
areas with a reduced amount of manpower. 
On the other hand, large sensor networks produce a 
huge amount of information that the analysts and 
operators have to monitor. Therefore, automatic data 
processing and information fusion is an essential part 
of large distributed and multimodal surveillance 
systems. The highest benefit of implementing 
automatic image processing is achieved when the 
automatism attracts the operator’s attention on 
relevant 
events 
and 
situations 
only. 
Hereby, 
integrated data processing approaches evaluate the 
incoming information and preselect interesting events 
for the human operator. Motion detection algorithms 
for example lead to a reduction of the operator’s 
workload by generating indications of movement 
automatically and therefore allow the human operator 
to focus on areas of interest only. 
This clearly can be solved more robustly, when 
sensors of different modalities are incorporated (e.g., 
video cameras with a visual spectrum during the day 
and infrared spectrum at night). On the other hand, 
the usage of different sensor modalities requires the 
implementation of more complex schemes for 
information fusion. Implementing theses schemes 
will result in a higher level of information quality, 
since 
automatic 
sensor 
data 
processing 
and 
information 
fusion 
summarize 
complementary 
information and reduce the amount of redundant data.  
 

259
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
3. Architectural Aspects of Information 
Sharing 
 
As stated above, the surveillance of borders or areas 
of interest requires the co-ordination of many 
different agencies each with their own personnel, 
systems, assets and equipment.  
The task of information sharing in a time sensitive 
domain places requirements on the architecture. To 
be able to share data and information some aspects 
have to be taken into account:  
Information has to be reliable and secure: To be able 
to make the right decisions and react appropriately, 
information has to be reliable. Access to classified 
data has to be limited to entitled agencies and 
persons. To ensure the security of the data transfer 
and the protection against cyber attacks encryption 
and authentication techniques must be implemented. 
Also, user roles that include access levels can be used 
to restrict data access to authorized persons only. In 
addition it allows the display of only the relevant data 
to the right personnel (analyst, decision maker on a 
regional/national level etc.) avoiding information 
overload. 
Information has to be provided in time and at the 
right place: An adequate data transmission network is 
required (i.e. distributed architecture and standardized 
mechanisms to access data). At the first step 
databases at different locations only synchronize their 
meta data (“video clip from location x, time y, sensor 
z, showing i”) and not the full data (the video file 
itself) as this would mean shifting unnecessary data 
loads through out the network causing congestions.  
To integrate information systems with different 
semantics, 
intelligent 
methods 
of 
information 
retrieval have to be established. The annotation of 
information with metadata and ontologies enables 
semantic interoperability between the systems. 
To be able to access data in time at the right place 
data transmission between more than two systems has 
to be enabled. This leads to a distributed architecture 
and standardized mechanisms to access data. 
Databases at different locations have to be able to 
synchronize their information, without synchronizing 
the data as this would mean to shift unnecessary data 
loads through the network. 
To grant an easy and adaptable data access 
standardized 
data 
formats 
and 
data 
sharing 
mechanisms should be used. The data formats have to 
provide the right type of information which implies a 
detailed analysis of the application domain.  
 
3.1 Data formats for the ISR domain 
 
The previously described particularities of the 
domain make an adequate handling of the data 
necessary.  
Surveillance has to be weather, season and daytime 
independent. Sensor systems have to consider the 
various landscapes and it has to be possible to detect 
all kinds of threats. Thus different sensor types 
providing different data types have to be deployed.  
A mix of sensors has to be implemented. To survey 
an area at night time thermal sensors like infrared 
(passive or active) have to be installed, contrariwise 
these sensors are not built for hot weather. Metal 
detectors have to be deployed to register weapons and 
for gas or explosives olfactory sensors are of interest. 
To get an overall picture and assign surveillance 
products to an area and put them in a chronological 
context as well as to fuse data, it is important to 
provide metadata with the product. The requirements 
at that point depend on the overall architecture and 
the display, exploitation and fusion capabilities. 
Information on chronological and areal allocation of 
the product, the source and the coverage of the sensor 
as well as the product type and size should be 
mandatory. If the data is confidential congruent 
metadata has to be defined.  
Standardization agreements exist in the military 
domain as well as in the commercial world. NATO 
standards are of interest for ISR because of the dual 
use within military and civil ISR. Nations with 
heterogeneous information and sensor technology 
need to combine their efforts and achieve a common 
situational awareness. Most of the information is time 
sensitive and in both domains there are areas of 
graded interest.  
In the commercial world there are a number of 
standardization agreements but most of them are less 
binding and the commitment to those standards is 
dependent on the application domain.  
• 
Military standards 
For the storage and dissemination of digital data 
STANAG (Standardization Agreement) 4559 NSILI 
(NATO Standard ISR (Intelligence, Surveillance, 
Reconnaissance) Library Interface) is the standard 
interface for querying and accessing heterogeneous 
product libraries maintained by various nations. “The 
interface provides electronic search and retrieval 
capabilities for distributed users to find products from 

260
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
distributed libraries in support of, but not limited to, 
rapid mission planning and operation, strategic 
analysis, and intelligent battlefield preparation. The 
overall goal is for the users, who may be intelligence 
analysts, imagery analysts, cartographers, mission 
planners, simulations and operational users from 
NATO countries, to have timely access to distributed 
ISR information...” [5]. 
For data types like image, video, radar or tracks 
standardized formats exist and are in use (e.g., 
STANAG 4545 [6], STANAG 4609 [7] and 
STANAG 5516 [8]). For secondary information like 
the textual analysis of surveillance products report 
standards are defined.  
• 
Commercial Standards 
The OpenGIS® Catalogue Service [9] defined by the 
OGC (Open GIS Consortium) is a standard for data 
dissemination that concentrates on geospatial data, 
related services and resources. It was not designed for 
the surveillance area, but could be adapted. The 
functionalities are similar to the ones defined in the 
STANAG 4559 [5]. 
For digital image conservation or video compression 
there are many standards available. The usage 
depends on user and domain needs. For video the 
codices and container formats defined by the MPEG 
(Moving Pictures Experts Group) consortium are 
among the most popular ones. Here standards for 
video compression (MPEG-2/ MPEG-4) and the 
management of corresponding audio and collateral 
data (MPEG-4) as well as the handling of metadata 
(MPEG-7) are defined. For tracks the ASTERIX (All 
Purpose 
STructured 
Eurocontrol 
SuRveillance 
Information Exchange) Standard that is defined by 
Eurocontrol [11] is of interest. In the maritime sector 
the 
NMEA 
(National 
Marine 
Electronics 
Association) defined a standard that handles 
navigation data [10].  
It is necessary to consider using “the best of both 
worlds”. 
 
3.2 Data transmission 
 
The choice which medium (wired ethernet/ wireless) 
to use depends on: the number of connected 
sensors/sensor ground stations, their location in 
space, their mobility and the kind of transmitted data. 
Generally, if the required overall data rate is very 
high, wireless communications might have problems 
before a landline’s limit would be reached. Also, 
security aspects deserve closer attention when using a 
wireless connection, since it is easier for the man in 
the middle to listen in, provide false information or 
disrupt communication. The usage of cables which 
can be shielded much easier than the complete area of 
radar coverage bears a smaller risk in this regard. 
For the implementation an architecture was chosen 
with wired connections wherever possible, only a few 
sensors are connected via a radio link due to the vast 
distances covered and the prohibition to lay cables 
everywhere. 
 
4. An architecture for ISR 
 
As ISR systems need to consist of many components 
it is necessary to build a flexible and adaptive 
architecture. Once the system components (sensors, 
exploitation and information systems) are decided 
upon, it is necessary to establish a way of connecting 
them. This chapter will detail the “how” of data 
transfer, what network layout to use. It will explain 
what happens to the data, once they have left the 
originating sensor, and in what way they arrive at the 
desired destination (i.e. the analyst). 
For the integrated sensors and information sources 
converters have to be developed that translate the 
incoming data into a common data format. As can be 
seen in Figure 2 different proprietary data formats are 
converted into a standardized one, so that inquirers 
do not have to know the type of source (e.g., sonar, 
radar or infrared) the information is coming from, but 
can focus on the information itself. The architecture 
described here is based on these formats (resp. 
STANAG 4559) [5]. 
The standardized data is then transferred over the 
network to a local data server. Connected to the same 
network are exploitation systems taking in a filtered 
set of the provided information (depending on the 
tasking). By fusion and analysis they generate new 
additional information (e.g. reports) that is also stored 
in the data server(s). Situational awareness systems 
are able to display selected intelligence and can ask 
for additional information from sensors, exploitation 
or information systems to support decision makers. A 
detailed description of data dissemination with the 
shared database is explained within 4.1. 

261
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
 
Figure 2: Information sharing within a local 
architecture 
 
4.1 The Shared Database 
 
The middleware CORBA for the client-server 
communication was chosen due to its providing 
transparency in regards to object location, language, 
and 
implementation 
and 
its 
established 
and 
widespread proven stability and performance. The 
clients access the server using interfaces for the 
ingestion or retrieval of data (see Figure 3). If a 
product is stored in the database, the client hands 
over the metadata and the product itself to the 
database via the CreationMgr. To retrieve a product 
the client asks for the metadata via the CatalogMgr 
and is able to order the product if it is of interest for 
the user. Within the metadata all (for the domain) 
relevant aspects of the product are defined and 
queryable. Those parameters could be for example: 
location, time, speed, size, friend/foe, weather 
condition, certainty of the info, product type. 
 There are two different ways of retrieving data: 
• 
With the interactive query the user searches 
the database on aspects of the product (e.g. 
time, space, product type). A summary of 
the results is presented in list form on the 
screen and the relevant data sets can be 
marked for download in the next step. 
• 
With the subscription method the data query 
is transferred to the server once and 
continues running for a set time interval 
whereby the client is automatically notified 
whenever new incoming data sets fit the 
query parameters.  
 
Figure 3: Data ingest and retrieval with the client 
Synchronization of information is necessary to be 
able to share information along different levels and 
locations. To distribute information from the local 
network to all interconnected nodes, thereby reducing 
bandwidth 
usage 
and 
increasing 
stability, 
a 
decentralized setup is used. Here (see Figure 4) the 
regional servers/local network hubs (in white) collect 
the data from their directly connected information 
sources (in black), respectively the converters.  
 
Figure 4: Decentralized network 
 
Note, that sometimes (preferably always) several 
possible connections between regional servers exist, 
so that connection loss on one link does not mean the 
cut off of data sharing. This is especially important, 
since the connections are of varying quality and 
reliability (ranging from fluctuating small band 
wireless to high-speed cable). 
 The regional servers synchronize their respective 

262
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
metadata content among each other in times of 
otherwise low network usage but in a set minimum 
interval using the mentioned subscription method 
whereby server A plays the role of client when 
receiving data from server B. The original product 
data (e.g., images, movie clips of possibly high data 
volume) are kept only on the originating server. 
When a situation awareness system (in grey) wants to 
collect 
data 
from 
different 
sources 
scattered 
throughout the whole network, it uses its client to 
send a query to its local server which delivers the 
results by looking only at its own data base. Only 
when one or more of the results are specifically 
requested, a connection to the originating server is 
initiated where the potentially large files (e.g. videos) 
are transported across the network. 
This setup has the advantage of reducing the amount 
of data traffic on the overall network, because bigger 
data packets are only transferred on demand, not 
every time they are created. Also, the local servers 
serve as a backup in case of network or server 
failures.. That “complete reliance upon a single point 
is not always required” [12] was the idea that started 
the ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Network) in the 1960s, which later evolved into the 
Internet.  
This system is fully scalable, i.e. the size of each 
‘subnet’ including its server can be understood to be 
either belonging to a certain sensor type in a small 
region or at the other extreme they could also consist 
of all sensors of a nation participating in a European 
network. Also, several layers of subnets are possible. 
In addition to accumulation, storage and distribution 
of data, other tasks of the servers can be the 
processing and generation of new data out of the 
received information. Examples are:  
• 
Data fusion (combine the information 
obtained from a daylight and infrared 
camera pointing at the same location 
resulting in new knowledge unobtainable 
from each single sensor individually)  
• 
Data 
clarification/extraction 
(motion 
imagery 
processing 
like 
image 
stabilization, mosaicing, object tracking, 
noise reduction) 
• 
Object recognition (e.g., 3-D object 
recognition using several 2-D images 
[13]) 
 
To allow hierarchical information access according to 
different levels of authority further data fields 
(metadata) are necessary for each product. 
On the server – querying client connection side user 
roles have to be supported, i.e. clients need an 
account specifying their access rights and statuses. 
For restricted information, a login and user password 
has to be supplied before each connection to 
guarantee the authenticity and the right of access. 
Additionally, the usage of certificates raises the 
security of the system to a satisfactory level.  
To circumvent unauthorized access to sensitive data 
from a third party and ensure a secure transmission 
the data transfer should be encrypted (for example by 
using a private key infrastructure (PKI)). Using 
secure lines alone only saves one from intruders 
outside the network of permitted nodes, but not 
everyone within the network should be able to read 
all data from everyone and everywhere. A further 
complicating situation arises when “friends become 
foes” within coalitions: a partner who you share data 
with in one area might be a competitor/adversary in 
another area or at another time. A more detailed 
analysis of this “Dynamic Coalition Problem (DCP)” 
with an emphasis on the military domain can be 
found in [14]. 
 
4.2 Image and Video Processing 
 
In surveillance systems, image and video processing 
modules are incorporated for three basic reasons: The 
first one concerns the human machine interface, more 
precisely 
the 
enhancement 
of 
video 
stream 
visualization. The second one concerns automatic or 
semi-automatic scene understanding to disburden the 
operator or analyst. The third one concerns aspects of 
efficient data storage, e.g. for recording the 
happenings for offline reconnaissance. 
Visualization of sensor data streams may be 
improved by diverse methods of automatic image 
processing. The purpose thereby is, to manipulate the 
video streams such that the video material is 
optimized for the perception of a human observer, 
e.g., realized by automatically optimizing contrast or 
color values of the images. 
Another way of improving visualization requires 
some 
basic 
methods 
of 
automatic 
scene 
understanding: Highlighting moving or otherwise 
relevant objects or persons in the video streams help 
the human observer to focus his mind on relevant 
situations. The same procedure can be implemented, 
when aspects of data storage are addressed: Instead of 
recording all sensor data all the time, the recording 
functionality can be switched off, whenever the scene 

263
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
does not show any (relevant) alteration. 
More 
complex 
forms 
of 
automatic 
scene 
understanding can be established in order to generate 
alarms that call the observers attention to an 
abnormal situation. Since this kind of high-level 
situation 
awareness 
highly 
depends 
on 
the 
specification of the specific abnormality and – in 
addition – presumes more scene information, these 
methods are less portable to scenarios other than 
specified.  
A system was built that includes a module for (semi-) 
automatic video processing and sensor data fusion. 
The module is able to process heterogeneous video 
sensors (e. g. EO, IR) from different video providers 
and 
redistribute 
extracted 
information 
to 
all 
participants using the shared database capabilities. 
Additionally, the image processing module uses 
sensor information provided by non-video sensors (e. 
g. sonar, radar, etc.) for automatic control of movable 
video sensors. 
For interaction with the integrated algorithms, a user 
interface for image processing and analysis was 
created. The so-called Image Processing Unit has 
access to all available video streams in the sensor 
network, is able to receive alarms from all (video and 
non-video) sensor systems over the shared database 
and is additionally able to request stored imagery data 
for offline processing of historic video data from all 
video providers. 
The Image Processing Unit acts as a fusion module 
between different video sensors and non-video data 
sources providing three basic processing modes: 
single-sensor video processing, multi-sensor video 
fusion and video-sensor remote control (by non-video 
sensors). In “single-sensor video processing”-mode 
the Image Processing Module provides generic sensor 
independent algorithms, applicable to all video 
sources available in the network. Using the GUI of 
the Image Processing Module the user is able to 
select an arbitrary video sensor provided by any 
participating subsystem and process the video data by 
miscellaneous algorithms, like “automatic motion 
detection”, “video-based moving target indicator”, 
“multi-object-tracking” 
or 
“real-time 
video 
mosaicing”. The processed video streams are sent 
back to the sensor network (to provide results to all 
participants) and important information (detections / 
alarms etc.) is additionally archived in the database. 
Of course, if an automatic image processing 
algorithm detects suspicious behavior it generates 
alarms like any other subsystem, and broadcasts the 
information using the common track data and the 
shared database. 
 
4.3 The Fusion Perspectives  
 
As motivated in 2.3, automatic image processing by 
means of analyzing distributed and multimodal 
sensor-data, requires the implementation of sensor 
fusion techniques, which can be solved by various 
types of fusion techniques.  
In the context of (semantic) sensor data analysis, 
information fusion can be characterized under several 
aspects. One of these aspects focuses on the level of 
information aggregation, where the fusion takes 
place: “early fusion” indicates that information is 
fused before semantic descriptions are derived. This 
might be realized by extracting (abstract) features 
from each of the sensors, which then are concatenated 
to a common description, i.e. in terms of a high 
dimensional vector. The analyzing step then is solved 
on the common description and results in a 
multimodal description of events, situations etc.  
“Late fusion” on the contrary indicates, that semantic 
concepts are derived from unimodal sensor data and 
the fusion step (that often coincides with a kind of 
decision or detection) is implemented on these 
semantic descriptions.  
Both techniques are applicable in surveillance 
systems. While early fusion is predestined to be 
applied on sensor data, that is acquired within a 
locally limited area where redundant information has 
to be expected, late fusion techniques should be 
preferred, when events have to be evaluated in a more 
global manner. 
Another method of sensor fusion, that is relevant for 
surveillance tasks, is to assign each type of sensor a 
sensor specific task, e.g., using PIR motion detection 
sensors as trigger for detailed automatic or 
semiautomatic analysis in EO- or IR-cameras. This 
approach is even more efficient, when the cameras 
are mounted on pan/tilt units: Triggered by non-video 
sensors cameras can be sighted towards the detected 
event. This kind of active vision not only results in 
reduced computational effort, but also allows the 
reduction of the amount of sensors, that have to be 
installed. Moreover, this method provides an 
interaction-free view on the point of interest in a high 
image resolution.  
Finally, the direct fusion of video streams for 
visualization is a worthwhile technique in the context 
of surveillance systems: When the number of video 
streams that have to be displayed in order to monitor 
a scene is high, multiple sensor streams can be fused 

264
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
into one common video stream. This is even more 
profitable, when cameras of different modalities are 
directed onto the same location of the scene, since 
there exist image fusion techniques that accentuate 
the sensor specific information. E.g., for two 
cameras, one of them in the visual and the other one 
in the thermal spectrum, these approaches deliver 
images, that show visible structures and thermal 
structures as overlays. 
 
5. Deployment of the Architecture 
 
The 
previously 
described 
architecture 
was 
implemented in several trials and exercises. The core 
component for data dissemination always was a 
shared database. Data fusion was implemented on 
differentiating levels within the different projects.  
 
5.1 MAJIIC 
 
The primary driver for the Coalition Shared Data 
(CSD) Server was the project of MAJIIC (Multi-
Sensor Aero-Ground Joint ISR Interoperability 
Coalition) [15]. During the last conflicts that German 
Bundeswehr and allied forces were involved in 
ISTAR Data (Intelligence, Surveillance, Target 
Acquisition, and Reconnaissance) could not be 
shared and exploited among the involved forces 
because of technical and operational problems which 
resulted in a loss of human lives and material. 
To avoid this in the future the multinational project 
was introduced. The aim was to strengthen and prove 
the processes, methods and applications that support 
interoperability. Interoperability is enforced by 
standardized data dissemination. 
The sensor data that is processed within the sensor 
workstations in proprietary formats is transformed 
into 
standardized 
formats 
and 
shared 
over 
standardized interfaces. 
The concept passed its first full-blown test during a 
major 
NATO 
exercise 
in 
Norway, 
Bold 
Avenger/Trial Quest 2007 [16], which included real-
time maneuvers by several thousand air and ground 
forces. During the exercise joint ISR interoperability 
was demonstrated in a „Live environment with a 
multi-sensor, multi-service geographically dispersed 
set-up”. 
5.2 Common Shield 
 
In 2008 the concept was successfully tested during 
the common Bundeswehr experiment Common 
Shield  and NATO DAT (Defence against terrorism) 
experiments 
Technology 
of 
ISTAR 
against 
Terrorism, Critical Infrastructure Protection, and 
Harbour Protection Trial [17]. The aim of the 
Common Shield exercise was to test C2 (Command 
and Control) processes in a NEC (network enabled 
capability) environment with integrated ISR and C2 
systems. The Common Shield architecture integrated 
sensor systems, exploitation capabilities, situation 
awareness tools,  common operational picture 
displays, and C2 systems provided by 27 different 
producers. Amongst the collection assets there were 
airborne imaging sensors and ground based imaging 
sensors; but also ground based radar systems 
providing MTI and chemical sensors capable to 
detect explosives as well as sea-based surface and 
sub-surface sensors. Exploitation systems provided 
capabilities to exploit still and motion imagery, MTI 
data, to fuse alarms generated by the chemical 
explosive detection sensors with imagery, and to fuse 
alarms and tracks generated by the sea-borne sensors 
with imagery. The seamless data and information 
exchange of all the sensor data and exploitation 
products with a real-time update of the common 
operational picture was enabled by the employment 
of a series of CSDs with the capability of storage, 
query, subscribe and retrieve, and automatic real-time 
synchronization of metadata. 
 
5.3 SOBCAH 
 
An exemplary implementation of this architecture 
was realized and successfully demonstrated in the 
European Project SOBCAH [18]. Within a demo at 
the harbor of Genoa different threat scenarios were 
exercised. The joint observation of land- and sea-
borders with a variety of sensors, among them sonar, 
radar, video (IR and EO), container and car tracking 
systems and motion detectors, was tested. The 
information retrieved from all these sensors was 
stored in the SOBCAH Shared Database (SSD) that 
was designed upon the described architecture 
principles. A situation awareness system subscribed 
(via a client) to data stored in the SSD and was able 
to display all relevant information for local decision 
bodies. As it was possible to store relevant data 
forensic analysis at a later point in time was possible 
as well.  
The demo showed successfully that data from all 
kinds of different sensors can be integrated into one 
system where in a timely manner, i.e. without long 

265
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
delays in time due to the large amount of data a 
common ground picture of a situation can be 
extracted. 
 
6. Conclusion and Future Work 
 
Within 
MAJIIC 
detailed 
processes 
to 
share 
information within the ISR domain have been 
developed, implemented and tested. The focus of this 
work was on multinational information sharing 
within a coalition with (mainly) satellite and airborne 
IMINT sources. The usage of an architecture as 
previously defined proved to be applicable for the 
information exchange between different nations. 
Within the Bundeswehr experiment Common Shield 
adaptability of that architecture to different sensor 
types and surveillance needs was successfully tested. 
Although the adaptation of some of the STANAGS 
was necessary it was possible to integrate new 
systems in this type of architecture relatively easily. 
Within SOBCAH the usage of such an architecture in 
a civil environment was demonstrated. Data fusion 
techniques as described above were of great use to 
help the operator focus on relevant events. 
For future work within CIMIC the seamless 
integration such an architecture with the means of 
converters and services should be further developed. 
Standardized mechanisms of data dissemination in 
civil and military security applications should be 
enforced as this enables an agile plug and protect 
system. Sensor and information systems can be 
integrated and thus different sources of information 
can be fused if necessary.  
The integration of other data/information sources 
(e.g. human intelligence, electronic intelligence) in 
such an architecture has to be evaluated and planned. 
To be able to cooperate on a semantic level the 
mapping of data models and ontologies from the 
different domains (civil and military, ISR and C2 
etc.) has to be enforced and integrated in an 
intelligent situation awareness system. 
 
7. References 
[1] Essendorfer, B., Monari, E., Wanning, H.(2009). 
An Integrated System for Border Surveillance. 
GlobeNet ICN 2009, International Conference 
on 
Networks. 
28.02.-05.03.2009. 
Cancun, 
Mexico. 
[2] Jaeger, 
T., 
Hoese, 
A., 
Oppermann, 
K. 
Transatlantische 
Beziehungen. 
Sicherheit- 
Wirtschaft- 
Oeffentlichkeit. 
Verlag 
für 
Sozialwissenschaften. 2005 
 
[3] Endsley, M. R. Situation awareness global 
assessment technique (SAGAT). Proceedings of 
the 
National 
Aerospace 
and 
Electronics 
Conference (NAECON). (New York: IEEE), 
789-795. 1998 
[4] Endsley, 
M.R., 
Garland, 
D.J. 
Situation 
Awareness 
Analysis 
and 
Management. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 2000 
[5] STANAG 4559 NATO Standard ISR Library 
Interface. 
Edition 
2. 
http://www.nato.int/structur/AC/224/standard/45
75/ag4_4575_E_ed2_nu.pdf. 27.07.2009 
[6] STANAG 4545 NATO Secondary Imagery 
Format (NSIF). 
http://www.nato.int/structur/AC/224/standard/45
45/4545_documents/4545_ed1_amd1.pdf. 
27.07.2009 
[7] STANAG 4609 NATO Digital Motion Imagery 
Format. 
http://www.nato.int/structur/AC/224/standard/46
09/4609_documents/4609Eed01.pdf. 27.07.2009 
[8] STANAG 5516 Tactical Data Exchange- Link 
16.   
[9] OGC (2005). Open GIS Consortium. OGC 
catalogue service specification. 
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id
=5929&version=2. 27.07.2009 
[10] NMEA 0183 Interface Standard. NMEA 0183 
Interface Standard 
[11] Eurocontrol standard document for surveillance 
data exchange. Part 1. All Purpose Structured 
Eurocontrol Surveillance Information Exchange 
(ASTERIX).  
http://www.eurocontrol.int/asterix/gallery/conten
t/public/documents/pt1ed129.pdf. 27.07.2009 
[12] Baran, P. (1964) On Distributed 
Communications Network. IEEE Transactions 
on Communications [legacy, pre - 1988], 12, 1 
[13] Dutta Roy, S., Chaudhury, S. and Banerjee, S. 
(2004).  Active Recognition through Next View 
Planning: A Survey. Pattern Recognition, 37, 3, 
pp. 429 – 446  
[14] Phillips, C. E., Ting, T.C., Demurjian, S. A. 
(2002). Information sharing and security in 
dynamic coalitions, Proceedings of the seventh 
ACM symposium on Access control models and 
technologies, June 03-04, 2002, Monterey, 
California, USA  
[15] MAJIIC (2007). http://www.nato-
otan.org/docu/update/2007/pdf/majic.pdf. 
27.07.2009 

266
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
[16] Trial Quest (2007). Key NATO reconnaissance 
technology passes major test. 
www.nato.int/docu/update/2007/12-
december/e1210d.html.27.07.2009 
[17] Stockfisch, D. (2008): Common Shield 08. 
TechDemo 08/Harbor Protection Trials. 
Strategie & Technik, October 2008 
[18] SOBCAH. Surveillance of Borders, Coastlines 
and Harbors, 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/security/doc/projec
t_flyers_2006/766-06_sobcah.pdf.27.07.2009

