Empirical Case Studies of the Root Cause Analysis Method in Information Security
Niclas Hellesen, Henrik Miguel Nacarino Torres, and Gaute Wangen
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Gjøvik, Norway
Email: niclash@stud.ntnu.no, henrik.torres@gmail.com, gaute.wangen@ntnu.no
Abstract— Root cause analysis is a methodology that comes
from the quality assurance and improvement ﬁelds. Root-cause
analysis is a seven-step methodology that proposes multiple
tools per step, which are designed to identify and eliminate the
root cause of a reoccurring problem. Lately, the method has
been adapted into the information security ﬁeld, yet there is
little empirical data regarding the efﬁciency of the Root cause
analysis approach for solving information security management
problems. This paper presents three empirical case studies of
root cause analysis conducted under different premises to address
this problem. Each case study is qualitatively evaluated with
cost-beneﬁt analysis. The primary case study is a comparison
of information security risk assessment and root cause analysis
results from an analysis of a complex issue regarding access
control violations. The study ﬁnds that in comparison to the risk
assessment, the beneﬁts of the Root cause analysis tools are a
better understanding of the social aspects of the risk, especially
with regards to social and administrative causes for the problem.
Furthermore, we found that the risk assessment and root cause
analysis could complement each other in administrative and
technical issues. The second case study tests root cause analysis
as a tabletop tool by modeling an information security incident
primarily through available technical documentation. The ﬁnd-
ings show that root cause analysis works with tabletop exercises
for practice and learning, but we did not succeed in extracting
any new knowledge under the restrictions of a tabletop exercise.
In the third case study, the root cause analysis methodology was
applied in a resource constrained setting to determine the root
causes of a denial of service incident at small security awareness
organization. In this case, the process revealed multiple previously
undetected causes and had utility, especially for revealing socio-
technical problems. As future work, we propose to develop a
leaner version of the root cause analysis scoped for information
security problems. Additionally, root cause analysis emphasizes
the use of incident data and we suggest a novel research direction
into conducting root cause analysis on cyber security incident
data, deﬁne some of the obstacles, research paths, and utility
of the direction. Our ﬁndings show that a problem needs to be
costly to justify the cost-beneﬁt of starting a full-scale root cause
analysis project. Additionally, when strictly managed, root cause
analysis performed well under time and resource constraints for
a less complex problem. Thus, the full-scale Root cause analysis
is a viable option when dealing with both complex and costly
information security problems. For minor issues, a root cause
analysis may be excessive or should at least be strictly time
managed. Based on our ﬁndings we conclude that Root cause
analysis should be a part of the information security management
toolbox.
Keywords— Information Security; Root cause analysis; Risk
Management; Case study; Socio-technical; Empirical.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Judging by the available literature on standards and
methods, the common approach to dealing with problems in
information security (InfoSec) is risk assessments (ISRA). Risk
assessment aims to estimate the probability and consequence of
an identiﬁed scenario or for reoccurring incidents and propose
risk treatments based on the results. Although the InfoSec
risk management (ISRM) approach is useful for maintaining
acceptable risk levels, they are not developed to solve complex
socio-technical problems or improve the system performance
beyond keeping risk acceptable. For example, given a malware
infected network the aim of the ISRA is to identify and deal
with unacceptable risk, not to identify and deal with the root
cause(s) of the problem. To aid the InfoSec industry in problem
elimination, this paper continues the study of applying Root
cause analysis (RCA) methodologies in InfoSec [1]. RCA is
”a structured investigation that aims to identify the real cause
of a problem and the actions necessary to eliminate it.” [2].
The current RCA is not a single technique, rather, it describes
a structured process that comprises of a range of approaches,
tools, and techniques to uncover causes of problems, ranging
from standard problem-solving paradigms, business process
improvement, bench-marking, and to continuous improvement
methods [2], [3]. The ISRA and RCA approaches are dif-
ferent in that RCA investigates incidents that have occurred
with some frequency aiming to understand and eliminate the
problem from a socio-technical perspective, while the objective
of ISRM is to manage the risk by keeping it at an acceptable
level.
Our literature review found that the application of formal
RCA tools in InfoSec is an area that has remained largely
unexplored. Therefore, the problem we are addressing in this
study is to determine the utility of RCA for InfoSec and if it
provides useful input to the decision-making process beyond
the ISRA. The contribution of this research is knowledge
regarding the application and performance of established RCA
methods on InfoSec problems. Speciﬁcally, the paper addresses
the following research questions:
1)
How does the results from running a full-scale RCA
extend the ﬁndings from the ISRA process?
2)
Does the RCA approach have utility in tabletop
exercises?
3)
How well does the RCA approach work in a resource
and time restricted setting?
4)
Which RCA tools are suited for InfoSec analysis?
The problems are investigated mainly through case stud-
ies, qualitative assessment of results, and cost-beneﬁt analy-
sis.
This paper applies the seven-step process RCA method-
ology [2] for comparison of results, each step in the RCA
method includes multiple tools for completing the step. The
data collected for this study was primarily from technical re-
60
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ports, historical observations and data in the target institutions.
Together with qualitative interviews of stakeholders in two of
the case studies. A key limitation of this study is that the
applied RCA all come from the tool selection described in
Andersen and Fagerhaug.
The structure of this paper is as follows: The following
section addresses previous work on RCA in InfoSec. Section
III provides a description of the applied ISRA method for case
comparison and an in-depth description of the applied RCA
method and the associated tools including statistical analysis.
The primary case study presented in this paper extends the
ISRA of a complex socio-technical problem with RCA and
discusses the cost/beneﬁt of the results. Firstly, we present
the results from the ISRA application as a comparison basis
followed by the results of a full scale RCA. The case study
is of breaches to the access control (AC) security policy
(SecPol) with consequent costly incidents, such as access card
and Personal Identiﬁcation Number (PIN) exchange between
employees. This complex problem is located at the intersection
of the social and technological aspects that many organizations
may face. The ISRA and the RCA presents different tools
and approaches, but both seeks to treat the problem at hand,
which makes the output comparable. The primary case study
investigates if RCA can be applied as a useful extension to the
ISRM process for the AC SecPol problem. To investigate this
issue, we qualitatively assess the results of a RCA conducted as
an extension to a high-level ISRA of the problem. The second
case study is of RCA performed as a tabletop exercise con-
strained to technical documentations of the Carbanak incident,
in which a group of cyber criminals managed to steal large
amounts of money from multiple banks. For this case study
we analyze whether the RCA provides a useful insight into
the incident. The third case study investigates the root causes
of a DDoS attack against a Norwegian security awareness
organization. This case was conducted under resource and time
restrictions to test RCA performance under these conditions.
Furthermore, this paper qualitatively evaluates the performance
of RCA tools for InfoSec cases together with cost/beneﬁt
analysis. The RCA method suggests incident data as a source
of knowledge [2] and we have conducted some preliminary
work in applying incident data for RCA. This paper presents
insight into key issues together for applying incident data in
RCA with a proposal for future work. Lastly, we conclude the
results.
II.
RELATED WORK
The RCA results presented in this paper represents the
summary of the work presented in the Thesis ”Root cause
analysis for information Security” [4] and is an extension of
the conference version of the paper ”An Empirical Empirical
Study of Root-Cause Analysis in Information Security Man-
agement” [1].
RCA was developed to solve practical problems in tradi-
tional safety, quality assurance, and production environments
[2]. However, RCA has also been adopted in selected areas
of InfoSec: Julisch [5] studied the effect of the RCA, by
considering RCA for improvement of decision-making for
handling alarms from intrusion detection systems. The study
provides evidence towards the positive contribution of RCA,
but it does not apply the RCA tools as they are proposed in the
recent literature [2], [6], [7]. Julisch builds on the notion that
there are root causes accounting for a percentage of the alarms,
but proposes his tools for detecting and eliminating root causes
outside of the problem-solving process, Fig. 1. A more recent
study conducted by Collmann and Cooper [8] applied RCA for
an InfoSec breach of conﬁdentiality and integrity in the health-
care industry. Based on a qualitative approach, the authors
ﬁnd the root cause of an incident and propose remediation.
Their results also show a clear beneﬁt from applying RCA,
although their RCA approach seems non-standardized, being
primarily based on previously published complex problem-
solving research articles. Wangen [9] utilizes RCA to analyze
a peer review ring incident, where an author managed to game
the peer review process and review his papers. This incident
is analyzed by combining RCA tools and the Conﬂicting
Incentives Risk Analysis (CIRA) to understand the underlying
incentives and to choose countermeasures. Further, Abubakar
et al. [10] applied RCA as a preliminary tool to investigate the
high-level causes identity theft. The study applies a structured
RCA approach [7] and identiﬁes multiple causes and effects
for setbacks to the investigation of identity theft. The Abubakar
et al. study shows the utility of RCA for InfoSec by providing
an insight into a complex problem such as identity theft.
Hyunen and Lenzini [11] discuss RCA application in InfoSec
by contrasting the traditional approaches to Safety and Secu-
rity to highlight shortcomings of the latter. Furthermore, the
authors propose an RCA-based tool for InfoSec management
to address said shortcomings and demonstrate the tool on a use
case. The tool is designed to reveal vulnerable socio-technical
factors.
According to Wangen et al. [12] one of the most de-
veloped InfoSec risk analysis methods is the Factor Analysis
of Information Risk (FAIR) [13]. The authors of FAIR have
recognized the need for RCA as an extension of the ISRA
method to eliminate problems and they propose a short version
of RCA based on ﬂowcharts (p. 366-373). Yet, the book
does not go in-depth regarding the RCA method and does
not provide any data regarding application. Some of the tools
applied in an RCA are also recognizable in the risk assessment
literature, for example, instruments such as Flowcharts and
Tree diagrams model processes and events visually. Typical
comparable examples from risk assessment are Event-tree and
Fault-tree analysis, where the risk is modeled as a set of
conditional events, however, these approaches are not specif-
ically developed for InfoSec risk analysis. Schneier adapted
the Fault-tree analysis mindset and created Attack Trees [14].
These tools resemble those of RCA. However, the frame for
applying them is different in the sense that attack trees focus
on the technical threat and vulnerability modeling, while RCA
tools focus on problem-solving.
Although there are a couple of published studies on
the application and utility of formal RCA methodologies, the
previous work on RCA in InfoSec is scarce, and there is a
research gap in experimenting with the RCA tools for solving
re-occurring InfoSec problems. The studies we found provided
positive results and motivation for further experiments with
RCA for InfoSec problems.
III.
METHOD
The research approach was case studies of problems
occurring in a Scandinavian R&D institution (primary case
study), multiple banks (tabletop exercise) and a small security
61
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

awareness company. The case studies were conducted to inves-
tigate the complex socio-technical security problems.
Each case study was conducted following the seven step
RCA process, Fig. 1. Furthermore, we qualitatively assessed
the results. For the primary case study, we also analyzed the
differences in approaches between RCA and ISRA, ﬁndings,
and treatment recommendation. Additionally, we applied a
cost-beneﬁt analysis to measure resources regarding time spent
on conducting RCA and beneﬁts concerning additional knowl-
edge about the problem.
The following section brieﬂy describes the ISRA ap-
proach applied in this study, while the second section describes
the RCA approach. The latter contains a description of the
seven-step RCA process, overview of the applied tools used,
data collection methods, and a brief overview of the statistical
methods used for data analysis.
A. ISRA Method for the primary case study
The ISRA was conducted as a high-level risk assessment
for the institution, which revealed the need for deeper analysis
of the problem. The ISRA has been developed to analyze
risks that occur when applying technology to information,
and revolve around securing the conﬁdentiality, integrity, and
availability of information or other assets [15]. By focusing
on assets and vulnerabilities, these assessments tend to have a
technical scope [16], [17] with estimates of consequences and
respective probabilities of events as key outputs.
The ISRA method applied for the case study is based
on the standard ISO/IEC 27000-series [15]. It was further
substantiated with the Wangen et al. [18], [12] approaches,
which center on estimations of asset value, vulnerability, threat,
and control efﬁciency. These are combined with available
historical data to obtain both quantitative and qualitative risk
estimations. The applied method identiﬁes events together
with adverse outcomes and uses conditional probability to
estimate the risk of each identiﬁed outcome. The results section
provides a summary of the initial ISRA results. To illustrate the
risk, we modeled it using the CORAS language [19].
B. Applied Root cause analysis method
In choosing a RCA framework, we looked at compre-
hensiveness, academic citations, and availability. Based on the
criteria, our study chose to follow the seven-step RCA process
proposed by Andersen and Fagerhaug [2], as shown in Fig.
1. Each step consists of a set of tools to produce the results
needed to complete the subsequent steps, whereas step 7 was
out of scope. Depending on the problem one or more tools
are required to complete the RCA steps and conclude the root
cause(s). As recommended in the methodology, we chose tools
per step based on our judgment of suitability. All RCA in
this study was conducted by a three-person team supported by
a mentor. We have anonymized information according to the
employer’s requests. The following subsections describe each
step in the RCA process and our selected tools starting with
the tool applied for the primary case study (see [2] for further
description).
1) Problem understanding: The goal of this step is
to understand the problem and rank the issues. The tools
for understanding the problem are meant to give a better
understanding of the problem itself and what aspects in the
case one should consider for further investigation. In order
Fig. 1: Seven step process for RCA [2].
to know which tool to use on the problem and to handle the
correct problem, it is important to ﬁrst understand it. Below we
will list some of the tools we tried out in our research.
Performance Matrices: are used to illustrate the target
system’s current performance and importance. The perfor-
mance matrix contributes towards establishing priority of the
different problems, factors, or problems in the system [2] (P.36-
41): (i) which part of the problem is the most important to
address, and (ii) which problem will reduce the highest amount
of symptoms. The problems are qualitatively identiﬁed and
ranked on a scale from 1 to 9, on performance (x-axis) and
importance (y-axis).
Critical Incident: The main purpose of the Critical
Incident tool is to understand what are the most troublesome
symptoms in a problematic situation. By using the Critical
Incident, you will get a better understanding of the aspects
of the problem that must be solved, as well as the nature of
the problem and its consequences. As with most root cause
analysis tools, they are best used by a team to determine the
cause of the problem. To work it requires an atmosphere of
trust, openness and honesty that encourages people to disclose
important information without fear of the consequences. This
applies to all tools but especially Critical Incident.
Swim Lane Flowchart: Swim Lane Flowchart shows
the ﬂow of events through a timeline and shows connections
between events. The chart is divided into players where each
player has his horizontal path.
2) Problem Cause Brainstorming: The main idea of this
step is to cover other possible issues that may be causing the
problem, not thought of in Step 1. Brainstorming is a technique
where the participants verbally suggested all possible causes
they could think of, which was immediately noted on a
whiteboard and summarized together at the end. Brainstorming
can take place in different ways, structured or unstructured
brainstorming and brain writing. A structured brainstorming
is based on the members coming back with suggestions to
ensure that no person dominates the process. Unstructured
brainstorming allows spontaneous responses from anyone in
the group at any time. Brain Writing can be done in two ways.
Group members write down their ideas on so-called ID cards,
or on a blackboard. During brainstorming, it is important that
ideas and suggestions are not criticized until all the ideas and
suggestions will be reviewed.
3) Problem Cause Data Collection: The data collection
phase helps to make searches for problems more accurate.
Random problem solving tends to result in assumptions and
guesswork while structured RCA is based on a systematic
collection of valid and reliable data that is an important step in
62
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

root cause analysis. It is therefore important to plan carefully
what tools one might think about using. RCA recommends
several data collection techniques [2].
Interviews: For the primary case study, this study chose
scientiﬁc interviews as the main data collection approach as
this study required an in-depth understanding of the mo-
tivations for AC SecPol violation problem. The interviews
were conducted in a face-to-face setting, and was designed
using category, ordinal, and continuous type questions together
with open-ended interview questions for sharing knowledge
about the problem. The interview subjects were primarily
categorized as representatives of key stakeholder groups within
the organization and one group of external contractors. Each
interview had twenty-six questions with follow-up questions if
deemed necessary to clarify the opinion or to extract valuable
knowledge from particularly knowledgeable individuals. More
informal interviews were also applied as a data gathering
method in case study 3.
Check Sheet: is used to systematize collected registered
data. The main purpose is to ensure that all data collected
complies with reality. Can be used to record the frequency of
events that are believed to cause problems.
Incident data analysis: Andersen and Fagerhaug [2]
proposes to analyze incident data as a part of the RCA.
However, analysis of InfoSec incident data is quite complex
and the future work section outlines some of the research
problems encountered working with RCA and incident data.
Additionally, we propose research directions for solving the
problems.
4) Problem Cause Data Analysis: The purpose of this
phase is to clarify possible causes before attempting to solve
the problem in the ﬁnal preparatory stage, for example, how
are the possible causes related to the problem and what is the
most harmful? The purpose of the data analysis phase in the
ﬁnal preparatory stage before attempting to solve the problem
is to clarify possible causes. It is important to look at how
different aspects of the problem are linked. In data analysis,
the following tools can be used:
Statistical analysis: We applied a variety of statistical
data analysis methods speciﬁed in the results, and the IBM
SPSS software for the statistical analysis. A summary of the
statistical tests used in this research is as follows.
For Descriptive analysis on continuous type questions,
we applied the median as the primary measure of central
tendency. We also conducted Univariate analysis of individual
issues and Bivariate analysis for pairs of questions, such as a
group belonging and a continuous question, to see how they
compare and interact. As the Likert-scale seldom will satisfy
the requirements of normality and not have a deﬁned scale of
measurement between the alternatives, we restricted the use of
mean and standard deviation. We analyzed the median together
with an analysis of range, minimum and maximum values,
and variance. This study also analyses the distributions of the
answers, for example, if they are normal, uniform, bimodal, or
similar. We used Pearson two-tailed Correlation test to reveal
relationships between pairs of variables as this test does not
assume normality in the sample.
The questionnaire had several open-ended questions,
which we treated by listing and categorizing the responses.
Further, we counted the occurrence of each theme and sum-
marized the responses.
Afﬁnity diagram: helps to correlate apparently unre-
lated ideas, conditions, meanings, and reasons so that they can
collectively be explored further. When analyzing qualitative
data, Afﬁnity Diagram is useful as it groups data and ﬁndings
of underlying relationships into groups.
Relationship Diagram: Relationship diagram is a tool
used to identify logical relationships between different ideas
or problems in a complex and confusing situation. In such
cases, the strength of the relationship diagram is its ability
to visualize such relationships. The main purpose of a rela-
tionship diagram is to help identify issues that are not easily
recognizable.
5) Root Cause Identiﬁcation: The goal of this step is
to identify the root cause(s) of the problem. From the list of
possible causes created and analyzed previously, this step is
designed to identify the root cause. With root cause identiﬁ-
cation, the goal is to develop solutions that will eliminate the
symptoms and thus eliminate the problem. In terms of duration
and complexity, this stage is rarely the hardest or longest. With
thorough preparation, you can usually go through this stage
quickly.
Cause-and-Effect chart (Fishbone diagram): Fishbone
is a tool that analyzes a relationship between a problem and its
causes. It has aspects of brainstorming and systematic analysis
to create an effective technique. The main purpose of the tool
is to understand what causes a problem together with the
secondary causes/factors inﬂuencing the problem. It can be
used to develop as well as group reasons for a problem. The
Fishbone diagram also evaluates systematic causes, ﬁnds the
most likely root causes and should map to the undesired effect
to the problem.
Five Whys is designed to identify a problem then ask
why this is a problem. When you get an answer, ask why.
This is usually repeated ﬁve times until you get to the root
cause.
6) Problem elimination: The goal of this step is to
propose solutions to deal with the root causes of the problem,
Andersen and Fagerhaug [2] describe primarily two types of
tools for drafting treatments; one is designed to stimulate
creativity for new solutions, while the other is designed for
developing solutions. This step is successful if you remove the
correct root problem (s), the symptoms will disappear along
with the problem and will not resume.
Systematic Inventive Thinking (SIT): It is based on
investigating one or more components of the problem. All
components should then be assessed using the ﬁve SIT princi-
ples [1]. These principles are as follows: Attribute dependency:
Assess if a change in component will lead to improvement.
Component control: examine how the component is connected
to the environment around it. Replacement: Replace something
in the component with something from the component’s envi-
ronment. Displacement: Assess if the component can increase
performance by removing part of the component. Division:
Assessing splitting of a component or product’s attributes can
provide improvement.
Countermeasures Matrix: It is a method to help you
prioritize what actions to take. Priority is established by
ranking based on the impact and feasibility of recommended
measures.
63
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

7) Solution implementation:
Solution implementation
focuses on the implementation phase. This step includes how
to organize the implementation of solution implementation and
how to develop an implementation plan. We have not been able
to implement solution implementations in our task, but we have
made suggestions for the execution of the tools to which the
book refers.
Tree Diagram: Implementation processes can be com-
plicated, but in order to break down and organize the work,
Tree Chart is used to structure the activities. It is a tool that
is easy to use to break down major tasks in the business to
manageable sizes. Tree Diagram is simply a way to represent
a sequence of events.
IV.
PRIMARY CASE STUDY: RISK ASSESSMENT OF
ACCESS CONTROL POLICY VIOLATIONS
In this section, we ﬁrst present a summary of the results
from the ISRA, in terms of risk estimation and proposed
treatment. Further, we present the results from our RCA for
comparison.
The case data was collected from an institution whose
IT-operations delivers services to about 3000 users. The organi-
zation is a high-availability academic organization providing a
range of services to the users, mainly in research, development,
and education. The IT Operations are the internal owners of
the AC regimes and most of the lab equipment; they represent
the principal in this study. The objectives of the IT-operations
is to deliver reliable services with minimal downtime, together
with information security solutions.
During the last years, the Institution has experienced
multiple incidents of unauthorized access to its facilities. The
recurring events primarily lead to theft and vandalism of
equipment in a range of cost that is deemed unacceptable.
Thus, the hypothesis is that this has partially been caused
by employees and students being negligent of the SecPol
regarding AC, providing unauthorized access to the facilities.
While the SecPol explicitly states that both the token and
the PIN are personal and shall not be shared, there has been
registered multiple incidents of this occurring.
A. The Risk of Access control policy violations
The goal of the ISRA was to derive the annual risk of
the incidents. This section summarizes the asset identiﬁcation
and evaluation, vulnerabilities assessment, threat assessment,
control efﬁciency, and outcomes.
The Institution had two key asset groups: (i) hard-
ware and (ii) physical sensitive information, both stored in
access controlled facilities. The hardware’s primary protec-
tion attribute was availability, and the value was estimated
in the range of moderate according to the budget, with a
low to medium importance in the day-to-day business pro-
cesses.
The two controls in place are primarily (i) AC mech-
anisms - physical control in place to prevent unauthorized
accesses and mitigate the risk of theft. (ii) The SecPol -
administrative control, which is a written statement concerning
the proper use of AC mechanisms.
For the vulnerability assessment, experience showed that
illegitimate users were accessing the facilities on a daily
basis. We identiﬁed two primary vulnerabilities; (i) lack of
security training and awareness, whereas the stakeholders
do not understand the risk exposure of the organization.
(ii) Insufﬁcient organizational security policies, whereas the
SecPol itself lacks clear consequences for breaches, leaving
the personnel complacent. The main attack for exploiting these
two vulnerabilities was social engineering, where the attacker
either manages to get a hold of a security token and PIN.
Alternatively, the attacker manages to gain unauthorized access
to the facilities by entering with others who have legitimate
access (tailgating). With the number of stakeholders having
access, both attacks are easy for a motivated threat actor. The
exposure is summarized in Table I.
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF VULNERABILITY
ASSESSMENT.
Scenario
Vulnerability
Attack
Attack
Vulnerability
Exposure
Description
description
Difﬁculty
Severity
Assessment
A1
Lack of Security
Social Engineering -
Medium
Very High
High
Training and
Employee or Student
Awareness,
Gives away Token
Insufﬁcient
and PIN (Likely)
InfoSec Policies
A2
Lack of security
Social Engineering-
Easy
Medium
Medium
training and
Employee or Student
awareness,
leaves doors opened
Insufﬁcient
for convenience
InfoSec Policies
For the threat assessment, the experts identiﬁed one
threat group motivated by a ﬁnancial incentive with the intent
of stealing either physical equipment or sensitive information,
with two actors; (i) Actors who frequently steals small items,
representing high frequency - low impact risk. (ii) Actors who
conduct a few signiﬁcant thefts, representing the low frequency
- high impact risk.
1) Risk Analysis Results.: The risk is modelled in Fig. 2
using the CORAS modelling language [19]. From the model,
we have two likely conditional events where (i) the attacker
obtains access token and PIN, or (ii) access to the facilities by
piggybacking employees or students. The ISRA results showed
that the most severe risk facing the organization is theft of
sensitive information, while physical theft of equipment is also
a grave risk. According to past observations, the risk is greatest
during holidays with few people on campus. The two primary
risks were major equipment thefts during the holiday season
and several minor equipment thefts that aggregated into an
unacceptable amount (not differentiated in the CORAS model).
In addition, we have the low probability and high impact
risk that sensitive information gets compromised through this
attack.
2) Implemented Treatment - Camera Surveillance: As a
result of the ISRA, the treatment implemented to reduce the
two risks was camera surveillance of the main entry points
of buildings. Firstly, this treatment has a preventive effect in
the sense that it will heighten the attack threshold for threat
actors. Besides, it will provide audit trails that will be useful
in future investigations. Camera surveillance had also been
proven to reduce the number of incidents as well as increasing
the amount of solved crimes in similar institutions. This data
indicates a high control efﬁciency; however, the measure also
comes with some drawbacks, such as equipment cost together
with the required resources to operate the system. Due to
the data collection on employees surveillance brings, this risk
treatment also subjects the organization to requirements from
64
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 2: Risk modelled with CORAS [19]
data privacy protection laws. Neither did it address the socio-
technical problem with the SecPol, card swapping, and card
lending.
V.
PRIMARY CASE STUDY: RCA OF ACCESS CONTROL
POLICY VIOLATIONS
In this section, we present the results from conducting
the RCA according to the method described in Section III-B.
The results are derived from conducting RCA on the previously
outlined problem and risk; we outline the hypothesized root
causes and proposed treatments.
A. RCA Process, Step 1 & 2 - Problem Understanding and
Cause Brainstorming
The goal of these steps is to scope the RCA and center
on the preliminary identiﬁed problem causes. The performance
matrix, Fig. 3, is used to rank the identiﬁed causes on their
Importance and Performance. With the help of resource per-
sons, the team derived six topics from the preliminary RCA
steps 1 & 2, Fig. 1): (i) Theoretical knowledge of the SecPol
for AC, (ii) Practical implementation of the SecPol for AC,
(iii) Consequences for policy breaches, (iv) Security Culture,
(v) Backup solutions for forgotten and misplaced cards, and
(vi) Card hand out for new employees. The RCA team and
the expert ranked the issues and prioritized the data collection
step accordingly, illustrated in Fig. 3.
B. RCA Process Step 3 - Data Collection
For the categorical analysis, the team used age, gender,
and stakeholder group as the primary categories, with the
emphasis on the latter as our hypothesis was that parts of the
root cause are found in conﬂicting interests between internal
groups. The team interviewed thirty-six people located at the
site, Fig. 4 displays the distribution among the six primary
Fig. 3: Performance matrix.
TABLE II. DEMOGRAPHICS INCLUDING AGE AND
SEX DISTRIBUTIONS
Age
Sex
Group
Freq.
Percent
Group
Freq.
Percent
Valid
20-29
8
22,2
Valid
Women
10
27,8
30-39
7
19,4
Men
26
72,2
40-49
10
27,8
Total
36
100,0
50-59
8
22,2
60-69
3
8,3
Total
36
100,0
stakeholders. The interview subjects for the academic staff,
Ph.D. Fellows, and M.Sc. students were chosen at random.
The representatives of management and IT and security were
key stakeholders in the organization, such as decision-makers
65
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and policy writers.
C. RCA Step 4 - Problem Cause data analysis
The Descriptive analysis showed that about half of the
respondents had read the SecPol. All but two reported that it
is was not allowed to lend away cards, whereas the remaining
two did not know, indicating a high level of security awareness
for the issue. Also, the study uncovered uncertainty among
the respondents when we asked them about what the potential
consequences for breaching the SecPol would bring for the
employees. Whereas most of them assumed no consequence,
and none perceived any severe consequences. We also uncov-
ered that most people would be reluctant to admit to sharing
cards. Further, we asked them ”How often do you think access
cards are shared at the Institution?” on a scale from 1 - 5
(1- Never, Yearly, Monthly, Weekly, 5 -Daily), to which the
respondents thought that this is an issue that occurs on at
least a weekly basis (Median 4). Using the same scale, the
team asked how often the respondents had the need to borrow
cards from others. Over half reported to not ever had the need,
while twelve reported having had to lend cards on an annual
basis, only two reported having the problem more than that.
However, half of the respondents said to have been asked by
others to borrow cards, which documented the frequency of
the problem.
TABLE III. NOTABLE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
GROUPS ON ”HOW LONG DID IT TAKE FOR YOU TO
GET ACCESS TO THE FACILITIES YOU NEEDED?”
(BETWEEN 1 VERY LONG - 6 IMMEDIATE ACCESS)
Category
N
Range
Median
Minimum
Maximum
Variance
Management
3
0
6,00
6
6
0,000
Senior Academic Staff
17
4
6,00
2
6
1,654
Ph.D. Students
7
5
5,00
1
6
3,238
BSc. and MSc. Students
3
4
3,00
1
5
4,000
External Contractors
3
3
4,00
1
4
3,000
Total
33
5
5,00
1
6
2,729
1) Summary of categorical analysis: The statistical anal-
ysis showed differences between the responses of men and
women; where the latter viewed incidents involving card
borrowing among employees more severely than men. The
women in our sample also believe that it is more likely
that employees admit to borrowing cards. Another visible
difference between the stakeholder groups was who had read
the policy, where all the representatives of the Management
Fig. 4: Distributions of stakeholder groups included in the
study
and IT and Security groups had read it. The Ph.D. Fellows
and the student groups scored the lowest on having read the
policy. Another observable ﬁnding was that the waiting time
varied between the groups, whereas the permanent employees
perceived the shortest waiting times, Table III.
2) Qualitative analysis of differences between groups:
IT and Security. The IT operations owned much of the hard-
ware in the facilities and was in charge of both designing, im-
plementing, and operating the AC policy. Both representatives
had read the policy and considered it important that staff and
students also know the policy. The IT operations believed that
card lending is an increasing problem within the institution,
especially in the modern facilities where AC mechanisms are
more frequent. One also answered that since he had been
involved in developing the policy, he felt more ownership of it
and, therefore, experienced a greater responsibility to follow it
than other departments. They also felt the legal responsibility
not to break the policy due to owning the AC system.
Management. This group consists of middle and upper
management, which had all read the SecPol. Half believed
it was important to have those who will be subject to the
policy involved in the policy development process. When we
asked this group about what they saw as the worst scenario,
this group had similar opinions: their main concerns was loss
and compromise of information together with relevant legal
aspects. Two members of this group reported that they did
not get the service they expected from IT regarding forgotten
cards. Three out of four said that they believed the security
culture to be good, while the last one reported the security
controls to be cumbersome.
Senior academic staff. Consists of different types of
professors, researchers, and lecturers, and represents the ma-
jority of employees in the case. This group was the largest with
the most widespread opinions. Regarding the SecPol, several
expressed discontent and said that it was neither security
department or IT service that should be responsible for it.
The organization should provide the content of the policy to
ensure that it was not an obstacle in the day to day work.
Further, delivering on the aims and goals of the organizational
assignment should be compared to the potential harm from
card swapping incidents, meaning that the policy should be
designed with a better understanding of risk. An example of
this was that employees must have access to rooms to do their
job where a too-strict policy would stand in the way. Regarding
this, several mentioned that if the cards were not lent to other
employees, it would be very problematic due to the lack of
backup solutions. They missed good fallback solution if one
had forgotten access card.
Ph.D. Fellows. Out of this group, only one had read
the SecPol. Most assumed it was not allowed to lend out
their access cards, but two said they did not know. One
expressed discontent from not receiving his access card quick
enough, which he hypothesized as one of the reasons for
borrowing other people’s cards. Longer times to hand out
access cards may force them to lend cards internally in an
ofﬁce. Another issue was that Ph.D. Fellows occasionally
worked with students and that they often needed access to
restricted facilities to be able to work. This issue required
the Ph.D. fellow either to open the door physically for the
students or to loan them their card. When we asked about
the security culture, the responses were split: Two did not
66
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

know, one thought that security was good, another one said
that people trust each other, one said it was wrong, while one
said that people knew that they should not lend it to others.
The last one said that others could borrow it for practical
reasons.
Students. Represents the main bulk of people with
access to the main facilities, but with limited access to ofﬁces
and employee areas. Only one of the students had read the
policy, and none of the students who participated knew of any
instances of card lending, although two out of three had been
asked by someone if they could lend them their cards.
External contractors. Represents the contractors in
charge of running the physical facilities, such as cleaning
personnel and physical maintenance. In the External group,
only one had read the policy. All believed that it was not
allowed to borrow cards and that the school saw this as a
serious offense. Only one of them reported having had the
need to borrow a card.
D. RCA Step 5 - Identiﬁed Root causes
The interviews with the groups provided an insight into
the many views on this problem and the complexity it entails,
visualized with the Fishbone diagram in Fig. 5. Based on our
RCA we found ﬁve possible root causes:
1. Uncertainty regarding fallback solutions. We found
that there was uncertainty surrounding available backup so-
lutions among all the stakeholder groups. Where 14 of the
31 respondents were undecided if there existed any fallback
solution, and suggested to create better backup solutions. 17
said there existed backup solutions, but we uncovered different
opinions regarding what these were and who was responsible
for them. For example, six respondents thought they could
summon the IT department, three thought the student help
desk, while the remainder thought either management could
help or ask a colleague to lend them access cards. Even from
the two key stakeholders in IT the replies were contradic-
tory.
2. Discomfort when using fallback solutions. Two of
our respondents reported to have forgotten their cards and had
contacted the on-campus card distributor to use the fallback
solution. The respondents meant they had not been well-
received and had not gotten the help they needed. Overall,
they reported the situation to be discomforting, which was
unfortunate, as this may lead to the employees using different
methods for solving the problem.
3. Misaligned SecPol regarding authorization. Our
interviews highlighted that being able to do their work is the
most important goal for every employee. Thus, the SecPol
should aim to facilitate this aim. Too strict AC will in some
cases lead to obstruction in day-to-day tasks and lead to em-
ployees ﬁnding workarounds, which may compromise security,
such as asking trusted co-workers to borrow cards. Some of
the respondents reported not having been included in the de-
velopment of the SecPol and felt that it was misaligned.
4. Too much security. In especially one of the most
modern buildings, there is a very strict AC regime in place,
where low-level security rooms and facilities are regulated.
Several of the respondents highlighted this as the main reason
for card lending. These low-security rooms only required the
card and not the PIN code, so the respondents did not consider
this a serious breach of policy. Several of our respondents said
that this was too much security and could not understand the
reasoning underlying this decision.
5. Lack of risk awareness and consequences. 33 out of
36 deﬁned possible negative consequences for the institution,
so, the awareness around possible risks for the institution was
high. However, we found that less than half of the respondents
had read the overarching SecPol and that the respondents
were unaware and uncertain about the organization’s and their
personal risk if their cards went astray. Everybody agreed that
it was a bad thing, but nobody could say with certainty what
the consequences would be, if any at all.
E. RCA Step 6 - Proposed root cause treatments
Based on our ﬁndings we conducted Systematic In-
ventive Thinking and came up with following root cause
treatments:
Improve fallback solutions. Regarding root cause 1 and
2, the RCA team proposed to develop a solution for reserve
access cards with adequate and tailored room access. The solu-
tion should provide basic access to low-security level facilities,
with tailored room access according to stakeholder needs. This
suggestion should be a public and low threshold offer for those
who have forgotten or misplaced their cards.
Align SecPol with objectives. Regarding root causes
3 and 4, the RCA team proposed to risk assess the need
for physical security and AC for the facilities based on the
organizational goals, employee needs, and the assets stored in
the room. Include key stakeholders in the process and focus
on balancing productivity and security to revise the security
baseline.
Improve the overarching SecPol. Regarding cause 5,
the RCA team proposed to improve the overarching SecPol,
the suggestions were: (i) clarify consequences for breaches of
policy, (ii) assigning a responsible for sanctions per depart-
ment, (iii) including the employees in the shaping of policy,
and (iv) increase the accessibility of the policy.
Improving risk awareness. Regarding root cause 5, we
also propose to improve risk awareness among the stakehold-
ers, by running awareness campaigns including both the risks
the organization and employees are facing. As a part of this,
we proposed to create an information bank regarding risks,
fallback solutions, and how to make use of them.
F. Comparison of Risk Assessment and RCA Results
Upon completing the RCA, we see that the results from
the ISRA and RCA provide different models of the same
problem. The information gathered from the ISRA process
was scoped towards technical risks with solutions for reducing
probability and consequence. Furthermore, we found the RCA
to work better to visualize complexity and providing insight
into the human aspects of the problem. However, the RCA
process was resource intensive and required extra training to
complete. The RCA process also required the inclusion of
more stakeholders than the ISRA.
The results show that the beneﬁts of the RCA are a better
understanding of the social dimensions of the problem, such
as conﬂicts between users and the security organization. This
insight provides an improved decision basis and an opportunity
for reaching a compromise with the risk treatment. The risk
67
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 5: Fishbone diagram illustrating contributing causes to the main problem.
assessment team were aware of two (cause 3. and 5.) out of
the ﬁve identiﬁed root causes of the problem. Thus, in our case
study, the RCA did provide a valuable extension to the risk
assessment for solving the problem. The RCA results showed
all root causes to be on the administrative and human side
of the problem. Thus, the treatments produced from the two
approaches were different; ISRA produced a technical treat-
ment in camera surveillance, while RCA produced multiple
administrative treatments, each for addressing separate root
causes.
Although the ISRA did highlight the vulnerabilities
related to the human factor and risk perception as one of
the risk factors, in this case, the decision-makers did not
opt for revision of the AC policy. To summarize, the ISRA
ﬁndings viewed card lending as a technical security problem,
while RCA extended the knowledge into the administrative
problem.
Moving on, the nest section presents the results and
evaluation of RCA as a tool for tabletop exercises.
VI.
TABLETOP RCA CASE STUDY: CARBANAK
The RCA tabletop case was meant as an experiment on
how well RCA worked on a case with only historical data
and technical documentation available. A tabletop exercise is a
discussion-based exercise where personnel meet in a classroom
or simulated setting. The group got presented with a scenario to
validate the content of plans, procedures, policies, cooperative
agreements or other information for managing an incident.
Which means that there was restrictions regarding access to
new information. This case investigated how the RCA work
on a tabletop case.
The case study concerned attacks on multiple banking in-
stitutions, where the attackers managed to steal large amounts
of money. The attack was often referred to as Carbanak, but
also Anunak [20], [21]. The tools used on each step during
the analysis of the tabletop case is described in the following
sections.
A. Problem understanding
Since we worked only with documentation of the attack
we needed to gain an overview of information that was gath-
ered. Based on the constraints we found swimlane ﬂowchart to
be the best suited tool for modelling the attack, Fig. 6. As noted
in Section III-B this ﬂowchart works by having a swimlane
representing each actor on the y-axis, where the lanes progress
following the x-axis, which represents the chronological order
of actions or events in time. The ﬂowchart had three lanes
representing actions taken by either the attacker, the bank
employees and administrator. This tool visualized the main
events and how one lead to another. We found that the primary
way the attackers got into the banks was by using phishing
emails that was sent to employees, as documented at page 3 in
a Kaspersky report [20]. Furthermore, the attackers exploited
vulnerabilities in Microsoft Ofﬁce and Word before installing
the backdoor named Carbanak. In a video of a presentation by
a Kaspersky employee, the employee said that the attackers
escalated their privileges by sending an email from the infected
computer to the IT help complaining that the computer ran
slow [22]. The IT employee then logged in to the computer and
had his or her credentials stolen by a keylogger. The attackers
now escalated their privileges by obtaining access to more
machines to spy on additional bank employees. The attackers
then observed common working patterns and learned how to
use the tools the employees was using. This knowledge allowed
them to proceed with their attack and steal money from the
bank. The swimlane chart helps to visualize the attack ﬂow
and allowed us to obtain an overview of the situation, steps
taken, involved parties, and the timeline.
The second tool applied in the problem understanding
was Critical Incident, which is a tool meant to aid in the
process of uncovering symptoms of the most problematic root
causes [2]. Critical Incident is a two column table where the
left column is the name of a type of incident and the right
column is the frequency occurrence. Due to the constraints of
the tabletop exercise, we did not have the numerical data on
the frequency of different incidents that we needed to complete
68
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 6: Swimlane Flowchart illustrating attack ﬂow, the timeline of the attack from left to right.
TABLE IV. CARBANAK CRITICAL INCIDENT TABLE
FROM PAGE IN 88
Name
Frequency
Suspicious trafﬁc
High
Monitoring of machines
High
Opening of e-mail attachments
Medium
Policy violations
Medium
Unfaithful employees
Low
Attackers has access to servers
Low
Undiscovered infections in IT systems
Low
Ignorance of spyware
Low
Low security awareness among coworkers
Low
the tabletop case. The solution was to use logical reasoning to
estimate which incident most likely had the highest frequency
based on the technical documentation. We estimated this using
weights ranging from High - happens daily, Medium - weekly,
to Low - monthly or less often.
Suspicious trafﬁc has the highest frequency in the table.
This trafﬁc represents communication that goes from and
between IT equipment inside the banks that are infected and
the machines owned by the attackers. The frequency is set to
high as we expected that this trafﬁc could reasonably be argued
as high. The attackers monitored machines owned by the banks
in order to see how the employees operated them, page 21 [20],
and this is also placed as high frequency. Since the collected
documentation described that the attackers got into the bank
through email attachments it may be possible that it is not
too uncommon that employees opens and runs ﬁles received
in mail attachments. An employee may break a policy without
being purposefully unfaithful, but rather negligent. Thus it was
ranked as with medium frequency. The amount of times it
is believed that the attackers felt a need to enter the server
infrastructure of the banks is deemed as low. This happens
most likely when the attackers wants to place backdoors or
start malicious processes.
B. Problem cause brainstorming
Unstructured brainstorming aims to brainstorm on possi-
ble causes and present them to the group members. The results
were generated as a list of problems that can be improved. We
also wanted to identify possible consequences that originated
from the problem being analyzed.
The produced list from the brainstorming process is not
sorted in any way, and may contain suggestions that more
or less overlap. The following step is therefore to sort the
list and merge suggestions that overlap and improve upon the
suggestions. The list is then sorted according to what is deemed
to be the most realistic cause of the problem by the RCA
team.
Lastly, in the third step we categorized the proposed
problem causes. A total of four categories were created, where
the ﬁrst category deals with the training of employees and the
follow-up of the training. This category included the sugges-
tion that there might be a lack of policies or a lack of training
and exercise of said policies. The second category referred to
weaknesses such as lack of updates and the failing to notice
suspicious activity in their systems. The third category referred
to monitoring of network and the fourth and last category was
about corporate threats.
C. Problem cause data collection
It was not possible to do an active data gathering during
the tabletop case since there is no access to personnel to
interview or systems to look into.
D. Problem cause data analysis
In this phase we used Relation Diagram and Afﬁnity
Diagram III-B. The Relation Diagram, Fig. 7, illustrates the
relation between different systems and computers, compared
to the Swimlane Flowchart which showed the ﬂow of actions
over time. A large circle was drawn on a whiteboard and
elements that was viewed as important and overarching was
written around the circle. Arrows was then drawn between
these items according to relations. In this case, we did not
ﬁnd any new relations that we did not expect already from the
documentation and previous RCA steps.
69
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 7: Relation Diagram illustrating connections between employees and systems.
The Afﬁnity Diagram is a tool for organizing ideas and
data. Fig. 8 represents the afﬁnity diagram for the case where
we organized the problem situations under the groups malware,
training, and environment.
Fig. 8: Afﬁnity Diagram illustrating ordering by context.
E. Root cause identiﬁcation
The Five Whys approach was used to identify root cause,
Table V. The tool was used on the question of why the ATM’s
gave away money to the criminals. The reasons that answers
each of the ﬁve why questions was suggestions of what could
be realistic, given that this was a tabletop case. The tool did
uncover one root cause, however it is not visible if there exists
more root causes. The tool appear to be able to isolate the users
on one root cause unless it is run several times. The tool was
very quick to complete.
TABLE V. CARBANAK TABLETOP CASE, FIVE WHYS
ATM giving
Reason
away money
Why?
Because the system was compromised
Why?
Because the attackers exploited a vulnerability
when employees opened mail
Why?
Because their software was not up to date
Why?
Because the bank had inadequate update routines
Why?
It was not considered to be critical enough
F. Problem elimination
The tool Countermeasure Matrix, Table VI, was used
to suggest worthy countermeasures based on efﬁciency and
feasibility. The way the group solved it was by rating efﬁciency
and feasibility of a counter measure from 1 to 5. The two scales
are then summarized, and if the number is ten or above, an
action is suggested to be taken. However, for upgrading of
legacy systems an action was set to not do anything because it
could be unrealistic in many large organizations. We deﬁne
updating as installing a newer version of a software while
patching as installing security patches and bug ﬁxes of a given
version of the software. With baseline, it was meant as to have
a hash of most ﬁles in a system that could be used to detect
changes to these ﬁles.
G. Solution implementation
A Tree Diagram, displayed in Fig. 9, was used to show
which solutions and problems was related to each others,
sorted under categories that was linked together with branches
that are rooted to the main problem.
H. Assessment of RCA as a tabletop exercise
We found that doing a tabletop case gave us experi-
ence on the choosing and execution of RCA tools, but it
did not provide any new information about the case being
analyzed.
We do see that doing a RCA requires allot of information
70
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 9: Tree Diagram illustrating relations between problems and solutions.
TABLE VI. CARBANAK TABLETOP CASE,
COUNTERMEASURES MATRIX
Countermeasures
Efﬁciency
x Feasibility
Sum
Action
Updating
4
5
20
Yes
Patching
4
5
20
Yes
Auto-updates
4
2
8
No
Training
2
5
10
Yes
Baseline
4
3
12
Yes
Monitoring
4
4
16
Yes
Temporarily close bank
2
1
2
No
Trace attack back to attacker
2
1
2
No
Upgrade legacy systems
5
2
10
No
Sandboxing
3
3
9
No
Test environment
4
3
12
Yes
Going through logs
3
5
15
Yes
Scan incoming emails
3
4
12
Yes
about the case. For practice reasons a tabletop case works with
providing practice in selecting tools and applying them, but
in order to do an actual RCA and discover root causes and
implement solutions to them it is necessary to have access
to key personnel, logs about what happened, and any other
information that can be gathered.
As the tabletop case was dealing with protection versus
an APT, we got the impression that completely eliminating
a treat of attack from such an opponent is not completely
possible. However, eliminating a root cause for an exploited
vulnerability increases the organizations resistance towards
attacks from the attacker.
VII.
CASE STUDY 3: ROOT CAUSE OF DDOS AGAINST
SMALL SECURITY AWARENESS ORGANIZATION
In this case study, we analyzed a case we received
from a small Norwegian security awareness organization of
a DDoS attack that occurred in May 2015. At the time,
the organization consisted of approximately ten employees
with the primary objective of preventing and mitigating the
consequences of identity theft. In this case we applied the
RCA tools to investigate the root cause why their primary
website became unavailable during the attack. We also studied
whether the solution proposals implemented to date answer all
the problems or if any problems remain.
The data sources we had available for the case study was
primarily access to key personnel and the police report. Meet-
ings with key stakeholders were conducted in connection with
the problem understanding and data collection. An important
limitation was that the organization told us that they wanted to
largely ignore technical issues, like for example how to avoid
DDoS and type of DDoS. The case study was also conducted
under time and resource constraints and was conducted to
see how the RCA method perform under these conditions.
This case study was completed within approximately 150
hours.
A. Problem understanding - Multiple tools
The police report of the attack was an important contri-
bution to the problem understanding and facilitated modelling
the problem in a Swimlane Flowchart. The model is intended
to show the ﬂow through performances and events. The in-
cident involved three stakeholders: The attacker, the website
host, and the organization. The incident spanned over two days,
following is a description of the timeline and elements in Fig.
10:
7th of May 2015
•
14:30 - Organization is notiﬁed via external service
that Organization’s web pages are unavailable.
•
15:45 - Organization contacts their service provider
and is informed that they are working on the matter.
•
16:16 - Organization is contacted by its service
provider, who informs that it is a denial of service
attack (DDoS)
•
19:50 - Organization is contacted by their service
provider explaining that Organization’s web pages
continuously receive between 40 and 60000 requests
from foreign IP addresses and fails due to overload.
There was an attempt to block foreign trafﬁc, but due
to the challenges of the service provider’s network
provider, this did not make it possible. It was then
attempted to change the IP address of Organization
’web server and update the DNS of the domain Or-
ganization.no. This worked for 15-20 minutes. After-
noon/Evening - Organization informs National CERT
(NorCERT) and the related security operations centre
about the denial of service attack. NorCERT also gets
the logs of the attack.
8th of May 2015
•
08:00 - All Organization websites are still unavailable.
•
08:10 - All web pages are available again
•
10:15 - The attack starts again, with the result that all
the pages again becomes unavailable
71
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 10: Flowchart for DDoS case study.
•
12:24 - Service Provider informs that they are now
blocking trafﬁc from abroad, and web pages are
gradually available for Norwegian and Scandinavian
visitors. 12:30 - The local police is contacted for
assistance in the case.
Performance Matrix
Performance Matrix was used to ﬁnd out the most
important priorities for the organization and the current perfor-
mance within these areas. The priorities were identiﬁed in co-
operation with key stakeholders. The stakeholders said that the
most problematic about their site being down was that people
could not access the self-help sites for identity theft mitigation.
At the time, the organization had no sufﬁcient countermeasure
in place against DDoS. They could not quite answer how many
times they were exposed to DDoS in a year, because they
lacked the overview.
We were told that there was a high number of inquiries
to the main website. Another problem was that it could also be
difﬁcult to respond to each inquiry within an acceptable time
frame and provide sufﬁcient help. Their self-help page and also
website uptime were highly ranked within the performance
matrix, as it is an organizational objective from them that
the self-help site should serve and solve the majority of the
inquiries. For the performance matrix we investigated the
importance and performance of four areas: (i) Ability to help
together with uptime and capacity for managing requests,
(ii) Customer contact possibilities, (iii) Response Time, and
(iv) Availability of the Self-help page. Fig. 11 shows the
performance matrix for the four areas rated in co-operation
with the expert.
B. Problem cause brainstorming
Here we used unstructured brainstorming to obtain an
overview of and consensus on what is being seen as problem
causes. We developed a list of expected consequences and
causes of the problem or the problems that build up the
Fig. 11: Performance matrix for DDoS Case Study.
visible symptoms. The following list is grouped by impor-
tance, starting with identiﬁed possible consequences of the
problem:
1)
No accessibility for clients/users of the service.
2)
Reduced reputation.
3)
If the organization is unable to drive self-help, they
will experience increased queues in other channels
which they are not staffed to manage.
4)
Possible ﬁnancial problems.
Possible causes of the problem:
1)
Service Provider had no tested plan for handling the
situation.
2)
Not enough knowledge and training in the organiza-
tion for handling the incident.
72
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 12: Afﬁnity diagram for the DDoS case study.
3)
The organization is a target because it puts itself in
a cross ﬁre between individuals’ problems and cyber
crime attempting to make money.
4)
The attackers can be outside Norway, which limits the
jurisdiction and prosecution for domestic authorities.
5)
No existing DDoS deterrence.
6)
DDoS of the website was not a prioritized risk.
7)
Missing/insufﬁcient risk assessment.
8)
Insufﬁcient resources spent on server computing
power, throughput, and bandwidth.
C. Problem cause data collection
Due to the case constraints and since we already had
collected data on the problem, we chose to apply the check
sheet approach for systematizing the problem cause data. With
the Check Sheet tool we examined how the situation was while
under attack and how the situation was afterwards. The desired
dividend is to achieve a priority or a ranking of the items to
be analyzed.
The points generated in the brainstorming phase were
discussed with our contact person at the organization. Each
item in the causes and consequences list were discussed and
ranked. No graphical models of the check sheet was produced
for the case.
D. Problem cause data analysis
Very few of the available RCA tools suited the case
study. On the other hand, it was feasible to look for hidden
contexts in the data collected. An Afﬁnity Diagram 12 was
attempted even though the data was not numeric.
The desire is to look for hidden contexts in the data
collected. Following is qualitative assessment of the causes
from the data collection phase:
The police did not look at the evidence: The or-
ganization collected the available evidence in the form of
logs, and these were encrypted and password protected. The
organization then reported the attack to the police and sent the
encrypted evidence ﬁle and wrote that the police could contact
them to receive the password for the ﬁle. The police never
contacted them to obtain the password and dropped the case.
Which means that there is a low probability of the attacker
experiencing any consequences.
Contact with service provider: The website provider
had no procedures on how to handle the situation, and con-
tacted its network provider who could not immediately assist.
The time it took to establish contact was relatively short.
Slettmeg.no experiences it as an important aspect of this
situation that contact time is short and that they themselves
know that there are problems with the services they are
delivering.
Ad-hoc situation handling: The provider of the web
services was not trained in such situations and could not handle
it when the attack occurred. Therefore, they contacted their
network provider and suggested that they block the trafﬁc from
foreign addresses when they discovered that the attack did not
originate from Norway. The network provider was also unable
to immediately respond to this request. The organization itself
had not completed any exercises on DDoS situations, so the
incident was handled ad-hoc.
Host unable to block foreign trafﬁc immediately:
The website host did not have any mechanisms in place to
shutdown network trafﬁc from abroad. Thus, they had to
contact the ISP they used, which also had no solution in place.
Thus, it took unnecessary time for network trafﬁc from abroad
to be closed.
Wide-spanning vulnerability: The crash was aimed at
the domain and not the IP address, however, the trafﬁc took
down all web services provided by the organization.
Unnecessary resources spent on handling the inci-
dent: The attack also led to people having to prioritizing to
handle the situation leading to production loss. This situation
occurred both at the web host and the ISP.
E. Root cause identiﬁcation
Due to the restrictions of the case study, no visualization
tools were applied to this phase. For this case, we identiﬁed 5
primary root causes
1. The attacker’s motivation and intention: The at-
tacker is motivated to perform an attack for several different
reasons. Some of the reasons may occur from the work on
mitigating the consequences of identity theft. There may also
exist motivations that are not due to the organization’s primary
objectives but may be motivated by the attacker attempting to
gain recognition. Bragging also deal with hacktivists that is
motivated by publicity and fame. There may be a prestige
in taking down a website that is managed by a security
organization. DDoS is an easy to implement attack and with
the right measures it is difﬁcult to reveal the attacker.
2. Low perceived risk: It is costly to track down a
moderately skilled attacker on the Internet. This may con-
tribute towards the attacker thinking that there is a low
probability of detection and therefore, there are no effective
deterrents.
3. Easy to implement: A DDoS attack is easy to
conduct. Even with little knowledge, there are standardized
tools available for the task, some for free and others for sale.
Ampliﬁcation attacks also contribute contribute to an uneven
distribution of power between attacker and defender, as the
vulnerable protocols are easy to exploit.
4. Lack of preparation: Neither the organization, web-
site host, or the ISP was prepared to manage the DDoS
incident.
73
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

5. Lack of security management: The situation was
poorly managed and the organization delegated responsibility
for the situation without verifying that the host was able to
handle such situations.
F. Problem elimination
Systematic inventive thinking is an approach to eliminate
the problem. Since the case study had time constraints, the root
cause we proposed to address was primarily Lack of security
management. Furthermore, we listed components for the prob-
lem and according to tool description we took suggestions on
components even though they could seem irrelevant. The areas
we proposed to improve was:
1)
Responsibility and chain of command
2)
Security procedures for handling the problem
3)
The contract and service level agreement
4)
Incident handling cooperation and communication
with the supplier
5)
Knowledge and experience building of the provider.
These
problem-solving
components
were
chosen
according to the 5 SIT principles. However, several of the
principles turned out to be unworkable on the component,
and in our case we chose to leave them blank. During
the implementation of an SIT principle, we have described
a proposal for improvement based on the purpose of the
principle. Following are SIT analysis examples of the three
ﬁrst countermeasures:
No. 1 Responsibility and chain of command.
Component control: Ensure that the responsible person is
linked to environments with professional knowledge.
No. 2 is Security procedures:
Attribute dependency: Impose greater control on the purchased
services.
Component control: Compare own procedures with best
practices.
Procedure: If one compares their procedures with similar
organizations and best practices, one can discover weaknesses
in their own and get new ideas on how problems can be
solved. By carefully examining the service provider, an
attempt can be made to reduce possible problem situations in
the future.
No. 3 is Contract:
Attribute dependency: The contract should clearly describe the
supplier’s responsibilities.
Component control: Make sure the contract is equivalent to
the environment.
Procedure: If the contract had held the service provider respon-
sible, it could have been possible for the organisation to receive
compensation for lost working hours caused by reorganization
of work tasks during and after the attack. Contracts can also
specify that the provider must have knowledge of how such
situations should be treated.
G. Solution implementation
We have presented suggestions for improvement on pro-
cedure and contract. Furthermore, it is necessary to determine
TABLE VII. TOTAL HOURS SPENT CONDUCTING THE
PRIMARY RCA FOR AN UNTRAINED THREE MAN
TEAM (APPROXIMATELY 220 HOURS PER TEAM
MEMBER)
Step
Phase
Tasks
Time spent
Preliminary
Preparations
Collecting available data
100 hours
Preliminary
Preparations
Testing and choosing tools
72 hours
1
Problem Understanding
Performance Matrix
3 hours
2
Problem cause brainstorming
Brainstorming
1 hours
3
Problem cause Data Collection
Planning interviews
150 hours
3
Problem cause Data collection
Conducting interviews
100 hours
4
Data analysis
Qualitative & Statistical
220 hours
5
Root cause identiﬁcation
Fishbone
7 hours
6
Root cause elimination
SIT
7 hours
Total 660 h.
Only RCA Process
Total 488 h.
how the implementation is to be organized. The solution imple-
mentation tools available to help explain how the organization
should be. Then there is the question of whether a tool is
needed to guide, organize and structure the implementation. If
the implementation is large or unintentional, it is recommended
to use a Tree Diagram. We see from previous analyzes that the
three chart has a structured review, as shown in the access card
case for access cards and DDoS case. When it is appropriate
to make comparisons with other organizations, a Spider Chart
can be used.
H. Assessment of RCA in situations with limited resources and
time
Having a limited amount of time and resources on the
analysis of the DDoS attack was very demanding. Two analysts
completed the case within two weeks (∼ 150 hours of effective
work). In this case, the project team would have beneﬁted from
more contributors, for example, by identifying more potential
problems during the brainstorming phase. Additionally, more
project members would have provided a stronger quality
control of the RCA process in the early phases. Due to time
constraints, the tool selection and model development had less
emphasis as the pressure was to deliver results within the
time frame. However, going through the RCA process did
produce results and insight into the problem. The RCA tools do
force a structure onto a complex issue, which makes it more
comprehensible. Our results shows that carrying out a RCA
can provide a better understanding of the situation even with
limited resources. We came up with suggestions for changes
that the organization had not considered following the incident,
providing evidence that the RCA process does have utility
for InfoSec issues in more time constrained environments as
well. However, the results would have improved with more
time and resources, and more of both would be needed to
complete a case with increased complexity and scope of the
problem.
VIII.
DISCUSSION
This section discusses the cost/beneﬁt of RCA, then
evaluates the RCA tools for InfoSec application, and lastly,
outlines the limitations and proposals for future work within
the ﬁeld.
A. Cost-beneﬁt analysis
For cost-beneﬁt analysis, we consider time spent on tasks
and usefulness of the task. Table VII shows cost in time for
74
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

our team from conducting the primary case study. The reported
hours are the total amount from start to end without having a
budget constraint. The reported hours does contain resources
spent beyond the three-man team, e.g., from interview atten-
dance and supervision. Case studies 2 and 3 were conducted
within approximately 150 hours per assessment, but without a
concrete distribution of hours per task. Because of this, they
are left out of the cost beneﬁt discussion.
The most time consuming and crucial tasks were the
steps 3 and 4, data collection and analysis. Further, the table
shows that the resource demand for the Root cause identiﬁca-
tion and elimination phases as low, this is because the team
primarily identiﬁed the root causes during the data analysis.
While the main task of the root cause identiﬁcation phase was
to formalize the causes and effects, and the elimination was
used to propose treatments.
As the team gain experience with using RCA on cases,
the time estimate should be signiﬁcantly be reduced. For
example, our study spent 172 hours in the preparation phases
gathering data on the problem and testing tools. With more ex-
perience, the preliminary steps will be signiﬁcantly shortened.
Our team also estimated that the whole process itself would
become leaner with practice.
To summarize, we derived the primary beneﬁt from
the problem cause data collection and analysis phases, which
enabled the root cause identiﬁcation. Furthermore, the group
beneﬁted from working on the performance matrix, which set
the direction for the remainder of the project. Regarding the
remaining tools, the beneﬁts the problem cause brainstorming
was that it helped to provide an overview of the problem space
and invited creative thinking. The advantage of the Fishbone
tool was to group and visualize the identiﬁed problems in the
context. Further, the process step contributed to determine and
analyze causes. The SIT tool has a series of ﬁve principles
that attempts to discover how to solve the components of the
root cause. This tool offers a well-structured way to traverse
a problem situation but could be resource intensive when
handling many problems with all their components.
Issues of minor importance should not be subject to such
an extensive effort as RCA requires. During the preparations
for this study, we ran RCA for minor issues and found it
not worthwhile as it was unproductive to use a complicated
problem-solving process to less costly problems. However,
future projects should consider RCA when they perceive the
issue as important and do not know its nature or cause. The
problem should be expensive, complicated, and cannot be
addressed sufﬁciently with less comprehensive methods. These
properties make conducting an RCA on the project justiﬁable
and a valuable addition to the decision-making process.
B. Evaluation of the applied RCA tools
In this section, we evaluate the tools regarding expec-
tation, application, and outcome. The cases are numbered as
follows; the case about the access control for the Scandinavian
R&D institution is case one, the tabletop exercise is case two,
and the DDoS on the Security awareness website is case three.
Table VIII shows an overview of the RCA tools applied on
each case.
1) Performance Matrix: The performance matrix was
applied in two cases. The purpose of this tool is to achieve a
better understanding of the problem, prioritization of problem
TABLE VIII. OVERVIEW OF RCA TOOLS USED IN THE
CASE STUDIES.
RCA Phase
Tool name
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Card Swap
Carbanak
DDoS incident
Problem
Performance
X
X
Understanding
Matrices
Critical Incident
X
(X)
Swimlane
X
X
Flowchart
Problem Cause
X
X
X
Brainstorming
Problem Cause
Interviews
X
X
Data Collection
Check Sheet
(X)
Incident Data
Analysis
Problem Cause
Afﬁnity Diagram
X
X
X
Data Analysis
Relationship
X
Diagram
Root Cause
Fishbone
X
Identiﬁcation
Diagram
Five Whys
X
Problem
Systematic Inventive
X
X
Elimination
Thinking
Countermeasures
X
Matrix
Solution
Tree Diagram
X
X
Implementation
X = Applied
(X) = Tested, but experienced restrictions
components, and to identify which part of the problem will
reduce the largest amount of symptoms if removed. In the
primary case study, we interviewed key personnel from the IT
department at the institution based on the tool. The difference
between what we estimated the answers to be and the responses
we got was quite different, which shows how important it is
to have key personnel partaking in the process of applying a
Performance Matrix. Overall, this tool helped the group to gain
a better understanding of the problem.
In the DDoS case, it was essential for us to determine
what was important for the website owner and how they felt
that the functions they offer were working. We did experi-
ence that communication was critical, such as our ability to
communicate what we were looking for. A note here is that
more planning on how to teach the workings of performance
matrices to the stakeholders would have made the process
easier and quicker than we experienced it to be.
In both cases, we found that performance matrices were
worth the effort as they are not time-consuming and they
provide valuable insight into the problem.
2) Critical Incident: This tool was used in case two
and three. Our expectations of the tool in these cases were
that it would give a canonical and graphical display of the
most frequent incidents. In both cases, we realized that it was
not possible to generate actual numerical frequency labels.
However, our experience in case two shows that it was possible
to substitute these numerical frequencies with variables such
as ”low, medium, and high,” as long as a description of what
these ranges are. In case three, this issue was solved by creating
questions that we gave them, and they ranked them according
to what they found the most problematic. Our experience
shows that it was difﬁcult to acquire numerical frequencies of
InfoSec incidents or other events, which rendered the critical
incident tool having low utility. We managed a workaround
using subjective values but quantiﬁed numbers are less prone
to biases, and an approach for quantifying InfoSec incidents
is proposed in the future work section.
75
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Under the premises for the case studies the critical inci-
dent tool still provided information regarding problem causes
without numerical data. However, frequencies of incidents
should be in place before using the tool.
3) Swimlane Flowchart: This tool was ﬁrst used in the
tabletop exercise and then in case three regarding the DDoS
incident. When using swimlanes, we wanted to investigate the
ﬂow of actions and get a visual representation of the incident.
The goal was to obtain a better understanding of the incident
details and detect connections between elements, which other-
wise would not be easy to spot. The tool resulted in a graphical
representation of the links and relationships between events
and summarizes the events and their occurrence. We found
this tool useful for visualizing the problem ﬂow, involved
stakeholders and actions taken. Flowcharts have a low cost
to produce and a high utility.
4) Problem cause Brainstorming: This tool was applied
in all cases with the aim to generate a list of probable causes
and unify the project members views as a foundation for the
next steps. Further, we also wanted the brainstorming process
to help us identify possible consequences from the problems
brainstormed. The tool worked well in categorizing the issues
as well as bringing forth information about how some problems
may relate to others. The brainstorming together with the
problem understanding sets the scope for the remainder of the
RCA and is therefore crucial step in the process.
5) Interview: Interviews were used in the case 1 and
2, and we experienced it as a good way to obtain contact
with stakeholders, establish a network, and collect useful data
for the RCA process. The interviews had to be planned with
due care and tailored for the interview subject. With case
one from the R&D organization we experienced that doing
interviews revealed the attitude on card lending between the
employees. Additionally, interviewing the primary stakeholder
in case 3 provided invaluable information and insight into
the problem space. Interviews were very time consuming, but
did also provide the most reward through insight into the
problem.
6) Check Sheet: By using Check Sheet in case three
we wanted to achieve a ranking on either a prioritization or
ranking of problems that has occurred. We also wanted to
gain experience on the usage of the tool and evaluate how
the tool worked in the given situation. It was not possible to
obtain the frequencies of the events, which we then had to
solve by asking questions concerning the problems that we
had listed. The check sheet also partly relies on incident or
problem frequencies as some tools rely on them to work as
intended.
The check sheet tool did not provide the information
needed to continue the case study and had to be exchanged
with interviews.
7) Incident data analysis: This tool was not applied in
the case studies but is discussed under future work.
8) Afﬁnity Diagram: In case one, the goal of the Afﬁnity
Diagram was to categorize the suggested solutions to the
problem, and then research which category the interview
objects was the most interested in. We addressed this task by
using a number on each proposed solution and summarized
the numbers in the top of each column.
The afﬁnity diagram worked well in our case studies to
categorize and sort the identiﬁed elements. For each case study,
we identiﬁed multiple elements rendering a high problem
complexity. The afﬁnity diagram aided in categorizing these
elements and reducing them to a manageable problem. In case
three our goal using Afﬁnity Diagram was to discover hidden
relationships in the data. However, no hidden relationships
were found.
We experienced that the tool was useful for categorizing
elements and reducing complexity. But it did not reveal or
correlate any hidden relationships between the causes of the
problem. For overview purposes, the tool has high utility and
low cost. However, the utility is more uncertain when it comes
to revealing hidden relationships.
9) Relationship Diagram: We applied the Relationship
Diagram in case two where we aimed to see relationships be-
tween elements in the diagram and how they affect each other.
We did not ﬁnd any previously undiscovered relationships, and
the tool did not have utility for advancing the RCA. However,
the tool might be helpful in communication settings and is has
a low cost time-wise to implement.
10)Fishbone Diagram: Fishbone Diagram was used on
solving case one in the root cause identiﬁcation stage. The
diagram displays the causes leading up to the card lending
problem for then to use this information to uncover the root
causes. We experienced that it was difﬁcult to generate the
categories and the elements in the diagram. However, as Fig.
5 shows, this is one of the highest utility tools in the RCA
toolbox. It visualizes the problem space and the contributing
causes in a comprehensive way, which also aids in stakeholder
communication. The time spent using the tool and making the
diagram was worth the time, and the cost will diminish with
more practice.
11)Five Whys: The RCA tool Five Whys was used in
case two in the root cause identiﬁcation phase. The tool itself
has a low cost. However, the completeness of the process
is questionable as there might be more causes than ﬁve. It
would have been preferable that the tool opens up for more
possibilities. A modiﬁcation could be to run it in more than one
iteration to see if more possible causes to the problem could
be generated. The tool is easy to understand and to implement,
with a time-wise low cost.
12)Systematic Inventive Thinking (SIT): SIT is designed
to ﬁnd the problem-causes where solutions could be applied
to eliminate the occurrence of the problems overall. We expe-
rienced that the tool worked well for its purpose, but the cost
was high to complete the process, and it was time-consuming
to deal with all the small components as well as it was error-
prone. We expect the amount of work needed to apply this tool
will vary depending on the task size. Designate enough time
to this tool and try to have as much overview of the problem
and its environment before embarking on it. In case three, the
SIT helped us discover components we earlier did not notice,
so, it has the tool has utility.
With smaller problems SIT can be useful, however, the
amount the work grows proportionally with the size of the
problem. The utility of running this tool is high as it provides
insight into the problem and strategies to eliminate it.
13)Countermeasure Matrix: Countermeasure Matrix was
used in case two to determine which countermeasures would
best solve the problem. The tool takes into account risks and
76
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

costs associated with applying the solutions. We found that
one of the tool’s limitations was that it was not able to take
into consideration the consequence a countermeasure could
present. Meaning that implementing a control can solve the
problem, but also likely introduces a new risk or problem
into the system. The countermeasures matrix is a useful tool
for sorting problem treatments and ranking them according to
estimated efﬁciency and feasibility. However, the tool could
also beneﬁt from estimating treatment cost.
14)Tree Diagram: In case one, the Tree Diagram was
used to present a structured plan for implementation of solu-
tions found while using SIT to the card lending problem. The
tool was able to display the order of the steps to be taken as
well as what category the action belongs. While applying this
tool, key personnel should be actively partaking in the process.
In case two, the goal with the tool was to generate a structure
of the solution implementation tasks and to visualize the links
between these tasks and their respective activity. Tasks are
represented by leaves and activities are represented by the root
and the branches. Since all the cases were limited to proposing
solutions and not implementations, we do no estimate the
utility of the tool.
C. Limitations & Future Work
The case study presented in this article is speciﬁc to
the organization and culture; thus our results have limited
generalizability, but the RCA method and results provide an
insight into what to expect from the process. Another aspect
is that our RCA team was inexperienced and other more
experienced teams will run the process more efﬁciently with
a better cost-beneﬁt.
An important limitation for this study was that we limited
the tool selection to the method proposed by Andersen and
Fagerhaug [2]. We did this to limit the complexity of the
process and tool selection. Future studies may wish to include
tools from other RCA methodologies and frameworks. We
found interviews have the highest value in the data collection
process. Similarly, questionnaires were not included in our
cases, but they have the potential for reaching a broader
audience and can also contribute to the RCA process.
Another issue is if a similar insight could have been
gained if we delegated a similar amount of resources into
the ISRA to investigate the problem. It is possible that the
results of the ISRA would have overlapped more with the RCA
with more time and resources spent on the former. However,
the ISRA process does not argue for such a deep dive into
the problem as the RCA process and does not provide tools
for doing so. It is therefore unlikely that a more thorough
ISRA process would have produced a similar result. However,
the incentive for such an investigation was not there, and we
perceive the ISRA methodologies as immature in this area [12].
Instead of considering the RCA as an extension of the ISRA, a
possible path for future work is to conduct case studies where
the researchers invest a similar amount of resources into both
the RCA and ISRA and then compare results.
An additional direction for future work is to apply RCA
to more and diverse case studies to get a better understand-
ing of the contributions and limitations of the approach for
InfoSec. Recent work has also proposed a novel approach for
conducting socio-technical security analysis [11], and a path
for future work is to adapt, develop, and improve RCA tools for
InfoSec. Furthermore, the future efforts could research RCA
efﬁciency through automation of tasks and build knowledge
repositories. Regarding the latter, a repository of tools for
data collection would help streamline step 3 in the RCA
process.
D. A proposal for RCA of InfoSec incidents
Andersen and Fagerhaug [2] proposes the use of incident
data analysis for use in RCA. An InfoSec incident is in short
a violation of the integrity, availability, or conﬁdentiality of
information assets or resources that fall under the security
constituency. If logged properly, incident data documents a
security incident from its detection until it is solved, including
measures taken by the incident handler to solve it. Thus,
incident data is a reliable and important source both for RCA
and risk analysis. However, we have conducted preliminary
research into utilizing RCA for InfoSec incident data and
encountered several challenges that must be solved for the data
to readily lend itself to RCA:
1)
No two incidents are the same. Both incident fre-
quencies and risk quantiﬁcation requires incidents to
be counted. So, to determine whether an incident is
re-occurring or not, we need to be able to quantify in-
cidents. However, in our preliminary work we found
that no two incidents are identical. For example, we
might be facing two incidents that are caused by com-
promised accounts, but the incidents do not involve
the same account, and the initial compromise and
malicious actions are likely different. The root-cause
might be vulnerable account security, but we need
a framework to classify and quantify to determine
the frequencies of re-occurring incidents. There are
already taxonomies of computer security incidents
[23], [24] that provide a nice starting point, but as
the threat landscape changes an update to these are
needed and a higher granularity is also desirable for
incident analysis.
2)
A security incident has at least one cause and one
malicious action. Trying to analyze a security inci-
dent one quickly reaches the conclusion that there
are at least two parts of the incident that must be
quantiﬁed. There is both an observable cause and an
observable outcome of an incident, where the latter
is often what is detected and triggers the incident. An
example of a typical incident:
”Incident topic: Compromised user
User XX is sending spam email internally to employ-
ees. The email contains a suspicious link to a foreign
IP address.”
In this case, the cause of the incident would classify
as a compromised user account, while the observable
outcome and malicious action is sending spam email.
Typically, the paper trail of an incident consists of the
original incident report or trigger, which varies quite
a lot depending on how the incident was detected.
Further, the incident handler logs each step he takes
to solve the incident and all correspondence with
affected parties. In short, all correspondence, analysis,
follow ups, and treatments are present in the logs.
Both the cause and the outcome of the incidents
should be observable from the incident data, so, a
77
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 13: Distributions of causes for DDoS Outgoing
comprehensive classiﬁcation scheme should aim to
classify both. However, our research into state-of-the-
art frameworks suggests that no such classiﬁcation
scheme exists.
3)
Organization maturity. The organization must be suf-
ﬁciently mature to have a developed and repeatable
process for handling and documenting incidents. A
non-standard process will generate a large variety
of incident logs, which will not easily lend itself to
incident quantiﬁcation.
In our preliminary analysis, we have tried to determine
the root causes of outgoing DDoS attacks for an organization,
where an attacker abuses vulnerable systems through for
example ampliﬁcation attacks. In Fig. 13, we have applied a
preliminary incident classiﬁcation framework and attempted to
classify all the the causes leading to the 61 security incidents.
Further, by classifying both the cause and the outcome
we can also analyze the outcomes of a particular incident
cause. This approach is useful for determining attacker mo-
tivation once he has exploited a vulnerability and gotten a
foot-hold inside the network. In Fig. 14, we have classiﬁed
84 incidents as ”Regular User Compromise” and mapped the
malicious actions of each incident with frequency distribu-
tions.
The incident data does show great promise as an addition
to the InfoSec management and resource allocation. From a
management perspective, the causes can be addressed by likeli-
hood reducing measures, while the outcomes can be addressed
with consequence reducing measures. However, there are some
challenges that need to be overcome in order to adapt RCA
into incident analysis. We have conducted some preliminary
research into the topic, but more research is needed particularly
into framework development.
IX.
CONCLUSION
This study has applied RCA tools to propose a solution
to a complex socio-technical InfoSec problem and found the
RCA method a valid but costly extension to the ISRA. Running
a full-scale RCA requires a lot of time and resources and
the problem should be expensive enough to justify the RCA.
The results from the RCA overlapped slightly with the initial
ISRA. The main differences were that the RCA team proposed
Fig. 14: Distributions of User Compromise outcomes
administrative treatments aimed at solving problems in the
social domain, while the ISRA produced a more technical
analysis and treatment of the problem. We conclude that practi-
tioners should look at these two approaches as complimentary
for dealing with complex socio-technical risks and problems.
The combination of the ISRA and RCA will also have utility
when planning for defense-in-depth, where administrative and
technical risk controls can work in coherence to mitigate
threats.
This study found that the RCA process does lend itself
to the constrictions of a tabletop exercise for training purposes.
RCA did not reveal any additional root causes. The group has
to manage the limitations of not having access new information
for solving the case. So, RCA has utility for exercise and
experimenting with the tools on different types of data, but
it is unlikely to provide any additional knowledge.
Applying the RCA under the time and resource-restricted
setting did generate valuable insight into the root causes of the
problem. For the case study of the DDoS attack, the process re-
vealed multiple causes that were previously undetected by the
principal. Several of these causes were in the socio-technical
domain, and are not likely to be found using typical InfoSec
analysis approaches. Therefore, we conclude the RCA process
worked well under resource and time restricted setting.
Several RCA tools proved useful for addressing til
InfoSec problems, with an overarching process tailored for
problem-solving. Examples of tools that worked well for our
case-studies for problem understanding was performance ma-
trices and swimlane ﬂowcharts. For data collection, interviews
had the highest utility. We found the afﬁnity diagram to have
the highest cost-beneﬁt in the problem cause data analysis
phase. One of the best tools in the RCA process for visualizing
several existing causes in the problem and communicating
was the ﬁshbone diagram. Although SIT has some drawbacks
regarding problem scaling, it worked well to provide solutions
to identiﬁed root causes.
The main drawback of RCA was that our cost-beneﬁt
analysis of the time and resources invested in case one is on
the borderline of being justiﬁable, and the cost of the problem
should be considered before launching a RCA. However, RCA
performed well under time and resource constraints for a less
78
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

complex problem. Thus, the full-scale RCA is a viable option
when dealing with both complex and costly InfoSec problems.
For minor issues, a RCA may be excessive or should at least
be strictly time managed. Based on our ﬁndings we conclude
that RCA should be a part of the InfoSec management tool-
box.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the help and support from Erlend
Brækken, Professor Einar Snekkenes, Christoffer Hallstensen,
and Stian Husemoen. We also extend our gratitude to all
the participants in our study and to the anonymous review-
ers.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Wangen, N. Hellesen, H. M. N. Torres, and E. L. Brækken,
“An empirical study of root-cause analysis in information security
management,” in SECURWARE, vol. 2017.
IARIA, 2017, pp. 26–33.
[2]
B. Andersen and T. Fagerhaug, Root cause analysis: simpliﬁed tools
and techniques.
ASQ Quality Press, 2006.
[3]
M. F. Peerally, S. Carr, J. Waring, and M. Dixon-Woods, “The problem
with root cause analysis,” BMJ Qual Saf, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 417–422,
2017.
[4]
H. M. N. Torres, N. Hellesen, and E. L. Brækken, “Bruk av
rot˚arsaksanalyse i informasjonssikkerhet,” B.S. thesis, NTNU in Gjøvik,
2016.
[5]
K. Julisch, “Clustering intrusion detection alarms to support root
cause analysis,” ACM transactions on information and system security
(TISSEC), vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 443–471, 2003.
[6]
P. F. Wilson, Root cause analysis: A tool for total quality management.
ASQ Quality Press, 1993.
[7]
A. M. Doggett, “Root cause analysis: a framework for tool selection,”
The Quality Management Journal, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 34, 2005.
[8]
J. Collmann and T. Cooper, “Breaching the security of the kaiser
permanente internet patient portal: the organizational foundations of
information security,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 239–243, 2007.
[9]
G. Wangen, “Conﬂicting incentives risk analysis: A case study of the
normative peer review process,” Administrative Sciences, vol. 5, no. 3,
p. 125, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/2076-3387/5/
3/125
[10]
A. Abubakar, P. B. Zadeh, H. Janicke, and R. Howley, “Root cause
analysis (rca) as a preliminary tool into the investigation of identity
theft,” in Cyber Security And Protection Of Digital Services (Cyber
Security), 2016 International Conference On.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[11]
J.-L. Huynen and G. Lenzini, “From situation awareness to action: An
information security management toolkit for socio-technical security
retrospective and prospective analysis,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy,
2017, pp. 213 – 224.
[12]
G. Wangen, C. Hallstensen, and E. Snekkenes, “A framework for
estimating information security risk assessment method completeness,”
International Journal of Information Security, Jun 2017. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10207-017-0382-0
[13]
J. Freund and J. Jones, Measuring and Managing Information Risk: A
FAIR Approach.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2014.
[14]
B. Schneier, “Attack trees,” Dr. Dobbs journal, vol. 24, no. 12, pp.
21–29, 1999.
[15]
Information technology, Security techniques, Information Security
Risk Management, International Organization for Standardization Std.,
ISO/IEC 27005:2011.
[16]
G. Wangen and E. Snekkenes, “A taxonomy of challenges in in-
formation security risk management,” in Proceeding of Norwegian
Information Security Conference - NISK 2013 - Stavanger, vol. 2013.
Akademika forlag, 2013, pp. 76–87.
[17]
P. Shedden, W. Smith, and A. Ahmad, “Information security risk
assessment: towards a business practice perspective,” in Australian In-
formation Security Management Conference.
School of Computer and
Information Science, Edith Cowan University, Perth, Western Australia,
2010, pp. 119–130.
[18]
G. Wangen, A. Shalaginov, and C. Hallstensen, “Cyber security risk as-
sessment of a ddos attack,” in International Conference on Information
Security.
Springer, 2016, pp. 183–202.
[19]
F. den Braber, I. Hogganvik, M. S. Lund, K. Stølen, and F. Vraalsen,
“Model-based security analysis in seven steps - a guided tour to the
coras method,” BT Technology Journal, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 101–117,
2007.
[20]
Kaspersky, “Carbanak apt the great bank robbery,” 2015. [Online].
Available: https://securelist.com/ﬁles/2015/02/Carbanak APT eng.pdf
[21]
“Anunak: Apt against ﬁnancial institutions,” Group-Ib, Fox-It. [On-
line].
Available:
https://www.group-ib.com/resources/threat-research/
Anunak APT against ﬁnancial institutions.pdf
[22]
J.
van
der
Wiel,
“How
did
the
carbanak
cybergang
steal
$1
billion from banks? (1/3),” accessed 22-Feb-2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=csc9VDuHBNU
[23]
M. Kjaerland, “A taxonomy and comparison of computer security
incidents from the commercial and government sectors,” Computers &
Security, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 522–538, 2006.
[24]
S. Hansman and R. Hunt, “A taxonomy of network and computer
attacks,” Computers & Security, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 31 – 43, 2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167404804001804
79
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

