Improving IT Security of Medical IoT Devices:
A Maturity Evaluation and a Labeling Approach
Michael Gleißner1,2, Johannes Dotzler1, Juliana Hartig1, Andreas Aßmuth2,
Clemens Bulitta1 and Steffen Hamm1
Technical University of Applied Sciences OTH Amberg-Weiden
1 Hetzenrichter Weg 15, 92637 Weiden, Germany
2 Kaiser-Wilhelm-Ring 23, 92224 Amberg, Germany
Email: {m.gleissner | jo.dotzler | j.hartig | a.assmuth | c.bulitta | s.hamm}@oth-aw.de
Abstract—The healthcare industry worldwide is currently
being transformed by digitization and the Internet of Things.
As the level of digitization increases, the number of devices
within a network of a healthcare facility grows exponentially. The
consequential complexity of the infrastructure poses a substantial
challenge for IT professionals to keep their networks secure. This
paper aims to provide two different ways to aid administrators
and decision makers to help integrate the increasing amount
of interconnected medical devices into their infrastructure more
securely. Additionally, two mobile ultrasonic scanners were tested
in regard to their security as well as privacy to show where
problems with such devices might occur.
Keywords—Internet of Things; healthcare; Medical IoT; cloud
services; IT security; IoT labeling; IoT evaluation.
I. MOTIVATION
With the rise of the Internet of Things (IoT), IT security
has become an ever increasing challenge. Additionally, one of
the main reasons why the focus on IT security is going to be
amplified is the fact that future communication networks will
be based on software-defined networks (SDN). SDNs will be
exposed to a large number of known attack vectors, which are
already available on the market since SDNs are increasingly
implemented using architectures similar to the Representa-
tional State Transfer (REST) schematic. Therefore, attacks can
be carried out by anyone without specific expert knowledge.
This risk is consciously accepted, and solutions are developed
for it. The reasoning is that potential gains for industries
that come with Next Generation Mobile Networks (NGMNs)
exceed the known risks. Potential benefits of NGMNs include,
for example, network-slicing or SIM provisioning. From an
economic point of view, NGMNs require new use cases, e.g.,
the density of connected IoT devices, to make it a profitable
investment for adopters. The most promising adoption of 5G
networks in that context is the so-called “massive Machine
Type Communication” (mMTC) [2]. New use cases are still
evolving, for example, for branches like public safety, the
automotive industry, healthcare, factory automation etc. These
use cases are based on the concepts of IoT and promise a
steep increase in productivity across a variety of business
processes and industries [3]. To implement these use cases, it
will be necessary to integrate and administrate up to 100,000
devices per 1 km² [4] in the future. This is going to present a
challenge that needs to be carefully considered. Undoubtedly,
managing such a massive IoT ecosystem demands highly
secure architectures and certified processes with a strong
focus on IT security, particularly for healthcare providers. The
goal of this paper is to provide two different methods for
healthcare facilities to improve their IT security posture. A
maturity model is presented, which provides guidance on how
an environment for Medical IoT (MIoT) integration needs to
be shaped in order to maintain a secure infrastructure while
still reaping the benefits of the devices. Additionally, a labeling
concept is shown. This concept allows personnel responsible
for procuring MIoT devices to quickly assess if a product
fulfills the minimum requirements to be considered secure for
integration. It is meant as a supporting tool for gaining a brief
overview rather than a replacement for an in-depth security
analysis of the MIoT device. The rest of the paper is structured
as follows. In Section II, a brief review of currently published
IoT security-related reference models from accredited stake-
holders, e.g., industry associations, consortia and alliances, are
presented. Section III highlights the background to understand
the topic and underlines essential aspects. Section IV intro-
duces a majority model focusing specifically on the healthcare
sector. Section V presents a labeling approach for technology
to empower healthcare facilities and consumers. Section VI
outlines a security test of two IoT devices in detail. At last,
an outlook and future thoughts are given.
II. RECENT WORKS
This section presents a brief literature overview of common
standards and reference models targeting IoT-related security
models and architectures by accredited consortia, alliances and
standardization bodies. During the literature research, it turned
out that relevant standardization efforts mainly originate from
the manufacturing and production sector. Consequently, it is
not surprising that most (industrial) IoT reference models,
architectures and blueprints target manufacturing and pro-
duction sites and are, therefore, not fully compatible with
the healthcare sector. A possible reason for these one-sided
efforts could be the fact that several government programs,
e.g., “Industrie 4.0” from Germany [5] or the “Made in China
2025” initiative from the Chinese government [6] have been
established.
52
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Literature research of already existing IoT reference models
targeting manufacturing and surrounding topics has already
been conducted by many researchers. Some examples are the
research from Nakagawa et al. with the title “Industry 4.0
reference architectures: State of the art and future trends”
[7] and the work of Mazon-Olivo and Pan titled “Internet
of Things: State-of-the-art, Computing Paradigms and Refer-
ence Architectures” [8]. For the sake of completeness, some
well-recognized reference models are mentioned. These are
the “Referenzarchitekturmodell Industrie 4.0” (RAMI4.0) [9],
the “NIST Smart Manufacturing Ecosystem” [10] and the
advanced IoT reference models for the Internet of Things
from the “IoT World Forum Reference Model” [11]. Also, the
European Union published a consolidated IoT standard and
announced the “3D Reference Architecture Model” [12].
Those architectures and frameworks targeting IoT security
all share that security cannot be achieved by merely apply-
ing software and / or technologies, e.g., blockchain, alone.
Security has to be an integral part even before the beginning
of the actual development process. During this process, the
type of users and the intended use cases are vital parameters
to consider. Some alliances apply security-relevant topics to
the entire supply chain. Starting with the component manu-
facturer (producer of hardware, e.g., chips and processors),
over to retailers and operational users. The goal is to provide
recommendations targeting those specific groups to security
by design into practice, which results, for example, in the
(Hardware) Root of Trust ((H)RoT) [13]. Others shed light
on detailed processes, e.g., on an auditable and verifiable boot
process [14], when setting up and integrating IoT devices in
an existing network.
From a German perspective, the Federal Office for Infor-
mation Security published in their recommendations several
useful proposals for how IoT devices can be used safely in
institutions [15] and how they can be operated securely [16].
These recommendations might find attention in well-financed
production industries with up-to-date IoT devices, which are
intended to perform their tasks in a network. But the reality
shows an entirely different picture because other industries,
e.g., the German healthcare industry, cannot rely on up-to-
date equipped departments, and thus, some outdated medical
devices will be modified to act as IoT devices. This approach
leads to a very error-prone infrastructure. A scenario has been
considered in this manner neither by the publications of the
Federal Office for Information Security nor by other sources
listed above. Another critical topic is the kind of data in the
healthcare industry. Health data or data related to patients need
to be treated with special care because this data describes
various medical conditions of people and can cause damage
in the wrong hands. In order to implement a legal basis, the
EU states in its General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
[17] a set of regulations which enforces compliant handling
of personal data. This is done to handle potential misconduct
of such sensitive information (e.g., healthcare data). A proper
application of the GDPR needs to be considered, especially in
the healthcare sector, where highly sensitive data is collected
[18]. Additionally, a certain set of rules and requirements need
to be defined in order to provide a minimum in the safety
and security of the technology used in practice. Therefore,
it is imperative to answer the corresponding questions about
what IoT devices will be deployed and thus purchased and
integrated in a future healthcare environment. This paper aims
to outline the common understanding and need for the defini-
tion of references related to safety and transparency labeling
models, focusing on the healthcare industry in Germany. Com-
plementary to this, a maturity model for Medical IoT devices
is proposed, which allows to evaluate if a secure integration
of these products by the corresponding actor is possible.
Section V proposes a concept that will enable consumers to
obtain a comprehensive picture of the functionality, built-in
components, generated data and responsible parties of an IoT
device. This allows customers to gain an overview of the
corresponding product even before purchase. Last but not least,
two exemplary Medical IoT devices are examined to show
the current deficits of the industry in regards to IT security.
In the following section, the mentioned assessment model is
introduced.
III. BACKGROUND
IoT is now influencing many areas of business and private
life and is gaining increasingly technical, social and economic
importance. IoT can be defined as “an emerging concept
comprising a wide ecosystem of interconnected services and
devices, such as sensors, consumer products and everyday
smart home objects, cars, and industrial and health compo-
nents” [19]. This work focuses on IoT devices in the healthcare
sector. It aims to be an extension to our previous work in [1]
with the goal of analyzing MIoT with a focus on IT security.
Especially in the healthcare sector, device failure can have
devastating consequences for human beings.
The reason for this is the increasing focus on digitization in
the healthcare sector. The introduction of the new 5G mobile
network will enable better and more efficient connectivity
between IoT devices, which means that the number of these
devices in the sensitive healthcare environment is expected to
grow exponentially over the next few years. In numbers, this
means that USD 60.83 billion were spent on IoT devices in
the healthcare sector in 2019, whereas in 2027, the investment
is expected to reach USD 260.75 billion [20]. The goals of
MIoT devices are, among others, to reduce the workload of
medical staff, to make diagnostics more efficient and safer, and
to make everyday life easier for patients. One possible way
might be monitoring interconnected devices in the network
to analyze utilization, location or maintenance intervals. A
reduction in search times and an increased efficiency in the use
of equipment (e.g., mobile ultrasound scanners) are potential
benefits.
53
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. MATURITY MODEL FOR SECURE MEDICAL IOT
INTEGRATION
The following model is embedded in the 5G4Healthcare
research project, which is briefly presented below to provide
context.
A. Project 5G4Healthcare
The 5G4Healthcare project (5G4HC) at the Technical Uni-
versity of Applied Sciences Amberg-Weiden (OTH-AW) is
one of six research projects funded under the 5G Innovation
Program of the German Federal Ministry for Digital and
Transport. The project’s objective is to establish a platform
based on 5G technology on what digital applications can
be integrated into healthcare scenarios. The scenarios will
focus on measurable improvements in the effectiveness and
efficiency of healthcare delivery. The project also aims to
explore opportunities and limitations in improving healthcare
delivery through 5G. Primarily related to the two defined use
cases “Homecare” and “Integrated Care”, the opportunities and
potentials of the 5G technology in healthcare will be explored.
Part of the 5G4HC project is developing an evaluation model
specifically for the digital health sector. Based on the work
done on the general evaluation model, the following model
was developed for Medical IoT devices with a focus on the
secure integration of MIoT devices in healthcare facilities. The
methodology of the general model is explained below.
B. Methodology of the General Evaluation Model
The model developed takes the essential aspects of estab-
lished evaluation systems in a mixed-method approach and
combines them to form a new evaluation model. Initially, the
basis for this system is the model of the European Foundation
for Quality Management (EFQM) [21]. The EFQM model is
based on a comprehensive analysis of elements in three levels:
structure, process and result relevant to quality. In its original
model, it is divided into a total of nine criteria and subdivisions
(e.g., management, personal, law and regulatory, etc.). These
criteria have been adapted for the Medical IoT model (see
Section IV-C). In the next step, the sub-dimensions of the
EFQM model are assessed using the systems of a maturity
model. These five maturity levels are divided into beginnings
(1), first steps (2), on the way (3), developed organization (4)
and mature organization (5).
The essential novelty of the developed evaluation model
consists in the systems that a holistic consideration will take
place by means of the nine sub-dimensions. The intention is
to ensure that the results provide a weighted statement about
the development status of a technology, a process or even an
entire system.
C. Methodology of the Medical IoT Model
The generic evaluation model is modular. One module was
adapted Medical IoT devices, with IT security as the main
criterion. There are many recommendations on IT security
of IoT devices in the international literature (see Section II).
However, the market has lacked a separate elaboration tailored
to integrating Medical IoT devices into a healthcare environ-
ment so far. The following assessment model is intended to
fill this gap. Based on the recommendations for general IoT
devices from industrial and other sectors [22], an overview
was created that includes special conditions for the medical
industry. The available literature includes recommendations
and guidelines from organizations such as the IoT Security
Foundation, Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC), Online Trust
Alliance (OTA), European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
(ENISA), and many other official entities. The criteria found
in these guidelines were thus adapted to this specific use case
in the healthcare sector and divided into five maturity levels.
Before explaining the model, the specifics of the healthcare
sector will be discussed.
Normally, Medical IoT devices are used by medical person-
nel. Both doctors and nurses operate diagnostic and therapeutic
IoT devices. It can therefore be assumed that the user has a low
level of digital competence. Furthermore, medical personnel is
under time pressure in their daily work. Due to staff shortages
or acute indications of patients, seconds can play a decisive
factor in care. In the context of Medical IoT devices, this
means that failures or complex handling are not suitable
to be an actual relief for the staff. Dedicated IT personnel
are also typically few to nonexistent and require a broad
knowledge of medical devices. It is common, especially in
outpatient practices, that no trained IT staff is on site. Instead,
separate external companies that have a 24-hour response
time are used. In the medical sector, the availability of IoT
devices must therefore be close to 100 %, especially for critical
applications. Otherwise, the well-being of patients is at risk.
Another critical point is the environment the Medical IoT
devices have to be integrated into. The IoT devices must
be embedded into existing infrastructure. However, in most
cases, that infrastructure is outdated, especially in hospitals,
nursing homes and outpatient practices, which directly impacts
IT security. Even if an IoT device was developed and sold
by the manufacturer using the security-by-design approach,
there is still a risk of unauthorized access or tampering simply
because of the infrastructure in the healthcare facility. To
minimize this risk, investments in infrastructure need to be
made, highlighting the next problem in the healthcare sector:
Lack of financial means. Depending on the country, healthcare
facilities have a different financing structure. Facilities can
be governmental, private or public nonprofit. Government
health facilities, in particular, often lack the money for new
investments. Primarily, financial investments are made in more
urgently needed areas, such as additional staff or an expansion
of treatment services. Investment in infrastructure is rarely
the first priority. These particular problems make it clear
that, from an IT security perspective, a good and trustworthy
environment cannot be assumed. However, there is hope for
the future. Many countries (e.g., Germany with the Hospital
Future Act) are switching to state support for digitization
in healthcare facilities. The potential funding amounts are
enormous depending on the country (e.g., in Germany, 4.3
billion euros in 2021). These subsidies should be used urgently
54
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Criteria
Availability
Usability
Connectivity
Data Management
Authentication System
Organization
Updates
Figure 1. Criteria as basis for the evaluation model
to make the environment in healthcare facilities more secure,
as the potential risk here is exceptionally high for the reasons
mentioned. In the following, however, we will still focus on
Medical IoT devices, as many threats can be prevented through
good preparation and a structured approach. To structure the
evaluation of the Medical IoT integration process and thus
reduce complexity, seven criteria were formed similar to the
generic evaluation model (see above). These can be seen in
Figure 1.
These criteria were divided into the dimensions of structure,
process, and outcome according to the Donabedian approach
[23]. Following the approach, means that with a good structure
and a good process based on it, a good result is automatically
achieved. The dimensions thus build on each other and in-
fluence each other. All criteria were deliberately chosen to
provide a controlled setting for Medical IoT devices to be
embedded into. By providing such an environment, security
and safety for staff and patients can be significantly improved
both during the implementation phase and during regular
operation. All detailed criteria can be seen in the appendix.
The system in the maturity model states that all criteria of
one level must be fulfilled to attain the next higher level. For
example, even if individual criteria of level four are fulfilled,
but one criterion from level three is still not fulfilled, the
IoT device is only awarded level three. The three matrices
for evaluation can be found in the appendix. After shedding
light on the maturity model, the upcoming sections refer to a
concept that aids consumers in their decision-making regarding
IoT products.
V. SOVEREIGN TECHNOLOGY LABELING
The idea is to provide visual indications for products
(e.g., IoT devices) to help consumers and decision-makers
in sensitive and critical industries. The healthcare industry
must provide accessible and understandable information about
MIoT devices that go beyond price and functionality. That
information needs to be even more detailed if IoT interacts
closely with humans. To be able to perform an adequate
evaluation of MIoT devices, some kind of additional labeling
(obligation) might be helpful. A system of this kind could
be a beneficial addition to the evaluation model presented
in Section IV, making it easier to assess criteria such as
data management or updates. The labeling should reflect
key figures that best represent individual IT security-related
aspects. Looking at hardware, labels should be displayed on
the respective product packaging or the devices themselves.
For software, on the other hand, a digital indication should be
given before the final purchase / sign-up is made. Furthermore,
future IoT devices must also be equipped with an expiry date
that clearly reflects a time frame for action to be taken in order
to further continue the use of integrated hardware components,
installed software and intended operating environments.
An already applied and working analogy, which proves the
increase of safety and security, can be noticed in the food
industry and their products. The food industry must ensure
that its products do not cause any harm to consumers. That
is the reason why various procedures have been developed to
increase the safety of food. To make the safety aspect transpar-
ent to consumers, various information and visual labels have
been developed and put on products. Guidelines and labels
could also be a foundation and possible approach to evaluate
different technologies and their adaptations in products, e.g.,
IoT, software, or services. These guidelines and labeling
requirements for food products are defined precisely and even
required by law. Almost every country has governmental
regulations for food safety, for example, the food regulations
introduced by the European Union [24]. The quality assurance
tools and mechanisms for the food industry have already
proven that it is possible to shift the issue of safety to the
manufacturer and, thus, away from the consumer. It would be
appropriate to establish such guidelines for technology as well.
An example of a mapping of food safety scenarios applied to
technology is presented as follows:
Nutrition Facts Label → IoT Components Facts Label
Food Handling → IoT Lifecycle Facts
The Best Before Date → IoT Best Before Inspection Date
A first approach is presented to map necessary information
from the nutrition to the IoT domain by declaring precisely
what components, protocols etc., were integrated or used
during operation. It should be noted that this approach is not
supposed to end up with a confusing set of different labels.
One or two labels that make the most important indicators
available must be sufficient to allow the consumer to make
a quick and comprehensive assessment. A QR code will be
provided should there be a need for more in-depth details. At
the moment of writing, a list of parameters, which should be
displayed, has not been defined. It is emerging that the areas
affecting the human in this context will be a focus point. Until
now, these areas are hardware, software and data (flow). The
standard IoT component facts label suggested above would be
a first step towards a more transparent evaluation of an IoT
device itself and supports decision-makers to evaluate IoT de-
vices in more detail. Specifications may vary depending on the
55
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IoT Components
Used in Item
Sensors / Detectors
real time, post processing
1. Temperature Sensor
Temperature in Celsius
2. Location Sensor
GPS, Latitude and Longitude
Actuators
1. Electric Motor
Rotation
Connectivity / Network
Cloud / Local
1. Protocol Name
MQTT
2. Protocol Name
Bluetooth
Gateways
Cloud Location
Italy, EU
Storage Location
Netherlands, EU
Responsible Entity
Company name, phone, email, country
Stored Attributes
Name / Cycle
1. Attribute
GPS (latitude and longitude) / every minute
2. Attribute
Temperature / every minute
User Control
App, device itself
Deletion of Date
Easy to complex
1. Electric Motor
Rotation
TABLE I. An example of a possible IoT component labeling approach
product category, intended use and criticality. The following
section presents the second part of the presented approach with
all relevant runtime facts of a specific MIoT device that needs
to be measured and labeled by the manufacturers.
A. IoT Runtime Facts
The IoT runtime facts provide information about nominal
or target values for different stages of usage of an IoT device.
Those stages are presented as follows:
1) Integration Stage (Initial Setup): This stage of an IoT
device represents the initial integration into an existing en-
vironment by recording the boot process of the IoT device
in detail. Reference values should be specified by the man-
ufacturer. These values are to be expected during the initial
boot process. Examples are CPU usage, energy consumption,
standard boot time, successful boot loader verification, etc.
Having reference points would help detect tampered IoT
devices from the beginning. Comparing the original values
(manufacturer’s specifications) with the actual values when a
device is first set up allows the detection of anomalies. This
approach can not only be applied during initial integration
into an IoT environment, but it can also be utilized in the
day-to-day monitoring efforts of IoT devices during operation.
Threshold values could also be defined and specified by the
manufacturer which are not exceeded during everyday use.
2) Operating Stage: This stage should reflect the IoT
device metric in operation mode. It should list the same param-
eters as mentioned in the integration stage but with adjusted
values. Additional values when operating in a production
environment could be listed. An example might be the data
throughput (amount of processed data). Furthermore, the IoT
runtime facts in operation enable responsible parties to identify
malicious IoT devices by monitoring the given reference
values with the current information when in use. This allows
for the detection of misconfiguration or of tampered devices
without having to shut down an entire MIoT infrastructure as
a precaution. To meet the above requirements, the IoT Device
IdentificAtion and RecoGnition (IoTAG) [25] approach might
present a possible solution. The IoTAG approach proposes
that all IoT devices used in an IoT environment report their
security-relevant parameters, such as a unique ID, a device
name, the current software version, active services, etc., in
order to manage IoT networks securely [25].
3) Fail Safe Stage: Within this stage, extreme values for
security-relevant parameters need to be defined by the manu-
facturer. Those extreme values (maxima and minima) should
never be exceeded in any operation stage of a MIoT device.
Should this still happen, a reaction chain must be invoked,
and the MIoT device has to automatically be removed from
the operating stage and be forced to pause operation.
B. Best Before Inspection Date
To support a more transparent labeling and thereby
strengthen the role of consumers, an additional important
indicator is suggested: the best-before-inspection date. This
date is not a fixed value as known from food safety. Instead,
it is intended as an indication for decision-makers. It repre-
sents how long the IoT device can securely operate, at least
without the need to apply changes. The date can be extended
by updates, patches, etc. The best-before-inspection date for
MIoT proposed depends largely on the activities and reaction
time in terms of further development by the manufacturers.
Parameters, which influence the best-before-inspection date,
are, among others, the following:
• Update cycle
• How many new product variants were newly developed
by the manufacturer?
• What is the average end of lifetime period for this
particular manufacturer?
• etc.
Many more parameters could be mentioned to modify the
best-before-inspection date. The mentioned parameters are
used to get the idea across. The approach to calculating an
accurate best-before-inspection date is quite difficult, as no
average values regarding the lifetime of individual hardware
components are available. This is amplified by the fact that the
lifetime is also dependent on its operating time and operating
environment. If average values were available for the lifetime
of individual components considering the actual operating time
and operating environment, it would be possible to calculate
the best-before date of hardware. Results could be based on
the component with the shortest life time. It should also be
noted that a fixed best-before date could negatively impact our
ecological environment, as IoT devices would be disposed of
when the best-before date is exceeded. Reevaluating whether
the IoT device can still be used for its intended purpose from
a technical point of view might not be done. Hence, there
is a need to develop a more flexible best-before-inspection
date. The best-before-inspection date is intended to specify a
point in time when it becomes necessary to reevaluate the IoT
device for the first time after its initial integration. Otherwise,
IoT turns into an avoidable risk. With this definition in
mind, it is more comprehensible to calculate an accurate best-
before-inspection date. The calculation starts with the date of
manufacturing or, if not available, with the date of purchase.
56
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

After a starting point is declared, the best-before-inspection
date can vary based on certain parameters. Parameters that
have a positive effect could be the frequency of updates, if
the product or software is still purchasable or if the product
line still exists. Parameters with a negative effect could be that
the manufacturer does not provide support or updates anymore.
This kind of behavior of a manufacturer would automatically
lead to a negative label. Labeling a product in such a way
provides decision-makers an indicator that the manufacturer
does not provide continuous and recurring updates. This might
influence the decision of whether buying an IoT or MIoT is
beneficial. The precise definition of parameters that can be
used to classify values as positive or negative in relation to the
best-before-inspection date will be identified in future research
efforts.
The approach of determining an approximate best-before-
inspection date enables IT security managers to initiate various
actions. The best-before-inspection date is primarily intended
to initiate an action on a specific day. An action can be a
comprehensive screening of the IoT device by checking if the
firmware is up to date. Restarting the IoT device and then
comparing the measured values during the reboot process with
the original ones provided by the manufacturer is also possible.
Another option is ensuring that actual support activities offered
by the manufacturer are still active. Furthermore, the best-
before-inspection date can also be used to start a new threat
modeling or the maturity modeling process. The latter is
suggested in Section IV.
Ultimately, it can be said that the three proposed labeling
approaches have the potential to provide two benefits. On
the one hand, the decision-making power of end consumers
is increased. On the other hand, decision makers in critical
businesses, for example, hospitals, can be strengthened as
well. Above all, the MIoT components facts label contributes
to greater transparency and thus increases trust in MIoT
devices, the manufacturers and the technologies themselves.
To achieve a labeling system for technology and to encourage
manufacturers to participate, the government is in charge
of establishing incentives and / or regulations, as it can be
observed in the food industry. In the following section, two
specific MIoT devices have been examined. The focus of the
examination is on security in order to emphasize the relevance
of the previous suggestions.
VI. SECURITY TESTING OF ULTRASONIC SCANNING
EQUIPMENT
In our previous work [1] we concluded that common secu-
rity guidelines for Medical IoT devices are needed to build the
resilience necessary to provide a safe and secure environment
for patients in the long term. But is a need for such guidelines
and recommendations warranted? To answer this question, we
monitored the connections of two mobile ultrasonic scanners.
Analyzing only two MIoT devices does not allow drawing
conclusions on how security is handled in the MIoT industry
as a whole. However, as it is already laid out in [1] other
entities did take a look at a larger number of devices and
deduced that many MIoT devices lack basic security features.
This section is meant to see if those results are still relevant
for up-to-date products currently sold on the market.
Both scanners require smartphones for operation. On each
smartphone, the respective app needs to be installed. These
apps allow connecting to the scanner and provide additional
functionalities such as
• saving previous scans,
• creating patient records,
• live video conferencing whilst sharing the image of the
ultrasonic scanner,
• synchronizing patient records with the cloud of the man-
ufacturer or
• sharing patient records through the cloud.
The scanners are multi-purpose ultrasonic imaging systems.
They allow the examination of different organs of the human
body, such as the abdomen, bladder, lung or prostate. One
product uses a WiFi connection, while the other requires
a wires USB Type-C connection to communicate with the
corresponding smartphone app.
A. The Security Test Setup
smartphone app
mitmproxy
cloud service
ultrasonic
scanner
Figure 2. Abstract structure how app traffic is intercepted
The apps of both scanners require the user to log in with an
account at the respective cloud service. A connection to the
cloud services is mandatory to use the products. Monitoring
the connection between the smartphone and the cloud service
is therefore of interest in order to gain information about how
connections are being handled and what type of information
is being sent.
The smartphone used for testing was a rooted Android
device. For intercepting the traffic between the smartphone
and the cloud services, the software mitmproxy [26] has been
set up. The traffic can be decrypted on the fly by installing the
root certificate generated by mitmproxy on the smartphone as a
system-level certificate. The traffic of the scanner app is being
redirected towards the proxy by leveraging the firewall rules
of the smartphone. A simplified structure of how the traffic
is intercepted can be seen in Figure 2. To ensure that any
outgoing connections can be attributed correctly, only traffic
from and towards the respective app is being redirected to the
mitmproxy software.
B. Pitfalls and Limitation During Testing
Both tested devices and apps presented certain challenges
when trying to intercept their communications. In the follow-
ing section, these will be presented to give an understanding
57
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the limitations of the security tests within the scope of this
specific work.
1) Communication Interfaces: Each scanner uses a dif-
ferent way to establish a connection with the smartphone.
One scanner opens up a WiFi access point. The respective
smartphone needs to connect to that. The other scanner uses
a wired USB Type-C connection to exchange data with the
smartphone. Both ways put certain restrictions on the means
of how the connections can be monitored.
The wireless scanner reserves the WiFi connection for the
data exchange with the smartphone. A simultaneous connec-
tion with the cloud services is therefore only possible by using
the mobile broadband connection of the smartphone. Hence, it
was tried to build a reverse tethering connection between the
smartphone and the device where the mitmproxy software is
running [27]. This approach came with its own issues. Since
the software used generates the reverse tethering connection
by tunneling all network traffic through a Virtual Private
Network (VPN) client towards the proxy device, all network
communication is forced to go through this proxy computer.
As a result, the app cannot communicate with the scanner
while the reverse tethering connection is active. No signals
can be exchanged even if the wireless device is connected to
the smartphone via WiFi.
Due to these constraints, it was only possible to evaluate
the connections made by the app itself. Connections made
while using the wireless scanner were not the subject of the
evaluation.
2) Root Detection: The scanner, which uses the wired
connection, allows for a simultaneous connection of the smart-
phone with the computer where the mitmproxy software is
running in order to intercept the traffic. However, this device
puts mechanisms in place to detect if the app is running on
a rooted smartphone. If the app detects that the smartphone
has root access enabled, it then simply refuses to start. Extra
steps had to be taken to trick the scanner app into accepting
the rooted environment. After hiding the root privileges, the
app successfully started. Still getting past the app’s login
screen was not possible, even with all these modifications in
place. This only allowed inspecting connections made right
after first starting the app, as well as authentication attempts
made when trying to use login credentials. Rooting the device
was required to install the TLS certificate of mitmproxy as a
system-level certificate, which allows the inspection of TLS-
encrypted traffic. Decrypting the TLS traffic on a non-rooted
device was not possible.
C. Results of the Traffic Monitoring
All connections captured were secured using Transport
Layer Security (TLS) 1.2 or higher. No plaintext communi-
cation between the manufacturers’ apps and cloud services
was discovered.
The smartphone app of the wireless scanner only connected
to two different URLs:
• https://cloud.-manufacturer-.com and
• https://*.amazonaws.com.
Taking a look at the second domain reveals that the corre-
sponding IP address belongs to the Amazon Web Services
(AWS) platform. The entire cloud service for the wireless
scanning system is therefore hosted on servers belonging to
the company Amazon. The IP addresses can be assigned to
the city of Montreal, Quebec, Canada, according to the service
IP2Location [28].
On the wired ultrasonic scanning system, significantly more
communication activity can be seen. After first starting the
app, connection attempts to the following URLs can be ob-
served:
• https://firebase-settings.crashlytics.com
• https://firebaseinstallations.googleapis.com
• https://crashlyticsreports-pa.googleapis.com
• https://clientstream.launchdarkly.com
• https://mobile.launchdarkly.com
• https://firehose.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
• https://cdn-settings.segment.com
The first three URLs listed belong to the Firebase product
provided by the company Google. The connections captured
infer that the Firebase cloud service is mainly used to process
application-related logging events, such as crash reports. A
report sent to Firebase contains additional meta data besides
the error message created by the application. The metadata
consists, among other things, of the build number of the app,
the smartphone model, the smartphone fingerprint, the built-in
chipset, the language of the operating system, the manufacturer
name and the operating system version.
The next two URLs belong to Launchdarkly. Launchdarkly
is a feature management platform for mobile app development.
It allows the developer to enable or disable certain features
through an online portal without needing to redeploy or update
the application. The app is told by the Launchdarkly server,
whose features are supposed to be enabled or displayed. A
regular synchronization mechanism between smartphone and
server is therefore leveraged. It should be mentioned that
similar metadata to what is sent to the Google Firebase service
is sent to the Launchdarkly servers. The IP addresses of
Launchdarkly suggest that their servers are located in the US
and are part of the AWS infrastructure.
Amazon Kinesis Data Firehose is a platform by Amazon
that allows data streams of high volumes and from many
sources to be saved and processed within the Amazon in-
frastructure. This is most likely the service used to store all
user information, such as previous scans or patient data. The
data streams sent and received during the tests could not be
decoded. Therefore, it was not possible to reconstruct what
kind of data was actually sent. The servers are located in the
US and are part of AWS’s infrastructure.
The last service monitored during testing was Segment.
Segment is a service dedicated to giving the app developer the
ability to collect user analytics data. The focus is on tracking
user and device behavior to optimize the user experience.
While Firebase and Launchdarkly both collect some user
information, the number of parameters sent was far less than
what Segment is transferring to their servers. The additional
58
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

information is, for example, the screen resolution of the smart-
phone, active wireless connections, mobile carrier information
or the timezone the user is in. Again, the location of the
Segment servers is in the US, and they belong to the AWS
infrastructure.
D. Implications of the Monitoring Results on Security and
Privacy
The security of both ultrasonic scanners can not be suf-
ficiently evaluated to make a qualified statement about their
resilience against an attacker. This is either due to technical
constraints or obstacles put in place by the developer to
restrict tampering with or evaluating the software used with
the scanner. It can be said that all connections observed were
using at least TLS 1.2 or higher to encrypt the traffic between
the apps and the cloud services. This ensures a sufficient level
of confidentiality when transferring data from one endpoint to
another.
However, in terms of privacy, bigger issues become appar-
ent. In both cases, third parties save and process metadata
and patient data directly. None of the vendors tested were
hosting their own cloud solution. Instead, both manufacturers
decided to use the AWS solution, which is apparently hosted
in Canada and the US. The wired ultrasonic scanning system
shares information with four different companies, which are
not part of the manufacturer or vendor. All data observed was
secured via TLS but was not end-to-end encrypted. That means
all information stored in the cloud servers is stored in plain
text. Patient data is also saved in plain text. This was verified
by creating a dummy patient record in the app of the wireless
scanning system and monitoring the connection activity. It is
worth mentioning that cloud synchronization of patient data is
an optional feature of the device.
Storing sensitive patient data in plain text on cloud services
can be an issue. Both manufacturers state on their website
that they comply with the European GDPR. However, the data
is being stored on foreign servers in plain text. Therefore,
the data could be accessed by foreign entities or agencies.
Additionally, every actor with access to the cloud storage could
read and manipulate any data they want. In both cases, the
manufacturer of the ultrasonic scanner, as well as Amazon,
have access to the medical data provided to them by their
customers. This can be a problem if customers want to ensure
a high level of privacy for their patients. The customer must
trust the vendor or service provider to handle the information
given with absolute discretion. Misuse of the data stored can
not be prevented on a technical level. It is up to the service
provider to adhere to the contractual agreements. Furthermore,
the service provider needs to ensure that their infrastructure
has state-of-the-art IT defense mechanisms in place to prevent
cyber attacks. In a worst-case scenario, a security breach at a
vendor could lead to a data leak of all customers.
But patient data is not the only information transmitted to
third parties. In Section VI-C it was shown that additional
metadata is being sent to Google, Launchdarkly and Segment.
These companies are able to see what equipment was used
at a certain time in a specific location. They might even be
able to retrace usage statistics of employees handling these
devices. So, not only is information about patients given to
third parties, but it is also plausible to argue that employees’
privacy using these scanners might be compromised.
In conclusion, the customer needs to trust that all parties
linked to these ultrasonic scanners handle the data given to
them responsibly. No technical precautions have been put
in place to prevent misuse of the given data. Given the
sensitivity of the handled data, better security mechanisms can
be expected from the manufacturers in question.
VII. OUTLOOK
As presented in this work, it is applicable that many efforts
will be spent on future security topics, e.g., architectures
and processes, starting with best practices for manufacturers.
Trustworthy security, safety and trust begin not by signing
contracts, e.g., Service Level Agreements (SLA). The trust
root starts long before. Politicians and official authorities
should consider the derived proposed labeling concepts from
the food industry. Of course, those labeling concepts require
further research and broad consensus among manufacturers
and global technology consortiums. But as we all know, it
is possible to agree on labeling and enclosed concepts that
provide more transparency for consumers and additionally
strengthen safety, security and trust. The National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) is already discussing
labeling IoT products targeting mostly security-related aims
[29].
Research already provides different processes, methods and
models that can be used to realize a more secure, safe and
trustworthy technological evolution; for example, the process
described by Roots of Trust (RoT) [3] is a promising and
practical way to achieve absolute trust in a hyper-stakeholder
environment targeting manufacturers from the first breath up
to the retailers. Bringing the roots of trust into action requires
a non-editable approach to audit and trace. A promising
technological fundament would be distributed ledger technol-
ogy to fulfill the required needs. Actual Blockchain-enhanced
RoT solutions are already discussed [30], [31]. Another well-
promising enhanced version of the “roots of trust” is the
“hardware roots of trust” to validate and ensure trust in
hardware components. Also, this approach is being researched
by Javaid et al. [32]. With the mentioned RoT processes,
it would also be relatively easy to accurately define a best-
before-inspection date, which can be, for now, only roughly
estimated.
Unquestionably, all the above-mentioned suggestions are
worth further exploration to foster security, safety and trust in
the IoT domain. This paper should not only summarize already
existing efforts. Instead, it is intended to present a (Medical)
IoT labeling approach and a new paradigm that seems worth
focusing on.
59
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we pointed out that while advisories, guide-
lines and certain regulations for common IT networks exist,
the Medical IoT sector still severely lacks these documents and
frameworks. This has the potential to become a severe issue
in the future since the amount of IoT devices in operation
is rapidly growing, and the data processed is very sensitive
information which requires robust protection mechanisms.
To provide guidance for stakeholders and authorities, we
proposed an evaluation system to help actors within the
healthcare sector. This methodology aims to identify the cur-
rent Medical IoT security posture. Additionally, this maturity
model can be used to understand which steps are necessary to
bring the IT security of the infrastructure in question to the
next level.
Furthermore, a labeling system for Medical IoT devices was
proposed. With such a system, stakeholders should be able to
get an overview of the key facts and components of a MIoT
system to ascertain the risks and benefits it provides. With that
information, decision-makers can manage risk more reliable
and faster. However, such a system needs to be standardized.
It is the responsibility of governments and regulatory bodies
to define the rules for creating such a label to guarantee the
sufficiency of the values included and ease of use for the
stakeholders.
Finally, two Medical IoT devices were subjected to a basic
security test. This test showed that for the connections of
the IoT devices to their respective cloud services, sufficient
security mechanisms had been put in place. However, in terms
of privacy and confidentiality of patient data, it is not clear
to the consumer or stakeholder what parties are involved
to provide the services. Since the security posture between
different parties can vary significantly, it is misleading to think
that the security of the IoT device only depends on the vendor
or manufacturer.
That is why it is essential for stakeholders to have the tools
available to assess the security of their networks and to have
a concise overview of the components and parties involved in
providing a Medical IoT service.
IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded as part of recently granted
5G4Healthcare project by the German Federal Ministry for
Digital and Transport within the 5x5G Initiative.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Gleißner, J. Dotzler, J. Hartig, A. Aßmuth, C. Bulitta, and S. Hamm,
“It security of cloud services and iot devices in healthcare,” in CLOUD
COMPUTING 2021, B. Duncan, Y. W. Lee, and M. Popescu, Eds.
Wilmington, DE, USA: IARIA, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[2] S. Dahmen-Lhuissier, “Etsi - technologies - 5G,” 2022. [Online].
Available:
https://www.etsi.org/technologies/5g?tmpl=component&jjj=
1642854003450 [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[3] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “roots of trust,”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/roots_of_
trust[retrieved:2022.12.15] [retrieved: 2022.04.11].
[4] ITU Radiocommunication Sector, “Minimum requirements related
totechnical performance for IMT-2020 radio interface(s),” ITU Radio-
communication Sector, Nov. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.
int/dms_pub/itu-r/opb/rep/R-REP-M.2410-2017-PDF-E.pdf [retrieved:
2022.12.15].
[5] Bundesministerium
für
Bildung
und
Forschung,
“Indus-
trie
4.0
[industry
4.0],”
Jan.
2016.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.bmbf.de/bmbf/de/forschung/digitale-wirtschaft-und-
gesellschaft/industrie-4-0/industrie-4-0.html [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[6] Harvard University, “Made in china 2025 explained,” 2022. [Online].
Available:
https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/innovation/made-china-2025-
explained [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[7] E. Y. Nakagawa, P. O. Antonino, F. Schnicke, R. Capilla, T. Kuhn, and
P. Liggesmeyer, “Industry 4.0 reference architectures: State of the art
and future trends,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 156, p.
107241, 2021.
[8] B. Mazon-Olivo and A. Pan, “Internet of things: State-of-the-art, com-
puting paradigms and reference architectures,” IEEE Latin America
Transactions, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 49–63, 2022.
[9] R. Heidel, M. Hoffmeister, M. Hankel, and U. Döbrich, Eds., Industrie
4.0: The reference architecture model RAMI 4.0 and the Industrie 4.0
component, ser. Beuth Innovation.
Berlin and Wien and Zürich and
Berlin and Offenbach: Beuth Verlag and VDE Verlag, 2019.
[10] Y. Lu, K. C. Morris, and S. Frechette, “Current standards landscape for
smart manufacturing systems,” Feb. 2016.
[11] Juxtology,
“Iot:
Architecture.”
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.m2mology.com/iot-transformation/iot-world-forum/
[retrieved:
2022.12.15].
[12] IoT
European
Large-Scale
Pilots
Programme,
“Create-IoT.”
[Online]. Available: https://european-iot-pilots.eu/create-iot/consortium/
[retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[13] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Roots of trust.”
[Online].
Available:
https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Hardware-Roots-of-
Trust [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[14] IoT
Security
Foundation,
“Device
secure
boot.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.iotsecurityfoundation.org/best-practice-guide-
articles/device-secure-boot/ [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[15] Bundesamt
für
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
“SYS.4.3
Eingebettete
Systeme
[SYS.4.3
Embedded
Systems],”
2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/
DE/BSI/Grundschutz/Kompendium_Einzel_PDFs_2021/07_SYS_IT_
Systeme/SYS_4_3_Eingebettete_Systeme_Edition_2021.pdf [retrieved:
2022.12.15].
[16] Bundesamt
für
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
“Sys.4.4:
Allgemeines
iot-gerät,”
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/
Kompendium_Einzel_PDFs_2021/07_SYS_IT_Systeme/SYS_4_4_
Allgemeines_IoT_Geraet_Edition_2021.pdf [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[17] European
Union,
“Regulation
(eu)
2016/679
of
the
eu-
ropean
parliament
and
of
the
council,”
2016.
[Online].
Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=
CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN#d1e3265-1-1 [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[18] Public Health, “Factsheet - european health data space (ehds),”
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/latest-updates/
factsheet-european-health-data-space-ehds-2022-05-03_en
[retrieved:
2022.12.15].
[19] European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, “Baseline security recom-
mendations for IoT,” Nov. 2017, [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[20] BioSpace,
“IoT
in
healthcare
market
to
reach
USD
260.75
billion
by
2027–
reports
and
data,”
Jul.
2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.biospace.com/article/iot-in-healthcare-
market-to-reach-usd-260-75-billion-by-2027-reports-and-data/
[re-
trieved: 2022.12.15].
[21] EFQM,
“Efqm_model_2020_v2_german_summary:
2.
überarbeitete
ausgabe,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://mailchi.mp/b505ea74b885/
61o67uatr8 [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[22] Brookfield, “Mapping of iot security recommendations, guidance
and standards to the UK’s code of practice for consumer IoT
security,” Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/973928/Mapping_of_IoT__Security_Recommendations_Guidance_
and_Standards_to_CoP_Oct_2018_V2.pdf [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[23] Avedis
Donabedian,
“Evaluation
the
quality
of
medical
care,”
p. 166–206, 1965. [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/
3348969
60
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[24] European
Union,
“EUR-Lex
-
32018r0775
-
EN,”
May
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
DE/TXT/?qid=1568299917869&uri=CELEX:32018R0775
[retrieved:
2022.12.15].
[25] L. Hinterberger, S. Fischer, B. Weber, K. Neubauer, and R. Hackenberg,
“Iot device identification and recognition (iotag),” in CLOUD COMPUT-
ING 2020, The Eleventh International Conference on Cloud Computing,
GRIDs, and Virtualization, 2020, pp. 17–23.
[26] A. Cortesi, M. Hils, and T. Kriechbaumer, “mitmproxy - an interactive
HTTPS
proxy,”
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://mitmproxy.org/
[retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[27] R.
Vimont,
J.
Shuali,
S.
Testa,
and
A.
Aslanyan,
“Gnirehtet
(v2.5),”
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/Genymobile/
gnirehtet [retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[28] IP2Location, “IP address to IP location and proxy information |
IP2Location,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.ip2location.com/
[retrieved: 2022.12.15].
[29] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “IoT product criteria,”
Feb.
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.nist.gov/itl/executive-
order-improving-nations-cybersecurity/iot-product-criteria
[retrieved:
2022.12.15].
[30] 2018 International Conference on Smart Communications and Network-
ing (SmartNets).
IEEE, 2018.
[31] Elisa Bertino, Dan Lin, and Jorge Lobo, Eds., Proceedings of the
23nd ACM on Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies,
ser. ACM Conferences.
New York, NY: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=3205977
[32] U. Javaid, M. N. Aman, and B. Sikdar, “Defining trust in IoT en-
vironments via distributed remote attestation using blockchain,” in
Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Symposium on Theory,
Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks and
Mobile Computing.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2020.
61
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

APPENDIX
TABLE II. Criteria dimension structure
Maturity
/
Criteria
Organisation
Data Management
Authentication System
1
• Health facility’s manage-
ment commitment to the
implementation of IT se-
curity for all IoT devices
in the whole healthcare
area
• Detailed
description
of
end-to-end-security
and
cryptographic principles
• Utilize crypto coproces-
sors for key creation and
storage
• All products related to
web
servers
have
their
HTTP
trace
and
trace
methods disabled
• No default credentials for
Medical IoT devices
• No use of any function by
unauthorized user or guest
users incl. patients (also
changing credentials)
• Applications operated at
the lowest privilege level
possible
2
• Definition of basic ob-
jectives, scope, roles and
tasks regarding IT secu-
rity of Medical IoT de-
vices
• Determining
contractual
clauses
with
Medical
IoT suppliers about IT
security
• Encrypted data on appli-
cation layer
• All communications keys
are stored with industry
standards (e.g., FIPS 140)
• All communication ports
(e.g., USB, RS232) only
communicate with autho-
rized
and
authenticated
entities
• Minimized sharing princi-
ple of resources
• Different secret keys for
each Medical IoT or prod-
uct family
• Complex password man-
agement (no blanks, no
containing user account
name, etc.) for all Medical
IoT devices
3
• Definition of all Medical
IoT processes including
risk level
• All
products
contain
a
unique
and
tamper-
resistent device identifier
(e.g., chip serial number)
• Key
management
incl.
generation,
distribution,
storage and maintenance
• Utilize
trusted
platform
modules
(TPM)
and
hardware
security
modules (HSM)
• Communication protocols
are at most secure version
(e.g., Bluetooth 4.2 rather
than 4.0)
• No hard coded passwords
in IoT software code
• 2-Factor
authentication
for
all
Medical
IoT
devices
4
• Training for medical staff
about IT security of IoT
devices
• All OS non-essential ser-
vices have been removed
from product‘s software
• Storage of sensitive data
in hardware (not software)
• Only
use
secure
boot
methods
• Multi
factor
authentica-
tion or certificates for all
Medical IoT devices
• Secure mechanism for up-
dated
credentials
(fixed
time
intervals)
for
all
medical stuff
5
• Manufacturers
consider
compliance
with
ISO
30111
for
vulnerability
report handling
• Encrypt data parameters
using a Direct Acess Re-
covery (DAR) encryption
key stored I a physically
locked module
• Using Root of Trust (cer-
tificates, signing keys)
• No secret credentials left
in
application
code
of
Medical IoT devices
• Biometric
authentication
for all medical staff
62
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. Criteria dimension process
Maturity
/
Criteria
Updates
Malfunction Management
Usability
1
• Regular updates of secu-
rity measures of all Med-
ical IoT devices
• User
notification
when
updates and patches mod-
ify user-configured pref-
erences, security and pri-
vacy settings
• Defined use of error han-
dlers
• Generic
error
messages
and use of custom error
pages
• Enable restore secure state
after security breach
• Runtime Protection mech-
anism
• Basic training for medical
staff is done
2
• Agile
and
prompt
re-
sponse to new security or
other flaws of IT in the
health facility
• Validation of authenticity
and integrity of all up-
dates (e.g., signing certifi-
cate)
• Restore secure state (if
update was not successful
or occurred)
• Log all authentication at-
tempts and failures of the
medical staff
• Log all access control fail-
ures of the medical staff
• Log all apparent tamper-
ing events
• Advanced
training
for
staff is done
3
• Automated update process
for all Medical IoT de-
vices
• Use of libraries that are
actively maintained and
supported
• Defined
bug
reporting
system from Medical IoT
suppliers
• Log all backend TLS con-
nection failures
• Automated alerting sys-
tem for tampering events
• Regular training sessions
incl.
innovations
are
taught for medical staff
4
• Defined limitation of de-
vice functionality for all
Medical IoT devices af-
ter security support period
ends (e.g., remote control)
• Backward
compatibility
of
updates
(compatible
with
previous
versions)
for
all
Medical
IoT
devices
• Mechanisms
for
self-
diagnosis and self-repair
for
all
Medical
IoT
devices
• No training necessary for
usage or all medical staff
is trained for usage
5
• Updates include crypto-
graphic checks and cipher
suites
• Complete
end-to-life
update
strategy
for
all
Medical IoT devices incl.
awareness
of
potential
risks beyond its expected
expiry date
• Participation in informa-
tion sharing platform to
report vulnerabilities and
current cyber threats of
Medical IoT devices
• No training necessary for
usage or all medical staff
is trained for usage incl.
IT security handling
63
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV. Criteria dimension outcome
Maturity
/
Criteria
Costs for IT Security
Downtime reg.
criticality
Failsafe
Threats and attacks
1
• Less
than
1 %
of
the
complete
health
facility
budget
• All Medical IoT
devices with low
criticality have a
max. downtime of
3 days
• Failure affects the
whole
system
/
the whole Medical
IoT device / the
whole IoT product
family
• there
were
less
than 25 security-
related
events
(e.g.,
threats,
attacks) last year
in
the
health
facility
2
• Less
than
2 %
of
the
complete
health
facility
budget
• All Medical IoT
devices with low
criticality have a
max. downtime of
24 hours
• Failure
affects
parts
of
the
system
/
the
whole
Medical
IoT
device
/
the
whole
IoT
product family
• there
were
less
than 20 security-
related
events
(e.g.,
threats,
attacks) last year
in
the
health
facility
3
• Less
than
4 %
of
the
complete
health
facility
budget
• All Medical IoT
devices
with
medium criticality
have
a
max.
downtime
of
3
days
• Failure
affects
the availability of
operation or use
of the system / the
whole
Medical
IoT
device
/
the
whole
IoT
product family
• there
were
less
than 15 security-
related
events
(e.g.,
threats,
attacks) last year
in
the
health
facility
4
• Less
than
6 %
of
the
complete
health
facility
budget
• All Medical IoT
devices
with
medium criticality
have
a
max.
downtime
of
24
hours
• Failure
has
no
effect
on
the
medical operation
(no
human
damage possible)
• there
were
less
than 10 security-
related
events
(e.g.,
threats,
attacks) last year
in
the
health
facility
5
• More
than
8 %
of
the
complete
health
facility
budget
• All Medical IoT
devices with high
criticality have a
max. downtime of
24 hours
• Failure has no ef-
fect on the op-
eration or use of
the whole system /
the whole Medical
IoT device / the
whole IoT product
family
• there
were
less
than
5
security-
related
events
(e.g.,
threats,
attacks) last year
in
the
health
facility
64
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

