169
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Cloud Cyber-Security: Empowering the Audit Trail
Bob Duncan
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Email: bobduncan@abdn.ac.uk
Mark Whittington
Accounting and Finance
University of Aberdeen
Email: mark.whittington@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract—Cyber-security presents a serious challenge. Cyber-
security in the cloud presents a far more serious challenge, due to
the multi-tenant nature of cloud relationships and the transitory
nature of cloud instances. We have identiﬁed a fundamental weak-
ness when undertaking cloud audit, namely the misconceptions
surrounding the purpose of audit, what comprises a proper audit
trail, what should be included, and how it should be achieved
and maintained. A properly speciﬁed audit trail can provide a
powerful tool in the armoury against cyber-crime, yet it is all
too easy to throw away the beneﬁts offered by this simple tool
through lack of understanding, incompetence, mis-conﬁguration
or sheer laziness. A major weakness is the need to ensure the
audit trail is properly preserved. We propose that some simple
changes in approach are undertaken, which can considerably
improve the status quo, while radically improving the ability to
conduct forensic examination in the event of a breach, but of
course, merely having an effective audit trail is not enough —
we actually have to analyse it regularly to realise the potential
beneﬁts it offers.
Keywords—cloud cyber-security; compliance; assurance; audit;
audit trail.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This article is based on an extended version of our 2016
paper [1], in which we examined the possible strengths and
weaknesses of the proper use of the audit trail in cloud cyber
security. Achieving information security is not a trivial process.
When this involves a cloud setting, the problem intensiﬁes
exponentially. Let us ﬁrst consider how we go about achieving
security. Usually it is achieved by means of compliance with
standards, assurance or audit. We provide some useful back-
ground on this in [2]. In a non-cloud setting, we have a range of
established standards, which are well understood by industry.
However, when we move to cloud, everything changes. There
are an extensive range of cloud standard setting bodies, yet no
comprehensive cloud security standard yet exists. We outline
the status of cloud security standards in Section V.
Often, when a company moves its programmes to a cloud
setting, there is an assumption that it is a straight transfer. As-
surance in a non-cloud setting is well understood, but assurance
in a cloud setting is much less well understood. There are a
great many challenges to overcome and we addressed some
of those in earlier work [3], with a colleague, developing a
conceptual framework for cloud security assurance, where we
addressed three key challenges, namely standards compliance,
management method and complexity. There are a great many
issues to consider, and many common mistakes are made in
this process, and we discuss some of the most common of
these in Section III.
One of the fundamental, long standing security concepts for
internal business control is the concept of separation of duties,
which is designed to remove both opportunity and temptation
from staff employed in the business, and we look at this in
more detail in Section IV.
A further primary tool that can be used to help ensure cloud
security is the simple audit trail. There are, of course, many
other challenges, and we revisit these in Section II, where we
look at the deﬁnition of security goals, compliance with cloud
security standards, audit issues, the impact of management
approaches on security, how the technical complexity of cloud
and the lack of responsibility and accountability affects cloud
security. We look at the need for, and beneﬁts derived from,
proper measurement and monitoring. We also consider the
impact of management attitude to security, the security culture
in the company and the threat environment, both external
and the possible impact of internal threats. In Section III,
as noted above, we discuss some of the most common mis-
takes companies make when adopting cloud computing, and
in Section IV, as already mentioned above, we review the
separation of duties in more detail. In Section V, we review
the current state of cloud security standards. The remainder of
the paper is organized as follows: in Section VI we discuss
how the literature approaches cloud auditing; in Section VII
we consider the misconceptions prevalent across different
disciplines of what exactly the audit trail is; in Section VIII we
discuss how we might go about improving the audit trail in a
cloud setting, suggesting the use of some simple measures that
can easily be taken to improve the status quo. In Section IX,
we provide a useful reminder of who should be responsible
for carrying out mitigating steps for the problem areas, and in
Section X we discuss our conclusions.
II.
CLOUD SECURITY CHALLENGES
There are a number of challenges that need to be addressed
in order to achieve the goal of good security. The fundamental
concepts of information security are conﬁdentiality, integrity,
and availability (CIA), a framework developed when it was
common practice for corporate management to run a company
under agency theory. We have all seen how agency theory has
failed to curb the excesses of corporate greed. The same is
true when applied to cloud security, which would suggest a
different approach is needed.
Ten key security issues have been identiﬁed, namely:
• The deﬁnition of security goals [6];
• Compliance with standards[3] [2];
• Audit issues [2] [13];
• Management approach [3] [25];

170
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Technical complexity of cloud [3] [14];
• Lack of responsibility and accountability [6] [14];
• Measurement and monitoring [14];
• Management attitude to security [1];
• Security culture in the company [1];
• The threat environment [25].
These 10 key security issues are not the only issues that
need to be tackled, but in our opinion, these represent the issues
that present the greatest barriers to achieving a good level of
cloud security. We discuss each of these in turn below.
In looking at the deﬁnition of security goals, we have
recognised that the business environment is constantly chang-
ing, as are corporate governance rules and this would clearly
imply changing security measures would be required to keep
up to date. Many managers are unable, unwilling or unsure of
how to deﬁne proper security goals [4] [5] [6]. More emphasis
is now being placed on responsibility and accountability [7],
social conscience [8], sustainability [9][10], resilience [11] and
ethics [12]. Responsibility and accountability are, in effect,
mechanisms we can use to help achieve all the other security
goals. Since social conscience and ethics are very closely
related, we can expand the traditional CIA triad to include
sustainability, resilience and ethics (SRE). This expansion of
security requirements can help address some of the short-
comings of agency theory, but also provides a perfect ﬁt to
stewardship theory. Stewardship carries a broader acceptance
of responsibility than the self-interest embedded in agency.
This breadth extends to acting in the interests of company
owners and potentially society and the environment as a whole.
Broadening the deﬁnition of security goals provides a more
effective means of achieving a successful cloud audit, although
the additional complexity cloud brings will potentially compli-
cate the audit trail.
In earlier work [3], we developed a conceptual framework
to address cloud security. In this work, we identiﬁed three
key barriers to good cloud security, namely standards compli-
ance, management method and complexity. We have already
addressed compliance with standards [2]. The lack of coherent
cloud standards undermines the effectiveness of cloud audit as
well as introducing a fundamental weakness in that process
[13] — the use of checklists. We also addressed complexity
as part of [14]. Naturally, there are not just three barriers to
good security to contend with, as we see from the above list.
On the matter of achieving compliance with cloud security
standards in practice, we have identiﬁed the use of assurance
to achieve security through compliance and audit. Turning ﬁrst
to compliance, there are a number of challenges to address.
Since the evolution of cloud computing, a number of cloud
security standards have evolved, but the problem is that there
is still no standard that offers complete security — there is no
“one size covers all”, which is a limitation. Even compliance
with all standards will not guarantee complete security, which
presents another disadvantage [2]. The pace of evolution of
new technology far outstrips the capacity of international
standards organisations to keep up with the changes [15],
adding to the problem and meaning it may not be resolved
any time soon. We have argued that companies need to take
account of these gaps in the standards when addressing issues
of compliance. Reliance on compliance alone will undermine
effective security. We believe that standards need to shift from
a rule based approach to a risk based approach [16] [17] [18]
[19] [5] [20].
In [21], we addressed the basic issues faced in cloud
audit, namely the misunderstandings prevalent concerning the
reasons for audit, where we identiﬁed the three main purposes
of audit. We considered the impact of many factors on the audit
process, including addressing the impact of these shortcomings
on the successful outcome of the process. We expand on
that work here. It is certainly the case that cloud audit is
not a mature ﬁeld, and much early work on cloud audit has
focussed on addressing technical issues. We have long held
the view that focussing on technical issues alone can never
solve cloud security. The business architecture of a company
comprises people, process and technology [22], not technology
alone, thus focussing only on a technical solution is likely
to undermine security. We suggest that management need to
better understand the purpose, and importance, of audit [21]
[23] [6] [14] [24]. It is also necessary to understand both the
key importance and weaknesses offered by the audit trail [1].
We also considered the management approach [25], where
we addressed the cloud security issue with management
method, and argued that the historic reliance on agency theory
to run companies can undermine effective security, and we
outlined what the impact of this might be on security. There
is no doubt that management approach is a key consideration
to be aware of in addressing the complex relationships in the
cloud ecosystem [25]. While all actors do not utilise the same
approach, it is certainly helpful for management to recognise
the management approach used by each of the actors involved
within their own cloud ecosystem. This will better arm them
to identify key risks they face and take appropriate mitigating
action.
Having started to address complexity of cloud in [14], it is
clear that there is a need for further research in this area. Too
many cloud users take the view that cloud is a simple paradigm
to use, but are unaware of the serious impact presented by
the complexities of cloud. The increasing complexity that
new technology brings, results in increased potential exposure
to risk as a result of failure to grasp the signiﬁcance of
these risks [26]. Traditional distributed information systems
present a multiplicity of technical layers, each of which must
interact with one or more other layers, and this is already well
understood. Cloud introduces further layers, each of which can
be operated by different actors. Cloud brokers may also be
involved, leading to yet more layers, more complexity, and
more risk. This is an area that is less well understood. Cloud
allows a user to quickly deploy, for example, a web server with
a database back end, often relying on default settings, which
can introduce a number of weaknesses [21]. These default
settings usually pay far more attention to usability than to
security.
Monahan and Yearworth [27] observe that Service Level
Agreements (SLAs) should be meaningful, both for cloud users
and providers, as deﬁned by some objective criteria. Evidence
from procurement failures for large IT systems suggests oth-
erwise. This observation has inspired an investigation into the
possibility of offering alternative security SLAs that would
be meaningful to both customers and vendors. Duncan and
Whittington [6] provide some useful background on these
issues in SLAs. It is hard to allocate proper responsibility to the

171
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
right actors [28], personal data [29] and privacy [30], far less
persuade them to accept responsibility for it. Some [31] [30]
[32], have long argued that responsibility and accountability
should always be built in to the design of cloud systems.
While there has already been extensive research conducted
into the security concepts of CIA, there is less research into
our additional goals of SRE, We do see a good deal of research
into measurement of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR),
[33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40], resilience [41] [42]
[43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] and sustainability [49] [50] [51],
yet there is still some way to go before effective measures
are properly developed and deployed. While measurement is
extremely important, it can be very difﬁcult to achieve. There
is a clear need to use continuous monitoring when it comes to
security management. Reports from global security companies,
which cover both non-cloud and cloud data [22], [52], [53],
suggest that over 85% of security breaches are achieved with
a low level of technical competence, often facilitated by lack
of understanding, lack of competence, or poor conﬁguration of
victims’ systems. Duncan and Whittington [14] provide some
useful background on this.
Our ﬁrst key goal was to deﬁne proper security goals,
and obviously proper measurement is essential to be able to
understand whether these goals can be met. This obviously
requires constant monitoring to ensure the goals are actually
achieved, or to warn of possible failures before it becomes a
more serious problem.
Management attitude to security has been a high priority
[54] for a considerable time. In [55], 77% of security profes-
sionals have recognised the need to set security attitudes from
the top. According to a report [22], management attitude is
high, if you listen to the executives, yet low when you listen
to IT practitioners. Thus management need to be fully aware
that it is not simply a technical issue to be passed down the
line, rather it is a fundamental business process that needs to
be driven right from the top of the organisation. Information
security presents one of the largest risks facing business today
and needs to be given the proper attention and commitment it
requires.
One of the most important aspects of creating good security
in a company lies in the development and maintenance of a
good security culture within the organisation. This has long
been recognised [54] [55] [22], but its success is dependant
on the attitude to security displayed by top management. This
attitude must be coupled with proper staff training to ensure
staff understand how to adequately deal with security threats.
It is estimated [22], that in 2012, only 26% of companies with
a security policy believed their staff understood how to use
them.
It is necessary to recognise the magnitude of the threat
environment. Attackers are constantly probing for weaknesses,
which they will exploit without mercy. It is clear that the threat
environment is developing just as quickly as the technological
changes faced by industry [2] [25] [24]. We need to be aware
of the threat this presents, be mindful of the fact that insider
threats also pose a signiﬁcant security risk, and try to minimise
the possible impact. While we have absolutely no control
over attackers, we can help reduce the impact by making life
so difﬁcult for them that they go away and attack an easier
target instead. It is also necessary to understand that the threat
environment is not restricted to outside actors. It is vital to
understand that an equally dangerous threat may come from
within the organisation. This can come in the form of employee
laziness, incompetence, inexperience, lack of proper training,
or worst of all, from malicious internal actors. This danger can
be multiplied exponentially where they are acting in collusion
with external malicious actors.
The above ten issues are of particular importance for
management of a company, as they are the people responsible
for determining the security position of the company, and
enforcing the delivery of these goals. In the next sections, we
consider a range of common mistakes made by management
when adopting a cloud solution. Some of these mistakes are
quite simple, some are more complex, but they all share a
common thread, they all impact adversely on security.
III.
SOME COMMON MISTAKES COMPANIES OFTEN
MAKE WHEN TRANSFERRING TO CLOUD
Companies should not believe the economic arguments
of cloud service providers (CSPs) [56]. Instead, they should
evaluate their needs properly for themselves, and where they
are unsure, they should take neutral advice. It is necessary
to prepare properly ahead of time, not to rush the decision
to move to cloud, and to carry out their own due diligence
on downtime history, data accessibility, pricing structure and
CSP security and privacy record before signing any contract
[57]. Companies should not assume it will be easy. Instead,
they should think it through, understand the costs properly,
and purchase the right service package rather than taking the
ﬁrst one that comes along [58].
Companies often wear cost blinkers when choosing cloud
provisioning, but it is vital to factor in the risks and exposure
too [59], not forgetting to just look at the short term, but to
take the long view too. Before deciding, companies should
check performance, making sure latency at end user nodes
is acceptable. Remember, all clouds are not created equal. It
is so important not to choose an inappropriate Cloud Service
Provider (CSP).
Often, companies fail to prepare a proper disaster recovery
plan [60]. Companies should always expect the unexpected,
and plan for it. It is vital to be aware of what data must go to
cloud, and who should be able to see it, and it is important not
to forget access control. One key consideration is “location,
location, location”. Companies must understand where their
data is stored [61], and how they can get their data back, if
required. They need to understand who can gain access to
their data. Cloud systems will not necessarily just be exposed
to CSP personnel, but also other sub-contracted organisations
[62], whose security and privacy approach may be nowhere
near as good as that of the CSP. Companies often fail to
account for data privacy risks. This presents a really good
incentive for using encryption for their data.
When it comes to cloud security and privacy, there is no
single solution [2]. In the ﬁrst case, companies should not
assume the CSP’s security is good. CSPs have a heavy incen-
tive not to release full details of previous security and privacy
breaches so as not to adversely affect future sales. Companies
should not use the wrong privacy approach, and should try to

172
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
align security with its business goals [63]. Whatever approach
is used, it must be cloud-friendly. For compliance, companies
should always consider encryption [64], preferably with split
encryption keys. Companies often sign up to cloud accepting
the standard SLA. This can be a big mistake as many of
these standard contracts are extremely vague about security and
privacy, or do not even mention it. This lack of accountability
on the part of the CSP will only help attackers breach company
systems more easily.
When a company does switch to cloud, a common mistake
is to try to do too much, too quickly. It is better to do small
applications ﬁrst, preferably those where failure will have
minimal negative impact [65]. A company must not fail to
understand the true threat against their employees, customers,
suppliers and ultimately, their data. The company must have
a cutting-edge comprehensive information security plan. The
company needs to view security not just as an “IT problem”,
but rather as a “business problem” that also includes IT. Many
who have implemented security as an IT problem have ended
up with a strong IT implementation of data security controls
but limited (if any) attention paid to the majority of available
or required security controls such as physical security, security
policies and procedures, training, and other administrative and
environmental controls. People are generally the weakest link
in the security chain, which is why special attention needs to be
paid to their proper training in all security issues. This is also
why security mirrors the business architecture of a company,
people, process and technology [22], not technology alone.
It is also important for companies to “keep their eye on
the ball”, otherwise apathy soon follows, with consequent
weakening of company security policies leading to disaster.
Companies also need to keep up-to-date, by subscribing to
threat intelligence feeds and collaborating with other leaders
in the ﬁeld [63]. New vulnerabilities and threats are discovered
every day, and there is no room for complacency.
There have been a range of interesting approaches to try to
alleviate some of the obvious issues in cloud security. One such
area is the issue of how to ensure data integrity in the cloud. We
see a number of interesting proposals, such as [66] [64] [67]
[68] [69], which seek to provide assurance of data integrity
to users through various forms of audit, which generally work
quite well. There are those, such as [70] [71] [72] [73], who
have suggested trust computing could be the way forward.
Again, these can work well, but it is important to realise
that despite establishing trust between providers and users,
nevertheless, the fact remains that the work is being performed
on someone else’s systems, thus an element of risk will always
remain. Others, such as [74] [75] [76] [77], believe provable
data possession could help address this problem. Some believe
that timeline entanglement, such as [78] [79] [80], is the way
forward.
These systems, while generally proving capable of deliver-
ing what they promise, share a common ﬂaw. They all provide
an excellent means of achieving their objectives, but do not
provide a means to deal with what happens after a serious
security breach involving, usually brutal and indiscriminate,
modiﬁcation or deletion of multiple records. Where users do
not understand the true purpose of an audit trail, it may be that
they no longer have access to the necessary data with which
to restore the modiﬁed or deleted data to its original state.
We can learn lessons from the accounting world, speciﬁ-
cally in the area of the audit trail, as used with accounting
systems for centuries. One of the key requirements in the
accounting process is the separation of duties, and we discuss
this more fully in the next section.
IV.
THE IMPORTANCE OF SEPARATION OF DUTIES
One of the core, long standing security concepts for internal
business systems is that of “separation (or segregation) of
duties.” This concerns the advisability of separating and then
parcelling out parts of a task to different people and places in
order to reduce the opportunity for fraud or theft as multiple
actors would need to take part. The fundamental nature of
this concept is shown in the ground-breaking behavioural
research of Ashton [81], who questioned auditors to seek an
understanding of their consistency in applying judgement. He
started with two questions in his questionnaire that embedded
the concept of separation of duties
• Are the tasks of both timekeeping and payment of em-
ployees adequately separated from the task of payroll
preparation?
• Are the tasks of both payroll preparation and payment of
employees adequately separated from the task of payroll
bank account?
The implications of judging that the answer to either of
these two questions is “no” are obvious — an opportunity and
a temptation arises for an individual to manipulate the payroll
to their advantage. Clearly if it were possible to locate the
payroll department away from the main work location and be
conﬁdent that no one in payroll knew anyone in the rest of
the company, then conﬁdence would be increased yet further.
Such separation not only makes fraud difﬁcult, but also means
unintentional errors are more likely to be spotted.
Gelinas et al. [82], pinpoint four basic transaction functions
that should be separated: authorising transactions, executing
transactions, recording transactions and safeguarding resources
subsequent to the transactions being completed. Vaassen et al.
[83], list ﬁve — “authorisation; custody; recording; checking
and execution”. Hall [84], takes the separation of duties
logic and applies it speciﬁcally to computerised accounting,
suggesting that the questions should now include “Is the logic
of the computer program correct? Has anyone tampered with
the application since it was last tested? Have changes been
made to the programme that could have caused an undisclosed
error?” (page 208). Whilst this may seem obvious and it might
be assumed to be a problem that no longer causes grief,
this is not the case. Ge and McVay [85], take advantage
of the additional disclosures following the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act [86], where executives were putting their lives on the
line when signing off the integrity of their accounts, and
examine companies that admit weaknesses. Looking at a two-
year window (2002-2004) they ﬁnd 261 ﬁrms with confessed
internal control weaknesses and 45 of those admitted to a lack
of segregation of duties. Computer ﬁrms were over-represented
in the group of companies reporting problems.
The analogies to wider programming and software use
are obvious and well known at least at a theoretical level.
The more important question is whether the actual practice
matches with the theory and then whether there is a record

173
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to demonstrate that such safety features were both in place
and effective (i.e., the audit trail). As a real life example,
one of the authors used to manage a large purchase ledger
department and one of his staff got very confused with £2
million of invoices from a large supplier and had entered
invoices, cancelled them, entered credit notes, cancelled them
numerous times and had eventually come to him in tears. This
was sorted, but the auditor some months later picked out these
unusual transactions for investigation and an event log was
able to show the mistakes, how they were rectiﬁed and who
had performed each entry on the system.
We take a brief look at the current state of cloud security
standards at the present time in order to demonstrate possible
weaknesses in relying on compliance with these standards to
provide cloud security assurance.
V.
THE CURRENT STATE OF CLOUD SECURITY
STANDARDS
There are a great many organisations who have worked on
cloud security standards over the past decade. The following
list, which is not exhaustive, gives a ﬂavour of the variety of
organisations working on the standards that are evolving today:
• AICPA [87];
◦ AICPA Trust Service Criteria;
• ARTS [88];
• Basel 3 [89];
• BITS [90];
• CSA [32];
• CSCC [91];
• Control objectives for information and related technology
(COBIT) [92];
• CSO [93];
• DPA [94];
• DMTF [95];
◦ OVF;
◦ OCSI;
◦ CMWG;
◦ CADFWG;
• ETSI [96];
◦ TC Cloud;
◦ CSC;
• FedRamp [97];
• Generally accepted privacy principles (GAPP) [98];
• GICTF [99];
• HIPAA [100];
• IATAC [101];
• ISACA [92];
◦ COBIT;
• ISAE 3402 [102];
• ISO/IEC [103];
• Information
technology
infrastructure
library
(ITIL)
[104];
• ITU [105];
• Jericho Forum [106];
• NIST [107];
• NERC [108];
◦ CIP;
• OASIS [109];
◦ OASIS Cloud-Speciﬁc or Extended TC;
OASIS CAMP TC;
OASIS ID Cloud TC;
OASIS SAF TC;
OASIS TOSCA TC;
OASIS CloudAuthZ TC;
OASIS PACR TC;
• OCC [110];
• OGF [111];
◦ OCCI Working Group;
OCCI Core Speciﬁcation;
OCCI Infrastructure Speciﬁcation;
OCCI HTTP Rendering Speciﬁcation;
Other OCCI-related Documents;
• OMG [112];
• PCIDSS [113];
• SNIA [114];
◦ SNIA CDMI;
• The Open Group [115];
◦ Cloud Work Group;
Cloud Computing Business Scenario;
Building Return on Investment from Cloud Com-
puting;
• TM Forum [116];
◦ Cloud Services Initiative;
TM Forum’s Cloud Services Initiative Vision;
Barriers to Success;
ECLC Goals;
Future Collaborative Programs;
◦ About the TM Forum;
TM Forum’s Framework.
Most of these organisations have addressed speciﬁc cloud
areas, particularly where they might relate to how their mem-
bers might use cloud services with a better degree of safety.
PCIDSS, for example, is speciﬁcally concerned with how cloud
impacts on payment mechanisms. Larger organisations, such
as CSA, ISACA, ISO/IEC, NIST tend to take a broader view
to solving the problem. CSA and ISACA are cloud oriented
organisations, while ISO/IEC and NIST have a much wider
focus. Of the latter two, NIST were very quick to produce
a cloud security standard, whereas the ISO/IEC standards
approval process is very slow. On the plus side, once approved,
an ISO/IEC standard will generally be adopted by large
global corporates. To illustrate this process, NIST released
their ﬁrst cloud standard in 2009, followed in 2011 by a
more comprehensive standard, which was well adopted by US
corporates. Whereas, it took until 2014 before the ISO/IEC
even mentioned cloud.
However, once they started moving, cloud standards started
to ﬂow, and ISO/IEC 27017:2015, which provides guidance for
cloud speciﬁc security controls based on ISO/IEC 27002:2013,
was ﬁnally approved in 2015. During the current decade, there
has been a shift in the ISO 27000 series of standards from
a compliance based approach to a risk based approach, and
this is to be welcomed. ISO/IEC 27018:2014 was published
in 2014, and covers use of personally identiﬁable informa-
tion (PII) in public clouds. ISO/IEC 270364:2016 provides
guidance on the security of cloud services. This standard
does not address business continuity management or resiliency
issues for cloud services. These are addressed in ISO/IEC
27031:2011, although this has been improved on in ISO
22301:2012.

174
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
There are three security studies currently being conducted
by the ISO/IEC on: cloud security assessment and audit;
cloud-adapted risk management framework; and cloud security
components. Beyond that, the following four areas have been
proposed: guidelines for cloud service customer data security;
the architecture of trusted connection to cloud services; the
architecture for virtual root of trust on cloud platforms; and
emerging virtualization security.
Thus we will next take a brief look at cloud audit literature
to see what lessons we can learn from this area.
VI.
CLOUD AUDIT LITERATURE
Vouk [117], in an early description of the issues surround-
ing cloud computing, suggests there must be an ability to audit
processes, data and processing results. By 2009, we see a little
more concern being expressed in the area of cloud audit. Wang
et al. [118] address how the cloud paradigm brings about many
new security challenges, which have not been well understood.
The authors study the problem of ensuring the integrity of data
storage in cloud computing, in particular, the task of allowing
a third party auditor (TPA), on behalf of the cloud client, to
verify the integrity of the dynamic data stored in the cloud. The
authors identify the difﬁculties and potential security problems
and show how to construct an elegant veriﬁcation scheme for
seamless integration of these features into protocol design.
Leavitt [119] suggests CSPs will not be able to pass
customer audits if they cannot demonstrate who has access
to their data and how they prevent unauthorised personnel
from retrieving information, a a line of enquiry they generally
discourage. Some CSPs are addressing this by appointing
TPAs to audit their systems in advance and by documenting
procedures designed to address customers data security needs.
Where the TPA is not an accounting ﬁrm, there may be some
question as to auditor impartiality. Bernstein et al. [120] are
excited by the prospect of a “cloud of clouds”, but are worried
about the security processes used to ensure connectivity to the
correct server on the other clouds, and suggests some kind of
audit-ability would be needed. The authors stress the need for
cloud systems to provide strong and secure audit trails.
Pearson and Benameur [121] recognise that achieving
proper audit trails in the cloud is an unresolved issue. Wang
et al. [122] address privacy preserving public auditing for
data storage security in cloud, and are keen to prevent TPA
introduced weaknesses to the system. The authors present a
mechanism to enable a more secure approach to public audit
by TPAs. Zhou et al. [123] carry out a survey on security and
privacy in cloud computing, and investigate several CSPs about
their concerns on security and privacy issues, ﬁnding those
concerns are inadequate. The authors suggest more should be
added in terms of ﬁve aspects (i.e., availability, conﬁdentiality,
data integrity, control and audit) for security. Chen and Yoon
[60] present a framework for secure cloud computing through
IT auditing by establishing a general framework using check-
lists by following data ﬂow and its life-cycle. The checklists
are made based on the cloud deployment models and cloud
services models.
Armbrust et al. [124] present a detailed description of what
cloud computing is, and note that the possible lack of audit-
ability presents the number three barrier to implementation.
Ramgovind et al. [125] provide an overall security perspective
of cloud computing with the aim of highlighting the security
concerns that should properly be addressed and managed to
realise the full potential of cloud computing. The authors
note that possible unwillingness of CSPs to undergo audit
presents a real barrier to take up. Grobauer et al. [126] note
that discussions about cloud computing security often fail
to distinguish general issues from cloud-speciﬁc issues. The
authors express concern that many CSPs do not do enough to
ensure good cloud audit practice can be provided to ensure
proper security is achieved.
Doelitzscher et al. [127] present a prototype demonstration
of Security Audit as a Service (SAaaS) architecture, a cloud
audit system that aims to increase trust in cloud infrastructures
by introducing more transparency to both user and cloud
provider on what is happening in the cloud. This system aims
to keep track of changes to the infrastructure as VMs are
deployed, moved or shut down. Hale and Gamble [128] note
that current SLAs focus on quality of service metrics and lack
the semantics needed to express security constraints that could
be used to measure risk. The authors present a framework,
called SecAgreement (SecAg), that extends the current SLA
negotiation standard to allow security metrics to be expressed
on service description terms and service level objectives.
Pappas et al. [129] present CloudFence, a framework that
allows users to independently audit the treatment of their pri-
vate data by third-party online services, through the interven-
tion of the cloud provider that hosts these services. The authors
demonstrate that CloudFence requires just a few changes to
existing application code, while it can detect and prevent a
wide range of security breaches, ranging from data leakage
attacks using SQL injection, to personal data disclosure due
to missing or erroneously implemented access control checks.
Xie and Gamble [30] outline a tiered approach to auditing
information in the cloud. The approach provides perspectives
on audit-able events that may include compositions of inde-
pendently formed audit trails. Zhu et al. [77] propose the use
of provable data possession (PDP), a cryptographic technique
for verifying the integrity of data, without retrieving it, as part
of a means of carrying out audit on the data.
Ruebsamen and Reich [130] propose the use of software
agents to carry out continuous audit processing and reporting.
The authors propose continuous audit to address the dynami-
cally changing nature of cloud use, so as to ensure evidence
concerning vital periods of use are not missed. Doelitzscher
et al. [131] propose the use of neural networks to analyse and
learn the normal usage behaviour of cloud customers, so that
anomalies originating from a cloud security incident caused
by a compromised virtual machine can be detected. While
retrospective tests on collected data have proved very effective,
the system has yet to reach a sufﬁcient level of maturity to be
deployed in a live environment.
Doelitzscher et al. [132] present a cloud audit policy
language for their SAaaS architecture. The authors describe
the design and implementation of the automated audit system
of virtual machine images, which ensures legal and company
policies are complied with. They also discuss how on-demand
software audit agents that maintain and validate the security
compliance of running cloud services are deployed. Thorpe et
al. [133] present a framework for forensic based auditing of

175
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
cloud logs. The authors explore the requirements of a cloud
log forensics service oriented architecture (SOA) framework
for performing effective digital investigation examinations in
these abstract web services environments. Wang et al. [134]
propose a secure cloud storage system supporting privacy-
preserving public auditing. The authors further extend their
proposal to enable the TPA to perform audits for multiple users
simultaneously and efﬁciently.
Lopez et al. [135] propose privacy-friendly cloud audits
by applying Somewhat Homomorphic Encryption (SHE) and
Public-Key Searchable Encryption (PEKS) to the collection
of digital evidence. The authors show that their solution can
provide client privacy preserving audit data to cloud auditors.
Shameli-Sendi and Cheriet [136] propose a framework for
assessing the security risks associated with cloud computing
platforms. Xiong and Chen [137] consider how to allocate
sufﬁcient computing resources but not to over-provision these
resources to process and analyse audit logs for ensuring the
guarantee of security of an SLA, referred to as the SLA-
based resource allocation problem, for high-performance cloud
auditing.
Now that we have looked at the cloud audit literature, will
take a look at the audit trail in a bit more depth, to gain a
better understanding of the detail we need to get to grips with
to help us gain some beneﬁt from it.
VII.
THE AUDIT TRAIL
Auditing in the accountancy world has enjoyed the beneﬁt
of over a century of practice and experience, yet there remain
differences of opinion and a number of problems are yet
to be resolved. Duncan and Whittington [2] provide some
background on this issue. Cloud computing audit can not be
considered a mature ﬁeld, and there will be some way to go
before it can catch up with the reﬂection and rigour of the
accounting profession. An obvious area of weakness arises
when taking audit professionals from the accounting world out
of their comfort zone, and placing them in a more technical
ﬁeld. Equally, the use of people with a computing background
can overcome some of these issues, but their lack of audit
background presents an alternate weakness.
A fundamental element of the audit process is the audit
trail, and having two disciplines involved in providing cloud
audit services means we have two different professional mind-
sets to contend with, namely accounting professionals and
security professionals. An obvious concern is what is meant
by the term “audit trail”. It is easy to assume that everyone
is talking about the same thing, but is that actually the case?
To an accounting professional, the meaning of an audit trail is
very clear.
The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) [138] has two useful
deﬁnitions of an audit trail: “(a) Accounting: a means of
verifying the detailed transactions underlying any item in an
accounting record; (b) Computing: a record of the computing
processes that have been applied to a particular set of source
data, showing each stage of processing and allowing the
original data to be reconstituted; a record of the transactions
to which a database or a ﬁle has been subjected”. As we can
see, there is not a complete common understanding between
the two disciplines of what an audit trail should be able to
achieve.
In the accounting world, an understanding of exactly what
is meant by an audit trail, and its importance, is a fundamental
part of the training every accountant is subjected to. Some 20
years ago, the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) [139] provided, in the context of computing security,
a very detailed description of what an audit trail is, and this
is wholly consistent with the OED deﬁnition. However, when
we look at the deﬁnitions in use in some cloud audit research
papers, we start to see a less rigorous understanding of what an
audit trail is. For example, Bernstein [120] suggests the audit
trail comprises: events, logs, and analysis thereof, Chaula [140]
suggests: raw data, analysis notes, preliminary development
and analysis information, processes notes, etc.
Pearson et al. [121] recognise that achieving proper audit
trails in the cloud is an unresolved issue. Ko et al. [141]
explicitly note that steps need to be taken to prevent audit
trails disappearing after a cloud instance is shut down. Ko
[142] recognises the need to collect a multiplicity of layers
of log data, including transactional audit trails in order to
ensure accountability in the cloud. The EU Article 29 Working
Party [143] raises several cloud-speciﬁc security risks, such
as loss of governance, insecure or incomplete data deletion,
insufﬁcient audit trails or isolation failures, which are not
sufﬁciently addressed by the existing Safe Harbor principles
on data security.
The audit trail can be a very powerful tool in the ﬁght
against attack. Just as the audit trail offers forensic accountants
a means to track down fraudulent behaviour in a company, so
the audit trail in a cloud setting, providing it can be properly
protected against attack, offers forensic scientists an excellent
basis to track intrusions and other wrongdoing. In the event
of a catastrophic attack, it should be possible to reconstruct
the system that has been attacked, in order to either prove the
integrity of the system values, or in a worst case scenario,
reconstruct the system from scratch. The redundancy offered
by the simple audit trail, often seen by many IT people, as an
unnecessary duplication, will prove invaluable in the event of
compromise. One of the authors has spoken to countless IT
people who have claimed they already have multiple backups
of all their data, so do not see the need for a proper audit
trail. This completely misses the point that after a breach
occurs, the corrupted data will be duplicated over time into all
the carefully maintained backup copies, resulting in multiple
sets of corrupted data. This is particularly problematic where
there is a considerable time between breach and discovery.
Whereas, a simple, carefully protected audit trail would allow
the corrupted system to be fully reconstructed.
Many cloud users are punctilious about setting up proper
audit trails, but sometimes forget that when a virtual machine
(VM) running in the cloud is shut down, everything, including
the audit trail data they have so assiduously collected, dis-
appears as soon as the VM shuts down [141], unless steps
are taken to prevent their loss. In real world conditions, most
database software ships with inadequate audit trail provision
in the default settings. Anderson [144] states that the audit
trail should only be capable of being read by users rather than
being edited. While it is simple enough to restrict users to read-
only access, this does not apply to the system administrators.

176
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This presents an issue where an intruder gets into a system,
escalates privileges until root access is obtained, and is then
free to manipulate, or delete the audit trail entries in order to
cover their tracks.
Cloud users often assume that the VMs they are running
will be under their sole control. However, the VMs run on
someone elses hardware — the CSPs. These CSPs also employ
system administrators. CSPs also employ temporary staff from
time to time, some of whom are also system administrators.
While the CSP may vet their own staff to a high level, this
may not the case with temporary employees [146]. Network
connections too are often virtualized, opening up yet more
avenues of attack.
A cloud user can take as many steps to secure their business
as they wish, but a key ingredient in the equation is the fact
that all cloud processes run on somebody elses hardware, and
often software too — the CSPs. The cloud relationship needs
to include the CSP as a key partner in the pursuit of achieving
security [6]. Unless and until CSPs are willing to share this
goal, technical solutions will be doomed to failure.
Thus in the next section, we will take a look at some of the
practical approaches we can take to help us achieve the goal
of a better level of security. Most of these recommendations
will not be technically challenging, yet many companies fail to
act on these simple actions, which could signiﬁcantly improve
security for their company.
VIII.
HOW CAN WE IMPROVE THE AUDIT TRAIL?
There are three fundamental weaknesses here, which need
to be addressed. First, inadequate default logging options can
result in insufﬁcient data being collected for the audit trail.
Second, there is a lack of recognition that the audit trail data
can be accessed by a malicious user gaining root privileges,
which can lead to the removal of key data showing who
compromised the system, and what they did once they had
control of it. Third, failure to ensure log data is properly
collected and moved to permanent storage can lead to loss
of audit trail data, either when an instance is shut down, or
when it is compromised.
To illustrate the ﬁrst point, we discuss one of the most
popular open source database programmes in general use today
— MySQL. The vast majority of implementations will use
either standard default settings on installation, or install the
programme as part of a standard Linux, Apache, MySQL and
PHP (LAMP) server. In the case of a LAMP server, all four of
the constituent elements are set up using the default settings.
This works very well for easy functionality “out of the box”,
which is the whole purpose of a LAMP server. Unfortunately
this does not adequately address security in each of the four
elements of the LAMP server.
MySQL offers the following audit trail options:
• Error log — Problems encountered starting, running, or
stopping mysqld;
• General query log — Established client connections and
statements received from clients;
• Binary log — Statements that change data (also used for
replication);
• Relay log — Data changes received from a replication
master server;
• Slow
query
log
—
Queries
that
took
more
than
long query time seconds to execute;
• DDL log (metadata log) — Metadata operations per-
formed by Data Deﬁnition Language (DDL) statements.
By default, no logs are enabled, except the error log on
Windows. Some versions of Linux send the Error log to syslog.
Oracle offer an audit plugin for Enterprise (paid) Editions
of MySQL. This allows a range of events to be logged, but
again, by default, most are not enabled.
The MariaDB company, whose author originally wrote
MySQL, have their own open source audit plug-in, and offer a
version suitable for MySQL. It has the following functionality:
• CONNECTION — Logs connects, disconnects and failed
connects (including the error code);
• QUERY — Queries issued and their results (in plain
text), including failed queries due to syntax or permission
errors;
• TABLE — Which tables were affected by query execu-
tion;
• QUERY DDL — Works as the ‘QUERY’ value, but
ﬁlters only DDL-type queries (CREATE, ALTER, etc);
• QUERY DML — Works as the ‘QUERY’ value, but
ﬁlters only Data Manipulation Language (DML) DML-
type queries (INSERT, UPDATE, etc).
By default, logging is set to off. Thus, those users who rely
on default settings for their systems are immediately putting
themselves at a severe disadvantage.
Turning to the second point, as Anderson [144] states, the
audit trail should only be capable of being read by users. This
presents a problem in a cloud setting, where the software being
used is running on someone else’s hardware. There is a risk
of compromise from an outside user with malicious intent.
There is also a risk of compromise by someone working for the
CSP. While the CSP may well take vetting of staff seriously,
there may be situations that arise where a temporary contract
worker is engaged at short notice who has been subject to
lesser scrutiny.
Looking at the third point, where MySQL data logging is
actually switched on, all data is logged to the running instance.
This means the data remains accessible to any intruder who
successfully breaches the system, allowing them to cover their
own tracks by deleting any entries that relate to their intrusion
of the system, or to simply delete the entire audit trail ﬁles.
And, when the instance is shut down, all the data disappears
anyway.
These three points are generally not much thought about,
yet they present a serious weakness to the success of main-
taining the audit trail. Equally, these are relatively trivial to
address. Often management and IT staff will take the view
“so what?”.
Simply turn on data logging and send all log output to an
independent secure server under the control of the cloud user.
Adding an Intrusion Detection system (IDS) is also a useful
additional precaution to take, and again, this should be run on
an independent secure server under the control of the cloud

177
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
user. The use of an audit plug-in in addition to all the basic
logging capabilities, is also a useful thing to do. While there
will be an element of double processing involved, it is better
to have more data than none at all.
Where the MySQL instance forms part of a LAMP server,
then it would also be prudent to make some elementary
security changes to the setup of the Linux operating system,
the Apache web server, and to harden the PHP installation.
It is rather worrying that as far back as 2012, Trustwave
[145], report an average of 6 months between breach and
discovery. It is also rather worrying to see that three years later
[147], see Fig. 1, that 75% of breaches happen within days,
yet only 25% of discoveries are actually made within the same
time-frame. This still leaves a large gap where compromised
systems may still be under the control of malicious users.
Fig. 1. The Lag Between Breach and Discovery c⃝ 2015 Verizon
This presents a clear indication that very few ﬁrms are
actually scrutinising their server logs. Back in 2012, Verizon
[53] highlighted the fact that discovery of security breaches
often took weeks, months or even years before discovery,
with most discovery being advised by external bodies, such
as customers, ﬁnancial institutions or fraud agencies.
The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP)
carry out a survey every 3 years in which they collate the
number of vulnerabilities with the greatest impact on compa-
nies. In TABLE I we can see the top ten list from 2013, 2010
and 2007:
Sitting at the top of the table for 2013, again for 2010,
and in second place in 2007, we have injection attacks. It is
very clear that companies are consistently failing to conﬁgure
their database systems properly. Injection attacks rely on mis-
conﬁgured databases used in dynamic web service applica-
tions, which allow SQL, OS, or LDAP injection to occur when
untrusted data is sent to an interpreter as part of a command
or query. The attackers hostile data can trick the interpreter
TABLE I. OWASP TOP TEN WEB VULNERABILITIES — 2013 [148]
2013
2010
2007
Threat
1
1
2
Injection Attacks
2
3
7
Broken Authentication and Session Management
3
2
1
Cross Site Scripting (XSS)
4
4
4
Insecure Direct Object References
5
6
-
Security Misconﬁguration
6
-
-
Sensitive Data Exposure
7
-
-
Missing Function Level Access Control
8
5
5
Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF)
9
-
-
Using Components with Known Vulnerabilities
10
-
-
Unvalidated Redirects and Forwards
into executing unintended commands or accessing data without
proper authorization. This can lead to compromise, or deletion
of data held in company databases.
SQL injection attacks are relatively straightforward to
defend against. OWASP provide an SQL injection prevention
cheat sheet [149], in which they suggest a number of defences:
• Use of Prepared Statements (Parameterized Queries);
• Use of Stored Procedures;
• Escaping all User Supplied Input;
They also suggest that companies should enforce least
privilege and perform white list input validation as useful
additional precautions to take.
For operating system injection ﬂaws, they also have a
cheat sheet [150], which suggests that LDAP injection attacks
are common due to two factors, namely the lack of safer,
parameterized LDAP query interfaces, and the widespread use
of LDAP to authenticate users to systems. Their recommenda-
tions for suitable defences are:
• Rule 1 Perform proper input validation;
• Rule 2 Use a safe API;
• Rule 3 Contextually escape user data.
And for LDAP system injection ﬂaws, their cheat sheet
[151], recommends the following injection prevention rules:
• Defence Option 1: Escape all variables using the right
LDAP encoding function;
• Defence Option 2: Use Frameworks that Automatically
Protect from LDAP Injection.
None of these preventative measures suggested by OWASP
are particularly difﬁcult to implement, yet judging by the
recurring success of these simple attacks, companies are clearly
failing to take even simple actions to protect against them.
When considering secure audit trail and system logging
for a database, there are a number of simple conﬁguration
options open to the user. First, applying the above OWASP
recommendations would considerably limit exposure. Looking
at the database itself, the user access for posting records to
the logging database can have the option to modify or delete
records disabled. On the plus side, full database capabilities
are retained. On the negative side, should an attacker be able
to gain access to the database, and subsequently be able to
escalate privileges, then these restrictions could be reversed,
thus exposing the database.
Another simpler approach would be to conﬁgure the
database as an archive database. This allows new records to

178
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be added, prevents modiﬁcation of records in the database,
and also prevents deletion of records. On the plus side, the
attacker cannot change the database type, but on the negative
side, the database cannot be indexed, thus making searching
more difﬁcult (time consuming).
Yet another possibility would be to conﬁgure the database
such that full facilities are retained, but with the modify and
delete commands completely removed. This would meet the
goals for a proper audit trail, and would provide the ability to
retain full search capabilities for rapid analysis and searching
of the audit trail.
Thus, in addition to making the simple suggestions we
propose above, cloud users should also make sure they actually
review these audit trail logs. It is vital to be able to understand
when a security breach has occurred, and exactly which records
have been accessed, compromised or stolen. While recognising
that this is not a foolproof method of achieving cloud security,
it is likely to present a far higher level of affordable, achievable
security than many companies currently achieve.
However, we must warn that even if a company implements
these simple suggestions, that still will not guarantee security.
While it will annoy the majority of attackers to such an extent
that they will move on to easier pickings, it may well be that
new vulnerabilities will arise. Therefore the company must
remain vigilant at all times. It would be prudent to subscribe
to security feeds, and follow leaders in the ﬁeld to ensure
they remain aware of all the latest security vulnerabilities and
exploits. Of course, companies must also realise that the threat
environment is not restricted to outside parties alone. Perhaps
of greater concern is the threat posed by malicious internal
actors, which can be even more serious where they act in
concert with outside parties. This presents one of the most
serious weaknesses to the security of a company. Equally,
laziness on the part of staff or lack of knowledge, particularly
where they have not been regularly trained to provide them
with full awareness of all the latest threats, including social
engineering attacks, and the consequence of falling victim to
them, can also pose an extremely serious risk to company
security.
In the event of a security breach, not if, but rather when it
happens, it may be necessary to conduct a forensic examination
to establish how the company defences were breached. With
traditional distributed systems, there is usually something for
the forensic computer scientists to ﬁnd, somewhere in the
system. They are completely accustomed to dealing with being
able to ﬁnd only partial traces of events, from which they
can build a forensic picture of the breach. This becomes more
problematic the longer the time between breach and discovery.
However, once a company adopts cloud use, this becomes
far more problematic. While forensic computer scientists can
work wonders with a range of partial discoveries, deleted or
otherwise, once a cloud instance is shut down, there is virtually
zero chance of regaining access to the shut down system. The
disk space used by that system could be re-used, literally
within seconds, and where the time interval between breach
and discovery is considerably longer, as is generally the norm,
then this opportunity becomes a physical impossibility. Thus,
for forensic purposes, companies need to pay far more attention
to what is actually going on in the cloud.
In the next Section, we provide a number of tables as a
reminder of the issues we have discussed in this article and
how to attempt to mitigate these issues.
IX.
A REMINDER ON WHO IS RESPONSIBLE TO
MITIGATE THE PROBLEM AREAS
In this Section, we provide some tables as a handy reminder
of who is responsible for ensuring the mitigation of problem
areas. We start, in TABLE II, by taking a look at the 10 key
management risk areas we discussed in Section II.
TABLE II. 10 KEY MANAGEMENT RISK AREAS
WEAKNESSES AND MITIGATING RESPONSIBILITIES c⃝2016 DUNCAN AND
WHITTINGTON
Item
Weakness
Responsibility for Mitigation
1
Deﬁnition of Security Goals
Management
2
Standards Compliance
Management
3
Audit Issues
Management and Internal Audit
4
Management Approach
Management
5
Technical Complexity
Management and IT
6
Lack of Responsibility
Management
7
Measurement and Monitoring
Management and IT
8
Management Attitude to Security
Management
9
Security Culture
Management and All Employees
10
Threat Environment
Extreme Vigilance by Management and IT
Clearly, since these are key management risk areas, man-
agement must necessarily take a heavy responsibility for en-
suring these areas are properly dealt with. First, the deﬁnition
of clear security goals provides the fundamental basis for
ensuring a good security posture can be achieved by the
company. Note, there should be no delegation of this vital
task to IT. Management must take full ownership of this task.
On the matter of standards compliance, management must
understand that since cloud security standards are not yet
complete, they must recognise the risks involved in attempting
to rely on this compliance for security. Management must also
recognise the shortcomings pertaining to audit methodology,
and should do so in conjunction with internal audit, and, if
necessary, in consultation with the external auditors.
Management need to recognise the impact of the manage-
ment approaches adopted by all cloud actors, and recognise
how these differing approaches and risk appetites can increase
risk to the company. Management, in conjunction with their
IT department, must explicitly understand the potential impact
due to the added complexity of cloud ecosystems, in order to
ensure proper mitigation is achieved. Management must also
recognise the potential impact brought about through a lack
of responsibility and accountability from all the actors in the
cloud ecosystem chain, including their own staff.
Management must recognise fully the need for establishing
proper metrics in order to ensure proper measurement and
monitoring can take place. In this way, there will at least be a
recognition of when an attack has occurred, thus providing
an opportunity to ensure mitigating steps are immediately
taken. Management need to ensure they take a serious atti-
tude towards security, preferably with a board member being
appointed as the responsible security board member of the
company. This will help to ensure a proper security culture
can be developed, and maintained within the company.
Finally, there is a pressing need for management to take
very seriously the potential danger posed by the threat envi-

179
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ronment. By ensuring that currently known vulnerabilities are
quickly identiﬁed and mitigating action is taken promptly, this
will help reduce the impact posed by the threat environment.
Obviously, new vulnerabilities will become exposed all the
time, and with the previous steps taken, and in particular
extreme levels of vigilance, this should help to mitigate the
overall danger posed.
In TABLE III, we consider the common mistakes compa-
nies often make when adopting cloud computing within their
organisation, as we discussed in Section III.
TABLE III. COMMON MISTAKES
WEAKNESSES AND MITIGATING STRATEGIES c⃝2016 DUNCAN AND
WHITTINGTON
Item
Weakness
Action Required
1
CSP Sales Talk
Do not believe the hype. Do your own due diligence
2
Business Continuity
Prepare a proper disaster recovery plan
3
Cloud Security
Remember, there is no single solution
4
Rapid Deployment
Don’t try to do it all at once
5
Ongoing Ennui
Do not relax. Be vigilant at all times
6
Other Approaches
Look out for the loopholes
7
After a Breach
Have a plan for what to do after a breach
Remember, the primary goal of the CSP is get your
signature on the contract. Take nothing at face value, and
scrutinise the small print very carefully. What will you do in
the event of a security breach? You must have a proper and
comprehensive disaster recovery plan in place before you start
using cloud. Later will be too late. Do not forget that there
is no single solution to cloud security. Identify the risks, take
mitigating steps and above all remain vigilant at all times.
Do not try to implement your cloud installation too quickly.
You need to thoroughly carry out security testing to ensure you
eliminate as many issues as possible before you commit fully
to the system. Once it is up and running, do not assume all
will be well for evermore.
Do not assume new approaches will be a perfect solution
to the problem. There will likely be one or more loopholes
involved. Make sure that you are the one to ﬁnd them. Above
all else, have a plan in place for what to do the moment you
have a breach. With cloud systems, you cannot afford to wait
while you develop a plan. You have to take action right away,
otherwise there might be very little for you to investigate where
cloud systems are in use.
With regard to separation of duties, as discussed in Sec-
tion IV, it is worth remembering that this advice can and
should be applied to people, processes and technology. This
will ensure proper internal control can be organised across the
whole of the business architecture of the company.
When it comes to cloud security standards, as covered in
Section V, remember there is no complete cloud security stan-
dard yet in existence, and often, the compliance mechanisms
can be ﬂawed, leading to a false sense of security evolving.
Guard against this arising at all costs.
Finally, do not forget the beneﬁts to be obtained from
implementing a proper audit trail. In TABLE IV, we reiterate
the main points addressed in Section VIII.
There is a great deal of work that can be carried out with
databases to ensure a more robust environment is used to limit
TABLE IV. POSSIBLE IMPROVEMENTS TO ENSURE
A COMPLETE AUDIT TRAIL c⃝2016 DUNCAN AND WHITTINGTON
Item
Weakness
Action Required
1
Inadequate Default Logging
Make sure adequate logging is turned on
2
Insecure Audit Trail Data
Protect access to this data properly
3
Incomplete Audit Trail Data
Ensure full data collection
4
Secure Audit Trail
Use a separate secure server for this
5
Secure Server Setup
Setup a hardened server
6
Securing the Audit Trail Server
Add an Intrusion Detection system
7
Ensuring Security
Setup a live monitoring system
8
Ensuring Security
Update all security patches regularly
9
Ensuring Security
Setup immutable databases for the audit trail
10
Ensuring Security
Collect data from all running cloud instances
the damage from any security breach that might occur. It is
vital to ensure that taking the easy option of using default
settings is never to be allowed to happen. Default settings,
while very easy to implement, are a vital security weakness
which can be a great enabler for the attacker. A company
should always take the trouble to take this treat away from
potential attackers.
In the next section, we shall review our ﬁndings and discuss
our conclusions.
X.
CONCLUSION
We have looked at some of the challenges facing companies
who seek to obtain good cloud security assurance. We have
seen how weaknesses in standard CSP SLAs can impact on
cloud security. We have identiﬁed issues with cloud security
standards, and how that might impact on cloud security. We
have considered how the lack of accountability can impact on
security. We have discussed how a number of the above issues
must additionally be addressed. It is clear that companies who
use cloud need to understand the impact that the complexities
of using cloud will have on their security will have to be very
carefully considered in order to ensure they do not fall foul of
the many opportunities that exist for security controls to “fall
down the gaps” and thus become lost forever.
The practice of using default settings when installing
software in a cloud environment is clearly asking for trou-
ble. These simple steps we propose are relatively easy to
implement, need not be particularly expensive to implement
and maintain, and providing some on-going monitoring of the
audit trail logs will certainly prove beneﬁcial. Examination
of the logs need not be challenging or costly — there are
many software solutions available to address this task using
programmatic means. Complicated solutions generally lead to
complex problems, as the more complex the solution, the more
the risk of ineffective conﬁguration and maintenance can lead
to compromise in security. Yet all. too often, the simple steps
than can really help improve security are ignored.
We have touched on how these difﬁcult areas of security
might easily be approached as part of a comprehensive secu-
rity solution using simple and inexpensive methods. Clearly,
companies could beneﬁt from further research in several of
these areas. However, we would caution that action is needed
now, not several years down the line when research reaches
a more complete level of success in these areas. The threat
environment is too dangerous. Companies have to act now to
try to close the door, otherwise it may be too late.

180
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Privacy:
The Power and the Weakness of the Audit Trail,” in Cloud Comput. 2016
Seventh Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization.
Rome: IEEE,
2016, pp. 125–130.
[2]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Compliance with Standards, Assurance
and Audit: Does this Equal Security?” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Secur. Inf.
Networks.
Glasgow: ACM, 2014, pp. 77–84.
[3]
B. Duncan, D. J. Pym, and M. Whittington, “Developing a Conceptual
Framework for Cloud Security Assurance,” in Cloud Comput. Technol.
Sci. (CloudCom), 2013 IEEE 5th Int. Conf. (Volume 2).
Bristol: IEEE,
2013, pp. 120–125.
[4]
N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, M. C. Mont, and R. K. L. Ko, “Towards
Greater Accountability in Cloud Computing through Natural-Language
Analysis and Automated Policy Enforcement,” Engineering, pp. 1–4,
2011.
[5]
A. Baldwin, D. Pym, and S. Shiu, “Enterprise Information Risk Man-
agement: Dealing with Cloud Computing,” Abdn.Ac.Uk, pp. 257—-291,
2013.
[6]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Privacy:
Broadening the Service Level Agreement,” in 14th IEEE Int. Conf. Trust.
Secur. Priv. Comput. Commun. (IEEE Trust., Helsinki, Finland, 2015, pp.
1088–1093.
[7]
M. Huse, “Accountability and Creating Accountability: a Framework
for Exploring Behavioural Perspectives of Corporate Governance,” Br.
J. Manag., vol. 16, no. S1, pp. S65–S79, Mar 2005.
[8]
A. Gill, “Corporate Governance as Social Responsibility: A Research
Agenda,” Berkeley J. Int’l L., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 452–478, 2008.
[9]
C. Ioannidis, D. Pym, and J. Williams, “Sustainability in Information
Stewardship: Time Preferences, Externalities and Social Co-Ordination,”
in Weis 2013, 2013, pp. 1–24.
[10]
A. Kolk, “Sustainability, accountability and corporate governance:
Exploring multinationals’ reporting practices.” Bus. Strateg. Environ.,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2008.
[11]
F. S. Chapin, G. P. Koﬁnas, and C. Folke, Principles of Ecosystem Stew-
ardship: Resilience-Based Natural Resource Management in a Changing
World.
Springer, 2009.
[12]
S. Arjoon, “Corporate Governance: An Ethical Perspective,” J. Bus.
Ethics, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 343–352, nov 2012.
[13]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Reﬂecting on whether checklists can
tick the box for cloud security,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput.
Technol. Sci. CloudCom, vol. 2015-Febru, no. February.
Singapore:
IEEE, 2015, pp. 805–810.
[14]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “The Importance of Proper Measure-
ment for a Cloud Security Assurance Model,” in 2015 IEEE 7th Int.
Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., Vancouver, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[15]
G. T. Willingmyre, “Standards at the Crossroads,” StandardView, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 190–194, 1997.
[16]
E. Humphreys, “Information security management standards: Compli-
ance, governance and risk management,” Inf. Secur. Tech. Rep., vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 247–255, Nov 2008.
[17]
F. Albersmeier, H. Schulze, G. Jahn, and A. Spiller, “The reliability of
third-party certiﬁcation in the food chain: From checklists to risk-oriented
auditing,” Food Control, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 927–935, 2009.
[18]
K. Prislan and I. Bernik, “Risk Management with ISO 27000 standards
in Information Security,” Inf. Secur., pp. 58–63, 2010.
[19]
IsecT, “Information Security Frameworks from ”Audit” to ”Zachman”,”
Tech. Rep. March, 2011.
[20]
Order, “Executive Order 13636: Improving Critical Infrastructure Cy-
bersecurity,” pp. 1–8, 2013.
[21]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Enhancing Cloud Security and Pri-
vacy: The Cloud Audit Problem,” in Cloud Comput. 2016 Seventh Int.
Conf. Cloud Comput. GRIDs, Virtualization.
Rome: IEEE, 2016, pp.
119–124.
[22]
PWC, “UK Information Security Breaches Survey - Technical Report
2012,” London, Tech. Rep. April, 2012. [Online]. Available: www.pwc.
comwww.bis.gov.uk [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[23]
T. Sang, “A Log-based Approach to Make Digital Forensics Easier on
Cloud Computing,” Proc. 2013 3rd Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Des. Eng. Appl.
ISDEA 2013, pp. 91–94, 2013.
[24]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Information Security in the Cloud:
Should We be Using a Different Approach?” in 2015 IEEE 7th Int. Conf.
Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., Vancouver, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[25]
B. Duncan and M. Whittington, “Company Management Approaches
Stewardship or Agency: Which Promotes Better Security in Cloud
Ecosystems?” in Cloud Comput. 2015.
Nice: IEEE, 2015, pp. 154–
159.
[26]
E. Zio, “Reliability engineering: Old problems and new challenges,”
Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 125–141, Feb 2009.
[27]
B. Monahan and M. Yearworth, “Meaningful Security SLAs,” HP Labs,
Bristol, Tech. Rep., 2008. [Online]. Available: http://www.hpl.hp.com/
techreports/2005/HPL-2005-218R1.pdf [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[28]
M. Theoharidou, N. Papanikolaou, S. Pearson, and D. Gritzalis, “Pri-
vacy Risk , Security , Accountability in the Cloud,” in IEEE Int. Conf.
Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci. Priv., 2013, pp. 177–184.
[29]
C. Millard, I. Walden, and W. K. Hon, “Who is Responsible for
’Personal Data’ in Cloud Computing? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part
2,” Leg. Stud., vol. 27, no. 77, pp. 1–31, 2012.
[30]
S. Pearson, “Taking account of privacy when designing cloud computing
services,” Proc. 2009 ICSE Work. Softw. Eng. Challenges Cloud Comput.
CLOUD 2009, pp. 44–52, 2009.
[31]
S. Pearson and A. Charlesworth, “Accountability as a way forward for
privacy protection in the cloud,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including
Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 5931
LNCS, no. December, pp. 131–144, 2009.
[32]
C. C. V, “Security research alliance to promote network security,”
Cloud Security Alliance, Tech. Rep. 2, 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en{\&}btnG=Search{\&}q=
intitle:Security+Guidance+Critical+Areas+of+Focus+for{\#}0
[Last
Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[33]
T. Hahn, F. Figge, J. Pinkse, and L. Preuss, “Editorial Trade-Offs in
Corporate Sustainability: You Can’t Have Your Cake and Eat It,” Bus.
Strateg. Environ., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 217–229, 2010.
[34]
A. Lindgreen and V. Swaen, “Corporate Social Responsibility,” Int. J.
Manag. Rev., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2010.
[35]
D. J. Wood, “Measuring Corporate Social Performance: A Review,” Int.
J. Manag. Rev., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 50–84, 2010.
[36]
T. Green and J. Peloza, “How does corporate social responsibility create
value for consumers?” J. Consum. Mark., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 48–56, 2011.
[37]
A. Christoﬁ, P. Christoﬁ, and S. Sisaye, “Corporate sustainability: his-
torical development and reporting practices,” Manag. Res. Rev., vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 157–172, 2012.
[38]
N. Rahman and C. Post, “Measurement Issues in Environmental Corpo-
rate Social Responsibility (ECSR): Toward a Transparent, Reliable, and
Construct Valid Instrument,” J. Bus. Ethics, vol. 105, no. 3, pp. 307–319,
2012.
[39]
M. A. Delmas, D. Etzion, and N. Nairn-Birch, “Triangulating Environ-
mental Performance: What Do Corporate Social Responsibility Ratings
Really Capture?” Acad. Manag. Perspect., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 255–267,
2013.
[40]
I. Montiel and J. Delgado-Ceballos, “Deﬁning and Measuring Corporate
Sustainability: Are We There Yet?” Organ. Environ., vol. Advance on,
pp. 1–27, 2014.
[41]
D. Bodeau, R. Graubart, L. LaPadula, P. Kertzner, A. Rosenthal, and
J. Brennan, “Cyber Resiliency Metrics ,,” MITRE Rep. MP 120053 Rev
1., no. April, pp. 1–40, 2012.
[42]
H. Carvalho, S. G. Azevedo, and V. Cruz-Machado, “Agile and resilient
approaches to supply chain management: inﬂuence on performance and
competitiveness,” Logist. Res., vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 49–62, 2012.
[43]
M. Vieira, H. Madeira, K. Sachs, and S. Kounev, “Resilience Bench-
marking,” Resil. Assess. Eval. Comput. Syst., pp. 283–301, 2012.
[44]
A. V. Lee, J. Vargo, and E. Seville, “Developing a Tool to Measure and
Compare Organizations’ Resilience,” Nat. Hazards Rev., no. February,
pp. 29–41, 2013.
[45]
I. Linkov, D. A. Eisenberg, M. E. Bates, D. Chang, M. Convertino, J. H.
Allen, S. E. Flynn, and T. P. Seager, “Measurable Resilience for Action-

181
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
able Policy,” Environ. Sci. Technol., vol. 47, no. ii, p. 130903081548008,
2013.
[46]
I. Linkov, D. A. Eisenberg, K. Plourde, T. P. Seager, J. Allen, and
A. Kott, “Resilience metrics for cyber systems,” Environ. Syst. Decis.,
vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 471–476, 2013.
[47]
T. Prior and J. Hagmann, “Measuring resilience: methodological and
political challenges of a trend security concept,” J. Risk Res., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 281–298, 2014.
[48]
C. Ioannidis, D. Pym, J. Williams, and I. Gheyas, “Resilience in
Information Stewardship,” in Weis 2014, vol. 2014, no. June, 2014, pp.
1–33.
[49]
K. Gilman and J. Schulschenk, “Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board,” pp. 14–17, 2012. [Online]. Available: www.sasb.org [Last Ac-
cessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[50]
R. Eccles, K. Perkins, and G. Serafeim, “How to Become a Sustainable
Company,” MIT Sloan Manag. Rev., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 43–50, 2012.
[51]
R. G. Eccles, I. Ioannou, and G. Serafeim, “The Impact of Corporate
Sustainability on Organizational Processes and Performance,” Manage.
Sci., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 2835–2857, 2014.
[52]
Trend, “2012 Annual Security Roundup: Evolved Threats in a ”Post-
PC” World,” Trend Micro, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[53]
Verizon, N. High, T. Crime, I. Reporting, and I. S. Service, “2012 Data
Breach Investigations Report,” Verizon, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[54]
ISACA, “An Introduction to the Business Model for Information
Security,” Tech. Rep., 2009.
[55]
PWC, “Information Security Breaches Survey 2010 Technical Report,”
pp. 1–22, 2010.
[56]
M. Armbrust, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph,
R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, and A. Rabkin, “A View of
Cloud Computing: Clearing the clouds away from the true potential and
obstacles posed by this computing capability.” Commun. ACM, vol. 53,
no. 4, pp. 50–58, 2010.
[57]
J. Opara-Martins, R. Sahandi, and F. Tian, “Critical review of vendor
lock-in and its impact on adoption of cloud computing,” Int. Conf. Inf.
Soc. i-Society 2014, pp. 92–97, 2015.
[58]
Q. Zhang, L. Cheng, and R. Boutaba, “Cloud computing: State-of-the-
art and research challenges,” J. Internet Serv. Appl., vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
7–18, 2010.
[59]
K. Dahbur, B. Mohammad, and A. B. Tarakji, “A Survey of Risks,
Threats and Vulnerabilities in Cloud Computing,” Computing, pp. 1–6,
2011.
[60]
Z. Chen and J. Yoon, “IT Auditing to Assure a Secure Cloud Com-
puting,” in Proc. - 2010 6th World Congr. Serv. Serv. 2010, 2010, pp.
253–259.
[61]
D. J. Abadi, “Data management in the cloud: limitations and opportu-
nities,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 3–12, 2009.
[62]
R. Chow, P. Golle, M. Jakobsson, E. Shi, J. Staddon, R. Masuoka, and
J. Molina, “Controlling Data in the Cloud: Outsourcing Computation
without Outsourcing Control,” in Proc. 2009 ACM Work. Cloud Comput.
Secur., 2009, pp. 85–90.
[63]
K. Popovic and Z. Hocenski, “Cloud computing security issues and
challenges,” MIPRO, 2010 Proc. 33rd Int. Conv., pp. 344–349, 2010.
[64]
S. Subashini and V. Kavitha, “A Survey on Security Issues in Service
Delivery Models of Cloud Computing,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2011.
[65]
C. Low, Y. Chen, and M. Wu, “Understanding the determinants of cloud
computing adoption,” Ind. Manag. Data Syst., vol. 111, no. 7, pp. 1006–
1023, 2011.
[66]
Z. Hao, S. Zhong, and N. Yu, “A Privacy-Preserving Remote Data In-
tegrity Checking Protocol with Data Dynamics and Public Veriﬁability,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1432–1437, 2011.
[67]
D. Chen and H. Zhao, “Data Security and Privacy Protection Issues in
Cloud Computing,” 2012 Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Electron. Eng., vol. 1,
no. 973, pp. 647–651, 2012.
[68]
K. Yang and X. Jia, “An Efﬁcient and Secure Dynamic Auditing
Protocol for Data Storage in Cloud Computing,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst., vol. I, no. 9, pp. 2–5, 2014.
[69]
L. Wei, H. Zhu, Z. Cao, X. Dong, W. Jia, Y. Chen, and A. V. Vasilakos,
“Security and privacy for storage and computation in cloud computing,”
Inf. Sci. (Ny)., vol. 258, pp. 371–386, 2014.
[70]
N. Santos, K. P. Gummadi, and R. Rodrigues, “Towards Trusted Cloud
Computing,” Inf. Secur. Tech. Rep., vol. 10, no. 2, p. 5, 2005.
[71]
Z. Shen, L. Li, F. Yan, and X. Wu, “Cloud Computing System Based on
Trusted Computing Platform,” 2010 Int. Conf. Intell. Comput. Technol.
Autom., pp. 942–945, 2010.
[72]
S. Sengupta, V. Kaulgud, and V. S. Sharma, “Cloud Computing Security
- Trends and Research Directions,” 2011 IEEE World Congr. Serv., no.
October, pp. 524–531, 2011.
[73]
Z. Xiao and Y. Xiao, “Security and Privacy in Cloud Computing,”
Commun. Surv. Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 843–859, 2013.
[74]
Y. Zhu, H. Wang, Z. Hu, G.-j. Ahn, H. Hu, S. S. Yau, H. I. Storage, and
R. Information, “Efﬁcient Provable Data Possession for Hybrid Clouds,”
in Proc. 17th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2010, pp. 756–758.
[75]
G. Ateniese, R. Burns, R. Curtmola, J. Herring, O. Khan, L. Kissner,
Z. Peterson, and D. Song, “Remote data checking using provable data
possession,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2011.
[76]
Q. Wang, C. Wang, K. Ren, W. Lou, and J. Li, “Enabling Public Veri-
ﬁability and Data Dynamics for Storage Security in Cloud Computing,”
in IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, 2011, pp. 847–859.
[77]
Y. Zhu, H. Hu, G. J. Ahn, and M. Yu, “Cooperative provable data
possession for integrity veriﬁcation in multicloud storage,” in IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12, 2012, pp. 2231–2244.
[78]
H. T. T. Truong, C.-L. Ignat, and P. Molli, “Authenticating Operation-
based History in Collaborative Systems,” Proc. 17Th Acm Int. Conf.
Support. Gr. Work, pp. 131–140, 2012.
[79]
M. Mizan, M. L. Rahman, R. Khan, M. Haque, and R. Hasan, “Account-
able proof of ownership for data using timing element in cloud services,”
Proc. 2013 Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Simulation, HPCS 2013,
pp. 57–64, 2013.
[80]
S. L. Reed, “Bitcoin Cooperative Proof of Stake,” pp. 1–16, 2014.
[81]
R. H. Ashton, “An experimental study of internal control judgements,”
J. Account. Res., pp. 143–157, 1974.
[82]
S. S. G. Gelinas U.J. and A. E. Oram, Accounting Information Systems
(4th edition). South-Western College Publishing, Cincinnati, Ohio, US.,
1999.
[83]
E. Vaassen, R. Meuwissen, and C. Schelleman, Accounting information
systems and internal control.
Wiley Publishing, 2009.
[84]
J. A. Hall, Accounting Information Systems (3rd edition).
South-
Western College Publishing, Cincinnati, Ohio, US., 2001.
[85]
W. Ge and S. McVay, “The disclosure of material weaknesses in internal
control after the Sarbanes-Oxley Act,” Account. Horizons, vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 137–158, 2005.
[86]
Sox, “Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,” p. 66, 2002.
[87]
AICPA,
“AICPA
SOC2
Standard,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/FRC/AssuranceAdvisoryServices/
Pages/AICPASOC2Report.aspx [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[88]
ARTS, “Association for Retail Technology Standards,” 2014. [Online].
Available: https://nrf.com/resources/retail-technology-standards-0 [Last
Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[89]
Basel3, “Basel 3 Impact,” Basel, Tech. Rep. December 2010, 2011. [On-
line].
Available:
http://www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3.htm?m=3\%257C14\
%257C572 [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[90]
BITS, “Financial Services Roundtable Standards,” Tech. Rep. [Online].
Available: http://www.bits.org/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[91]
CSCC, “Cloud Standards Customer Council,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://http://www.cloud-council.org/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[92]
ISACA,
“Planning
for
and
Implementing
ISO
27001,”
ISACA
J., vol. 4, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.isaca.org/Journal/
Past-Issues/2011/Volume-4/Documents/jpdf11v4-Planning-for-and.pdf
[Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[93]
CSO,
“Cloud
Standards,”
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://cloud-standards.org/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[94]
Crown, “Data Protection Act 1998,” 1998. [Online]. Available: http://
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents [Last Accessed: 30 Nov
2016]

182
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[95]
DMTF, “Distributed Management Task Force: Standards and Tech-
nology,” 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.dmtf.org/standards [Last
Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[96]
ETSI, “European Telecommunications Standards Institute,” pp. 1–2,
2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.etsi.org/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov
2016]
[97]
FedRamp, “FedRamp,” 2014. [Online]. Available: http://cloud.cio.gov/
fedramp [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[98]
AICPA, “Generally Accepted Privacy Principles,” 2014. [Online].
Available:
https://www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/InformationTechnology/
Resources/Privacy/GenerallyAcceptedPrivacyPrinciples/Pages/default.
aspx [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[99]
GICTF, “Global Inter-Cloud Technology Forum,” 2012. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.gictf.jp/index e.html [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[100]
P. Law, “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996,” pp. 1936–2103, 1996. [Online]. Available: http://www.hhs.gov/
ocr/privacy/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[101]
R. F. Mills, G. L. Peterson, and M. R. Grimaila, “Measuring
Cyber Security and Information Assurance,” Tech. Rep., apr 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.
0-70350638023\&partnerID=tZOtx3y1 [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[102]
ISAE,
“ISAE
3402,”
ISAE,
Tech.
Rep.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ifac.org/sites/default/ﬁles/downloads/
b014-2010-iaasb-handbook-isae-3402.pdf
[Last
Accessed:
30
Nov
2016]
[103]
ISO, “ISO/IEC 27000:2009,” 2014. [Online]. Available: www.iso.org
[Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[104]
ITIL,
“Information
Technology
Infrastructure
Library,”
Axelos,
Tech.
Rep.,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
www.axelos.com/
best-practice-solutions/itil [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[105]
R. Bank, “ITU - Telecommunication Standardization Sector,” pp. 8 –
12, 2001. [Online]. Available: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/publications/
Pages/default.aspx [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[106]
Jericho Forum, “The Jericho Forum,” Tech. Rep., 2011. [Online].
Available: http://www.opengroup.org/jericho/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov
2016]
[107]
NIST, “Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Sys-
tems and Organizations Security and Privacy Controls for Federal
Information Systems and Organizations,” Natioinal Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, Tech. Rep. February, 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
NIST.SP.800-53r4.pdf [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[108]
NERC, “NERC Reliability Standards,” NERC, Tech. Rep. [Online].
Available: http://www.nerc.com/Pages/default.aspx [Last Accessed: 30
Nov 2016]
[109]
OASIS, “Organization for the Advancement of Structured Informa-
tion Standards,” 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.oasis-open.org/
standards [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[110]
OCC, “OCC - Open Cloud Consortium,” 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://opencloudconsortium.org [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[111]
A. Sill, “Open Grid Forum,” Tech. Rep., 2011. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.ogf.org/ogf/doku.php/standards/standards [Last Ac-
cessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[112]
OMG, “Object Management Group,” pp. 1–36, 2003. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.cloud-council.org/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[113]
PCI Security Standards Council LLC, “Data Security Standard: Re-
quirements and Security Assessment Procedures,” PCI Security Standards
Council, Tech. Rep. November, 2013.
[114]
SNIA, “Cloud data management interface,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[115]
TOG, “The Open Group,” Tech. Rep., 2014. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.opengroup.org/ [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[116]
TM Forum, “TM Forum Frameworx,” The TM Forum, Tech. Rep.,
2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.tmforum.org/Frameworx/1911/
home.html [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[117]
M. Vouk, “Cloud Computing Issues, Research and Implementations,”
ITI 2008 - 30th Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Interfaces, vol. 16, no. 4, pp.
235–246, 2008.
[118]
L. Wang, J. Zhan, W. Shi, Y. Liang, and L. Yuan, “In Cloud, Do MTC
or HTC Service Providers Beneﬁt from the Economies of Scale?” Proc.
2nd Work. Many-Task Comput. Grids Supercomput. - MTAGS ’09, pp.
1–10, 2009.
[119]
N. Leavitt, “Is Cloud Computing Really Ready for Prime Time?”
Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 42, no. January, pp. 15–20, 2009.
[120]
D. Bernstein, E. Ludvigson, K. Sankar, S. Diamond, and M. Morrow,
“Blueprint for the intercloud - Protocols and formats for cloud computing
interoperability,” in Proc. 2009 4th Int. Conf. Internet Web Appl. Serv.
ICIW 2009, 2009, pp. 328–336.
[121]
S. Pearson and A. Benameur, “Privacy, Security and Trust Issues
Arising from Cloud Computing,” in 2010 IEEE Second Int. Conf. Cloud
Comput. Technol. Sci., no. December.
Ieee, nov 2010, pp. 693–702.
[122]
C. Wang, Q. Wang, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Privacy-Preserving Public
Auditing for Data Storage Security in Cloud Computing,” in IEEE
INFOCOM 2010, vol. 62, no. 2, 2010, pp. 362–375.
[123]
S. Srinivasamurthy, F. Wayne, and D. Q. Liu, “Security and Privacy in
Cloud Computing : A Survey Security and Privacy in Cloud Computing
:,” in 2010 Sixth Int. Conf. Semant. Knowl. Grids, vol. 2, 2013, pp. 126–
149.
[124]
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski,
G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Zaharia, “A View of
Cloud Computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 50—-58, 2010.
[125]
S. Ramgovind, M. M. Eloff, and E. Smith, “The management of
security in cloud computing,” in Proc. 2010 Inf. Secur. South Africa
Conf. ISSA 2010, 2010, pp. 1–7.
[126]
B. Grobauer, T. Walloschek, and E. Stocker, “Understanding Cloud
Computing Vulnerabilities,” IEEE Secur. Priv., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 50–57,
2011.
[127]
F. Doelitzscher, C. Fischer, D. Moskal, C. Reich, M. Knahl, and
N. Clarke, “Validating Cloud Infrastructure Changes By Cloud Audits,”
in Proc. - 2012 IEEE 8th World Congr. Serv. Serv. 2012, 2012, pp. 377–
384.
[128]
M. L. Hale and R. Gamble, “SecAgreement: Advancing Security Risk
Calculations in Cloud Services,” in Proc. - 2012 IEEE 8th World Congr.
Serv. Serv. 2012, 2012, pp. 133–140.
[129]
V. Pappas, V. Kemerlis, A. Zavou, M. Polychronakis, and A. D.
Keromytis, “CloudFence: Enabling Users to Audit the Use of their
Cloud-Resident Data,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/
10022/AC:P:12821 [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[130]
T. Ruebsamen and C. Reich, “Supporting Cloud Accountability by
Collecting Evidence Using Audit Agents,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud
Comput. Technol. Sci. CloudCom, vol. 1, 2013, pp. 185–190.
[131]
F. Doelitzscher, M. Knahl, C. Reich, and N. Clarke, “Anomaly
Detection In IaaS Clouds,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol.
Sci. CloudCom, vol. 1, 2013, pp. 387–394.
[132]
F. Doelitzscher, T. Ruebsamen, T. Karbe, M. Knahl, C. Reich, and
N. Clarke, “Sun Behind Clouds - On Automatic Cloud Security Audits
and a Cloud Audit Policy Language,” . . . J. Adv. . . ., vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
1–16, 2013.
[133]
S. Thorpe, T. Grandison, A. Campbell, J. Williams, K. Burrell,
and I. Ray, “Towards a Forensic-based Service Oriented Architecture
Framework for Auditing of Cloud Logs,” in Proc. - 2013 IEEE 9th World
Congr. Serv. Serv. 2013, 2013, pp. 75–83.
[134]
C. Wang, S. S. M. Chow, Q. Wang, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Privacy-
Preserving Public Auditing for Secure Cloud Storage,” IEEE Trans.
Comput., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 362–375, 2013.
[135]
J. M. Lopez, T. Ruebsamen, and D. Westhoff, “Privacy-Friendly Cloud
Audits with Somewhat Homomorphic and Searchable Encryption,” in
14th Int. Conf. Innov. Community Serv. ”Technologies Everyone”, I4CS
2014 - Conf. Proc., 2014, pp. 95–103.
[136]
A. S. Sendi and M. Cheriet, “Cloud Computing: A Risk Assessment
Model,” 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Eng., pp. 147–152, 2014.
[137]
K. Xiong and X. Chen, “Ensuring Cloud Service Guarantees Via
Service Level Agreement (SLA) -based Resource Allocation,” in Distrib.
Comput. Syst. Work. (ICDCSW), 2015 IEEE 35th Int. Conf. IEEE, 2015,
pp. 35–41.
[138]
OED, “Oxford English Dictionary,” 1989. [Online]. Available: www.
oed.com [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[139]
B. Guttman and E. A. Roback, “Computer Security,” NIST, Tech.

183
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Rep. 800, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://books.google.com/books?id=
KTYxTfyjiOQC\&pgis=1 [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[140]
J.
A.
Chaula,
“A
Socio-Technical
Analysis
of
Information
Systems
Security
Assurance:
A
Case
Study
for
Effective
Assurance,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en\&btnG=Search\&q=intitle:
A+Socio-Technical+Analysis+of+Information+Systems+Security+
Assurance+A+Case+Study+for+Effective+Assurance\#1
[Last
Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[141]
R. K. L. Ko, P. Jagadpramana, M. Mowbray, S. Pearson, M. Kirchberg,
Q. Liang, and B. S. Lee, “TrustCloud: A framework for accountability
and trust in cloud computing,” Proc. - 2011 IEEE World Congr. Serv.
Serv. 2011, pp. 584–588, 2011.
[142]
L. F. B. Soares, D. a. B. Fernandes, J. V. Gomes, M. M. Freire, and
P. R. M. In´acio, “Security, Privacy and Trust in Cloud Systems,” in Secur.
Priv. Trust Cloud Syst.
Springer, 2014, ch. Data Accou, pp. 3–44.
[143]
EU, “Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in Europe,” 2012.
[Online]. Available: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=SWD:2012:0271:FIN:EN:PDF [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[144]
R. J. Anderson, Security Engineering: A Guide to Building Dependable
Distributed Systems, C. A. Long, Ed.
Wiley, 2008, vol. 50, no. 5.
[145]
Trustwave, “2012 Global Security Report,” Tech. Rep., 2012.
[146]
D. Catteddu and G. Hogben, Cloud Computing: Beneﬁts, Risks and
Recommendations for Information Security, Computing, Vol. 72, no. 1,
pp. 20092013, 2009.
[147]
Verizon, “Verizon 2015 Data Breach Investigation Report,” Tech. Rep.,
2015.
[148]
OWASP, “OWASP Top Ten Vulnerabilities 2013,” 2013. [On-
line].
Available:
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:OWASP
Top Ten Project [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[149]
OWASP, “OWASP SQL Injection Cheat Sheet,” 2016. [Online].
Available: https://www.owasp.org/index.php/SQL Injection Prevention
Cheat Sheet [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[150]
OWASP, “OWASP Injection Prevention Cheat Sheet,” 2016. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Injection Prevention
Cheat Sheet [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]
[151]
OWASP, “OWASP LDAP Injection Prevention Cheat Sheet,” 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://www.owasp.org/index.php/LDAP Injection
Prevention Cheat Sheet [Last Accessed: 30 Nov 2016]

