The Influence of the Human Factor on ICT Security: 
An Empirical Study within the Corporate Landscape in Austria 
 
Christine Schuster 
Institute for Empirical Social Studies 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: christine.schuster@ifes.at 
 
Johannes Göllner, Christian Meurers,  
Andreas Peer, Peter Prah 
Section Knowledge Management 
Department of Central Documentation & Information 
National Defence Academy of the Austrian Federal 
Ministry of Defence and Sports 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {johannes.goellner | christian.meurers |  
andreas.peer | peter.prah}@bmlvs.gv.at 
Martin Latzenhofer, Stefan Schauer 
Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology  
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {martin.latzenhofer | stefan.schauer}@ait.ac.at 
Gerald Quirchmayr1, Thomas Benesch2 
1Research Group Multimedia Information Systems  
Faculty of Computer Science 
2Institute for International Development 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {gerald.quirchmayr | thomas.benesch}@univie.ac.at 
 
Abstract — The human factor is a decisive risk factor in 
information security and is now on its way to be fully 
integrated into information security programs and risk 
management approaches. Due to this remaining lack of 
integration, we have designed a study on user attitudes 
towards information security issues in Austrian companies. 
This study included a comprehensive survey that was based on 
extensive desk research on risk, behavior and trust models. 
The second key part of the study reflects the results of two 
moderated focus groups that discussed information security 
issues derived from the analyzed literature. The third main 
component of our study is based on personal interviews with 
891 respondents structured by the prepared survey. The 
analysis of the results from the focus groups and the personal 
interviews allowed the identification and confirmation of user 
perceptions and trustworthiness factors. Building upon the 
survey results, we propose a set of significant indicators that 
can help to identify ICT-related misuse and fraudulent 
behavior as a situation awareness instrument. 
Keywords— information security; user perceptions; attitude; 
human risk factor; work satisfaction; compliance. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The trust employees have in their organization’s 
information and communication technology (ICT) systems 
plays a crucial role when considering the organization’s 
overall security situation. This has been emphasized by a 
comprehensive empirical study on ICT security in the 
corporate landscape in Austria carried out by the authors in 
2015 and firstly presented at SECURWARE 2017 in [1], and 
is also amply discussed in the literature from various 
perspectives [2] [3]. Further, the attitude of employees as an 
indicator of emerging problems has also been described in 
recent publications [4] [5]. The key issue here is that the 
human behavior represents a major risk factor and is hard to 
control from an organization’s perspective. Neither can these 
non-technical vulnerabilities be measured nor is there a real-
time early warning system covering this aspect in a 
sufficiently reliable way. Repetitive awareness measures 
help to strengthen an organization’s culture, but their 
effectiveness is hard to assess and those measures take a long 
time and many iterations. So far, there is no satisfying and 
reliable method that can be applied with reasonable effort to 
assess the human risk factor in an organization’s 
environment [6] [7]. 
The afore mentioned empirical study was part of the 
project MetaRisk [8], which was supported and partially 
financed by the Austrian National Security Research 
Program KIRAS. The survey was conducted among 
employees with and without management functions. Based 
on the results of this survey, we investigated the situation 
regarding information security in Austrian companies in 
2015. The key questions covered by this survey were the 
following:  
1. How do individual staff members apply the 
safeguards that have been set up by their 
organization?  
2. How do employees handle security-relevant incidents 
and, especially, which activities do they undertake to 
avoid or circumvent those incidents including 
activities that cause harm to the organization?  
3. What is the general relationship between employer 
and employees?  
By analyzing the employees’ attitudes, tendency of 
activities and behavior patterns, we have identified possible 
indicators which can even point to insider fraud in extreme 
cases.  
In the context of information security, the human aspects 
assume a decisive role as either an early warning of decaying 
information security awareness or as a careless attitude 
towards the issue. The continuously growing number of 
phishing, spear phishing and identity fraud attacks against 
48
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

normal and unexperienced users shows that these types of 
attacks have recently become even more attractive [9]. With 
more sophisticated forms of attacks, for example advanced 
persistent 
threats 
(APT) 
where 
perimeter 
controls 
substantially lose their protective effectiveness [10], the 
problem becomes more critical. These forms of attacks are 
trying to obtain an organization’s most confidential business 
information, causing financial damage and in stealing trade 
secrets. On the other hand, economic pressure is growing in 
general and both employees and employers are trying to 
reduce cost, aim for leaner processes and at minimizing 
efforts, thus making the work environment less comfortable. 
This is one reason why the potential for misuse, business and 
cybercrime is rising [2] [7]. A small but significant set of 
indicators reflects the attitude of the employee towards the 
information security situation in an individual organization. 
Consequently, if we look at this set of indicators all together 
we can identify the principal vulnerabilities of an 
organization related to the human risk factor. If we link these 
indicators to particular types of attacks, e.g., social 
engineering, we can decide whether an organization is more 
vulnerable than another. 
The present paper is structured into five sections. In 
Section II, we first present the scientific basis from the 
relevant literature and our motivation for the study. Section 
III describes the applied methodological approach of the 
survey performed for the study. In Section IV, we discuss the 
main results of the study compared to retrospectively 
documented attack stories from real life. Section V proposes 
aspects for further research and we present concrete 
indicators that can serve as basis for forming a radar chart 
and as input for a scorecard. This leads to a general overview 
of the influence of human risk on information security. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND BACKGROUND 
As amply described in a large number of recent 
publications including textbooks, information security is an 
issue of continuously growing importance for organizations 
of all sizes. Recent trends in Austria [11, p. 8] [12] [13] and 
Germany [14] [15, p. 7] (the German situation is closely 
comparable to the Austrian one) have been a shift in attacks 
towards social engineering and fraud. An analysis of attack 
types performed in 2014 [16], shows which types of attacks 
were most successful in affected enterprises (Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. Successful attack types in affected  
respondent’s enterprises in 2014, n=704 respondents [16, p. 6], edited 
In this context, “phishing” attacks had the highest success 
rate, followed by the classic attack types “malware” and 
“hacking attempts” and by “social engineering”. When 
looking at the latest, updated results of this study from 2015 
[17], we can see that “social engineering” has surpassed the 
hacking attempts, now taking the third rank after “phishing” 
and “malware” in the list of the most successful attack types 
(Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2. Successful attack types in affected  
respondent’s enterprises in 2015, n=461 respondents [17] 
 
The Austrian internet security report 2015 [12, p. 45] also 
explicitly states that social engineering methods are growing 
significantly in number and sophistication. This sort of attack 
can be seen as the currently most dangerous attack type. 
Therefore, the human factor has turned into the weakest link 
in the cyber defense chain of an organization.  
As these attacks have a significant financial impact on 
affected companies [16], it is important to know the human 
vulnerabilities towards social engineering attacks and 
financial fraud that use information technology as a vehicle 
to commit crime. In one extreme case, such a financial fraud 
attack on an Austrian aerospace manufacturer recently 
caused an estimated damage of 50 million EUR [18]. Figure 
3 illustrates this financial risk by pointing out that in 2014 
almost half of US companies suffered financial damage from 
attacks at least annually [19, p. 28], while in 2016 the 
number of companies in the US which suffered damage of 
more than one million USD due to cybercrime doubled (i.e., 
from 7% in 2014 to 15% in 2016) [20]. At the same time, 
employees and managers are more and more ignorant of the 
impacts of cybercrime with just slightly more than half of the 
US companies having a cyber incident response plan that is 
“fully in operation” [20].  
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3. Relative financial impact  
of cybercrime on organizations [19, p. 28], edited 
Figure 4 clearly shows that insiders – no matter whether 
they have malicious or non-malicious intents – contributed 
significantly to the damage that enterprises suffered in 2014 
[16].  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Threat actors 2014 [16, p. 5], edited 
The risked posed by insiders has been confirmed in the 
2015 report in [17] (Figure 5). This means that insiders will 
very likely continue to pose a high risk of security incidents 
also in the future. 
 
 
Figure 5. Threat actors 2015, n=461 respondents [16] 
The list of threat actors consequently raises the question 
of how to ensure expected behavior of involved persons in 
an organization. The term compliance can be defined as the 
sum of all reasonable measures that address lawful and rule-
consistent behavior of a company, its members and 
employees with regard to legal commands or prohibitions. 
The business integrity should also be consistent with social 
guidelines, moral concepts and ethical behavior [21]. In 
contrast, non-compliance entails all forms of non-observance 
of guidelines. It can be measured in terms of the seriousness 
of the infringement and can be categorized into violations 
that damage the company itself or employees. Three 
underlying motivational factors for divergent or non-ethical 
behavior of or within companies have been discussed in the 
literature: first, non-compliance can be justified by the 
personal 
benefit 
that 
employees 
gain 
by 
violating 
regulations. Second, the company as a whole can derive 
benefits from delinquent behavior. Third, non-compliance 
can be used to deliberately harm the company or external 
stakeholders [22, p. 225f]. Various factors might increase the 
likelihood of non-compliance: difficult working conditions; 
competitive pressures; unrealistic objectives and focus on 
simplistic success parameters; too much or too little control 
within a company’s control system; management style; and 
corporate culture [22, p. 233ff].  
In general, working conditions can be divided into three 
categories; macro, meso and micro level [23]. Raml [24, p. 
87ff] allocates economic and social conditions, such as 
career perspective, economic situation, social status, 
balancing of family and working life to the macro and meso 
level. Similarly, work structures and resources (work 
organization, time models, work atmosphere, career 
opportunities, bonus payments, information related to work) 
belong to the macro and meso level [24]. On the other hand, 
resources and stress are located at the interface between 
employees and their own work, and are therefore assigned to 
the micro level [24]. This entails the scope of action, work 
contents, 
professional 
qualification, 
disturbances 
and 
50
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

interruptions in daily routine, too many regulations and 
restrictive surrounding conditions. 
It is widely accepted that insiders pose a special form of 
threat to businesses, institutions and organizations [25] [26] 
[27]. Insiders are persons who have a legitimate access to 
components of the ICT infrastructure. In contrast to external 
hackers, they have always at least one access point to ICT 
systems, and thus they do not require time consuming efforts 
to obtain additional privileges. The predefined trust that 
insiders must be granted requires more sophisticated security 
measures. The insider threat is related to the level of their 
sophistication and depends on the users’ breadth and depth 
of knowledge, as well as their finesse [27].  
Insiders can trigger either an accidental or malicious 
threat, i.e., they can intentionally try to cause harm. 
Information security measures – e.g., encryption, access 
control, or least privileges principle – must be implemented 
regarding to human factors, e.g., with personnel checks or 
focused risk assessments regarding motivation, opportunity 
and capability [28]. While these insider threats cannot be 
eliminated, they can be assessed and managed. Users must 
understand the reasons for security controls in order to 
ensure their effectiveness. Hence, they may find ways to 
circumvent technical restrictions they are faced with [25].  
A variety of models addresses the insider issue, either 
concentrating on certain aspects (e.g., end user sophistication 
[27]) or more holistic in nature [26] [29]. The latter approach 
incorporates characteristics of the organization, the actor 
including behavior and attitudes, and the attack itself; overall 
representing 
the 
interdependencies 
of 
the 
different 
influencing factors [26] [29]. 
Prior national and international studies on insider security 
threats [29] [30] [31] have been conducted in the last decade 
and show the increasing importance of this issue up till now. 
Despite a good coverage of security policies and measures, 
the users may obviously work around the controls fulfilling 
their job objectives in a timely manner. Key issues identified 
by these studies are data loss prevention, remote information 
access and the threat against the whole information life 
cycle. They identified awareness trainings and intensive 
monitoring measures as effective countermeasures [29] [30] 
[31]. 
Working conditions in Austria are regularly measured by 
the „Work Climate Index“, which was first conducted in 
1997 by the Institute for Empirical Social Studies in 
cooperation with the Upper Austrian Chamber of Labor. It 
has evolved into a longitudinal study since then and aims at 
capturing the perception of employees concerning their 
working conditions, and reveals long-term changes in the 
structure of employment (e.g., increases in precarious 
employment), evaluates the subjective situation of Austrian 
employees, and analyses specific subgroups of employees 
(e.g., women or older employees). Since 2008, the “Work 
Climate Index” is complemented with the “Austrian 
Occupational Health Monitor” focusing on questions of 
subjective work-related health. Both studies are based on 
4.000 interviews conducted annually [32] [33] [34] [35]. Key 
finding of both studies is the relationship between time 
related stress and working conditions [32, p. 14]. The stress 
increasing factors are regulations exceeding the common 
working time hours Monday to Friday from 7 am to 5 pm 
(especially working on Saturdays or Sundays or at night) or 
working over-time regularly. Other factors are contributing 
to time-stress as well, for example permanent contact to 
customers, high responsibility, permanent surveillance or a 
lack of support from colleagues [36]. 
As a further step, our study follows a well-founded 
approach, combining qualitative question technique for 
discussion rounds and additionally contrasted by the results 
of a structured and rather restrictive predefined survey with a 
significant amount of participants. Despite the fact that 
human behavior can never be modeled accurately through 
surveys and the results may not be generalized as conclusive 
evidence for tactical changes in established organizations, 
the approach reflects a strongly required combination of 
work satisfaction with information security principles. Due 
to the extensive survey and the great random sample of 
respondents, this work might positively influences a proper 
methodology 
analyzing 
the 
human 
risk 
factor 
in 
organizations 
in 
future, 
e.g., 
heuristics, 
indicators, 
conditional relationships etc. 
Based on attack types documented in recent publications 
[12] [14] [16], we have identified a series of major risk 
factors that contribute to the success of attacks and have 
consequently derived a targeted list of questions. Some of the 
most interesting questions that were asked in the study 
described in this paper are: 
• What is the role of ICT security in your company? 
• How are security and user guidelines handled? 
• What is the current state of awareness among 
employees? 
• Which measures are taken to increase the awareness 
for ICT security? 
• Up to which extent is the private use of company 
equipment allowed? 
• Are there currently any privacy or data loss 
problems? 
• How does the company handle personal data? 
• How does the company handle information security? 
• Who is responsible for information security in the 
company?  
 
It is expected that by analyzing the answers to these 
questions and linking them to attack types, a good 
assessment of an organization’s preparedness for handling 
attacks can be performed based on organizational 
vulnerabilities and involving social engineering.  
III. 
STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING 
The design of the empirical study is based on a well-
proven approach that was developed by the Institute for 
Empirical Social Studies. We decided to use a mixed-
method-approach developed by the Institute for Empirical 
Social Studies. We decided to use a mixed-method-approach 
[37] and combine quantitative and qualitative aspects of 
social research, starting with desk research and following up 
with two focus groups and personal interviews.  
51
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Desk Research 
In the course of the desk research, we analyzed current 
studies on business crime [19] [38] [39], especially 
concerning (non-)compliance, fraud and personnel risk. 
Incidents of business cybercrime have generally been on the 
rise over the last years. Researchers assume that a large 
number of unreported incidents exist. Quite often, the 
perpetrators are among the organization’s employees. 
Nevertheless, these incidents are due to employees’ 
negligence and lack of awareness and not due to intentional 
or malicious acts. Our study showed that there are some 
conditions that influence non-compliant behavior: personal 
traits and moral awareness of an employee, the private 
situation of an employee; the working conditions, 
competitive pressure, excessive objective management, lack 
of internal control, leadership, and organizational culture. 
Based on these conditions, we derived the security level of 
the organization and the indicators which determine it. On 
this basis, we were able to develop suitable interview 
guidelines as well as questions and answers for the survey. 
These questions reflect the key aspects for non-compliance 
as identified in the desk research and based on the answers to 
these questions conclusions can be made how likely and 
organization will be affected by non-compliance.  
B. Focus Groups 
The second part of our study consisted of two focus 
groups, which took place on 23 and 29 April 2015. In 
general, a focus group is a moderated discourse method in 
which a small group of people is stimulated by information 
input to discuss a specific topic [40, p. 9ff].[41]. This input 
to get the group discussion started can be provided in form of 
a short presentation, an image or a website. The goal of a 
focus group is not to find consensus between the participants 
but to identify the different aspects of a specific topic.  
Focus groups are often used for analyzing different 
opinions in the group and how participants accept other 
opinions and evaluate certain measures. A core goal of focus 
groups is to make use of group dynamics, e.g., to motivate 
the participants to provide information (the participants’ 
contributions are used as reciprocal stimuli), to take 
advantage of the collective knowledge (which exceeds the 
individual intelligence of each participant) and to minimize 
interviewer or moderator effects by discussing with several 
participants in a focus group at the same time [42]. 
In general, and also in the course of our study, a 
facilitator structures the discussion among the participants of 
the focus group using an interview guideline. Such a 
guideline shall ensure that all aspects that are relevant to a 
topic are addressed during the discussions of the focus group. 
Additionally, the guideline also increases the comparability 
of the results of several focus groups that discuss a specific 
topic. The task of the facilitator is to ensure that all aspects of 
the interview guideline are covered, all participants are 
equally involved into the discussion, more quiet and reserved 
persons are encouraged to participate and not to animate 
dominant participants that use most of the air time [40, p. 15] 
[42]. 
There are no uniform ways to evaluate a focus group [40, 
p. 17]. In principle, the evaluation may focus either on the 
process of opinion formation (in this case, sequence and 
content analyses of the transcripts are used [43]), or on the 
group output on the content level (in this case, the central 
topics of the discussion are identified and a description and 
explanation of the different opinions is collected). For our 
study, we decided to focus on the content level and thus 
refrained from producing a verbatim transcription of the 
discussions, which initially were recorded on tape. Rather, 
we compiled minutes, which captured the participants’ 
statements but partly already shortened them and in this way 
introduced our interpretation of these statements. The 
minutes were evaluated using deductive categories, which 
were also used to prepare the interview guideline, while 
remaining open towards any new categories that might result 
from the discussions [43, p. 91] [44, p. 258]. These 
categories also form the starting point for the presentation of 
the results given below. 
The participants for the focus groups were selected 
through theoretical sampling based on the characteristics of 
individual members [44, p. 258] [45]. In this context, 
theoretical sampling means that the selection did not happen 
at random but in relation to characteristics which we 
considered to be significant in the respective framework 
[45]. The participants were recruited using the Computer 
Assisted Telephone Interview (CATI) system owned by the 
Institute for Empirical Social Studies. The scattering of the 
participants was improved using so-called "screeners", i.e., 
short questionnaires which record the characteristics that are 
relevant for the theoretical sampling. Before the start of the 
focus group, the participants completed a so-called "re-
screener", 
which 
once 
again 
captured 
the 
main 
characteristics of all participants. 
We invited both ordinary employees and persons with 
management functions to our focus groups. Since the 
selection was based on a theoretical sampling with 
characteristics like age, sex, and consumer behavior the aim 
was to form optimal focus groups with uniformly distributed 
characteristics. Accordingly, six ordinary employees (three 
men, three women) aged between 31 to 62 years took part in 
the first group. The second focus group consisted of eight 
persons in a management position (six men, two women) 
aged between 42 and 61 years. The group discussions were 
based on qualitative questioning techniques and facilitated 
by a trained person who used a structured interview 
guideline to guide the discussions, which allowed for an 
open exchange of opinions. The focus of the group 
discussions was on security measures, recent critical 
incidents in the area of information security, and on the 
relationship between employer and employees. All members 
described information and communication activities as a 
main part of their ordinary working routine. The participants 
received an incentive of 40 Euro to compensate for their 
expenses and motivate them. 
C. Personal Interviews 
In parallel to the focus groups, we conducted personal 
interviews with 891 employees of Austrian companies (53% 
52
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

men, 47% women) including persons with management 
function in the period from January to March 2015. These 
face-to-face interviews were structured by a prepared survey 
consisting of 48 questions having either several predefined 
answer possibilities or offering a five-tier rating. The 
interviewer leads through the questionnaire, explains, 
discusses and finally documents the participant’s answers. 
Participants were chosen by a multistage random sampling, 
where Austrian municipalities were grouped by the total 
number of inhabitants for each federal state and political 
district. Then, municipalities from each predetermined group 
were picked randomly. Within these municipalities, eligible 
households were picked randomly and were then used as 
samples for finding further addresses. Target persons were 
exclusively chosen based on their home addresses. Within 
each target household, members were assigned by random 
numbers, and only those were interviewed, whose number 
matched the one provided by the Kish selection grid [46]. 
Thus, each stage in the selection process of participants was 
guided by randomization.  
The survey covered central issues of job satisfaction, 
general 
health 
situation, 
satisfaction 
with 
corporate 
management, security measures within the organization as 
well as ICT security in general. Twenty-five percent of the 
respondents were aged below 29 years, 34% between 30 and 
44 years, and 41% older than 45 years. Each interview with 
workers (30%), employees (55%) and members of public 
administration affiliates (15%) took 25 minutes on average 
and was performed at the respondent’s personal domicile. 
Most of the respondents had completed compulsory 
education (9%) or with apprenticeship as craftsmen (42%). 
16% of respondents had gone to college and passed their 
school leaving examination, 16% went to college but did not 
finish it, and 17% had graduated from university. More than 
three fourths (76%) of respondents are employed full time, 
the rest worked less than 36 hours per week (24%). The 
results are shown separately between persons with a leading 
function (11%) and those without (89%). 39% of the 
respondents earn less than 1.500 EUR per month, 39% more 
than 1.500 EUR per month and 22% refused to indicate their 
salary. 
The study design described above was geared both 
towards obtaining a better understanding of how information 
security works in companies and towards determining key 
indicators of non-compliance by indirectly gathering 
information of employees of Austrian companies. This 
benchmark approach aimed at obtaining an accurate and 
undistorted view of employees older than 16 years within 
Austria across various organizational sizes and business 
sectors. The research community could now start follow-up 
projects with the same or a similar study design, which 
would enable more detailed analysis of one business sector 
or company size. 
IV. 
MAJOR RESULTS 
A. Focus Group Discussions 
The members of the focus groups reported on relevant 
information security incidents in their organizations, e.g., 
data loss of emails during archiving, loss of business data 
due to collapse of servers, stealing of material, sensitive 
information, and electronic equipment, physical damage by 
fire, perimeter control vulnerabilities, accounting errors due 
to account number conversion, and phishing. In general, the 
members of the focus groups point out the need for a balance 
between scope for development and restrictive measures. 
Both too much surveillance and the lack of it were 
considered as problematic. In the following paragraphs, we 
will discuss the results for the main five topics in further 
detail. 
1) Topic 1: Infrastructure  
Guidance for an employee’s individual behavior is often 
replaced by external restrictions that are implemented 
through technical solutions, e.g., blocking of social media 
networks, automated logouts, frequently forced password 
changes, access and/or time cards. Such technical restriction 
might lead to a regulatory overkill and the employees will 
find ways to boycott or circumvent these restrictive systems. 
The majority of the focus group members took a liberal 
position on surfing the internet for private purposes during 
working hours. Due to the constantly increasing pressure on 
employees to fulfill their working objectives, the employer 
often leaves it up to the employees to decide how much of 
their time and breaks they spend on surfing the web. Page 
blocking mechanisms are seen as little effective, since 
employees can use their smartphones instead of a company 
desktop computer. Some respondents experience a total 
“computerization” of the daily work routines as a really 
threatening scenario. When people are only seen as 
‘operators’ of computers (in the literal sense), this carries 
social risks. Generally, the members of the focus groups 
expressed a concern that artificial intelligence might soon 
dominate human intelligence and human labor might become 
obsolete. 
2) Topic 2: Time Management 
Work life balance is the most important prerequisite for 
healthy, 
hard-working 
and 
rule-abiding 
employees. 
Organizations increasingly 
perform 
health promotion 
measures and offer incentives to support work-life balance. 
Even though such measures make sense, there is also some 
skepticism towards them. Managers criticize these incentives 
if they are merely used as a ready-made argument in a (neo-) 
capitalistic system. The argument is that such incentives do 
not prevent job losses but disguise a “do more with less”- 
policy in the organizations. In this context, the technical 
progress in modern communication technologies can also 
have negative effects on employees’ work life balance. The 
use of corporate smartphones and notebooks increases the 
availability of employees for work-related tasks and causes 
an “always online” feeling among employees, which 
removes the spatial and systematic barriers between work 
and personal life. 
3) Topic 3: Awareness 
Employees are often not familiar with the details of the 
ICT security policies and code of conduct in their company 
despite the fact that these form part of their contract. The 
companies do not offer any dedicated trainings but the ICT 
regulations are brought to the attention of the employees 
53
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

when they start their job. However, the published content is 
not any more up-to-date and thus the employees are not 
aware of the current regulations. 
Data protection is seen in a broader and external context. 
The more benefits the rules and regulations bring for the 
employees or the society, they more likely will they follow 
them. A team operating with information, for example, might 
adhere to the protection of personal data because it wants 
that its own personal data is protected in the same way. 
4) Topic 4: Surveillance 
An excess of surveillance and regulations have a negative 
impact on the working atmosphere and productivity and 
creates a defiant attitude among employees. As in a self-
fulfilling prophecy, employees provoke exactly those acts 
that they actually want to prevent. The focus group members 
agreed that regulations are necessary in sensitive areas and 
regarding sensitive processes, e.g., data of patients, clients, 
customers and handling of products or money. Employees 
and employers share the view that delivery on time is more 
important than the “objectively” monitored working speed, 
although employees often have the perception of being too 
much checked upon. 
The loyalty of employees suffers when managers enforce 
strict time recordings or cancel home office agreements. It is 
demoralizing for employees if extra hours worked cannot be 
recorded in the time registration system due to system 
restrictions. Employees see break recording and break 
logging by computers as a form of “modern slavery”. 
5) Topic 5: Personal Interaction 
Reactive behavior to handle security incidents is not an 
appropriate strategy. Punishing employees collectively for 
the misbehavior of single employees deteriorates morale of 
all staff. Concerning loyalty, there are synergies: employees 
trust others if others also trust and appreciate them. Hence, 
when managers foster team work, actively take over 
responsibility and select the right personnel, the sense of 
responsibility among employees grow. Happy employees are 
good employees. Favorable working conditions are an 
important precondition for motivated and loyal employees. 
Good relationships between employees and between 
employees and their managers, transparent information and 
communication structures, clear working organization and 
participation in decision making processes are needed to 
enhance employees’ work and life satisfaction and to 
minimize psychological problems. It is important for the 
prevention of non-compliance to avoid unfavorable working 
conditions, e.g., unfair payment, unfair employment 
conditions, lack of appreciation by managers, lack of support 
or mobbing in teams or by managers, and lack of available 
resources. Against this background, it is important that 
organizations create a good working condition and a good 
working environment. 
One of the most important tasks of human resource 
management for the future is to select the “right” employees 
for the “right” tasks in the organization. Consequently, 
managers focus on a professional personnel selection 
process. The integrity of the employees is of key importance 
and considered to be more important than the integrity of the 
technical systems, which will never function completely 
error-free. Selecting the right persons is especially important 
for management positions, because managers have influence 
on a company’s success and working atmosphere. Bad 
managers can be a threat to the balance of an organization 
and thus managers should be selected and assessed carefully. 
Finally, the focus group discussed on whether more 
regulations and surveillance have the expected effect.  
B. Interviews with prepared survey 
The 48 answers of the questions discussed in the 891 
personal interviews which were conducted by trained 
interviewers following a predefined survey can be contrasted 
to the outcome of the focus groups presented in the section 
before. Hence, the results are structured along the same five 
main topics.  
1) Topic 1: Infrastructure  
15% of the respondents answer to the question how many 
percent of the employees in the company do the major share 
of their work on a computer that the percentage is 100% – all 
employees predominantly use a computer for their work – 
whereas 12% answer that no one in the company uses a 
computer for the major share of their work. However, one 
quarter of the respondents cannot provide further details on 
this. On average, 56% of the employees predominantly use a 
computer for their work. There are significant differences 
between branches, size of the organization and number of 
sites that an organization has. Smartphone usage shows a 
similar pattern: 37% of the employees use a smartphone as 
business phone. In general, using smartphones for work is 
common in all branches. However, around one quarter of the 
respondents cannot answer the question and one third say 
that no smartphones were used as business phones in their 
company. Similar to the results for computer usage, the share 
of companies without smartphones is highest in companies 
with less than 10 employees (49%) and with only one site 
(39%). 
30% of the employees (and 46% of the managers) 
indicate that the technical equipment provided by the 
employer may be used for private purposes. It is less 
common to use private devices for work. However, every 
fifth respondent indicates that this is allowed in his/her 
company. The use of private equipment, in particular, has 
negative implications both for the employees (the line 
between work and private life gets blurred) and for the 
companies (“bring your own disaster”). Overall, it can be 
concluded that, as expected, computers and smartphones 
form part of the basic equipment of any larger company and 
that employees (have to) work with them every day. This has 
led to the situation in the last decade that companies have to 
deal with the security implications of using these devices. 
Nowadays, this issue has to be addressed not only by large 
companies, but increasingly also by small and medium 
enterprises. 
2) Topic 2: Time Management 
As shown in Figure 6, one third of the employees answer 
company emails outside of working hours. Especially 
managers often can be reached outside of normal working 
hours: two thirds of them sometimes and 44% several times 
a week, whereas only 12% of normal employees work 
54
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

outside of normal working hours. The more the work 
depends on ICT services, the more the respondents 
communicate about work after working hours. Around 15% 
of employees are allowed to work at home. This proportion 
increases with the level of education: university graduates 
telework up to 35% of their working hours. The larger the 
company and the higher the employee’s position in the 
hierarchy, the more likely is the employee to be allowed to 
work at home. 
 
 
Figure 6. Employees’ email communication outside of working hours 
(values in %; n=891) 
35% of the respondents state that their jobs can be 
reconciled very well with their private interests and family 
commitments, and 46% think that they can reconcile these 
things rather well. On the other hand, only 3% of the 
respondents have the feeling that it is difficult to reconcile 
their private with their working life. Another 15% of the 
respondents are indifferent, but this shows that there is room 
for improvement for the concerned respondents. The group 
of persons aged 30 to 44 is less satisfied with their work-life 
balance. This is probably due to the fact that this group 
typically takes care of small children beside their work. 
Regarding the effects on human health, the survey shows 
that time pressure is the major stressor at the work place. 
Every fifth respondent feels very stressed by it, a quarter of 
the respondents states that they are moderately stressed by it. 
7% feel very stressed and another 13% moderately stressed 
because work cuts into their leisure time. Both stressors 
affect managers slightly more than other respondents. The 
technological developments of the last years contribute to the 
fact that the line between work and personal life gets more 
and more blurred. Although these technologies also bring 
advantages e.g., flexible working arrangements and time 
management, they also carry risks for employees, e.g., for 
their health. For the key personnel of an organization these 
risks tend to be higher.  
3) Topic 3: Awareness 
More than half of the respondents and three fourths of the 
interviewed managers consider information security to be an 
important topic. The survey results indicate that the 
importance attached to information security grows in line 
with the size of the organization and has special relevance 
when the company has offices abroad. Almost 75% of the 
persons working in large-scale companies (more than 100 
employees) assess information security’s importance to be 
very high or high, as shown in Table I. The first row in Table 
I entitled with “Total” compares the corresponding 
percentage value without distinction of the organization sizes 
as reflected by row two to six. The survey also showed that 
the sensitivity regarding information security is low among 
employees of very small organizations and of organizations 
with a low ICT usage. 
Table I. Importance of information security  
divided into company size (n=891) 
 
 
Information security was found to have an exceptional 
standing in companies in the finance and insurance sector 
(90%), in public administration (77%), and in the health and 
welfare sector (66%), presumably due to the awareness for 
processing sensitive data. Nevertheless, one third of the 
respondents indicate that they have no information security 
guideline for ICT usage. It is remarkable that especially 
employees with a lower level of education do not know 
about any regulations. The information security awareness is 
comparatively higher in the finance and insurance sector 
(93%) and in public administration (81%).  
A similar picture appears when analyzing the existence 
of information security awareness measures. Only 28% of 
respondents report of (semi-)annual measures, 15% indicate 
that those measures are rarely performed, one third indicate 
that no such measures are performed, and one fourth of the 
respondents do not know whether such measures exist. These 
results indicate that for almost half of the respondent’s 
organizations no awareness activities are in place. This is 
emphasized by the results about employee’s awareness 
attitude in Figure 7; almost 60% of the respondents see 
information security awareness attitudes of their colleagues, 
but on the other hand 40% do not. The main topics addressed 
by these awareness measures concern the handling of 
passwords, behavior during information security incidents 
and using the internet, awareness concerning the sensitivity 
of the processed data, risks of mobile ICT devices and data 
storages, contracts with external personnel, and social 
engineering strategies.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. Employees’ awareness assessment (values in %; n=891) 
Company Size
(numeric values in %)
very high
high
medium
low
very low
don't know / 
not specified
Total
28,39
24,55
11,43
5,20
6,90
23,53
Below 10 employees
20,41
17,96
13,87
7,35
13,06
27,35
10 to 19 employees
24,42
26,27
12,44
5,53
5,53
25,81
20 to 49 employees
28,37
27,40
11,54
5,77
6,25
20,67
50 to 99 employees
34,07
30,77
7,69
3,30
3,30
20,87
100 or more employees
47,15
25,20
7,33
0,81
0,81
18,70
55
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Furthermore, the employees are asked how specifically 
they handle sensitive information and security policies in 
their organizations. 8% say that employees talk (very) often 
about sensitive information, also outside the company; 
whereas 56% indicate that this basically never happens. 7% 
state that violations of security policies happen frequently, 
and 6% of the respondents indicate that they do not comply 
with ICT regulations. On the other hand, 63% and 59%, 
respectively, state that violations of security policies and 
violations of the ICT regulations virtually never happen. 
Figure 8 provides a summarizing sample of explicitly 
information security related questions and reflects the 
answers given in the 891 personal interviews. It shows not 
only the technical implementation of information security 
measures in the organizations, but in fact the degree of 
successfully enforcing them because the employees have 
obviously recognized the information security measures.  
 
 
Figure 8. How employees handle information security  
(values in %; n=891) 
4) Topic 4: Surveillance 
Almost half of the respondents answer that internet and 
ICT services cannot be used for private purposes, whereas 
the rest of the respondents are not sure about it. Only 17% of 
the respondents report that they have an explicit permission 
to privately use the internet and ICT services provided by 
their organization. The smaller the organization, the more 
likely it is that the organization enforces no rules concerning 
this private use. Companies with offices abroad are more 
likely to have some rules concerning the private usage of 
ICT services. Almost three fourths of respondents indicate 
that there have been no data loss and data protection 
incidents in their organizations, whereas the rest cannot 
answer the questions. 86% of the respondents trust their 
employers concerning the processing of their sensitive data, 
only 8% do not. The proportion of those who do not trust 
their employers in this regard is higher in public 
administration: 18% have doubts whether their organization 
protects data appropriately. 46% of the respondents know 
which data his or her employer stores, whereas 45% do not 
know.  
The main proportion of the employees uses working time 
recording systems, either manual recordings (33%) or an 
electronic badge (41%). In particular, large-scale enterprises 
use working time recording and access systems, have special 
visitor regulations, accounting systems for services or 
telephone cost monitoring. Video surveillance is more 
common in the finance and insurance sector, whereas Global 
Positioning System (GPS) locating is more common in 
transport services. As illustrated by Figure 9, around 68% of 
the respondents have no impression that their work place is 
monitored electronically – this is especially evident for 
employees from large-scale enterprises. On the other hand, 
27% think that they are under surveillance at work.  
In companies in Austria, a whistleblower hotline is rather 
unusual: 72% of respondents report that their organizations 
have no anonymous hotline, whereas 20% of respondents 
indicate that they do not know whether such a hotline exists. 
To conclude, performing a detailed evaluation of a 
company’s information security is rather difficult, since 
employees are often not allowed to openly speak about 
security incidents, which results in a considerable number of 
unrecorded incidents.  
 
 
Figure 9. Impression about work surveillance (values in %; n=891) 
56
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1) Topic 5: Personal Interaction 
The personal interviews with employees generally show 
that the respondents are most satisfied with the collaboration 
with their colleagues, the company`s image, the content of 
their work and the appreciation of their work by colleagues. 
More than 78% of the respondents and 63% of respondents 
with only compulsory education as highest education level 
stated their satisfactions with these aspects. This group 
indicated comparatively lower satisfaction levels in all 
categories than the rest of the respondents. Therefore, the 
satisfaction level of this specific group is explicitly indicated 
as a second percentage in the following results. Respondents 
indicated medium satisfaction with their line managers, their 
individual autonomy to take decisions on their working 
processes, their working time, and the social policies of the 
company (more than 66% and 45%, respectively). The 
respondents were least satisfied with training options, 
workload, employee participation and potential career 
possibilities (more than 48% and 33%, respectively).  
As depicted in Figure 10, loyalty of employees to their 
organization is relatively high. If they were to choose again, 
72% of the respondents would like to have a job in the same 
organization. On the other side, 9% would not strive for this. 
It has to be noted that women show a stronger tendency of 
choosing the same company again (75%) than men (69%). 
The results clearly show that with rising age the share of 
those employees who would strive for a job in the same 
company decreases. The share of managers that would 
choose a job in this organization again was above the 
average share (80%). Two thirds (66%) of the respondents 
would recommend a job in the organization for which they 
work. Among mangers the share is 78%. This share of 66% 
of respondents who would recommend their organization to 
relatives or friends is relatively high. On the other hand, only 
almost one out of ten employees would not recommend their 
organization. The most skeptical groups concerning these 
questions are persons with compulsory education (14%), 
persons with a net income less than 1.050 Euro (14%), and 
employees in companies with offices abroad in other EU 
countries (13%) and outside the European Union (19%). 
 
Figure 10. Loyalty of employees to their organization (values in %; n=891) 
Furthermore, the interviews showed that seven to eight 
out of ten employees comply with ICT policies, do not cheat 
the organization, do not take home data or steal anything, do 
not harm the enterprise intentionally or unintentionally, do 
not print private documents and do not talk about sensitive 
information outside of the work. In contrast, up to 7% have 
committed at least one of those actions. 14% of employees 
and 19% of managers go to work when they are ill due to 
their sense of duty, workload and a lack of deputies. In 
general, one quarter of the employees states that they went to 
work at least one day in the past half year although they were 
having health problems. In contrast, 9% of the respondents 
indicated that they had stayed at home at least once in the 
past although they had not been ill. 
Respondents considered ICT services to be a key issue in 
organizations, regardless of the business sector. Almost half 
of the respondents indicated that company smartphones are 
an important topic. The proportion of ICT and smartphone 
usage is considerably higher in organizations with less than 
ten employees and only one location. 30% of the employees 
and 46% of the managers are allowed to use the devices 
privately. Bring your own device (BYOD) is permitted only 
for one fifth of employees.  
The overall handling of information security differs 
strongly between managers and employees. The knowledge 
on information security is substantially lower among 
employees. The probability, that an organization enforces 
regulations on information security, increases with the size 
of the organization or if the organization has offices abroad. 
Again, 
the 
finance 
and 
insurance 
sector, 
public 
administration and the health and welfare sector are those 
business sectors in which information security represents an 
integral part of organizational culture. 
It is remarkable to note that only 15% of the respondents 
indicated that their organization has clearly defined who is 
responsible for information security, risk and compliance. 
On the contrary, 54% reported that their organization has not 
defined this responsibility and 31% did not know. In 
different organizations, the responsibility is defined in 
different ways and may lie with the ICT department, a 
dedicated person who is responsible for information security, 
an external company, an audit department or the top 
management. The likelihood, that appropriate responsibilities 
are established and enforced, increases with the size of the 
organization and whether the company has offices abroad. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Based on the findings described in Section IV above, we 
can draw the following top-5-conclusions:  
• High cyber security awareness. 
 
The awareness concerning the importance of cyber 
security is exceptional in the highly sensitive areas, 
i.e., the Austrian financial and insurance sector (about 
90%) and the public administration (about 77%).  
• Poor flow of information. 
 
Although 
security 
awareness 
is 
high 
among 
employees, often the responsibilities are not clear. In 
more than eight out of ten companies it is indistinct 
who is responsible for information security. Further, 
one out of three companies does not have a security 
guideline employees are aware of and in almost 60% 
of the cases, security awareness measures are either 
non-existing or not visible for the employees. 
57
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• Strong connection between employees and company. 
Employee’s loyalty to their company is rather high: 
roughly, less than one out of ten employees would 
strive for a job in another company and roughly two 
out of three managers would recommend a career in 
their companies to their relatives. 
• Loyal employees are honest employees.  
 
Eight out of ten employees do not cheat the 
organization, take home important data or steal 
anything.  
• Sufficient work-life balance is crucial.  
Less than one out of 20 employees think that their 
work-life balance is bad, but already one out of five 
feels heavily strained due to time pressure, identifying 
it as a health burden. Technological developments 
like mobile devices blur the line between work and 
personal life. 
 
Considered in more detail, our findings show that non-
compliance is more likely in an environment that is 
characterized by poor working conditions These include, 
among others, inadequate salary, job insecurity, insufficient 
appreciation of work, lacking support from team members or 
supervisors, mobbing, and lack of the resources that are 
necessary to get the work done. Further, competitive 
pressures, a focus on simplistic success parameters, problems 
in a company’s control system, management style and 
corporate culture also panders to non-compliant behavior. 
Favorable working conditions are therefore important in 
order to enhance the motivation and loyalty of employees 
[47]. Thus, it is crucial for companies to ensure good 
working conditions. External regulations and technical 
solutions, e.g., automated logouts, frequent password 
changes, access and time badges, are replacing the individual 
behavioral orientation. Overregulation leads to employees 
boycotting or bypassing the control system. Excessive 
control and regulation has a negative impact on the work 
environment and hampers productivity. Employees often 
spend working hours with defiant attitudes.  
Managers have great influence on the work environment 
of their employees [48]. Therefore, it is crucial that the 
managers are selected carefully because they contribute 
essentially 
to the 
company's 
success and 
working 
atmosphere. Good relationships between employees and 
managers, transparent information and communication 
structures, transparent work organization and participation in 
decision-making are necessary to enhance work-life 
satisfaction and reduce the occurrence of mental disorders. 
Work life balance in general is considered a requirement for 
healthy, hard-working, compliant behavior. At the same 
time, smartphones and laptops enable an integration of work 
and private life. Nevertheless, the result is that the line 
between work and leisure is becoming more and more 
blurred. 
While Austrian companies, especially larger ones and 
also innovative small and medium-enterprises are generally 
well-prepared concerning information security, the average 
of small and medium-enterprises still needs substantial 
support due to a lack of available funding for cyber security 
measures in order to catch up. Besides the size of the 
organization, the business sector is decisive for whether 
information security measures are implemented or not. In 
sectors where employees are used to handle a lot of sensitive 
data, such as in the finance and insurance sector, the health 
sector or the public administration sector, advanced 
information security measures can be found. Our findings 
indicate 
that 
stronger 
regulations, 
monitoring 
and 
surveillance measures might not lead to the expected effects 
in all cases. Consequently, one of the main tasks for human 
resource management is the selection of loyal employees and 
the successful integration of employees into the organization.  
Hence, the level of information security awareness in 
Austrian organizations is higher than reflected in the general 
studies we analyzed [16, p. 5] [17]. Employees are 
extensively honest. Future research might focus on a 
comparison of several countries in different cultural areas 
and within Europe because we expect differences [49]. 
Another approach we want to follow is to feed an 
appropriate risk management model with the data presented 
here. This more systematic research could lead to 
quantifiable key risk parameters and development of distinct 
thresholds for the human risk factor of information security. 
Due to the characteristics of behavior, attitude and 
perception a heuristic approach could generate input for a 
scorecard or radar chart with the suggested small set of most 
interesting questions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by the European 
Commission's Project No. 608090, HyRiM (Hybrid Risk 
Management for Utility Networks) under the 7th Framework 
Programme (FP7-SEC-2013-1). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Schuster, M. Latzenhofer, S. Schauer, J. Göllner, C. 
Meurers, A. Peer, P. Prah, G. Quirchmayr, and T. Benesch, 
“A Study on User Perceptions of ICT Security,” presented 
at the SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International 
Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and 
Technologies, Nice, 2016, pp. 281–288.  
[2] 
M. Plischke, “Company’s Prevention: Risk Management 
Competing 
with 
Technology 
[in 
German: 
Unternehmensprävention: Risikomanagement im Wettlauf 
mit der Technik],” Inf. Manag. Consult., no. 3, pp. 57–60, 
2009.  
[3] 
C. Suchan and J. Frank, Analysis and Design of Powerful IS 
Architectures: Model-based Methods from Research and 
Teaching in Practice [in German: Analyse und Gestaltung 
leistungsfähiger 
IS-Architekturen: 
Modellbasierte 
Methoden aus Forschung und Lehre in der Praxis]. 
Springer-Verlag, 2012.  
[4] 
M. Baram and M. Schoebel, “Safety culture and behavioral 
change at the workplace,” Saf. Sci., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 631–
636, 2007.  
[5] 
C. Buck and T. Eymann, “Human Risk Factor in Mobile 
Ecosystems [in German: Risikofaktor Mensch in mobilen 
Ökosystemen],” HMD Prax. Wirtsch., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 
75–83, 2014.  
58
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[6] 
F. W. Guldenmund, “The use of questionnaires in safety 
culture research–an evaluation,” Saf. Sci., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 
723–743, 2007.  
[7] 
B. Fahlbruch and M. Schöbel, “SOL–Safety through 
organizational learning: A method for event analysis,” Saf. 
Sci., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 27–31, 2011.  
[8] 
Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology 
(BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG), 
“KIRAS Security Research: MetaRisk,” 2016.  [Online]. 
Available: http://www.kiras.at/. [Accessed: 27-Dec-2016] 
[9] 
M. 
Jakobsson 
and 
S. 
Myers, 
Phishing 
and 
countermeasures: understanding the increasing problem of 
electronic identity theft. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.  
[10] 
S. Schiebeck, M. Latzenhofer, B. Palensky, S. Schauer, G. 
Quirchmayr, T. Benesch, J. Göllner, C. Meurers, and I. 
Mayr, “Practical Use Case Evaluation of a Generic ICT 
Meta-Risk Model Implemented with Graph Database 
Technology,” Int. J. Adv. Secur., vol. 9, no. 1 & 2, pp. 66–
79, 2016.  
[11] 
Federal Chancellery of Austria, Ed., “Cybersecurity in 
Austria [in German: Cybersicherheit in Österreich].” Mar-
2015.  
[12] 
nic.at and CERT Austria, “Report Internet Security Austria 
[in German: Bericht Internet-Sicherheit Österreich 2015].” 
Feb-2016.  
[13] 
Ministry of Finance, Federal Chancellery of Austria, and A-
SIT Center for Secure ICT, “ICT Security Portal – 
Cybermonitor 
[in 
German: 
IKT-Sicherheitsportal 
– 
Cybermonitor],” 
Onlinesicherheit.at, 
16-Feb-2016.  
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.onlinesicherheit.gv.at. 
[Accessed: 16-Feb-2016] 
[14] 
Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI), 
“The Situation of IT Security in Germany 2015 [in German: 
Die Lage der IT-Sicherheit in Deutschland 2015].” Nov-
2015.  
[15] 
Bundeskriminalamt 
Wiesbaden, 
“Cybercrime 
Federal 
Overview 2014 [in German: Cybercrime Bundeslagebild 
2014].” Bundeskriminalamt Wiesbaden, 2014.  
[16] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “State of Cybersecurity: Implications for 
2015 - An ISACA and RSA Conference Survey.” 2014.  
[17] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “State of Cybersecurity: Implications for 
2016 - An ISACA and RSA Conference Survey.” 2016 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.isaca.org/cyber/Docu 
ments/state-of-cybersecurity_res_eng_0316.pdf. [Accessed: 
03-Jan-2017] 
[18] 
G. Cluley, “Hackers Steal $55 million From Boeing 
Supplier,” 21-Jan-2016.  [Online]. Available: http://www. 
tripwire.com/state-of-security/security-data-protection/ 
boeing-supplier-hacked-claims-55-million-worth-of-
damage-as-stock-price-falls/. [Accessed: 16-Feb-2016] 
[19] 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, “Economic crime: A threat to 
business processes - PWC´s 2014 Global Economic Crime 
Survey - US Supplement.” 2014.  
[20] 
Pricewaterhouse 
Coopers, 
“Adjusting 
the 
Lens 
on 
Economic Crime: Preparation brings opportunity back into 
focus - Global Economic Crime Survey 2016: US Results.” 
2016 [Online]. Available: https://www.pwc.com/us/en/ 
forensic-services/assets/gecs-us-report-2016.pdf. [Accessed: 
03-Jan-2017] 
[21] 
H. 
Quentmeier, 
Practice 
Manual 
Compliance: 
Fundamentals, Objectives, and Practical Advice for Non-
lawyers 
[in 
German: 
Praxishandbuch 
Compliance: 
Grundlagen, Ziele und Praxistipps für Nicht-Juristen], 1. 
Aufl. Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2012 [Online]. Available: B:DE-
101 application/pdf http://d-nb.info/1018131469/04 DNB-
TOC Inhaltsverzeichnis 2 
[22] 
W. Schettgen-Sarcher, S. Bachmann, and P. Schettgen, 
Compliance Officer. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien 
Wiesbaden, 2014 [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-658-01270-0 Resolving-System Volltext 
[23] 
Semmer, 
N., 
“Stress,” 
in 
Handwörterbuch 
Arbeitswissenschaft, H. Luczak and W. Volpert, Eds. 
Stuttgart: Schäffer-Poeschl, 1997, pp. 332–339.  
[24] 
R. Raml, “Positive indicators for health in context of work: 
an interdisciplinary extension of the term health and its 
consequences for the differentiation of health situations for 
employees [in German: Positive Indikatoren der Gesundheit 
im Kontext Arbeit: eine interdisziplinäre Erweiterung des 
Gesundheitsbegriffs 
und 
dessen 
Folgen 
für 
die 
Differenzierung gesundheitlicher Lagen bei unselbständig 
Beschäftigten],” Medizinische Universität, 2009.  
[25] 
C. Colwill, “Human factors in information security: The 
insider threat–Who can you trust these days?,” Inf. Secur. 
Tech. Rep., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 186–196, 2009.  
[26] 
J. R. Nurse, O. Buckley, P. A. Legg, M. Goldsmith, S. 
Creese, G. R. Wright, and M. Whitty, “Understanding 
insider threat: A framework for characterising attacks,” in 
Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2014 IEEE, 2014, 
pp. 214–228.  
[27] 
G. B. Magklaras and S. M. Furnell, “A preliminary model 
of end user sophistication for insider threat prediction in IT 
systems,” Comput. Secur., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 371–380, 
2005.  
[28] 
J. Hunker and C. W. Probst, “Insiders and Insider Threats-
An Overview of Definitions and Mitigation Techniques.,” 
JoWUA, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 4–27, 2011.  
[29] 
A. M. Munshi, “A study of insider threat behaviour: 
developing a holistic insider threat model,” 2013.  
[30] 
RSA, “The Insider Security Threat in I.T. and Financial 
Services: Survey Shows Employees’ Everyday Behavior 
Puts Sensitive Business Information at Risk.” RSA, 2008.  
[31] 
L. Tan, Asia worried about insider threat. ZDNet Asia. 
2008.  
[32] 
R. Raml, Ed., “Working conditions and stress: findings of 
the 
Austrian 
Work 
Climate 
Index 
[in 
German: 
Arbeitsbedingungen und Stress: Erkenntnisse aus dem 
österreichischen 
Arbeitsklima 
Index],” 
Schriftenreihe 
Österr. Arbeitsklima Index - Austrian Work Clim. Index, 
vol. Arbeitsbedingungen und Stress, no. 3, pp. 12–17, 2015.  
[33] 
R. Raml, “Scientific fundamentals of the Austrian 
Occupational 
Health 
Monitor 
[in 
German: 
Wissenschaftliche 
Grundlagen 
des 
Österreichischen 
Arbeitsgesundheitsmonitors],” 
Schriftenreihe 
Österr. 
Arbeitsklima Index - Austrian Work Clim. Index, no. 2, pp. 
12–19, 2012.  
[34] 
R. Raml, “A theoretical evaluation of the Work Climate 
Index [in German: Eine theoretische Evaluierung des 
Arbeitsklima Index],” Schriftenreihe Österr. Arbeitsklima 
Index - Austrian Work Clim. Index, no. 1, 2009.  
[35] 
R. Raml and A. Schiff, “The localization of the Work 
Climate Index in a sociologic, psychologic and economic 
59
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

theory 
spectrum 
[in 
German: 
Die 
Verortung 
des 
Arbeitsklima Index im soziologischen, psychologischen und 
ökonomischen Theorienspektrum].” 2016.  
[36] 
M. Tarafdar, Q. Tu, B. S. Ragu-Nathan, and T. S. Ragu-
Nathan, “The impact of technostress on role stress and 
productivity,” J. Manag. Inf. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 301–
328, 2007.  
[37] 
R. B. Johnson, A. J. Onwuegbuzie, and L. A. Turner, 
“Toward a definition of mixed methods research,” J. Mix. 
Methods Res., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 112–133, 2007.  
[38] 
A. V. Heerden, F. Weller, and G. Weidinger, “Business 
Crime. Gemrany, Austria, Switzerland in comparison. 
Business Crime in large-sized organizations and medium-
sized 
business 
[in 
German: 
Wirtschaftskriminalität. 
Deutschland, 
Österreich, 
Schweiz 
im 
Vergleich. 
Wirtschaftskriminalität in Großunternehmen und dem 
Mittelstand].” KPMG, 2013.  
[39] 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, “Business Crime 2011. Security 
Situation 
in 
Austrian 
companies 
[in 
German: 
Wirtschaftskriminalität 
2011. 
Sicherheitslage 
in 
österreichischen Unternehmen].” PWC, 2011.  
[40] 
M. Schulz, “Quick and easy!? Fokusgruppen in der 
angewandten Sozialwissenschaft,” in Fokusgruppen in der 
empirischen Sozialwissenschaft, Springer, 2012, pp. 9–22.  
[41] 
D. Morgan, Focus Groups as Qualitative Research. 2455 
Teller Road, Thousand Oaks California 91320 United States 
of America: SAGE Publications, Inc., 1997 [Online]. 
Available: http://methods.sagepub.com/book/focus-groups-
as-qualitative-research. [Accessed: 03-Jan-2017] 
[42] 
D. W. Stewart and P. N. Shamdasani, Focus groups: Theory 
and practice, vol. 20. Sage publications, 2014.  
[43] 
U. Flick, The SAGE handbook of qualitative data analysis. 
Sage, 2013.  
[44] 
U. Flick, “Qualitative Social Research-An Introduction [in 
German: Qualitative Sozialforschung–Eine Einführung],” 
Reinbek Bei Hambg. Rowohlt, no. 5th edition, Nov. 2012.  
[45] 
C. Auerbach and L. B. Silverstein, Qualitative data: An 
introduction to coding and analysis. NYU press, 2003.  
[46] 
L. Kish, “A procedure for objective respondent selection 
within the household,” J. Am. Stat. Assoc., vol. 44, no. 247, 
pp. 380–387, 1949.  
[47] 
B. Aziri, “Job satisfaction: A literature review,” Manag. 
Res. Pract., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 77–86, 2011.  
[48] 
J. P. De Jong and D. N. Den Hartog, “How leaders 
influence employees’ innovative behaviour,” Eur. J. Innov. 
Manag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 41–64, 2007.  
[49] 
Z. Aycan, R. Kanungo, M. Mendonca, K. Yu, J. Deller, G. 
Stahl, and A. Kurshid, “Impact of culture on human 
resource management practices: A 10‐country comparison,” 
Appl. Psychol., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 192–221, 2000.  
  
 
60
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

