Role of User Proﬁle in Cloud-based Collaboration
Services for Innovation
Zahid Iqbal, Josef Noll and Sarfraz Alam
University Graduate Center (UNIK)
Kjeller, Norway
{zahid, josef, sarfraz}@unik.no
Abstract—Enterprises are evolving their businesses from silo-
based knowledge to collaborative-based knowledge by promoting
open innovation through collaboration in to their technology
infrastructure. Despite of being a prevailing trend, enterprises
are not quite willing to embrace the collaboration into their
working environment. This unwillingness is due to number of
technical obstacles including user proﬁling, balancing of open
and close collaboration and trust establishment. Therefore, the
paper tries to address these impediments by contemplating
collaborative enterprise computing approach that creates the
network of enterprises for enabling the active, automated and
trusted inter-enterprise collaboration. We propose a privacy-
enhanced innovation framework that eases off the innovation
process in an open and control manner. The framework does not
only allow enterprise employees to create a user proﬁle but also
encourage them to initiate innovation activity by registering their
novel ideas, which later can be realized in the form of business
opportunity. We select an ”innovation stock exchange” case study
in order to apply the proposed approach. Furthermore, we intend
to implement the framework in the form of cloud services that
are interoperable with any enterprise collaboration platform.
Keywords-Cloud Computing, Collaboration, Enterprise, Inno-
vation, Privacy, Social Computing, Trust, User Proﬁle
I. INTRODUCTION
While open innovation is a prevailing trend that could spur
new business opportunities, but enterprises are reluctant to
adopt and invest in open innovation initiatives due to the risk
factors associated with it. Most of the enterprises consider
such initiatives as potential channel of loss of knowledge,
control and core competencies, which in turns could negatively
impact the enterprise long term innovation life cycle. However,
success of consumer based social computing compels the en-
terprises to tend towards collaborative knowledge environment
where the inter-enterprise boundary line is becoming indistinct
by braking the silos. Today, collaboration is invertible for an
enterprise in order to meet the rapid and dynamic demands
of the businesses. Recently, HP Labs started the initiative
to conduct open innovation by establishing the Innovative
Research Program (IRP) between universities, enterprises and
governments [1]. This fosters the collaboration among dif-
ferent participants in the form of sharing new ideas, en-
abling people to work across enterprise boundaries. It creates
opportunities for capturing relevant knowledge, expertise so
that innovative products and services could be introduced to
the market. Initial indicators from HP Labs show that active
collaboration helps in augmenting and accelerating knowledge
creation and technology transfer, and the result of IRP is 179
papers and 34 HP patent disclosures in just three years [1].
Bringing innovation through collaboration is relied on en-
abling tool sets that allow enterprises to collaborate beyond
their perimeter in a trusted open environment. Mostly, enter-
prises use email as an enabling tool for collaboration, where
the new idea owner invites others through email to provide
feedback and collaborate on its innovative idea that could be
realized to a business opportunity by involving some external
partners. This approach limits the collaboration space to the
personal contacts of the idea owner within and outside of the
enterprise. It is highly probable that the most suitable partners
will be missed since they are not in direct contact of the idea
owner.
In order to foster an active collaborative environment,
enterprises can beneﬁt from social computing platforms be-
cause these platforms promote sharing and openness within
communities. These platforms offer different functionalities
such as sharing of knowledge and idea, displaying recent
activities of people, showing contacts and skills of people,
and providing a list of colleagues and friends from social
network sites. Enterprises are also considering social com-
puting platforms to communicate with their customers and
inform them about new services and releases. This does
not only bring value and uptake for their business in the
form of enhanced productivity and revenue, but also provides
customers with the beneﬁts of receiving services that are
pertinent to their preferences. A survey report from McKinsey
Global indicates that enterprises have gained high-business
beneﬁts by integrating social computing platforms in their
working environment [2]. A range of studies [3][4][5] pointed
out the signiﬁcant of social computing, but only few [6][7]
addressed the challenges and opportunities of social computing
in an enterprise environment. Though enterprises can possess
signiﬁcant beneﬁts from consumer based social computing
platforms such as Facebook, but stringent security and privacy
requirement of an enterprise does not foster use of such plat-
form for collaboration. This ampliﬁes the need of equipping
innovation platform with corporate social computing platforms
so that stringent enterprise security and privacy requirements
can be enforced. Current state-of-art collaborative platforms,
such as Microsoft’s SharePoint and IBM’s Lotus, only support
1
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

intra-enterprise collaboration and deﬁcit in providing collab-
oration beyond the enterprise perimeter. However, extending
collaboration space beyond the enterprise perimeter brings
some new research challenges, which needs to be addressed.
First one is the user proﬁling, which is the foundation of the
multitude of functionalities within any collaborative platform.
User proﬁle is the core for automated collaboration for any
enterprise. It allows to perform different numbers of interesting
scenarios, including people search based on their expertise,
target content push towards users to accelerate the knowledge
sharing. User proﬁles are essential for an enterprise, containing
information about the people working in an organization and
helping to obtain appropriate information about people’s skills,
education, and contacts. As user proﬁles are not linked, it is
not possible to reuse existing user proﬁle on any other site.
Even state-of-art social computing platforms do not facilitate
any mechanism for linking user proﬁles to objects such as
people, device, data and sensors. Second one is balancing of
open and close collaboration for innovation in a user-centric
way by specifying collaboration criterion. We envisage that the
future lies in an innovation process that are under perceived
control of each innovation initiative owner. In many cases,
enterprises do not willing to share knowledge with certain
competitors in order to serve the increasing demands of shorter
innovation life cycle, and create successful products faster
than their competitors to protect their business. This leads to
third challenge of establishing trust and forming trusted virtual
enterprise, connecting a number of autonomous enterprises
that collaborate to achieve either a common business goal or
to form a virtual market place.
In this paper, we propose a privacy-enhanced collabora-
tive framework for an enterprise that operates in an open-
controlled environment. The proposed approach aims at easy
and automated collaborative process within and beyond enter-
prises perimeter for bringing innovation by sharing knowledge
and technology transfer. The idea is to form an innovation
cloud by leveraging the cloud computing that facilitate and
speed up the innovation life cycle. This provides an entry
point especially to SMEs and making them active part of
the innovation process. The proposed framework comprises
of three-components: Access Manager (AM), Collaboration
Ensembler (CE) and Collaboration Criterion Manager (CCM).
The framework supports user proﬁle management and enables
enterprises employees to register their proﬁles. It further
allows them to initiate any novel idea or business opportunity.
The user proﬁles and ideas are backed up with proﬁle and
idea database whose schema is structured though semantic
enhanced models which are speciﬁed in the form of user
proﬁle ontology, trust ontology and idea ontology.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
discusses related work. Section III outlines the collaboration
enterprise computing approach. Section IV provides details of
the case study where proposed approach is employed. Section
V discusses how automated collaboration can be enabled in
an enterprise environment. Section VI presents the details of
proposed framework. Section VII provides the road map to
realized proposed framework in the form of cloud services and
integrate those services with existing enterprise collaboration
platforms. We conclude the paper in Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
This section presents the overview of prior work in the area
of user proﬁling, and cloud-based collaboration computing.
A. User Proﬁling
Social Network sites such as Facebook, Orkut, and MySpace
allow people to share their interests, social information and
contents among their friends or group of friends. It had
been seen in the very beginning that the information which
is stored on social network sites are not under the user
control. All the information is owned or controlled by database
owner. The proﬁles which contains user’s personal information
and attributes are typically cannot be exported in machine
processable formats. The lack of machine understandability is
a big hindrance in data portability and transformation between
systems.The aforementioned drawbacks can be resolved with
the advent of semantic technologies [8], more speciﬁcally the
Friend of a Friend (FOAF) project [9] which was initiated by
Dan Brickley and Libby Miller in 2000. Friend of a Friend
(FOAF) contains RDF vocabulary for expressing user personal
information (i.e., homepage, interest, friends, etc.) to create
FOAF proﬁles which are shared among people in a distributed
manner. FOAF proﬁles are posted on personal web site of
the user and linked from the user’s homepage. FOAF proﬁles
are static in nature and contains only one term ”knows” for
describing social relationships. FOAF proﬁles also contain
only one term ”interest” for describing user’s interest in a
speciﬁc topic. FOAF proﬁles does not provide any vocabulary
for capturing user’s context. Hence, FOAF proﬁles are only for
describing and linking people and things but not best suited to
address user proﬁle for personalized and context-aware service
delivery.
Gosh et. al. present technique of creation and discovery of
user proﬁle [10]. The discovery of appropriate user proﬁle for
speciﬁc service is addressed by considering the user sparse
information and context-awareness impact while accessing
services.Dynamically construction of user proﬁle is done by
Proﬁle Mediator and Constructor that receives desired user
proﬁle information for requesting services. The user proﬁle
ontology is deﬁned in OWL by reusing FOAF vocabulary.
Thus, it inherits the same aforementioned FOAF limitations.
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) is a major
standardization body dealing with future 3G networks and
services. The Generic User Proﬁle (GUP) spceciﬁcation [11]
is one of the 3GPP initiative to provide personalized services
delivery within the operators domain. The GUP aggregates
user related information such as user description, user services,
and user devices to provide personalized service delivery in a
standardized manner. GUP deﬁnes a global schema of the user
proﬁle in XML. Though, GUP is a well-known speciﬁcation
for user proﬁling but it lacks the enrichment of user proﬁle and
since it is based on XML so it cannot provide any intended
2
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

meaning to associated data and only constrain the structure of
GUP proﬁle.
Stann et. al. presents user proﬁle ontology [14] which is
inspired by the SPICE project [15]. A dynamic, situation aware
user proﬁle ontology is represented which enables real time sit-
uation awareness of the user and to express the social network
related preferences in situational sub-proﬁles.The preferences
are only limited to how a person’s friend or category of friend
can reach him in a speciﬁc situation and how Services (vibrate,
ring, voice message) can inform or notify him from a mobile
phone.
The General User Model Ontology (GUMO) [12] is a
notorious user proﬁle ontology, represented using OWL. The
GUMO inherits the UserML [13] approach where user proﬁle
is divided into triples. It contains some basic and useful infor-
mation about user’s characteristics, emotional state and some
facts about user’s personality. However, GUMO is quasi-static
model where applications can retrieve and add information
into the proﬁle.
B. Collaboration and Cloud Computing
Rapid adoption of social computing not only brings a
new collaborative and innovation business opportunity for
enterprises but also leads to the issue of corporate privacy
when the collaboration is formed within the trusted network.
Mostly, studies shed light on the collaboration within the
enterprise boundary by isolating their employees from the rest
of the world. Some works have identiﬁed the signiﬁcance of
collaboration not only in the enterprise environment but also
across the enterprise. In [16], authors analyze and compare
the existing vocabularies as a promising source for expert
ﬁnding framework. To make the ﬁnding simple and structure,
they highlight several factors such as common machine read-
able formats, reusable vocabularies and support of enabling
technologies for practical use cases. In [17], authors raise
the advantage of using linked data as an evidence source
of expertise by analyzing the traditional information retrieval
approaches. They also described some disadvantages of the
linked data on the basis of the results of their hypothesis.
Marian Lopez proposed a PeopleCloud platform [18] that
enables experts to collaborate from inside and outside organi-
zation. The platform helps organizations in completing their
tasks more efﬁciently and also leverage the expert networks
for future activities. They illustrated the platform capabilities
by discussing knowledge acquisition in IT inventory Man-
agement and IT support domain. Their comparison shows
that the knowledge acquisition either explicitly or implicitly
has signiﬁcance to enterprises working environment. In [19],
authors propose a propagation-based approach in order to
ﬁnd an expert in social network. They consider people local
information as well as their relationship between people for
their experiment. Their results show that the relationship is
a useful factor for precision in expert ﬁnding. Capuano. N
presents the enterprise framework by using semantic web
technologies, assisting enterprises for collaboration [20]. Their
framework comprises several layers and, each layer performs
their own task. For instance, data representation handles
modeling of data and data storage layer collects all the data
from the data representation layer. In [21], authors propose the
secure collaboration platform for enterprises by pointing out
the security requirements for the cloud environments. They
employ web service policy framework for their platform as a
service (PaaS) infrastructure in order to mitigate the security
threats. The aforementioned studies are insufﬁcient in dealing
privacy challenges in collaborative enterprises environment. In
this paper, our objective is to propose a framework that will ad-
dress the privacy issue in collaborative enterprise environment.
Furthermore, the framework is not only capable of managing
semantic-enhanced user proﬁles but also provide open inno-
vation mechanism, which assists enterprises in collaborating
new idea and ﬁnding relevant partners having right expertise.
III. COLLABORATIVE ENTERPRISE COMPUTING
APPROACH
Enterprises is growing and expanding their businesses glob-
ally where different people from different geographical loca-
tions connect, communicate and collaborate for achieving their
business goals. In this scenario, enterprises require reduction in
the cost of IT infrastructures without compromising their busi-
ness values. Cloud computing assists enterprises on-demand
resources provisioning where enterprises can exploit different
cloud computing models such as Platform as a Services (PaaS),
Infrastructure as a Services (IaaS) and Software as a Service
(SaaS) according to their conditions for reducing the IT costs
and increasing the productivity. Microsoft, IBM and Google
are notorious cloud computing providers not only providing
data and network infrastructure to the enterprises but also
providing software and applications for ease of business work.
For instance, word processing, document management, content
management and spreadsheets are delivered to enterprises on-
demand without buying and installing into their enterprise
environment. Indicators show that enterprises are considering
the adoption of cloud computing in their environment and its
market is growing with estimate of approximately $60 billion
by 2012 [22].
Cloud providers have already appraised value of collabo-
ration by incorporating social computing into their services
and application, which opens a new horizon of innovation.
Such collaborative environment facilitate enterprises in two
ways: 1) It allows people to share their knowledge and
information between partners and co-workers 2) It captures
feedback from customers about products and services. In this
way, enterprises can make their business processes efﬁcient by
involving skillful and competence people in the right place at
right time and improving the quality of products and services
rapidly by getting the response from customers. Hence, the
overall impact will be increased efﬁciency and agility in
the enterprises working environment that could lead to the
introduction of new services and products to the market.
With the globalization of businesses, enterprises are pro-
ducing large volume of disparate data with a different format,
which are located on different geographical locations. In the
3
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

larger interest of enterprises, such data require to be exposed
to different trusted partners and co-workers. The exposure can
be done on the basis of the relationship between enterprises
and/or people. The semantic web technologies can be used
as the glue that helps in providing meaning and linking to
enterprise data, services and user proﬁles. With such semantic
enhance descriptions it is possible to employ vertical search on
a predeﬁned topic to get relevant and precise search results.
The in-built reasoning capabilities of semantic web enables
the system to deduce new facts from the existing facts. Today,
many enterprises are adopting semantic web technologies into
their software development life cycle to bring intelligence
and smartness in the decision-making process. The semantic
web technologies are being implied in many areas such as
enterprise information integration, content management, life
sciences and e-government. According to the gartner, the
user of semantic web technologies in corporate, called as
corporate semantic web, will reduce costs and improve the
quality of content management, information access, system
interoperability, database integration and data quality [23].
In our vision, we amalgamate cloud computing, social
computing and semantic web technologies to expand the
collaborative environment across enterprises boundaries and
we commonly referred to Collaborative Enterprise Computing
(CEC) as depicted in Figure 1. This fusion beneﬁts enterprises
Figure 1: Collaborative Enterprise Computing
in many ways but low IT costs, correlate data of different
enterprises and providing communication mediums (Blogs,
Wikis, Social Network sites) are the most signiﬁcant. The
main rationale behind the CEC is to bring innovation through
collaboration. Moreover, CEC ease the process of innovation
by ﬁnding the trustworthy partners across enterprise bound-
aries who can be involved in the innovation process. These
trustworthy partners are discovered/ﬁnd according to their
competences and experiences on the basis of criteria which
can be given by enterprise.
IV. CASE STUDY - INNOVATION STOCK EXCHANGE
The objective of developing the innovation framework is to
create a trusted network for collaboration in an open-controlled
environment. Collaboration allows enterprises, governments,
entrepreneurs, academia, and other business entities to come
together from a closed environment to an open environment
and create new ideas as depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Innovation through collaboration
This innovation ecosystem fosters the innovation process
and introduces new products and services to the market.
Such members of the innovation ecosystem could have the
opportunity to register their ideas and openly collaborate with
people of their trusted network. This could also lead towards
the innovation stock exchange as depicted in Figure 3 where
investors could invest on highly ranked ideas for increasing
the business opportunities. By leveraging the collaboration into
Figure 3: Innovation stock exchange a case study under
consideration
the innovation ecosystem, enterprises will be able to develop
innovative products and reduce their operational costs. For in-
stance, Norwegian oil Industry reduced operational costs from
30-50% and enhanced productivity from 5-15% by integrating
several operations together into their system [24]. Moreover,
Procter&Gambler and Orange both has taken the initiative of
collaboration by inviting people to present their ideas on a
speciﬁc problem, and the most prominent idea was selected for
the transformation into product [25]. Thus, signiﬁcant revenue
and customer satisfaction were acquired by both companies
with innovation through collaboration. Current approaches are
based on selected people from different organizations working
together for a common goal. Our privacy-enhanced innovation
framework will allow members of the innovation ecosystem
to register an idea, assign scores from experts and ﬁnd out
trustworthy partners who can help in fostering the innovation
4
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

process so that the results can be achieved in the minimum
time.
Assume Bob has an innovative idea, which he registers it
in the system so that he could get right partners who could
collaborate to transform the idea into realization. Idea will be
reviewed for acceptance by the experts that belong to different
enterprises. The idea will be published categorically according
to the nature of its topic. The system will ﬁnd experts in
that topic by employing idea owner polices and criteria. The
system will send notiﬁcation to experts via email or sms and
consider them to assign scores. The system facilitates Bob in
ﬁnding trustworthy partners with whom he could collaborate
for the realization of the idea regardless enterprise premises.
Furthermore, the high-score idea will be published in the
innovation stock exchange where members could open a vital
investment opportunity. Thus, the system not only helping Bob
in ﬁnding the right partner for his idea but also providing him
implicit technical review, scientiﬁc value and the importance
of his idea.
V. ENTERPRISE COLLABORATION ENABLEMENT
This section outlines how an automated and trusted collab-
oration can be enabled in an enterprise.
A. User Proﬁling
User proﬁle plays an important role for enabling automated
collaboration beyond enterprise perimeter. User proﬁling gen-
erally involves proﬁle setup, manipulation, and synchroniza-
tion. In proﬁle setup a basic user proﬁle is created with explicit
user feedback. The proﬁle setup procedure can get user social
network sites membership information from user basic proﬁle,
allowing proﬁle setup mechanism to retrieve more information
about user’s preferences, groups and friends. In turns, this
leads to implicit user feedback, where user information is
collected without any intervention of user. The proﬁle manip-
ulation consists of create, read, update, and delete functions.
The proﬁle synchronization keeps update of all distributed
proﬁles. ETSI [26] , 3GPP GUP [11] and MAGNET Project
[27] among others are ﬁrst initiatives towards standardization
of user proﬁle structure. However, these aforementioned re-
search initiatives do not aim for collaboration. They mostly
focus on personalized services. Whereas, in this outlook we
speciﬁcally focus on user proﬁle in the context of enterprise
collaboration. We extend the user proﬁle ontology proposed in
[35], which classify the proﬁle into different categories. Each
proﬁle contains relevant information according to its category
and comprises authorization policy to restrict its access to
third parties. For instance, corporate proﬁle contains person’s
professional skills and expertise in a speciﬁc topic. This proﬁle
can only be accessed by third parties (i.e., colleagues, friend
from trusted-virtual company etc.) to whom the permission
has been granted. In this manner, a person can explicitly
choose what to share and with whom to share his proﬁle.
Currently, we have deﬁned one core concept Proﬁle, which
contains subclasses: (i) personal Proﬁle, (ii) social proﬁle, (iii)
corporate proﬁle, (iv) public proﬁle and (v) private proﬁle of it.
A simpliﬁed snapshot of the user proﬁle ontology is depicted
in Figure 4.
Figure 4: User Proﬁle ontology
B. Trust Modeling
While Trust is relative term, which is deﬁned differently
in literature according to the nature of the work. In [28],
author deﬁnes ”Trust in a passionate entity is the belief that
it will behave without malicious intent”. In [29], authors
consider context as an important factor for establishing trust
by deﬁning, ”Trust is the ﬁrm belief in the competence of an
entity to act securely, dependably and reliably within a speciﬁc
context”. In this paper, enterprise establish trust between their
partners and co-workers to collaborate with each other for
improving the quality of work and minimizing the risk factors.
Thus, we deﬁne trust in such a way where the trusting agent
has belief on trusted agent capabilities (see Figure 5) on the
basis of relationship with the trusted agent for collaboration
in order to realize a speciﬁc business opportunity.
Figure 5: Deﬁnition of trust
We consider four factors context, time period, relationship
and trust value that inﬂuence enterprises to obtain trusted
partners for collaboration. The context is the situation or
scenario for enterprises such as writing a research proposal,
sharing new idea, discussing recent activity. Time period is a
time at which one person interact with the other person and
afterwards assign a trust value to it. For instance, one can
5
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

establish trust for the context ”writing a research proposal”
in the time period 2009-2010. Relationship plays a pivotal
role in the trust establishment, which associates the trusting
agent with the trusted agent. The strength of the relationship
is determined with the trust value which is assigned by
trusting agent for a given context and time. Employees of an
enterprise establishes a relationship with others by doing direct
interaction and thus assign trust values to them. For instance,
Bob meets Alice in a conference and becomes friend, Bob
has a colleague and Bob meets Charlie on random meetings.
Employees also receive recommendations about others from
trusted friends, and trusted partners, which increase enter-
prises contacts not only within enterprise boundaries but also
outside enterprise boundaries. For instance, Bob has a direct
relationship with Alice, and Alice has a direct relationship
with Charlie. Neither Bob nor Charlie has a direct relationship.
Alice recommends Bob about Charlie and since Bob believes
on Alice recommendation he can treat Charlie as a trusted
partner. Trust relationship is depicted in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Trust relationship
To contrive social graph of trusted partners, Friend-of-a-
Friend (FOAF) vocabulary helps for establishing friendship
relation with foaf:knows property but it does not specify what
is the value of friendship between two friends? FOAFRealm
Onotology Speciﬁcation [30] leverages the foaf:knows prop-
erty by assigning the friendship value to the relationship.
However, the ontology lacks in associating the value with
given context and time period that are pivotal factors for
enterprises. Thus, we propose to reuse FOAFRealm Ontology
in conjunction of our Trust Ontology that allows employees
to deﬁne their list of partners and assign trust values to them
in a given context and a time period. The values can be given
in the range of 0% (very distant)
100% (very close). The
above table presents the two relationships R1 and R2 where
Bob has 90% trust on Alice in the context of ”Writing research
proposal” for the time period 2009-2010. This shows that Bob
only trusts Alice in writing research proposal context and he
does not trust her in other contexts. It can also be possible
for Bob to assign trust values to Alice in different context for
different time.
The trust Ontology is designed in [36] by considering the
key elements (i.e., Trust direction, Trust Value, and Trust Type)
to deﬁne the concept of Trust. Person can assign numerical
trust values to other person with respect to their relationship.
Furthermore, person can also assign multiple trust values
to same person on multiple contexts. All this information
is stored in Trust Ontology, which later can be used as
a security attributes for assigning authorization policies to
the user proﬁles. Moreover, we deﬁned the concept of the
TrustedParties as a union of ServiceProviders and Friends class
and then subsume it to TrustedParties. A simpliﬁed snapshot
of Trust ontology is depicted in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Overview of the trust ontology
C. Collaboration Criterion
As we discussed before that user-centric is one of the
most demanding and prevailing feature of any collaboration
platform, where innovation process is under perceived control
speciﬁc innovation activity initiator. This can be achieved by
deﬁning collaboration criterion, where initiators can specify
their conﬂict of interest, policy for establishing trust and
some other requirements for automated collaboration. This
paper proposes Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) [31],
which is a combination of RuleML and OWL-DL [32]. In
SWRL, rules are expressed in terms of OWL concepts i.e.,
classes, properties, individuals and literals. Rules are written
in the form of Horn clauses antecedent (body) and consequent
(head) where implication combines both the antecedent and
consequent together. SWRL expressivity can be expanded with
built-ins that provide traditional operations for comparison,
mathematical transformation and URI construction. SRWL
also enhances the expressivity by taking OWL expression (i.e.,
restrictions) in the antecedent or consequent of a rule but at
the cost of undecidability. However, the undecidability issue
can be resolved with DL-Safe rules [33]. The DL-Safe rule
binds only known instances in ontology to rule variables. This
restriction is sufﬁcient to make SWRL rules decidable.
D. Business Idea Ontology
The
Business
Idea
Ontology
provides
a
mechanism
to describe an idea which can be created by person,
6
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reviewed by executive members of an organization and
made it available for others in order to assign a score.
The ontology is combined with existing ontologies, such
as SKOS and FOAF, to achieve the modularity approach.
We choose a hierarchical model that links our main classes
id:Idea, org:ExecutiveMembers, skos:Concept, id:Score and
foaf:Person to the super class owl:Thing. An Idea class
(id:idea) contains the ideas by including abstracts, dates,
keywords and title to it. ExecutiveMembers class contains the
list of members who are responsible for providing review and
assign scores. These scores reside in the subclasses of Score
class (id: Score), which describes the assigned values in three
terms such as ”Excellent”, ”Good” and ”Fair”. Furthermore,
score class is created as a value partition class that included
the subclasses ”Excellent”, ”Good” and ”Fair” as shown in
the class deﬁnition.
푆푐표푟푒 ≡ 퐸푥푐푒푙푙푒푛푡 ∪ 퐺표표푑 ∪ 퐹푎푖푟
We make these subclasses disjoint so that an individual
cannot be a member of more than one class. In this manner, an
idea can be classiﬁed on the basis of assigned score. We also
deﬁned properties (object and data) that allow us to describe
the relationship between individual and literal values to these
classes.
∙ id:hasTopic is an object property that links idea to the
skos:Concept, describing the topic of an idea, e.g., Secu-
rity, and Mobile Development.
∙ id:isCreatedBy is an object property that links the idea to
a foaf:Person who is the creator of the idea.
∙ id:hasAssign is an object property point to the score
class, containing score values that assigned by executive
members.
The Figure 8 represents the complete overview of the
Business Idea Ontology.
Figure 8: Overview of the business idea ontology
VI. INNOVATION FRAMEWORK
The innovation framework is designed with the following
components: Access Manager, Collaborate Ensembler and
Collaboration Criterion Manger as depicted in the Figure 9.
A framework ﬁrst registers a person through Access Manager
and allows him to create his user proﬁle. After registration,
the person interacts with Idea manager for the creation of a
new Idea.
Figure 9: Innovation framework functional architecture
Idea manager notiﬁes the members of an organization
about the new idea so that they can review it and score it.
After scores, the idea manager makes it available to different
members or trusted-virtual communities according to their
access rights that are accorded by the idea creator. Later,
Collaboration ensembler reads the relevant information from
the user proﬁle and the idea along with the criteria from
collaboration Criterion Manager by discovering the relevant
partners. Apart from that, user proﬁle manager also links the
distributed user proﬁles by enabling linked data repository.
This empowers a person to separate his corporate proﬁle from
his social or public proﬁle and accord access according to
their relationship. In this manner, person can expose his data
in a controlled fashion where everything is under perceived
control.
A. Proﬁle Creation Phase
During the user proﬁle creation phase, access manager
receives a proﬁle creation request from a user. First, access
manager validates the user identity and after successfully
validating the user, a proﬁle creation page will be displayed
where the user supply his information, needed by the proﬁle
manager. After completing the proﬁle, access manager sends
the CreateProﬁleRequest to Proﬁle Manager, which stores the
user proﬁle information in the proﬁle Knowledge Base (KB).
Once the access manager receives the acknowledgment from
the proﬁle manager, it sends the ProﬁleCreatedResponse to
the user as depicted in Figure 10. The user can also be asked
to present the URI of his distributed proﬁles so that the user
proﬁles can be integrated from multiple sources. These linked
user proﬁles are stored in the linked data repository and later,
co-workers or other third parties can access accordingly.
7
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 10: Proﬁle creation phase
B. Idea Registration Phase
The idea manager is responsible for managing the idea
requested by the Access Manager. Idea manager is also respon-
sible by providing the mechanism of assigning scores. Initially,
the person requests Access Manager for the registration of
a new idea. After successfully validating the identity of the
person, access manager precedes him to the IdeaRegistra-
tionPage where idea can be written by providing its Title,
Abstract and Date. Idea manager stores the idea in to the Idea
Knowledge Base (KB) upon receiving RegisterIdea request
from the Access Manager by getting SubmitIdea request from
the person as depicted in Figure 11. Once the idea is registered
Figure 11: Idea registration phase
and stored in the knowledge base, Idea Manager sends the
notiﬁcation through SMS or email to executive members of
the organization so that they can make the innovation process
effective by involving themselves as soon as possible.
C. Score Phase
After receiving the new idea registration notiﬁcation, the
executive members can review the idea. To initiate the review
process the executive members provides their credentials and
idea name to access manger, which in response return the
newly register idea review page after validating the credentials.
The executive member can submit their score after reviewing
the idea. Once all the executive members submit their score
the IdeaManager calculate the overall score and set the status
of the Idea based on the score. If the idea achieved status
of open for collaboration then the CEE exploits description
logic [34] based reasoning capabilities over user proﬁle KB
and the approved idea by incorporating collaboration criteria
associated with the idea. The end result of this reasoning
process is a trusted-virtual company, containing a list of
relevant partners that are suitable for the approved idea. The
score phase in depicted in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Score phase
VII. IMPLEMENTATION ROAD MAP
Having described the innovation framework architecture,
this section outlines the road map for implementation of cloud
based services using the state-of-the-art technology enablers.
We propose to implement innovation framework in the form
of APIs as they are becoming mainstream. The essence of this
approach is better integration with existing apps, enablement
of custom apps development and augmentation of existing
apps with new functionalities. Additionally, we favor an open
API strategy instead of an internal-ﬁrst API strategy where
APIs are developed internally ﬁrst and then shared with close
partners and in the last phase made them open to the world.
This outlook aims to bring all stakeholder from all areas
of collaborative ecosystem, including industry and academia,
to enhance and ease off innovation process. Such inter-
organization collaboration demands a common/shared place
to publish and share novel and innovative ideas without
8
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

delving into technology infrastructure. We anticipate that cloud
computing platform is the most appropriate for such inter-
organization collaboration because it allows to focus more
on delivering services rather than on managing technology
infrastructure. We use cloud platform as a service endpoint
provider and data storage. In this regard, we select the win-
dows azure platform [37], which comprises of: (1) Windows
Azure - an operating system as a service that facilitate on-
demand compute, storage and mange web application on the
internet, (2) SQL Azure - a relational data storage service in
the cloud that foster reuse of familiar relational models, tools
and utilities, (3) Windows Azure AppFabric - a cloud-based
infrastructure services for applications running in the cloud or
on enterprise premises.
The prototype implementation of innovative stock exchange
case study can be realized in the form of windows azure
services. For this purpose, we propose to develop UserPro-
ﬁleService, IdeaRegistrationService, IdeaRatingService, and
IncubationService by using the innovation framework APIs.
Each service is backed by a DB storage such as ProﬁleDB,
IdeaDB, and ScoreDB. Despite the fact that windows azure
platform provides a wide range of storage options but it
still lacks the support of semantic enhance storage (i.e.,
triplet storage). This limitation can be ﬁxed by having a
mapping mechanism for proposed ontologies that is capable
of incorporating ontology level changes into relational storage.
Such mechanism can maintain semantic related stuff into
separate tables for each service DB storage, which works as an
overlay for the each service DB storage. These windows azure
services can be integrated with other apps regardless of the
technology since windows azure supports different standards,
protocols and languages including REST, SOAP, JAVA, PHP
and Ruby. However, we will focus only on SharePoint Server
2010 [38] (i.e., Microsoft based enterprise collaboration and
social computing platform). The integration of windows azure
services with SharePoint 2010 requires the development of
Silverlight enabled Web Parts. In this case, each Web Part is
associated with some Windows Azure service and SharePoint
acts as service consumer. The overall integration strategy is
depicted in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Integrating collaboration services with SharePoint
server 2010 using SharePoint Web Parts
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed the collaborative enterprise com-
puting (CEC) approach, helping in the creation of the network
of enterprises for enabling active, automated and trusted inter-
enterprise collaboration. This is achieved by considering the
challenges of user proﬁling, balancing of open and close
collaboration and trust establishment. The CEC approach is
quite signiﬁcant for discovering trusted relevant partners who
could involve in the innovation life cycle process.
The proposed framework comprises three core components
such as Access Manager (AM), Collaboration Ensembler (CE)
and Collaboration Criterion Manager (CCM). As the frame-
work is designed by considering the standard semantic web
tools it inherits some built-in features such as interoperability,
integrating of data from multiple sources, and reasoning for
deriving the entailment facts from the knowledge base. We
also designed semantically enriched user proﬁle ontology,
trust ontology and business idea ontology by considering the
modular approach. Moreover, the paper provides the road
map for the implementation of the innovation framework in
the form of APIs. The API oriented approach is suited for
better integration with other apps. We proposed to develop
cloud based services such as UserProﬁleService, IdeaRegistra-
tionService, and IdeaRatingService using proposed APIs. Our
exploration shows that capturing enterprise employee exper-
tise, and ideas in a structured and machine understandable way
are highly eminent for an automated inter and intra- enterprise
collaboration.
Our ongoing and future work includes evaluating the frame-
work by describing the sophisticated criteria for discovering
relevant partners. We are also considering enhancing the
framework by providing a Trust Management component,
which can ease the trust assigning and evaluation process.
Moreover, we will evaluate the framework in a real environ-
ment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the Norwegian Research Council.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Banerjee, R. Friedrich. L. Morell, ”Open innovation at HP Labs”, IEEE
Computer Society, Nov. 2010, pp. 88-90, doi:10.1109/MC.2010.322.
[2] J.
Bughin,
M.
Chui,
and
A.
MillerHow,
”Companies
are
beneﬁting
from
Web
2.0:
McKinsey
Global
Survey
Results”,
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Business Technology/BT Strategy/
How companies are beneﬁting from Web 20 McKinsey Global
Survey Results 2432 [accessed on 31 January 2011]
[3] Oracle,
”The
Social
Enterprise:
Using
Social
Enterprise
Appli-
cations
to
Enable
the
Next
Wave
of
Knowledge
Worker
Pro-
ductivity”, http://whitepapers.techrepublic.com.com/abstract.aspx?docid=
391431 [accessed on 31 January 2011]
[4] A. Fu, C. Finn, D. W. Rasmus, R. Salkowitz, ”Social Computing in
the Enterprise Microsoft vision for Business Leaders”, Microsoft White
Paper, 2009
[5] K. Efta, ”Enterprise Social Computing”, http://www.allyis.com/thinking/
Pages/Enterprise-Social-Computing.aspx [accessed on 31 January 2011]
[6] A.
P.
McAfee,
”Enterprise
2.0:
The
Dawn
of
Emergent
Col-
laboration”, http://sloanreview.mit.edu/the-magazine/articles/2006/spring/
47306/enterprise-the-dawn-of-emergent-collaboration/3/ [accessed on 31
January 2011]
9
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[7] D.
Hinchcliffe,
”Top
Ten
issues
in
adopting
Enterprise
Social
Computing”,
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/hinchcliffe/
ten-top-issues-in-adopting-enterprise-social-computing/581 [accessed on
31 January 2011]
[8] G. Antoniou, F. Van Harmelan, ”A Semantic Web Primer”, MIT Press
2008.
[9] FOAF Project, ”http://www.foaf-project.org/”, [accessed on 31 January
2011]
[10] R. Gosh, M. Dekhil, ”Discovering User Proﬁles”, Proceedings of the
18th international conference on World wide web, 2009.
[11] 3GPP TS 29.240, ”3GPP Generic User Proﬁle, Stage 3, Release 6”, http:
//www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/29240.htm [accessed on 31 January
2011]
[12] D. Heckmann, E. Schwarzkopf, J. Mori, D. Dengler,A. Kroner, ”The
user model and context ontology GUMO revisited for future Web 2.0
Extensions”, Contexts and Ontologies: Representation and Reasoning,
pp.37-46
[13] D. Heckmann, A. Krueger, ”A user modeling markup language
(UserML) for ubiquitous computing”, User Modeling 2003 In User
Modeling 2003 (2003), pp. 148-148
[14] J. Stan, E. Egyed-Zsigmond, A. Joly, P. Maret, ”A user proﬁle ontology
for situation-aware social networking” , 3rd Workshop on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Techniques for Ambient Intelligence (AITAmI2008)
[15] IST FP6 Spice project,”http://www.ist-spice.org/” [accessed on 31 Jan-
uary 2011]
[16] B. Aleman-meza , U. Bojars , H. Boley , J.G. Breslin, M. Mochol , L.
Jb Nixon , A. Polleres , A. V. Zhdanova, ”Combining RDF Vocabularies
for Expert Finding”, in proceedings of the 4th European Semantic Web:
Research and Applications , 2007
[17] M. Stankovic, C. Wagner, J. Jovanovic, P. Laublet, ”Looking for Ex-
perts? What can Linked data do for you”, in proceedings of the Workshop
on Linked Data on the Web, April 27, 2010
[18] M.Lopez, M. Vukovic, J. Lardeo, ”People Cloud Service for Enterprise
Crowdsourcing”, in proceeding of IEEE Service Computing, 2010
[19] J. Zhang, J. Tang, J. Li , ”Expert Finding in a Social Network”, in
proc. of Advances in Databases: Concepts, Systems and Applications In
Advances in Databases: Concepts, Systems and Applications, Vol. 4443
(2010), pp. 1066-1069-1069.
[20] N. Capuano, M. Gaeta, F. Orciuoli, P. Ritrovato, ”Semantic Web Fos-
tering Enterprise 2.0” in Proceeding of Intelligent and Software Intensive
Systems, International Conference, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2010.
[21] S. Bertram, M. Boniface, M. Surridge, N. Briscombe, M. Hall-May,
”On-Demand Dynamic Security for Risk-based Secure Collaboration in
Clouds”, in Proceeding of IEEE 3rd international conference on Cloud
Computing, Miami, August 2010.
[22] Cisco
White
Paper,
”Transforming
Enterprise
IT
Services
with
a
Secure,
Compliant
Private
Cloud
Environment”,
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/services/ps2961/ps10364/ps10370/ps11104/
services cloud enablement white paper enterprise.pdf [accessed on 15
January 2011]
[23] Gartner Press Release, ”Gartner’s 2006 Emerging Technologies Hype
Cycle Highlights Key Technology Themes”, http://www.gartner.com/it/
page.jsp?id=495475 [accessed on 5 January 2011]
[24] R. A. Fjellheim, R. B. Bratvold, M. C. Herbert, ”CODIO - Collaborative
Decision making in Integrated Operations”, in proc. of Intelligent Energy
Conference and Exhibition, Society of Petroleum Engineers, 2008.
[25] NESTA, ”Open innovation from marginal to mainstream”, http://www.
nesta.org.uk/library/documents/Open-Innovation-v10.pdf [accessed on 5
January 2011]
[26] ETSI
User
Proﬁle
Management,
http://portal.etsi.org/stfs/STF
HomePages/STF265/STF265.asp [accessed on 15 January 2010]
[27] MAGNET Project,
http://www.telecom.ece.ntua.gr/magnet/index.html
[accessed on 15 January 2011]
[28] A.
Jsang,
”The
right
type
of
trust
for
distributed
systems,”
in
Proc.
of
the
1996
workshop
on
New
security
paradigms
(NSPW
’96).
ACM,
pp.
119-131,
doi:10.1145/304851.304877,
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/304851.304877.
[29] T. Grandison, M. Sloman, ”A Survey of Trust in Internet Applications,”
in proc. of the Communication Surveys and Tutorials, IEEE, Volume 3
Issue 4, pp. 2-16, 2000, doi:10.1109/COMST.2000.5340804.
[30] FoaFRealm Ontology Speciﬁcation, http://www.foafrealm.org/xfoaf/0.1/
index.html}accessed on 15 January 2011]
[31] Semantic Web Rule Language, http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/
[accessed on 15 January 2011]
[32] Ontology Web Language, http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-guide/ [accessed
on 15 January 2011]
[33] B. Motika, U. Sattlerb, R. Studera, Query Answering for OWL-DL with
Rules, in Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World
Wide Web journal. Volume 3, Issue 1, July 2005, Pages 41-60.
[34] Franz Baader, Diego Calvanese, Deborah L. McGuinness, Daniele Nardi,
and Peter F. Patel-Schneider ”The Description Logic Handbook: Theory,
Implementation and Application”, Cambridge University Press, 2002.
[35] Zahid Iqbal, Josef Noll, Sarfraz Alam, Mohammad M. R. Chowdhury,
”SemSUP: Design and Implementation of Semantic Enhance Social-
Aware User Proﬁle”, in proc. of IEEE DEST, 12-15 April 2010, Dubai.
[36] Zahid Iqbal, Josef Noll, Sarfraz Alam, Mohammad M. R. Chowdhury,
”Toward User-centric Privacy-aware User Proﬁle Ontology for Future
Services”, in proceedings of IEEE third International Conference on
Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service (CTRQ 2010),
13-19 June 2010, Athens, Greece, pp. 249 - 254.
[37] Windows Azure - Microsoft’s Cloud Services Platform, http://www.
microsoft.com/windowsazure/ [accessed on 15 January 2011]
[38] Microsoft
SharePoint
Server 2010,
http://sharepoint.microsoft.com/
en-us/Pages/default.aspx [accessed on 15 January 2011]
10
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

