A New Secure Publication Subscription Framework
with Multiple Arbitrators
Shugo Yoshimura
Graduate School of Information Sci.
and Electrical Eng., Kyushu Univ.
Fukuoka, Japan
yoshimura.shugo.822@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Kouki Inoue
Graduate School of Information Sci.
and Electrical Eng., Kyushu Univ.
Fukuoka, Japan
inoue.kouki.882@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Dirceu Cavendish
Graduate School of Eng.
Kyushu Institute of Tech.
Iizuka, Japan
cavendish@ndrc.kyutech.ac.jp
Hiroshi Koide
Research Institute of Info. Tech.,
Kyushu Univ.
Fukuoka, Japan
koide@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—
In this study, to make it easy for everyone to
distinguish the right information from the wrong information,
we suggest a new framework (Secure Publication Subscription
Framework) that deﬁnes the reliability of publishers and provides
it to subscribers. Nowadays, services like blogs and social media
make available large amounts of information easily. On the other
hand, there is a lot of unreliable information on the Internet. It
is difﬁcult to distinguish between true and false information.
This problem is known as fake news and has become a serious
problem. To solve this problem, we suggest a new framework for
publishers and subscribers. The framework allows subscribers
to easily conﬁrm the authenticity of information by registering
publishers and subscribers, and tracking publishers’ reputation
via a reputation score, guaranteeing the quality of the information
that subscribers view. In this study, we show a proof of concept
of a simple Secure Publication Subscription Framework and
conﬁrm that it is possible to implement a framework with
the proposed functionality. We also conﬁrm that the reputation
score can be used as an indicator of the reliability of the
information by using 1000 randomly generated articles within
the framework. In addition, We also proposed three models of
how to incorporate multiple Arbitrators to be considered when
realizing this framework.
Keywords-dissemination; publication; social networking; authen-
ticity of information; reputation score.
I. INTRODUCTION
In our previous research [1], we proposed a Secure Publica-
tion Subscription Framework that allows subscribers to easily
conﬁrm the authenticity of the information and provides the
publisher’s reputation score. It consists of three parts, Pub-
lisher, Arbitrator, and Subscriber. The Subscriber can request
the information challenge to the Arbitrator, and the Arbitrator
veriﬁes data truthfulness. A reputation score describes the Pub-
lishers’ truthfulness and is increased or decreased according to
the authenticity of the Publishers’ information. We conducted
experiments to conﬁrm that the reputation score can be an
This study is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 21K11888 and
Hitachi Systems, Ltd.
indicator of the reliability of the Publishers. In this paper, we
also include a model with multiple Arbitrators, considering the
construction of a practical system. We propose three models
for setting multiple Arbitrators. The merits, demerits, and
conditions under which they should be used are discussed for
each mechanism, reinforcing the realism of this framework.
In recent years, Internet technologies have made great
progress, with the population of Internet users increasing
rapidly. Thanks to services like blogs and social media, anyone
can get a large amount of information easily. Nowadays, we
can be aware of what is happening around the world, no matter
where we are.
On the other hand, there is a lot of unreliable information
on the Internet. It is difﬁcult to distinguish between true
and false information. This problem is known as fake news
and has become a serious problem. Fake news is fabricated
information that mimics news media content in form but not
in organizational process or intent [2]. It is not just a prank,
but a serious problem. As an example, during the 2016 United
status presidential election, fake news was highly used and had
a big impact on Twitter [3] [4].
To solve this problem, we suggest a new framework for
publishers and subscribers. This framework allows subscribers
to easily conﬁrm the authenticity of information by registering
publishers and subscribers, guaranteeing the publisher of the
information that subscribers view, checking the information
challenge from subscribers, and providing the publisher’s
reputation score that increases or decreases as a result of the
authenticity of the information.
This framework consists of three parts, Publisher, Subscriber
and Arbitrator. The main role of the Publisher is publishing
articles or news. The Subscriber registers with the Publisher
and subscribes for publications. The Arbitrator provides the
Publisher’s reputation and veriﬁes the information challenge
from the Subscriber.
The paper is organized as follows. Related work is in-
96
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Secure Publication/Subscriber Architecture
cluded in Section II. Section III describes our proposed
secure publication/subscription reference model. Section IV
describes a proof of concept implementation of the reference
model. Section V describes two experiments used to track the
performance of the proposed publication/subscription model.
Section VI presents the performance results and discussions.
Section VII proposed three models for how to incorporate
multiple arbitrators to be considered when implementing this
framework, and discusses the advantages and disadvantages
of each model. Section VIII summarizes our studies and
addresses directions we are pursuing as follow up to this work.
II. RELATED WORK
Previous research on publication/subscription systems have
covered various areas, such as security, conﬁdentiality and
scalability.
Nakamura and Enokido [5] focused on a peer to peer
publication/subscription model where multiple topics are sup-
ported. In that work, they propose a subscription initialization
protocol to ensure that peers not authorized to have access
to topics do not have access to them. They do not address
the quality of the information exchanged within topics. In
contrast, our framework addresses information quality on a
generic publication/subscription architecture, not necessarily
requiring a peer to peer model.
Salem [6] addresses the problem of authenticating users of
a pub/sub system containing a message broker in a privacy-
preserving way. The proposal supports mutual authentication
in a scalable way, and may be adopted by pub/sub systems
with a broker. In contrast, our work does not focus on
anonymity of publishers/subscribers, although our pub/sub
model could be adapted to include a broker, if necessary.
In Srivatsa [7], a secure event dissemination protocol is
proposed where encryption and authorization keys are used
on top of an IP network that does not provide conﬁdentiality
nor integrity of data. In contrast, although our pub/sub model
supports integrity veriﬁcation of data, our focus is on the
control of the quality of data published.
Bovet and Makse [4] describe an information ranking mech-
anism to ﬁght unreliable (spam) data in a pub/sub system
model with a broker reference architecture. They propose to
rank information as a way to avoid blacklisting. However, their
ranking system is still based on participants’ voting. Although
the purpose of the research is similar to ours, our solution to
control quality of disseminated data is based on an arbitrator
that is supposed to be able to verify data quality on speciﬁc
domains, rather than relying on voting.
III. SECURE PUBLICATION/SUBSCRIPTION
This section describes the operation of the Secure Publica-
tion Subscription Framework in detail.
Figure
1
describes
our
proposed
secure
publica-
tion/subscription system architecture. Multiple publishers
provide signed data contents to consumers, or subscribers.
Data content quality is tracked by an independent quality
arbitrator.
The
quality
arbitrator
provides
publishers’
reputation to subscribers. Also, the arbitrator may receive
data truthfulness challenges from subscribers.
A. Sec Pub/Sub Components
Figure 2 illustrates how Publishers provide signed data
contents. Publishers also produce a digest of the data content
using standard asymmetric cryptography, using their private
key to ensure data integrity.
97
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2. Signed publishing
Figure 3 illustrates publisher/subscriber interfaces. The sub-
scriber requests subscription services from a publisher and
receives the publisher public key used to verify data authen-
ticity. Once the subscription service has been agreed upon, an
information retrieval interface is used to request signed data
from the publisher.
Figure 4 illustrates the subscriber’s data processing of pub-
lished data. Data processing includes data integrity veriﬁcation
and conﬁrmation authorship. The subscriber veriﬁes the digital
signature and the digest of the data, using the publisher public
key. In this process, the subscriber veriﬁes the integrity of the
received data and conﬁrms the data’s authorship.
Figure 5 illustrates publisher reputation tracking feature
of the secure pub/sub framework. Each publisher registers
ﬁrst with the quality arbitrator, upon which its public key is
passed to the arbitrator. The arbitrator then tests the publisher’s
possession of the corresponding private key as part of the reg-
istration. Each successfully registered publisher is associated
with a reputation score metric, which can be queried by both
the publisher itself as well as subscribers.
Figure 6 illustrates the subscriber/quality arbitrator inter-
faces. Subscribers can request publisher’s reputation score
from the arbitrator. In addition, subscribers can challenge
publisher’s trustfulness for each data received. The quality
arbitrator, upon receiving the challenge, veriﬁes data truth-
fulness, and adjusts the publisher reputation score according
with data veriﬁcation status.
B. Reputation Algorithm
The reputation score of a publisher is deﬁned as
score =
the number of correct data
the number of all published data.
However, as the quality arbitrator may not estimate correctly
every and all data published, we introduce a noise model
for data veriﬁcation, as shown in Figure 7. In the model, p
is the probability that a true piece of data be recognized as
false, whereas q represents the probability of a false piece of
information be admitted as true. In the experimental section,
we exemplify the arbitrator score reputation tracking on two
publisher scenarios: i- trusted publisher (all data is truthful);
ii- untrusted publisher; Publisher produces up to 1000 data
pieces (the data can be right or wrong).
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we describe an overview of the implemen-
tation of Publisher, Arbitrator, Subscriber. We implemented
the Publisher and the Arbitrator with Node.js and Express
that is a JavaScript Web framework, and we implemented
the Subscriber with Python3. The Publisher and the Arbitrator
operate like a Web server, independently, and the Subscriber
accesses them according to the scenarios. The versions used
in the implementation are summarized in Table I.
TABLE I
IMPLEMENTATION
Application
Version
Node.js
12
MySQL
5.7
Python
3.9.12
A. Publisher
The Publisher is implemented with Node.js and Express,
and it operates as a Web server. Figure 8 describes the im-
98
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3. Subscription and Information Retrieval
Figure 4. Data Integrity Veriﬁcation
plementation. The Publisher has subscriber registration, login,
some data pages and digital signatures. In addition, it has a
MySQL database that saves the Subscriber’s name and hashed
password. If it receives an HTTP Request from the Subscriber,
it replies with an HTTP Response and sends the data.
B. Arbitrator
The Arbitrator is also implemented with Node.js and Ex-
press, and operates as a Web server. Figure 9 describes
the implementation of the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator receives
the Publisher’s registration, reputation query, as well as in-
formation challenge and request for publisher’s public key.
Additionally, the Arbitrator supports a MySQL database,
which saves the Publisher’s name, password, public key and
Publisher reputation score. Firstly, the Publisher registers its
name, password and public key. In our experiment scenarios,
the Publisher’s information is saved in initial state, so this
step is omitted. If the Subscriber requests the Publisher’s
public key, the Arbitrator responds to it. If the Subscriber
requests the Publisher’s reputation score, the Arbitrator sends
the Publisher’s score. If the Arbitrator receives an information
challenge from the Subscriber, it veriﬁes data truthfulness,
updates the score of the Publisher.
99
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5. Publisher registration and Reputation Tracking
Figure 6. Reputation service interface
Figure 7. Noisy Channel Model
C. Subscriber
The Subscriber is implemented with Python3. It accesses the
Publisher and the Arbitrator according to the different scenar-
ios. During information processing, it veriﬁes the integrity of
received data and conﬁrms data authorship (Figure 10).
V. EXPERIMENT
This section demonstrates the evolution of the reputation
estimator and reputation score for the Secure Publication
Subscription Framework using 1000 randomly generated true
and false data.
The resulting graph shows 3 lines:
• Actual reputation score: the reputation score actually
obtained after going through the Secure Publication Sub-
scription Framework,
• Expected reputation score: the expected value of the
reputation score obtained from the actual truth of the data,
p and q,
100
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 8. Publisher
Figure 9. Arbitrator
• True reputation: proportion of data that is actually true.
We illustrate the secure publication/subscription model with
the following scenarios:
A. Scenario 1
1) Subscribers register and login in with the Publisher
2) Subscribers subscribe to data from the Publisher
3) Subscribers retrieve the data
4) Subscribers send a query about the Publisher’s reputa-
tion to the Arbitrator
In Scenario 1, the credibility of the Publisher’s data is
100%, hence the Publisher’s true reputation is 1. However,
the expected reputation score is
1 − p
because there is a possibility that the Arbitrator will judge it to
be false. In this experiment, the values of the p and q are set to
0.3 to check the reputation scores. To show that the accuracy
of the reputation score does not drop even if the accuracy of
the true/false discrimination is not so high, p and q were set to
fairly low values. We think that there is still room for further
study on this value.
Figure 11 shows the graph of the results for Scenario 1.
Figure 10. Subscriber
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of data
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Reputation score
Actual reputation score
Expected reputation score
T
rue reputation
Figure 11. scenario 1
B. Scenario 2
In scenario 2, Publisher’s data is not always true.
1) Subscribers register and login in with the Publisher
2) Subscribers subscribe to data from the Publisher
3) Subscribers retrieve the data
4) Subscribers issue an information challenge
5) The Arbitrator decides the data as false, and updates the
Publisher’s reputation
6) Subscribers query the reputation of the Publisher from
the Arbitrator
Let a be the probability that the publisher’s data is false. Then,
the expected value of the true reputation is
1 − a,
while the expected reputation score is
a ∗ q + (1 − a) ∗ (1 − p).
In Scenario 2, step 1, 2, 3 are the same as in Scenario 1.
However, the Subscriber carries out an information challenge
in steps 4 and 5. The probability of judging the data to be
101
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of data
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Reputation score
Actual reputation score
Expected reputation score
T
rue reputation
Figure 12. scenario2 data accuracy = 0.8
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of data
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Reputation score
Actual reputation score
Expected reputation score
T
rue reputation
Figure 13. scenario2 data accuracy = 0.6
correct was varied between 0.8 and 0.6, and p and q were 0.3
to check the reputation scores for each case.
The experimental results are shown in Figures 12 and 13.
VI. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, we present the reputation tracking results of
our secure pub/sub system. In scenario 1, the ﬁnal three scores
obtained from the 1000 data points are shown in Table II.
TABLE II
SCENARIO 1
Actual reputation score
0.713
Expected reputation score
0.700
True reputation
1.000
In scenario 2, the ﬁnal three scores obtained from the 1000
data points are shown in Tables III and IV.
From these experimental results, with a sufﬁcient number
of data points and a certain degree of accuracy in determining
TABLE III
SCENARIO 2 DATA ACCURACY = 0.8
Actual reputation score
0.615
Expected reputation score
0.623
True reputation
0.808
TABLE IV
SCENARIO 2 DATA ACCURACY = 0.6
Actual reputation score
0.535
Expected reputation score
0.543
True reputation
0.607
the truth of the data, we see that the actual reputation score
converges to the expected reputation score.
Moreover, we use a noise model for data veriﬁcation, and
we deﬁne the expected reputation to be
a ∗ q + (1 − a) ∗ (1 − p).
So, if p and q are known, the Publisher’s true reputation
can be estimated from the actual score.
These results indicate that the reputation score is closely
related to the probability of the correctness of the data (cred-
ibility) and that the actual reputation score can be calculated
with considerable accuracy if p and q are known.
The result shows that the reputation score is a sufﬁciently
reliable value for easily conﬁrming the credibility of the
Publisher.
VII. INCORPORATION OF MULTIPLE ARBITRATORS
Although we were able to conﬁrm that the reputation score
is related to the credibility of the publisher in the proposed
framework, there are still some problems to be solved in actual
operation. One of the problems is that it is not realistic for a
single arbitrator to handle all of the enormous amounts of
info challenges. To solve this problem, multiple Arbitrators
can be used instead of a single Arbitrator to perform fact-
checking. However, there are various problems associated with
this method, such as the sharing of secret keys and reputation
scores.
In this section, we propose three mechanisms for setting
up multiple Arbitrators. The merits, demerits, and conditions
under which they should be used are discussed for each
mechanism.
A. Basic method
In this model, each arbitrator maintains the same database
that contains the data of all the Publishers, and it is necessary
to rewrite the information in the database in case of registration
of a Publisher, information challenge from a Subscriber, etc.
while synchronizing with the other Arbitrators. The overall
diagram is shown in Figure 14. The explanation is based on
the case of two Arbitrators, but the same operation can be
performed even if the number of Arbitrators is larger.
The operation of Publisher registration is as follows.
102
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 14. basic method
1) The Publisher selects one of the two Arbitrators and
sends its public key and other information.
2) The selected Arbitrator veriﬁes the key. If the key
is invalid, it sends a message to the Publisher and
terminates the operation.
3) If the key is OK, it shares the public key and other
information with the other Arbitrator and updates the
database.
4) The Publisher is notiﬁed that the registration has been
completed.
This is how it works in the case of an information challenge.
1) The Subscriber selects one of the two Arbitrators to
perform the information challenge.
2) The selected Arbitrator veriﬁes the signature and per-
forms a fact check.
3) The result of the fact check and the new reputation score
is shared with the other Arbitrator, and the database is
updated.
4) The results of the fact check and the new reputation
score are sent to the Subscriber.
The advantage of this model is redundancy. If one Arbitrator
becomes unavailable, another Arbitrator can be substituted and
the entire system will not become unavailable. This model is
suitable when availability at any time is important.
There are three possible disadvantages of this model.
• The application address for information challenge by the
Subscriber when the Publisher registers
In the past, there was only one Arbitrator, so there was
no need to worry about where to submit applications, but
in this model, there are two Arbitrators, so the Publisher
and Subscriber must choose one or the other, or submit
to both.
• Sharing of publisher information and reputation score
For example, if one of the Arbitrator performs an infor-
mation challenge and the reputation score of the Publisher
changes, the other Arbitrator will be notiﬁed that the
information challenge was performed and that the Pub-
lisher’s reputation score has changed. The results of the
information challenge and the new reputation score need
to be shared with the other Arbitrator. When updating
the database is necessary, it must be handled in such a
way that it does not cause errors in the synchronization
process.
• Sharing of publisher information and public keys
Arbitrator needs to verify whether an article is written by
the correct Publisher at the time of information challenge.
Therefore, all Arbitrators must maintain the IDs and
public keys of all Publishers, which is inefﬁcient.
B. Combination of speciﬁc Arbitrator and Publishers
This model is a method that eliminates the need to share
reputation scores and keys with other Arbitrators by linking
the Publisher to a speciﬁc Arbitrator. The overall diagram is
shown in Figure 15.
In this model, the Publisher selects which Arbitrator he/she
belongs to and applies for registration to that Arbitrator. In
addition, when making an information challenge, the Sub-
scriber must send it to the Arbitrator to which the Publisher
of the article belongs. Therefore, it is necessary to indicate
which Arbitrator the Publisher belongs to in the article. In this
model, Arbitrator 1 and Arbitrator 2 have different databases.
Each Arbitrator keeps information only on the Publishers who
belong to the respective Arbitrator.
The advantage of this model is that the load on the Ar-
bitrator is well distributed. This makes it suitable for large-
103
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 15. Combination of speciﬁc Arbitrator and Publishers
Figure 16. Arbitrator manager model
scale systems. The accuracy of the information challenge can
be improved because the Publisher can select the appropriate
Arbitrator according to the ﬁeld of expertise and language
used.
The disadvantage of this model is that although there
are multiple arbitrators, only one arbitrator performs fact-
checking, which may bias the judgment of credibility. It also
has no redundancy. Therefore, it is not suitable for cases where
the accuracy of fact-checking or stable availability at any time
is important.
C. Arbitrator manager model
This model sets an ”Arbitrator manager” that accepts access
from publishers and subscribers. Arbitrator manager takes
requests such as registration from Publishers, information
challenge from Subscribers, conﬁrmation of reputation score,
etc. Only the fact check required for the information challenge
is requested and distributed to multiple Arbitrators. The public
key of the Publisher, reputation score, ID, and other informa-
tion are kept by the Arbitrator manager. The conﬁguration is
shown in Figure 16.
Information challenge in this system is performed as fol-
lows.
1) The arbitrator manager receives information challenge
from the Subscriber.
2) The Arbitrator manager veriﬁes the signature and veri-
ﬁes that it is the correct Publisher.
3) The arbitrator manager requests a fact check from ran-
domly selected arbitrators (the number of arbitrators is
arbitrary).
4) Each arbitrator performs fact-checking and returns the
results and reasons to the arbitrator manager.
5) The Arbitrator manager compiles the results of all fact-
checking, returns the results to the Subscriber, and
updates the Reputation score.
In step 3, the number of arbitrators to request fact checks
can be considered according to the situation. Using numerous
arbitrators may improve credibility, but it also increases the
time and cost. In addition, the method of selecting Arbitrators
could be not only random but also selecting appropriate
Arbitrators according to their expertise in the language or ﬁeld
of study.
In step 5, there are several possible ways to compile the
results of all fact checks. One is to simply ask how many
people perform fact checks and reﬂect the number of people
who judged the results to be true in the reputation score,
another is to adopt the result of a majority vote, and another is
to use a majority vote, but if the number of true/false votes are
close, the ﬁnal decision is made by the Arbitrator manager.
The advantages of this model are that the Subscriber does
104
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

not need to select an Arbitrator, but only needs to access the
Arbitrator manager, that there is no problem of sharing and
managing the Publisher’s key and reputation score among mul-
tiple Arbitrators, and that the Arbitrator manager can make the
ﬁnal decision when there are multiple Arbitrators. In addition,
the Publisher’s key and reputation score can be shared and
managed among multiple Arbitrators, and Arbitrators can be
easily added or deleted. Therefore, this model is suitable for
cases where high accuracy is important by having multiple
Arbitrators perform fact-checking.
The disadvantage of this model is that it does not distribute
the load of the Arbitrator manager itself and does not have re-
dundancy. Therefore, it is not suitable for large-scale systems.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we proposed a new framework (Secure Pub-
lication Subscription Framework) that allows subscribers to
check the accuracy of information based on the authenticity
of the publisher’s historical data by checking the reputation
score. In this framework, subscribers can check the reputation
score of the publisher and challenge data reliability if the
information is suspected to be unreliable. We also conducted
experiments on the publisher’s reputation score, and found
that the actual reputation score approximates the expected
value calculated from the probability of correctly judging the
reliability of information. In the actual operation of this frame-
work, it will be necessary to incorporate multiple Arbitrators
from the aspect of load distribution, etc. We have shown
three applicable methods to support multiple Arbitrators, and
discussed their technical feasibility. Each of them has different
merits and can be applied to various situations.
The development of the Internet and social media has
made it very convenient for anyone to easily disseminate
information, but it has also caused a major problem: fake news.
However, there is so much information that we see every day
that it is practically difﬁcult to check all of it to make sure it
is not fake news. Moreover, some of the information is highly
specialized and cannot be conﬁrmed as true or false even if it
is carefully read. Therefore, we believe that there is a demand
for a framework that allows anyone to easily verify whether a
Publisher is impersonating someone else, and to conﬁrm the
authenticity of that Publisher.
As future research, integration of AI(Artiﬁcial Intelligence)
algorithms to automatically identify fake news with expert
arbitrators is a promising path. Although the accuracy of
discriminating fake news has been a challenge for AI technolo-
gies, our expert framework can aid by using AI algorithms to
improve false positives/negatives. Combined with these tech-
nologies, we believe that a robust data reliability framework
for publication/subscription platforms can emerge.
There are still some minor problems. For example, in the
current reputation score algorithm, the score of publishers who
publish a small number of articles is rated higher than the
actual credibility of the articles. This problem can be improved
by setting the score lower when the number of articles is below
a certain level. We believe that improving the speciﬁcation of
these details will make this framework more realistic.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Yoshimura, K. Inoue, D. Cavendish, and H. Koide, “Secure Publication
Subscription Framework for Reliable Information Dissemination.” The
2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology,
Services, and Applications, 2022.
[2] D. M. J. Lazer, M. A. Baum, Y. Benkler, A. J. Berinsky, K. M. Greenhill,
F. Menczer, M. J. Metzger, B. Nyhan, G. Pennycook, D. Rothschild,
M. Schudson, S. A. Sloman, C. R. Sunstein, E. A. Thorson, D. J. Watts,
and J. L. Zittrain, “The science of fake news.” Science, pp. 1094–1096,
2018.
[3] N. Grinberg, K. Joseph, L. Friedland, B. Swire-Thompson, and D. Lazer,
“Fake news on Twitter during the 2016 US presidential election.” Science,
pp. 374–378, 2019.
[4] A. Bovet and H. A. Makse, “Inﬂuence of fake news in Twitter during the
2016 US presidential election.” Nature communications, pp. 1–14, 2019.
[5] S. Nakamura, T. Enokido, and M. Takizawa, “Subscription Initializa-
tion (SI) Protocol to Prevent Illegal Information Flow in Peer-to-Peer
Publish/Subscribe Systems,” 19th International Conference on Network-
Based Information Systems, pp. 42–49, Sept. 2016.
[6] F. M. Salem, “A Secure Privacy-Preserving Mutual Authentication
Scheme for Publish-Subscribe Fog Computing,” 14th International Com-
puter Engineering Conference, pp. 213–218, Dec. 2018.
[7] M. Srivatsa and L. Liu, “Secure Event Dissemination in Publish-Subscribe
Networks,” 27th International Conference on Distributed Computing
Systems (ICDCS ’07), pp. 22–22, June 2007.
105
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

