RMDM – Further Verification of the Conceptual ICT Risk-Meta-Data-Model 
Verified with the underlying Risk Models of COBIT for Risk and COSO ERM 2017 
 
Martin Latzenhofer 1 2 
1 Center for Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
email: martin.latzenhofer@ait.ac.at 
Gerald Quirchmayr 2 
2 Multimedia Information Systems Research Group 
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
email: gerald.quirchmayr@univie.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract— The aim of this article is to introduce an approach 
that integrates the different models and methods currently 
applied 
for 
risk 
management 
in 
information 
and 
communication technologies (ICT). These different risk 
management approaches are usually bound to the organization 
where they are applied, thus staying quite specific for a given 
setting. Consequently, there is no possibility to compare or 
reuse risk management structures because they are individual 
solutions. In order to establish a common basis for working 
with different underlying risk models, a metamodeling 
approach from the area of disaster recovery is used. This 
contribution 
describes 
a 
comprehensive 
mapping 
of 
information artefacts from both the COBIT for Risk and the 
COSO Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) framework in its 
new 2017 version which are then lifted to the meta-level of the 
proposed ICT risk-meta-data-model in order to be able to 
work with them in a consolidated way. Through this mapping 
process, all information artefacts are extracted, consolidated 
and harmonized to minimize the number of relevant objects. It 
has turned out that both the list of consolidated objects and the 
derived describing attributes can in general be incorporated 
into the proposed ICT risk-meta-data-model (RMDM). The 
results show that it is worth examining a data-structure-
oriented approach to develop both a model and a data 
structure for further framework-independent processing. 
Keywords-information and communication technology risk 
management; ICT risk-meta-data-model; COBIT for Risk; 
COSO ERM 2017; metamodeling; UML.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In literature and in practice, many different risk 
management approaches and models can be found for the 
area of information and communication technology (ICT) 
systems. Even within the field of ICT, these approaches and 
models are tailored quite narrowly to specific areas and are 
typically restricted to one single organization. Therefore, the 
information on risk management is usually not comparable 
and transferrable between different organizations. This 
means that the risk model, the established risk management 
method, the concrete process implementation, the required 
input data and the resulting outcome have to be adapted to 
the current requirements of an organization every time the 
risk management process is set up. This often leads to high 
efforts for an organization or a company because they have 
to 
initialize 
and 
re-establish 
the 
risk 
management 
frameworks and related processes each time. It is evident that 
these parameters result in a smaller degree of reusability of a 
given risk management process and less comparability of the 
information obtained from it.  
When interpreting this problem as a pure ICT issue, an 
explicit ICT solution is required. This leads to the main 
research question of this paper, i.e., whether it is possible to 
develop a common risk management model, which is 
flexible enough to be applicable in different fields of the ICT 
area as well as among different organizations. To achieve 
that, it is crucial to define a suitable level of modeling. 
Therefore, the goal of the introduced approach is to design a 
meta-model for ICT risk management. By integrating 
different existing ICT risk management models, which are 
suitable for various fields of application into a meta-model, a 
generic data structure that focuses on common aspects of 
these models can be developed. This umbrella model simply 
obtains data from the underlying specialized models that 
have been defined by different frameworks. In this work, the 
first mapping was performed with the risk model included in 
COBIT for Risk. Subsequently, the same transformation 
method was applied to another risk model that forms part of 
the COSO ERM 2017 version. The approach introduced in 
this article postulates a superordinate meta-model for ICT 
risk management and represents it as a data model, which is 
expressed as a UML class diagram. The iterative 
performance of the mapping strengthens the first result of the 
meta-model and ensures the detailed design of classes, 
attributes, and methods. Considering the application of ICT 
risk management in practice, the state-of-the-art frameworks 
are well-established in the daily business of organizations. 
Consequently, it is not realistic to replace them by a new, 
universally valid model. The ICT risk-meta-data-model 
approach introduced here firstly establishes a common data 
base of risk information gathered by different risk 
management frameworks, secondly makes data retrieved 
from different sources comparable, and thirdly verifies its 
practical applicability by describing real-life use cases, 
shown as an instantiation of the ICT risk-meta-data-model. 
The main goal is to specify the meta-model as a 
substantial data model. Using such a precise data model, the 
meta-model is directly applicable to real-life scenarios and 
enables the implementation of a dedicated ICT application or 
 
91
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

data structure. The data model is directly applicable for ICT 
tasks, provides a concrete ICT data structure where risk 
information can be stored, and is a fundamental (data) basis 
for ICT risk management applications.  
The authors’ conference paper for SECURWARE 2017 
discussed a first comprehensive mapping of a concrete risk 
model – provided by COBIT for Risk – to the ICT risk-meta-
data-model [1]. This present journal paper now integrates a 
second risk model from COSO ERM 2017 into the proposed 
RMDM, which has led to further adjustments and thus a 
more sustainable structure of the RMDM. The originating 
idea of the conceptual ICT risk-meta-data-model was first 
introduced as a draft proposal at DACH Security 2016, in 
Klagenfurt, Austria [2]. 
This article is divided into five main sections. Following 
this introduction, Section II starts with a short introduction of 
the common risk management framework COBIT for Risk, 
which was selected for the first mapping of risk models to 
the meta-model level. It discusses the processes of COBIT 
for Risk which are relevant for managing risk in detail. 
Section II continues to shortly introduce the COSO ERM 
2017 framework as the second risk model that has been 
mapped. Subsequently, it describes the fundamentals of the 
applied metamodeling approach and concludes with 
discussing related work. In Section III, the conceptual data 
model RMDM, described in Unified Modeling Language 
(UML) is introduced. The version of the RMDM that is 
presented in this work represents the current state of the 
model after the two mappings mentioned above have been 
performed. Section IV firstly discusses the mapping of the 
information artefacts, input and output components of 
COBIT for Risk, which are the core of the derived risk 
model, the objects of the proposed ICT risk-meta-data-model 
(RMDM) and the results of the mapping in detail. In line 
with this approach, the second part of Section IV documents 
the mapping of COSO ERM 2017 and the respective 
findings, which resulted in a slight refinement of the UML 
classes. The general objective of this section is to apply the 
postulated meta-model by modeling an instance of two 
concrete risk models. Both mappings represent an analysis of 
whether modeling at the meta level works in general. The 
concluding Section V outlines the results and proposes 
further research that is needed to refine the ICT risk-meta-
data-model (RMDM). 
II. 
FUNDAMENTALS 
Typically, organizations have a continuous need to 
manage the risks in their business environment. Such a need 
due to extrinsical factors is often motivated by legal 
requirements. Organizations have to ensure compliance with 
regulations, especially relating to finance and public 
accounting. Therefore, the responsible person implements 
risk management – in this case limited to the ICT area – by 
doing research and building upon already existing risk 
management 
structures. 
Special 
risk 
management 
frameworks that are applicable to ICT, e.g., International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) 31000 [3], National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special 
Publication (SP) 800-30/-37/-39 [4] [5] [6], Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) 
Enterprise 
Risk 
Management 
(ERM) 
[7], 
Management of Risk [8] or COBIT for Risk [9], have proven 
to be effective within one single organization. These 
frameworks set up a baseline in an organization when it 
comes to implementing risk management structures. This 
usually generates isolated solutions. The different risk 
management frameworks are characterized by relatively 
similar objects and terms but very different artefacts, which 
cannot be related, compared, or summarized. One important 
issue is to harmonize the semantic differences between the 
various risk management frameworks, and even within one 
single framework. 
A. COBIT for Risk 
COBIT for Risk [9] is a special publication edited by 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA, since 2008 the acronym itself is used as a brand 
name) [10] and is entirely based on Control Objectives for 
Information and Related Technology (COBIT, since version 
5 only the acronym itself is used as a brand name) 5.0 [11], a 
framework for governance and management of Enterprise 
ICT, especially for the interaction between ICT and classic 
business objectives. COBIT for Risk is a comprehensive 
guide for risk professionals. It elaborates the driving aspects 
for risk management in COBIT – principles and enablers – 
and extends the framework with risk scenarios. Furthermore, 
it provides suggestions for appropriate response measures 
using a combination of enablers. It has – similar to ISO 
31000 [3] – a two-tier approach: the risk management 
perspective puts the high-level principles into practice and 
the risk function view seeks to identify relevant COBIT 
processes, which support the risk management, as depicted 
in Figure 1. In this figure, the two core risk processes are 
shown in light blue, the other twelve key supporting 
processes are colored in dark red. 
The COBIT for Risk framework was chosen as a first 
candidate for the intended mapping because of its good 
balance between general applicability for risk management 
topics and very specific statements in form of concrete 
control objectives for risk management. It definitely provides 
much more topic-oriented reference-points than standard 
COBIT. The framework is clearly structured and its 
description is not too narrative. A highly narrative 
framework might increase the effort for identifying class 
objects. In summary, all these characteristics were 
considered to be good prerequisites for the practical mapping 
work. Other frameworks, e.g., ISO 31000 [3], might be too 
generic in order to derive substantial class objects to a 
sufficient extent or, e.g., NIST [4] [5] [6], is too text-heavy 
for an efficient proof of concept. Consequently, all the other 
frameworks are rather suitable for verifying the ICT risk-
meta-data-model in a more advanced state of development. 
92
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
B. COSO ERM 2017 
The first version of the “Enterprise Risk Management – 
Integrated Framework” (ERM) [12] was published by the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO) [13] in 2004 and was an extension of 
their first “Internal Control – Integrated Framework” 
publication from 1992 [14]. In the middle of 2017, COSO 
fundamentally revised the comprehensive ERM framework 
in cooperation with PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) [15] to 
address the raising complexity of risk in the business 
environment. The ERM framework aims at providing 
guidance to managers on how to handle different kind of 
risks in an appropriate way. The main objective of this 
framework is to offer managers specific methods and 
techniques for managing risks in their organization and to 
provide them with different use cases. 
In general, the COSO ERM 2017 framework emphasizes 
the relationship of risk management activities with the 
organization’s strategy, business objectives and current 
performance in order to raise the value that is derived from 
the organization’s mission, vision, and core values. This 
requires consistent risk management activities at all levels of 
the enterprise. The main objective is to establish a balance 
between risk and performance by developing a coherent risk 
profile based on an appropriate risk appetite that depends on 
the individual situation of the organization on the market. 
Typically, the performance targets and risks vary to a certain 
degree, which is referred to as tolerance in performance and 
risk capacity of the organization. Consequently, the 
organization seeks to reach the best possible performance 
within the given restrictions over time. 
The framework itself is a set of 20 principles that are 
categorized by five interrelated components, which are 
illustrated in Figure 2. The first component “Governance & 
Culture” addresses the setup of the organization, which 
includes the organizational structure, the definition of core 
values and of behavioral expectations, and the organization’s 
reliability and accountability. The second component 
“Strategy & Objective Setting” defines input requirements 
for the risk management in the organization: e.g., business 
context, risk appetite, alternative strategies and business 
objectives. Once the risk management framework has been 
set up, the organization can conduct the operational risk 
management process, which is described in the component 
“Performance”. In this process, the risk manager identifies, 
assesses and prioritizes risks, implements risk responses and 
develops an oversight portfolio view of all risks. In the 
“Review & Revision” component, the risk manager reviews 
the changes in risk and performance. The last component, 
“Information, Communication & Reporting”, deals with 
communication and reporting issues. 
Although this framework follows a typical top-down 
approach, it differentiates between the different levels in an 
organization – i.e., governance and strategic level (the first 
two components) and operational level (especially the third 
component). However, it also addresses the guiding 
processes for reviewing the risks in the fourth and 
communication in the fifth component; as it is also done in  
 
Figure 1. Supporting COBIT processes for the risk function [9, p. 35] 
93
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2. COSO ERM 2017 Risk Management Components and Principles [15, p. 21, Fig. 5.1 / pp. 22, Fig. 5.2] 
ISO 31000, COBIT for Risk, and the relevant NIST special 
publications. The 20 principles provide a good set of key 
principles which management has to follow in order to 
establish mature risk management processes in the 
organization. COSO ERM 2017 discusses the problem of 
cascading risks, continuous changes of risks and the required 
adjustments of the risk profiles and established responses, 
and it covers cost implications. 
The COSO ERM 2017 framework was mainly chosen as 
the second candidate for the mapping because of its dense 
content and because its narrative description is similar to 
COBIT for Risk. Additionally, the new version of COSO 
ERM from June 2017 provides an up-to-date perspective on 
the current business complexity and risk management 
measures. Consequently, COSO ERM 2017 represents a 
suitable framework for further verifying and developing the 
RMDM after the first verification by the risk model of 
COBIT for Risk. 
C. Metamodeling Approach 
The semantic meaning of a risk model must be 
transferred to the meta-level. A formal, scientific approach to 
build a consistent umbrella is missing. The meta-modeling 
process helps to create a common basis for standardization. 
The instantiation procedure of the meta-model down to the 
distinct risk management framework provides rules for 
transferring data from a concrete model up to the meta-
model, and is in that way working as a normalization 
process. The first advantage of representing the risk-meta-
model as data model is the immanent design of a structured 
data management based on a semantic model. It must be 
verified whether the general concepts can be divided from 
content-specific 
aspects 
in 
such 
a 
way 
that 
the 
 
interaction between meta- and model-level still remains 
efficient. The data model works as a structure model and 
holds static information. The risk management process and 
corresponding workflows change this data dynamically, 
providing a data model for the whole risk management life 
cycle. However, this article focuses on the verification of the 
basic content and on whether the data model can process the 
information. In addition, the meta-model approach for 
standardizing risk management information can be implicitly 
verified by setting up the data model, at least for those risk 
models which have been analyzed earlier. Certainly, it is no 
evidence for its comprehensiveness that all existing risk 
models still fit in the proposed meta-model. In fact, some 
models might be unsuitable for mapping. However, re-
performing the transformation process for a specific number 
of widely accepted risk frameworks ensures that the meta- 
model is sufficiently applicable for risk management tasks in 
organizations. 
In the context of a metamodeling hierarchy according to 
Karagiannis and Kühn [16] (cf., Figure 3), the ICT risk-
meta-data-model is situated on Level 2 – Metamodel, 
described by the Metamodeling Language UML. The 
selected risk management framework, e.g., COBIT for Risk 
[9], corresponds to Model on Level 1. It is described by 
means of the published framework, here in a semi-narrative 
way. The underlying Original itself can in fact be referred to 
as Level 0, and represents the organization’s risk 
management structure facing a concrete risk situation. On the 
top of the hierarchy, the Meta²-Model on Level 3 defines the 
structural elements of the general UML class diagram. The 
Meta²-Modeling Language can be understood as the 
modeling language UML used to describe the ICT risk-meta-
data-model. 
94
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3. Metamodeling hierarchy [16] 
D. Related Work 
A lot of academic work has been published on selecting 
the best risk model or the most promising method to identify 
and assess ICT risks. Literature research on the general 
subject of risk management modeling has shown that there 
are certain common issues that are typically encountered. 
One issue is the complex application field which the 
conventional risk management models cannot satisfactorily 
cope with. Typical examples for difficulties are cascading 
effects of risks, a broad diversity of possible risks not being 
able to cover the complete risk landscape or even a high 
degree of uncertainty. Some recent works deal with ICT 
risks in established domains which remain hard to manage, 
e.g., 
outsourcing, 
project 
management, 
software 
development; relatively novel innovative environments like 
cloud computing, internet of things (IoT) with still diffuse 
risk implications; or previously independent and even stand-
alone domains which are now merging, e.g., safety and 
security or cyber-physical systems (CPS) in relation to ICT. 
It should be noted that risk management structures and 
measures, including many different and widely accepted 
models, have already been established in organizations. 
However, they tend to struggle with different types of 
models because in many cases none of them fits their 
individual requirements completely.  
At least four different approaches can be identified. The 
first category of scientific approaches the proposal of “yet 
another 
new/integrated/simplified/formally 
structured 
model”. The following citations refer to representative 
examples for this category that were found during the 
literature research and are definitely not exhaustive: e.g., for 
cloud computing risks [17], enterprise risk [18], outsourcing 
risks [19], or even general information security risks [20], 
which may be appropriate for the very specific situations and 
circumstances for which these models have been developed 
for. However, this interpretation generates even more models 
and leads to the fact that models are not universally 
applicable. A second approach of the scientific community is 
to apply combinations of different already existing models or 
methods to get a more accurate and/or comprehensive result. 
A representative example for outsourcing can be found in 
[21], for project management in [22], or risk mitigation 
decisions in [23]. Thirdly, digging a bit further into the 
inherent structure of risk models, there are other remarkable 
approaches which link different methodological approaches 
together, e.g., simulation, empirical studies and/or modeling 
approaches [24] [25]. The fourth strategy – which seems to 
be the most promising approach for the present task – is to 
generalize the models and to transfer them to a superordinate 
meta-level. Obviously, meta-modeling is an interesting 
approach when all the challenges discussed in the previous 
paragraph arise: firstly, a complex and diverse application 
domain (e.g., ICT risk management) which cannot be 
analyzed satisfactorily with one single model among the 
variety 
of 
different 
and 
already 
applied 
structural 
frameworks (e.g., all the widely accepted risk management 
frameworks like ISO 31000, NIST, COSO, COBIT for 
Risk). However, the risk models do not fit in every aspect 
(e.g., strategic or operational, business or technical risks) and 
sometimes even combinations of different approaches (e.g., 
modeling or simulation, quantitative or semi-quantitative if 
possible versus qualitative approaches) lead to different and 
partially contradictory results. In fact, meta-modeling 
promises good results when a methodological superstructure 
does not exist. Representative contributions for this approach 
which address the inherent complexity of specific domains 
can be identified for e.g., safety and security [26], big data 
[27], cyber-physical environments [28], or even information 
system security risk management [29]. 
The approach introduced in this article is explicitly 
inspired by similar work in the field of disaster recovery [30] 
[31], which introduced a meta-model integrating data from 
different natural disaster scenarios. Othman and Beydoun 
have implemented a data model in order to store data 
relevant to disaster recovery and have conducted a proof of 
concept for two natural disaster incidents of recent history, 
the Christchurch earthquake and Fukushima nuclear incident 
[31]. In this article, their approach is shifted into the ICT risk 
management domain while verifying whether it is a 
sustainable method for risk management. 
III. 
ICT RISK-META-DATA-MODEL (RMDM) 
This section introduces the proposed ICT risk-meta-data-
model and its current status of development up to now, 
followed by a discussion about the main components. 
A. General Requirements 
One of the main objectives of the conceptual ICT risk-
meta-data-model is to record key information of any 
underlying risk model in a way that it can be compared, 
consolidated, merged and subsequently analyzed from an 
abstract meta-perspective. This approach ensures that risk 
management models that have already been implemented in 
organizations in practice continue to be used, at least the 
most commonly applied frameworks. Furthermore, this 
abstraction step reduces the information risk managers work 
with to the really essential requirements needed to establish 
the risk management framework and to perform the risk 
management process. This transformation from the risk 
model to the more abstract and general meta-level must 
follow specific rules and definitely causes some information 
loss. To succeed it is necessary to strike a viable balance 
between the appropriate level of detail of the information 
content – by selecting only the key data, combining it 
95
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

semantically correct and transferring it to the meta-level – 
and the complexity level of the risk-meta-data-model. The 
authors assume that an adequate level of abstraction is 
reached when three to four structurally different risk models 
can be consistently represented as instances of the ICT risk-
meta-data-model. This iterative refinement of the risk-meta-
data-model through the analysis of different underlying risk 
models enhances its sustainability and robustness for 
practical application. The major advantage of formulating the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model as an ICT data model is that this 
allows organizations and companies to apply it in practice. 
By depicting the meta-model as unified modeling language 
(UML) classes diagram the modeler can immediately 
generate the corresponding data structure, implementing a 
demonstrator, which can serve as a proof of concept. 
Consequently, 
the 
ICT 
risk-meta-data-model 
itself 
constitutes an ICT application that can be applied in practice. 
In other words, the ICT problem to merge data from different 
risk models requires an ICT solution, which can immediately 
be applied by IT means. 
The first draft of the ICT risk-meta-data-model was 
developed based on literature research on different risk 
management frameworks, which all propagate distinct risk 
models but use the same or similar terms. The literature 
research also indicated that there is a need to reflect on the 
exact meaning of the used terms, even if they seem to be 
identical. A feasible mapping of the concepts used in 
different risk models is a prerequisite for successfully raising 
the key information of the risk model up to the meta-level. 
This requires the definition of consistent concepts on the 
meta-level in order to prevent overlapping of concepts and 
resulting misinterpretations. However, it depends on the 
specific framework whether the risk model can be derived 
directly from the publications. ISO 31000 [3], for example, is 
formulated in a generic way, thus leaving room for 
interpretation. COBIT for Risk [9], does in contrast provide 
very specific control objectives for the key and supporting 
processes on a more detailed level. This characteristic was 
the main reason for selecting COBIT for Risk for the first 
mapping of a risk model to the ICT risk-meta-data-model.  
The conceptual model aims at reflecting both the 
fundamental framework establishment and the operative risk 
management process that covers the risk management 
lifecycle. This dual perspective is a key feature of many 
frameworks and easily visible in, e.g., ISO 31000 [3], NIST 
[4] [5] [6], or even COBIT for Risk [9] or COSO ERM 2017 
[15]. A core aspect was to identify appropriate objects, 
which represent the focus points within the risk management 
structure. These objects are further described by dedicated 
attributes, which are the variables for storing the relevant risk 
management information. These attributes can be changed, 
modified, extended, and adapted by specific methods. By 
setting up this data structure it is possible to transfer all 
relevant risk management data from the origin model up to 
the ICT risk-meta-data-model. A very first draft of the 
modeling was already introduced in [2]. This article included 
a first draft of the ICT risk-meta-data-model and a possible 
approach for a proof of concept by applying COBIT for Risk 
as the underlying risk model. The first version of the ICT 
risk-meta-data-model was the result of a creative process. 
This process followed the life cycle of risk management: 
starting with the identification of risk factors, followed by 
the analysis of the resulting risk by linking it to the current 
challenges that the organization has to cope with, and finally 
the evaluation of the risk. Furthermore, the data-model may 
represent the monitoring of established treatment activities. 
As a consequence, the data model fulfills the essential 
requirements of the risk management process as suggested in 
[3]. The next step was to perform a precise mapping of 
information artefacts propagated by COBIT for Risk [9] as 
described in Section IV A and B. The logical next step was 
to repeat the mapping with another fully applicable risk 
management framework. The selected COSO ERM 2017 
framework provides a similarly dense narrative description, 
which was a good prerequisite for the further verification of 
the RMDM. Another reason for choosing this framework 
obviously was that the publishing organization COSO 
thoroughly updated it in June 2017. The second mapping and 
its results are discussed in Section IV C and D. 
B. Main Components 
Figure 4 shows the status quo of the advanced ICT risk-
meta-data-model (RMDM) after the second mapping. 
Classes or relationships written in italics are represented in 
the UML diagram. The RMDM can be divided in five main 
components. On an abstract level, all classes are derived 
from class Organisation and further divided in Input, 
Process, Output and Actor. These classes of the first 
component introduce a fundamental structure to group the 
other classes within the risk management process. This 
construction 
with 
generalization 
relationships 
both 
introduces an additional inherent structure of the data model 
and applies generalization and inheritance of attributes by 
superior classes in order to cope with the rising complexity. 
A particularity of the class Actor has to be underlined. The 
class Actor represents all persons and their responsibilities 
taken over by organizational entities, persons or roles, e.g., 
by the risk manager. Actor also owns a Process. However, 
especially the class Process should also be able to 
summarize all important processes, policies, standards and 
guidelines that form the operational environment. It is not 
only an abstract data structure, but rather a hybrid class. 
The operative part of the conceptual model and the linked 
classes can be further divided into three virtual processing 
parts, which are not explicitly included in the UML diagram 
in Figure 4 but structurally grouped in line with the virtual 
workflow collecting input, processing and controlling risks. 
In the first phase, which summarizes all the different input 
factors and puts them into a common context, the conceptual 
model shows the detailed causal chain from the single risk 
factors to the identified risk, which is in fact a prerequisite 
for performing an operational risk management process. This 
architectural characteristic enables a possible ex-post 
analysis or simulation by means of the provided background 
information in the input classes to examine their practical 
influences on the final risk. The resulting risk is only a 
product of its input factors. The appealed causal chain starts 
on the left side with a pure Hazard, which threatens a 
 
96
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 4. Conceptual ICT risk-meta-data-model (RMDM) described as UML class diagram after the COSO ERM 2017 mapping [own research] 
 
 
particular Vulnerability, resulting in the associated class 
Threat. Hence, the Threat explicitly affects an Asset of the 
organization, leading to one main risk factor Impact, which 
is also designed as an associated class. The Threat has also 
some Probability to materialize, which is the second 
immediate main risk factor. Typically, the Risk can be 
characterized by its essential components Impact and 
Probability, which are often shown in a risk matrix and here 
designed as composition of both risk factors. However, the 
Risk reflects only the identified risks and does not yet link to 
a detailed assessment, which the organization is required to 
do as a next step. 
The second phase of the risk management process further 
processes the risk. It involves the assessment of the 
previously identified raw risks and linking them with the 
given influencing factors and framework conditions. 
Accordingly, the class Risk is a composition for 
AssessedRisk. This class records all necessary evaluations of 
the risks. A Measure treats AssessedRisk, but there is no 
indication whether these measures are really applied in this 
stage. This is indicated by the associated class Treatment. In 
this way, a gradual filter starting from Risk, via Measure to 
Treatment can be applied. This filter – which could also be 
interpreted as a second causal chain in the same sense as the 
risk factors discussed above – allows focusing only on those 
risks, which should be actively addressed in the risk 
management process and further reduces the complexity of 
the model to the high-risk areas according to the individual 
risk level. Consequently, all selected Treatments are 
managed by MitigationManagement during their whole 
lifecycle. The class MitigationManagement represents the 
fundamental risk portfolio from a manager’s point of view. 
Thus, this class represents the core structure for performing 
the risk management process within the defined risk 
management framework over time. After the identification of 
risks, this stage effectively reduces the amount of relevant 
risk on which the organization should focus. Finally, 
management will control the remaining risks by applying a 
97
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

continuous risk management process. The underlying idea is 
that the relevant risks which need ongoing attention will be 
filtered, reduced in their amount and monitored by a cyclic 
quality process that forces the organization to regularly look 
at the remaining risks.  
The third stage of the operative risk management process 
represented in the ICT risk-meta-data-model addresses the 
management’s governance and its supporting elements, e.g., 
key output, risk events, or metrics. The class Governance 
establishes requirements for the class MitigationManagement 
and subsumes all the influencing factors to set up the 
appropriate 
risk 
environment. 
It 
holds 
management 
information about finance, vision, mission, business 
objectives, strategy, culture and business context, risk model, 
attitude, appetite and tolerance etc. It is supported by 
ongoing Changes, which subsume all ancillary activities that 
support risk management activities, i.e., projects, changes. 
The class Categorization addresses all forms of structuring, 
e.g., categories, graduations, risk scales, and cluster 
definitions in the context of risk management efforts, and 
provides additional structure, while it leaves enough leeway 
for individual metrics. Consequently, the Categorization 
class has relationships with all the classes that need such a 
structuring. It is also possible to integrate external 
catalogues, frameworks, and regulations into the risk 
management model through the interface class Catalogue. 
The intention of this part is to reflect on the necessary high-
level governance of risk management in the responsible 
organization. 
The fifth and final part covers all aspects that are relevant 
for documentation and measuring performance. This fifth 
part enables to take a current snapshot of the risk situation 
and forms a new starting point for a further cycle of the risk 
management process. Additionally, this part also provides 
concrete information on actual risk, which helps to achieve a 
higher maturity degree of the risk management lifecycle. 
Documentation in any form, especially Reports or (Key 
Risk) Indicators, has specifying classes, which are 
implemented as aggregations from the generic structure 
(Documentation) 
to 
more 
quantifiable 
information 
(Indicator). Documentation covers all documents that are 
relevant for governance decisions and thus creates an 
information 
repository. 
Metrics 
with 
specified 
CalculationRules stores all kinds of calculation bases, e.g., 
for Balanced Scorecard, Key Risk Indicators, or Process 
Performance. This ICT risk-meta-data-model also includes 
an important feedback loop. The class RiskEvent ensures the 
remediation of risk information based on new findings due to 
incidents based on real-life incidents. In combination with 
the class Frequency, the quantification of already suffered 
risk events enables the adjustment of the underlying risk 
factors, thus increasing the accuracy of further assessments. 
Finally, intended self-referencing relationships for the 
classes Categorization, Threat, Impact, Risk, AssessedRisk, 
and Treatment enable further substantial analysis, e.g., 
multidimensional assessments of cascading effects if needed. 
These five main parts of the ICT risk-meta-data-model 
interlock with one another. Thus, both the continuous 
elements of the risk management process and the different 
perspectives of operative process performance and strategic 
embedding in the organization – in fact the apparent two-tier 
approach of the discussed risk management frameworks can 
be reflected in the model.  
IV. 
MAPPING 
A. Method for the COBIT for Risk Mapping 
The critical success factor for the proper functioning of 
the meta-modeling idea is the coherent transformation of the 
information of the selected risk model up to the meta-model 
while at the same time sufficiently reducing the information 
content. This transformation is in fact a mapping of all the 
relevant pieces of information that is necessary for 
performing risk management with the selected risk model. 
The risk model COBIT for Risk was selected as the first 
proof of concept for the metamodeling approach. It provides 
an appropriate degree of concreteness in order to verify the 
draft concept that was first introduced in [2]. 
In a first step, both risk management core processes 
Evaluate, Direct and Monitor (EDM) 03 “Ensure Risk 
Optimisation” – the setup of the risk management 
environment in the organization – and Align, Plan and 
Organise (APO12) “Manage Risk” – the risk management 
process as discussed above – were analyzed. All information 
artefacts mentioned as input or output objects and in the 
description of the risk specific activities were extracted to a 
list. These have a different degree of concreteness, which 
was also assessed. This step was repeated for each of the 
other twelve supporting processes, which are marked in dark 
red in Figure 1. This finally resulted in a list of 1619 
identified information artefacts, but this list included 
duplicates, synonyms, and different notations of the same 
objects, cf. Figure 5. In a second step, all these entries were 
consolidated in order to even out differences and reduce the 
amount of information artefacts for further analysis. All 
entries were transformed into a consolidated object, in fact 
performing a form of abstraction. This transformation 
resulted in a list of 26 objects, which corresponds to the 
column ‘synonym’ in Figure 5. The purpose of these objects 
was to set up a data store, leading to a UML class at the end 
of this process. This abstraction process was conducted as 
iterative working step because the consolidated object list 
initiated continuous improvement actions in order to get a 
coherent list for the subsequent steps. Once the list of 
consolidated objects had been verified, the consolidated 
object list was mapped to the classes in the UML diagram. In 
a third step, the class attributes were revised so that the 
essential data for risk management fit properly into the 
appropriate classes.  
B. Results of the COBIT for Risk Mapping 
The mapping process showed that it is generally possible 
to transform the essential risk management data from COBIT 
for Risk up to the meta-level. Small amendments to the draft 
version of the ICT risk-meta-data-model were necessary 
after completing the mapping process, e.g., the introduction 
of the new class Changes, which reflects all current change 
management activities in the considered organization. The 
98
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

transformation is highly dependent on how concrete the 
specification of the risk model and its components is. If the 
risk model leaves too much room for interpretation 
inconsistencies may appear in the instantiation of the ICT 
meta-data-risk-model itself. This means that activities 
without inputs or outputs should be scrutinized. Almost all 
inputs, outputs and standard COBIT 5 activities specified in 
the twelve risk supporting processes were unsuitable for the 
mapping. Thus, certain problems are expected when using 
ISO 31000 as base risk model because of its highly generic 
approach. This means that not every risk management 
framework may be suitable for the mapping due to the 
different levels of detail of the different frameworks. 
Furthermore, the framework must provide storage of all kind 
of documentation that supports the functioning of the 
management system. Currently, the meta-model includes the 
dedicated class Documentation for this issue. It was 
originally intended only for risk management documentation, 
but it has a broader scope, providing a repository for all 
documentation produced by the applied management system. 
 
 
Figure 5. Excerpt of the list of information artefacts  
of COBIT for Risk [own research] 
The first mapping extends the proof of concept that was 
outlined in [2] to all affected risk management processes of 
the COBIT for Risk framework. Some small adjustments of 
the first draft of the ICT risk-meta-data-model were made, 
but no fundamental changes of the inherent structure of the 
classes or relationships were necessary. This shows that the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model is able to represent and store the 
necessary information for applying the COBIT for Risk 
framework in principle. 
C. Method for the COSO ERM 2017 Mapping 
In order to further develop the RMDM in the version of 
[1], a second mapping with another risk model is performed. 
The objective of this second round of mapping is to verify 
the defined class structure and refine the attributes, which 
were established after the COBIT for Risk mapping. This 
second mapping aims at ensuring a consistent structure of the 
RMDM for both underlying frameworks. If this second 
mapping was also successful, the RMDM could be applied at 
least for those two risk models, would be more robust, more 
mature and expected to be applicable in a more flexible way 
to other frameworks. The assumption is that the adjustments 
which will be needed to integrate a second risk model should 
be limited. On the other hand, it is important that the 
modifications are done carefully because the class structure 
and especially its attributes must be valid for both risk 
models. 
In contrast to COBIT for Risk, which is in fact a 
specification of a broad, comprehensive governance 
framework for risk management, the whole framework 
COSO ERM 2017 [15] is explicitly designed for risk 
management purposes. This implies that all five components 
and the 20 principles – as depicted in Figure 2 – had to be 
analyzed. According to the applied mapping method, all 
information artefacts mentioned in these principles have 
been identified in the narrative description of the framework, 
finally resulting in 1 935 entries. This list, which is 
illustrated in Figure 6, has the same structure as the list that 
was generated for the COBIT for Risk mapping earlier, so 
that the entries can be easily compared later on. It was 
remarkable that the information artefacts could be directly 
mapped to an existing class object that already existed in the 
RMDM. Consequently, the consolidating intermediate stage 
for categorizing, harmonizing and finally minimizing of the 
information artefacts was not needed. Additionally, the first 
mapping was helpful to leave no room for interpretation. It 
also ensured a kind of quality control in order to avoid 
inconsistencies during both mapping processes. Furthermore, 
it showed that the class structure already has a stable form 
and is ready for a third risk model integration. 
D. Results of the COSO ERM 2017 Mapping 
Since the attributes had already been aligned to COBIT 
for Risk, the necessary adjustments to the attribute’s names 
had to be done very carefully. Therefore, no attributes were 
deleted and there was no need for this either. The main 
objective was to provide sufficiently clear mapping paths 
from an information artefact on the risk model level to a 
class attribute on the meta-level, regardless of whether 
COBIT for Risk or COSO ERM 2017 was applied. The 
second mapping resulted in small adjustments in the names 
of attributes and even in additional attributes. The detailed 
changes that were introduced to the RMDM as a result of the 
COSO mapping were as follows. A self-referenced 
relationship of the class Risk depicts a risk inventory. A 
direct relationship between Actor and Process reflects the 
process ownership. An additional relationship of the 
Documentation and the Report class to the Categorization 
class helps to better categorize the different types of 
documentation 
and 
reports. 
The 
further 
attribute 
‘identification source’ defines the origin of the different risk 
factors. More attributes were added to the classes 
Organisation, 
Governance, 
MitigationManagement, 
AssessedRisk and Risk. It can be argued that the reason for 
these additional attributes is the stronger top down approach 
of COSO ERM 2017 compared to COBIT for Risk. The 
additional attributes provide points of references for vision, 
mission, risk attitude, risk model, culture, risk capacity, risk 
portfolio, current [assigned] resources, core values, size, type 
99
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and level of entity. The current status of the RMDM after 
the second mapping is shown in Figure 4, which can be 
compared with its previous version in [1, Fig. 3], if needed. 
It is remarkable that the concepts of terms and definitions 
used in the COSO ERM 2017 framework are more 
consistent than in the COBIT for Risk, resulting in fewer 
synonyms and discrepancies in terms and notations and 
making it easy to find double entries. The terms were applied 
in a highly consistent way throughout the whole framework. 
Therefore, it was much easier than in the first mapping to 
perform the consolidation phase. It was almost a straight-
forward process to select the right class objects from the 
RMDM. A key difference compared to COBIT for Risk is 
that COSO ERM 2017 starts with the risk itself and does not 
even analyze the previous risk factors before. Consequently, 
451 identified information artefacts could be subsumed 
under the Governance class, as many as 66 remained to be 
subsumed under the class MitigationManagement and 223 
under the AssessedRisk class. In total, this amounts to almost 
42 percent of all identified information artefacts of COSO 
ERM 2017. In contrast, in COBIT for Risk the number of 
assigned artefacts to these three classes amounts to only 304 
information artefacts.  
Finally, it shows that all the risk management 
information that is necessary for applying the COSO ERM 
2017 risk model can also be covered by the existing RMDM 
classes. Due to the fact that the terms and definitions in 
COSO ERM 2017 are more robust than in COBIT for Risk, 
some light adjustments of the attribute names make sense 
and are important. Based on the higher consistency of terms 
and definitions in the COSO ERM 2017, both the RMDM 
classes and their attributes pass a kind of consistency check 
when these adjustments of attributes are performed. 
E. Further Research 
Further 
research 
is 
still 
needed 
to 
verify 
the 
transformation process with two or three other risk 
management frameworks. This verification should definitely 
be done for ISO 31000 [3], despite the above-mentioned 
expectation that the framework will be too generic. The 
suitability of ISO 31000 should be verified because of its 
outstanding importance as a world-wide standard. The NIST 
Special Publications 800-30/-37/-39 [4] [5] [6] also provides 
the more detailed content that is necessary for the mapping 
and is thus a good candidate. Moreover, its importance in the 
US strongly suggest an integration into the RMDM. If it is 
possible to map their information requirements in the same 
way as it has been done for COBIT for Risk and COSO 
ERM 2017, the ICT risk-meta-data-model can be applied at 
least for these four risk management frameworks, in this way 
providing an adequately sustainable meta-model solution.  
However, the top down approach of the COSO ERM 
2017 mapping reveals the inherent problem of adequately 
reflecting abstract concepts of terms like culture, code of 
conduct, behavior, expectations or business context, which 
are not easy to present in the data structure. For the moment, 
all these aspects have been subsumed under culture and it has 
not been decided yet how to integrate them into the data 
structure in more detail. 
If the mapping process has been applied several times 
and the attributes are almost stable (except for a refinement 
of the definite data types and the visibility properties), the 
methods can be refined next. The methods of a class should 
be able to support the complete lifecycle of the concerning 
attributes. The third area in which refinements are needed is 
the relationships. It must be verified whether a direct data 
exchange between the different objects is needed or 
transitive relationships achieve the same result. Once these 
 
 
Figure 6. Excerpt of the list of information artefacts of COSO ERM 2017 [own research] 
100
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

three research questions have been solved, the ICT risk-
meta-data-model can be implemented as a first demonstrator, 
thereby starting the technical verification process. Analyzing 
these research questions is an ongoing process in order to 
verify the applicability and utility of the ICT risk-meta-data-
model.  
In the currently ongoing CERBERUS project of the 
Austrian National Security Research Program KIRAS [32], 
the RMDM can serve as a basis for the required overall data 
model. The objective is that the CERBERUS model holds 
static data about critical infrastructure objects and combines 
them with dynamic data obtained from simulations and 
analyses to represent cross-sectoral cascading risks. The 
RMDM can serve as a starting point for the development of 
the CERBERUS data model and can provide structural 
inputs for risk describing concepts. 
The fundamental idea of aggregating risk management 
data that is stored in different risk models and can be 
effectively applied when different risk information, e.g., 
from different companies or organization units that still 
apply different risk models, need to be migrated. This might 
be 
necessary 
when 
different 
companies 
merge 
or 
Comparisons across industry sectors are needed. Another 
possible application is to use the meta-data-model for 
training purposes. The model helps to highlight the key 
elements which are essential for a comprehensive risk 
management. Moreover, the differences between the risk 
management frameworks in terms and structure of different 
risk management models can be illustrated to future risk 
managers. The implicit comparison between the different 
approaches gives the training participants an overview of 
existing risk management approaches that are used in 
practice.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This article shows the basic instantiation of two specific 
risk models – in this case the risk models of COBIT for Risk 
and COSO ERM 2017 – by means of the conceptual ICT 
risk-meta-data-model. The objective of the research design is 
to introduce an ICT risk-meta-data-model for ICT, and to 
embed it in the context of different established risk models 
that are commonly applied in the ICT area. The approach of 
designing a consistent superstructure in form of a meta-
model with no need for replacement of the already 
established ICT risk management models is based on the 
principle of an ex-post adjustment. Additionally, it provides 
a data-oriented and more formalized way of overcoming the 
current organizational and model-related restrictions. The 
meta-model addresses the whole risk management lifecycle 
as recommended in [3], from identification, analysis, 
evaluation to treatment. It reflects both the risk management 
context and the monitoring and communication requirements 
for the process. The three main components and the 
conceptual background of the involved objects are discussed. 
The findings can be summarized as follows: 
• 
An instantiation of the ICT risk-meta-data-model is 
generally possible and is a promising possibility to 
overcome the current situation in ICT, where many 
different risk models and methods are applied. 
• 
The critical success factor is the coherent 
transformation of the information of the selected risk 
model up to the meta-model, while at the same time 
sufficiently reducing the information content. All 
essential data of the risk model have an equivalent 
reference in the superstructure. 
• 
It is crucial to repeat the mapping with other 
appropriate ICT risk models in order to strengthen 
the ICT risk-meta-data-model. Moreover, this will 
reconfirm the general applicability of the meta-data-
model and will increase its utility due to having 
several different risk models mapped to a meta-level. 
• 
The methods and relationships of the objects in the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model need to be refined before 
a practical demonstrator can be implemented that 
can be fed with risk management use cases. 
Results show that transferring the general information 
artefacts specified by COBIT for Risk as well as COSO 
ERM 2017 into the classes of the meta-model is feasible and 
promising. The future refinement effort will iteratively 
improve the ICT risk-meta-data-model in order to further 
develop and evaluate it and strengthen its applicability for 
ICT risk management. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work received financial support from the 
CERBERUS (Cross Sectoral Risk Management for Object 
Protection of Critical Infrastructures) Project (No. 854766) 
of the Austrian National Security Research Program KIRAS, 
Call 2016/2017. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Latzenhofer and G. Quirchmayr, “RMDM – A 
Conceptual ICT Risk-Meta-Data-Model – Applied to 
COBIT for Risk as underlying Risk Model,” presented at 
the SECURWARE 2017: The Eleventh International 
Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and 
Technologies, 
Rome, 
2017, 
pp. 
117–124 
[Online]. 
Available: www.thinkmind.org 
[2] 
M. Latzenhofer, “Ein Meta-Risiko-Datenmodell für IKT,” 
in 
Bestandsaufnahme, 
Konzepte, 
Anwendungen, 
Perspektiven, Klagenfurt, pp. 161–173.  
[3] 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Ed., 
ISO 31000:2009 Risk management - Principles and 
guidelines. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.  
[4] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Task Force 
Transformation Initiative Information Security, Ed., “NIST 
800-30: Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments.” 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology 
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, USA, Sep-2012 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
30/sp800-30.pdf 
[5] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Task Force 
Transformation Initiative Information Security, Ed., “NIST 
800-37: Guide for Applying the Risk Management 
Framework to Federal Information Systems: A Security 
Life Cycle Approach.” Computer Security Division, 
101
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Information Technology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, 
USA, 
Feb-2010 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.S
P.800-37r1.pdf 
[6] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Task Force 
Transformation Initiative Information Security, Ed., “NIST 
800-39: 
Managing 
Information 
Security 
Risk 
- 
Organization, Mission, and Information System View.” 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology 
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, USA, Mar-2011 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
39/SP800-39-final.pdf 
[7] 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO) and Price Waterhouse Cooper (PwC), 
“Enterprise Risk Management - Aligning Risk with Strategy 
and Performance (Public Exposure Draft).” Jun-2016.  
[8] 
The Stationary Office (TSO), Ed., “Management of Risk: 
Guidance for Practitioners.” 2010.  
[9] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “COBIT 5 for Risk.” Information Systems 
Audit and Control Association, Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 
USA, 2013 [Online]. Available: http://www.isaca.org/ 
COBIT/Pages/Risk-product-page.aspx 
[10] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), “ISACA.”  [Online]. Available: https://www. 
isaca.org/Pages/default.aspx. [Accessed: 24-May-2018] 
[11] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the 
Governance 
and 
Management 
of 
Enterprise 
IT.” 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association, 
Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 USA, 2012 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.isaca.org/cobit/Pages/CobitFramework.aspx 
[12] 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission 
(COSO), 
Enterprise 
Risk 
Management 
Framework. Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission, 2004.  
[13] 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO), “COSO.”  [Online]. Available: 
http://www.coso.org/. [Accessed: 24-May-2018] 
[14] 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO), “Internal Control - Integrated 
Framework.” 1992.  
[15] 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO) and Price Waterhouse Cooper (PwC), 
Enterprise Risk Management - Integrating with Strategy 
and Performance, vol. 1. 2017.  
[16] 
D. Karagiannis and H. Kühn, “Metamodelling Platforms,” 
in E-Commerce and Web Technologies, vol. 2455, K. 
Bauknecht, Am. Tjoa, and G. Quirchmayr, Eds. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2002, p. 182 [Online]. Available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45705-4_19 
[17] 
N. Rödder, R. Knapper, and J. Martin, “Risk in modern IT 
service landscapes: Towards a dynamic model,” in Service-
Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA), 2012 5th 
IEEE International Conference on, 2012, pp. 1–4.  
[18] 
Y. Yu, Q. Hao, and P. Hao, “The research and application 
of enterprises’ dynamic risk monitoring and assessment 
model based on related time series,” in Chinese Automation 
Congress (CAC), 2017, 2017, pp. 7407–7410.  
[19] 
T. R. Bezerra, S. Bullock, and A. Moura, “A simulation 
model for risk management support in IT outsourcing,” in 
Simulation and Modeling Methodologies, Technologies and 
Applications 
(SIMULTECH), 
2014 
International 
Conference on, 2014, pp. 339–351.  
[20] 
D. Wawrzyniak, “Information security risk assessment 
model for risk management,” in International Conference 
on Trust, Privacy and Security in Digital Business, 2006, 
pp. 21–30.  
[21] 
M. Kakvan, M. A. Mohyeddin, and H. Gharaee, “Risk 
evaluation of IT service providers using FMEA model in 
combination with Multi-Criteria Decision-Making Models 
and ITIL framework,” in Telecommunications (IST), 2014 
7th International Symposium on, 2014, pp. 873–878.  
[22] 
N. C. Pa and B. Anthony, “A model of mitigating risk for 
IT organisations,” in Software Engineering and Computer 
Systems (ICSECS), 2015 4th International Conference on, 
2015, pp. 49–54.  
[23] 
M. L. Yeo, E. Rolland, J. R. Ulmer, and R. A. Patterson, 
“Risk mitigation decisions for IT security,” ACM Trans. 
Manag. Inf. Syst. TMIS, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 5, 2014.  
[24] 
C. A. Pinto, A. Tolk, and M. McShane, “Emerging M&S 
application in risk management,” in Proceedings of the 
2011 Emerging M&S Applications in Industry and 
Academia Symposium, Boston, Massachusetts, 2011, pp. 
92–96.  
[25] 
Q. Zheng and H. Na, “Insurance IT outsourcing risk 
assessment modeling and empirical study,” in Information 
and Financial Engineering (ICIFE), 2010 2nd IEEE 
International Conference on, 2010, pp. 202–206.  
[26] 
Y. Zhang, B. Hamid, and D. Gouteux, “A metamodel for 
representing 
safety 
lifecycle 
development 
process,” 
presented at the 6th International Conference on Software 
Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2011), 2011, pp. 550–556.  
[27] 
B. Yang and T. Zhang, “A Scalable Meta-Model for Big 
Data Security Analyses,” in Big Data Security on Cloud 
(BigDataSecurity), IEEE International Conference on High 
Performance and Smart Computing (HPSC), and IEEE 
International Conference on Intelligent Data and Security 
(IDS), 2016 IEEE 2nd International Conference on, 2016, 
pp. 55–60.  
[28] 
F. Cicirelli, G. Fortino, A. Guerrieri, G. Spezzano, and A. 
Vinci, “A meta-model framework for the design and 
analysis of smart cyber-physical environments,” in 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
in 
Design 
(CSCWD), 2016 IEEE 20th International Conference on, 
2016, pp. 687–692.  
[29] 
M. Findrik, P. Smith, J. H. Kazmi, M. Faschang, and F. 
Kupzog, “Towards secure and resilient networked power 
distribution grids: Process and tool adoption,” in Smart Grid 
Communications 
(SmartGridComm), 
2016 
IEEE 
International Conference on, Sydney, Australia, 2016, pp. 
435–440.  
[30] 
S. H. Othman and G. Beydoun, “Metamodelling approach 
to support disaster management knowledge sharing,” 
presented at the 21st Australasian Conference on 
Information Systems (ACIS), Atlanta, GA, USA, 2010, pp. 
1–10 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/ 
viewcontent.cgi?article=10789&context=infopapers 
102
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[31] 
S. H. Othman and G. Beydoun, “Model-driven disaster 
management,” Inf. Manage., vol. 50 (2013), no. Elsevier, 
pp. 218–228, Apr. 2013.  
[32] 
Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology 
(BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG), 
“KIRAS Security Research: CERBERUS,” 2016.  [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.kiras.at/en/projects/detail/d/ 
cerberus/. [Accessed: 25-May-2018] 
 
103
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

