274
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
GHOST: An Evaluated Competence Developing Game for Cybersecurity 
Awareness Training  
Johannes A. König and Martin R. Wolf 
Lab for IT Organization and Management 
Aachen University of Applied Sciences 
Aachen, Germany 
email: koenig@fh-aachen.de, m.wolf@fh-aachen.de 
 
Abstract—To train end users how to interact with digital 
systems is indispensable to ensure a strong computer security. 
‘Competence 
Developing 
Game’-based 
approaches 
are 
particularly suitable for this purpose because of their 
motivation- and simulation- aspects. In this paper the 
Competence Developing Game ‘GHOST’ for cybersecurity 
awareness trainings and its underlying patterns are described. 
Accordingly, requirements for an ‘Competence Developing 
Game’ based training are discussed. Based on these 
requirements it is shown how a game can fulfill these 
requirements. A supplementary game interaction design and a 
corresponding evaluation study is shown. The combination of 
training requirements and interaction design is used to create a 
‘Competence Developing Game’ -based training concept. A part 
of these concept is implemented into a playable prototype that 
serves around one hour of play respectively training time. This 
prototype is used to perform an evaluation of the game and 
training aspects of the awareness training. Thereby, the quality 
of the game aspect and the effectiveness of the training aspect 
are shown. 
Keywords-Cybersecurity; Awareness; CDG; Serious Game; 
tablet game; business simulation; evaluation. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
The use of digital systems is crucial in modern companies 
and one effort of digitization is to use these digital systems 
more efficiently. Through these efforts, more and more analog 
processes are no longer available. By that, nowadays almost 
all relevant records are stored in databases or on cloud based 
file servers. Accordingly, the analog data management will be 
reduced to minimum, if that has not already happened.   
Of course, a well-functioning digital working environment 
is required to ensure that the data are always available. If data 
are accessible everywhere and always for employees, then 
assailants are able to use these infrastructure, too. This issue 
is getting worse because nowadays, in modern digitalized 
systems, employees are owners of the keys necessary for data 
access. Consequently, it is no longer necessary for an assailant 
to attack the IT-infrastructure (IT = Information technology) 
or the IT-department. He can focus his attack directly on the 
data-using persons, e.g., with fishing-mails, social attacks, 
manipulated flash drives, etc. Despite this issue, this kind of 
always available data management is indispensable for 
modern companies.  
An “Competence Developing Game”-concept (CDG) to 
train non-IT employs was presented by König and Wolf [1] in 
a shorter version of these paper on the ACHI 2018 conference. 
In that paper, however, it has remained at the concept level, a 
prototype was not presented. Supplementary to the old paper, 
in this contribution it is shown how the CDG prototype exactly 
looks like. That includes all prototype quests with their serious 
and entertaining aspects. Further, based on the prototype, an 
empirical study is presented. The study is used to evaluate the 
serious and the entertainment aspects of the CDG.   
Regardless of the chosen approach, it is essential to train 
non-IT personnel how to avoid cybersecurity risks arising 
within their daily digitalized work [2]. Already today, 
employees are often the biggest threat in the cybersecurity 
chain [3]. To offer an effective cybersecurity awareness 
training, it is important to establish a continuous training cycle 
to establish a long term behavior change (req. 7 (see Section 
II)). It should be noted that too many topics in too short time 
increase the risk to overwhelm the exercisers which is also a 
reason for a long training cycle. Basically, a successful 
cybersecurity awareness training has to solve two tasks. On 
one hand, it has to attract the attention of the participants for a 
defined time period. On the other hand it has to convey the 
training content as efficiently as possible. Unfortunately, most 
of today’s trainings solutions show weaknesses in dealing 
with both aspects. A very suitable solutions to address both 
aspects is the use of interactive computer-based training 
methods (req. 6 (see Section II)) [2]. The use of gaming 
concepts in serious situations provides the possibility to 
transfer the motivation of a gaming situation into a serious 
learning context. In addition, games provide an environment 
which allows to choose risky or intentional wrong strategies 
just to figure out what will happen. Generally, there are three 
major kinds of games with a serious approach: Serious 
Games, Business Simulation/Games and the approach of 
Gamification. Further, there are different gradations of, e.g., 
serious games, which are not consistently defined [4].  
However, instead of questioning ‘What defines a 
particular game kind?’ König and Wolf suggest focussing on 
the question ‘What characteristics of which game kind are 
well suited for a specific application’ [5]. For this, they 
provide the umbrella term CDG that encompasses all ‘serious’ 
game types (digital and analog):  
‘A Competence Developing Game (CDG) is a game that 
has the primary purpose to teach [how to use] knowledge, 
skills and personal, social and/or methodological abilities, in 
work or study situations and in professional and personal 
development of the game player, by retaining the motivation 
of a gaming situation’ [4] (Note: The ‘how to use’ was 
accidently missing in the original source).  

275
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Accordingly, this paper examines what features a digital 
CDG must have in order to enable a cybersecurity awareness 
training for (German) business users. Further, it shows a 
specific CDG-design, in which these features are adressed. 
The CDG is called GHOST: Gamified Hacking Offence 
Simulation-based Training. In addition, a prototype will be 
introduced that contains a sample of the game ideas. Further, 
using this prototype an empiric evaluation study will be 
performed, analyzed and interpreted to prove the game’s 
concepts. In detail, this paper is structured as follows:   
In Section II, the target audience is determined in more 
detail, to understand their preferences and requirements. 
Section III addresses these requirements to determine a 
suitable CDG game kind. In Section IV, it is explained, how a 
game interaction interface design for a huge audience group 
like, ‘business users’, could look like. In addition, in Section 
V, a study that examines game interaction systems is briefly 
presented.  Section VI describes the CDG GHOST which 
results from all previous considerations. In Section VII a 
prototype of the GHOST game and a corresponding 
evaluation study is presented. In addition, in Section VIII the 
study results are shown and interpreted. Finally, Section IX 
offers a conclusion and an overview about future work and 
use. 
II. FINDING REQUIREMENTS BY UNDERSTANDING THE 
AUDIENCE 
A study in German enterprises determined that the three 
most common reasons for employee related trainings are: the 
development of employee skills, increasing employee 
motivation and job satisfaction, and strengthening the 
employee-company relation (req. 1). The study also 
determined the obstacles that inhibit employee trainings. The 
identified top-two reasons not to train although there is a need 
are: no time available to dispense employees (43.8%) and 
missing internal capacity to organize a training (42.6%) [6]. 
A second study in German companies identified training 
costs and also the time issue as main reasons not to train 
employees. The three most common training methods are 
learning at the place of work (46%), external courses (28%) 
and in-house courses (<28%) [7].  
In the case of learning at the place of work, the time an 
employee needs to be dispensed is limited to the actual 
duration of the training, because there is no traveling time 
(obstacle: no dispense time available) (req. 2.a.). The absence 
of traveling time is linked to the absence of traveling costs 
(obstacle: training costs) (req. 2.c.). By that, the 
organizational complexity of the training is also reduced, as 
employees must be covered shorter, and they are more easily 
accessible in crisis situations, etc. (obstacle: organizational 
capacity) (req. 2.b.). Accordingly, in the case of a continuous 
training cycle, as needed for a cybersecurity awareness 
training and therefore for GHOST, learning at the place of 
work seems particularly advantageous. These considerations 
clarify why learning at the place of work is the most popular 
training method and therefore it should be the method of 
choice for GHOST (req. 2). 
In addition to these employer-focused considerations, the 
CDG GHOST is after all played by employees. As explained 
in Section I, more or less every employee who uses digital 
systems for work reasons should participate in a 
cybersecurity awareness training. By that, the target audience 
is broad (req. 3). Since the GHOST-Research-Project is 
granted by a German ministry (Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research), the German employee sector was considered 
in first place. According to a report by the Federal Institute 
for Vocational Education and Training, the average German 
trainee is 19.7 years old.  The report shows the first grouping 
called "16-year-olds and younger". The average age of all 
employees was 43 years in 2016, with a relatively balanced 
distribution between women (~ 47%) and men (~ 53%) [8]. 
In summary, it can be stated that the vast majority of the 
target group is > = 16 years and <67 years old, the average 
age is 43, and women and men are similarly distributed. 
As already mentioned, the use of a CDG as a training 
instrument has the advantage that the motivation of a game 
situation can be transferred in a serious context. In order to 
use this advantage a CDG must entertain players in a fun way 
while keeping the serious content in focus. This aspect 
requires a CDG that matches the tastes and abilities of the 
target audience. But because of the diversified target group, 
it is nearly impossible to construct a CDG that fulfills the 
individual game taste of each subject. On the other hand, the 
development of many games that meet the individual taste of 
each player would be expensive and it would stand in 
opposite to the obstacle: ‘costs’. Following these remarks, a 
CDG that addresses a broad audience always represents a 
compromise in game design.  
To find the major common denominator of each CDG-
Player 
the 
‘Pyramid 
Assessment 
Framework 
for 
‘Competence Developing Games’’ ('PACDG-Framework') 
was studied with this objective. The PACDG-Framework 
represents a tool that delivers the capability to analyze 
different game kinds in a standardized way. To do so, the 
framework covers, among other things, the entire player 
perspective of a CDG [5], as it was proposed (also) in the 
well-known 
MDA-framework 
for 
conventional 
entertainment games [9]. However, the PACDG-Framework 
covers the CDG-Player perspective in the three steps: 
“Experience”, “Aftereffect” and “Impact”. The last two steps 
refer to the same idea: A CDG should lead to competence 
acquisition, where the competences should help to solve at 
least one real life problem (req. 4). The step “Experience” is 
all about the player’s claim to participate in an emphatic and 
positive gaming experience. In order to meet this claim, a 
high, entertainment game equivalent, quality must be 
delivered (req. 5).  
Therefore, a CDG-based training that is accessible for all 
employees who use digital systems for work reasons 
should…:  
Req. 1. 
…develop skills, increasing motivation / 
satisfaction, strengthening the job relation. 
Req. 2. 
…take place at the place of work to reduce 

276
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a. time expense and release time, 
b. organizational overhead and by that  
c. costs. 
Req. 3. 
…be accessible for every target group member. 
Req. 4. 
…help to solve a real life problem.  
Req. 5. 
…be similar in quality to an entertainment game.  
 
Additionally a CDG for a cybersecurity awareness training 
should…: (see Section I) 
Req. 6. 
…use interactive computer based training 
methods. 
Req. 7. 
…occur in a continuous training cycle. 
III. GAME TYPE SELECTION 
As discussed in Sections I and II, the use of interactive 
computer-based training methods is suitable for a 
cybersecurity awareness training. By that, a serious game, a 
business simulation (supported by a computer based 
simulation model) or a gamified work environment could be 
used (fulfill req. 6). Furthermore, it is of course possible to 
develop a CDG in one of the named kinds with an 
entertainment game comparable quality (fulfill req. 5).  
However, every well designed cybersecurity awareness 
training will match the requirements 1 and 4, too. It is because 
the main CDG purpose would be to lead to competence 
acquisition, where these competence acquisition refers to the 
ability to perceive possible IT-Security threats (fulfill req. 1). 
As IT-Security issues are a real life problem, of course, such 
competences would support to solve a real life problem (fulfill 
req. 4).  Therefore, it can be assumed that a capable 
development team has the ability to develop a CDG from one 
of the named game kinds that has the potential to fulfill the 
requirements 1, 4, 5 and 6.   
So, to choose the most suitable CDG game kind it is 
necessary to determine whether the requirements 2, 3 and 7 
can be fulfilled.  
’’Gamification’ is the use of game design elements in non-
game contexts“ [10]. As a result, for the gamification solution 
a deeply integration of game elements into the computer 
environment of the employees would be necessary. Based on 
such integration, e.g., correct behavior such as scanning a 
flash drive or locking the screen during a longer period of 
inactivity could be rewarded with points (fulfill req. 2a-b). 
This solution would enable a permanent and time neutral 
training without the need of learning to handle the training 
instrument (fulfill req. 3 and 7). However, the necessary 
development effort would be high (game element integration 
in every used program and operating system) and the privacy 
protection question would need clarification (not fulfill req. 
2c). In addition, the extensive system intervention could have 
unforeseeable consequences on the IT security of the 
manipulated operating systems and programs. For these 
reasons a gamification solutions does not seem suitable for a 
cybersecurity awareness training. 
A closed ‘Business Simulation’ is characterized by the 
participants being placed into a well-defined and prepared 
action situation. A model calculation (the simulation) assesses 
the decision effects on the game environment. Further the 
model communicates the success of each action to the players 
[11]. Since a business simulation is similar to a board game 
the majority of the employees should not have any problem to 
handle the game (fulfill req. 3). In addition, many simulation 
games are turn-based anyway and thus predestined for a long 
continuous game cycle (fulfill req. 7). The problem here is that 
even if it is possible to organize multiple business game 
session at the work (fulfill req. 2a), fixed dates have to be 
coordinated between different employees plus the necessary 
setup and dismantling of the business game have to be 
organized in time (not fulfill req. 2b-c). That means, a 
business simulation can also not fulfill all requirements. 
The third alternative are ‘Serious Games’. Serious Games 
are video games where the primary purpose is not 
entertainment, enjoyment or fun, which does not mean that 
Serious Games are not entertaining. They just have another 
primary purpose, in kind of an ulterior motive [12]. A video 
game has the advantage of being fully flexible in terms of 
time. Further no coordination is required between employees 
nor an organization of the game setup and it can also take 
place at work (fulfill req. 2a-c) However, it is difficult to 
realize a continuous training cycle without a turn-based design 
and such a design is not intended for Serious Games (not 
fulfill req. 7). But indeed it is the only approach that has the 
potential to fulfill requirement 2.  
At this point, a CDG reveals its strength. The solution is 
to mix up the game kinds. Serious Games are the only game 
type that fulfills the requirements 2a-c, but the turn-based 
design of business simulations supports a continuous game 
cycle. Accordingly the solution is to develop a Serious Game 
with Business Simulation (turn-based) game mechanics (see 
Section VI). Therefore, only the mix out of a Serious Game 
and a Business Simulation has the potential to fulfill 
requirements 1 to 7.  
Due to this design choice, the biggest problem with 
meeting the requirements will be requirement 3 in which a 
CDG is demanded that is playable for every target group 
member. In requirement 5, the demand for a quality which is 
similar to an entertainment game is formulated. It needs to be 
kept in mind that not all members of the target group have 
experience with video games. It must therefore be ensured that 
requirement 3 can be met without losing number 5. Therefore, 
it is necessary to find an interaction-interface for a high quality 
video game that does not require any video game experience. 
Section V will introduce a case study that was performed to 
evaluate how a game interface has to be designed to meet 
requirement 3 even when the game uses a 3D-Environment to 
fulfill requirement 5. Section IV explains the game interface 
development and the case study design.   
IV. DEALING WITH THE GAME INTERACTION ISSUE 
Germany is on of the largest video game markets in 
Europe with sales of 2.8 billion euros in 2015. Overall, the 
video game players are distributed as follows: PC / laptop 18.4 
million players, smartphone 17.2 million players, console 15.6 
million players, tablet 11.5 million players, handheld 8.3 
million players. It should be noted that smartphones and 
tablets both use gaming apps, which means gaming apps with 
23 million players in total have the largest player community 

277
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[13]. Accordingly to that information even in the aimed target 
group the amount of people who have experience with gaming 
apps should be higher than with other video game mediums. 
In addition, it can be stated that touchscreens as used in 
smartphones and tablets have significantly changed the world 
of games in a short period of time. Modern touchscreen 
devices show a very intuitive interaction design that allows 
even children to use such a device successfully. 
To explain why touchscreen devices are intuitive to such 
strong extend, a look at the three-layered brain model is 
helpful. To use a tool (in a computer context a tool means a 
device like a keyboard, a mouse, a game controller, etc.)  
humans have to make use of their neocortex. The cerebrum 
represents the highest layer in the brain model. In contrast, for 
‘touches’, as needed during the use of a touchscreen device, 
humans only need to use the reptilian brain, which is 
represented in the lowest layer in the three-layered brain 
model [14]. Both aspects, (a) the widely use of gaming apps 
and (b) the intuitive aspect of modern touchscreen devices 
lead to the conclusion that a gaming app based CDG is the 
right choice for GHOST. Considering the broad target 
audience it is further reasonable to use a tablet based gaming 
app because of the larger screen size compared to a 
smartphone.  
According to the last section, a CDG should be similar in 
quality to an entertainment game (req. 5). Modern gaming 
apps with the scope to be played over a longer period of time 
(as it is planned in GHOST) implement a three-dimensional, 
high quality looking game environment regardless of the 
genre (see e.g., Lara Croft Go, Lego Star Wars, Jam League, 
Modern Combat, Asphalt, Bothers: a tale of two sons, etc.). 
By that, GHOST has to be a three-dimensional tablet based 
CDG. On the other hand, GHOST has to be accessible for 
every target group member (req. 3). Thus, an appropriate 
game interaction system has to be found, that allows three-
dimensional tablet based playing even for people who have 
never played a video game in their live. However, there are 
well established interaction systems for videogames that are 
also adapted for touchscreen devices.  
The three most common used are 1st-Person, 3rd-Person 
and God view. The idea behind the 1st-Person perspective is 
that the player sees through the eyes of his player-character 
(PC) [15]. In conventional video games, the player controls 
the PC with mouse and keyboard [16]. Touchscreen based 1st-
Person games are usually implemented in landscape mode. To 
control the PC the left and right thumb are used. The left 
thumb is used in the lower left area of the screen to control the 
movement of the PC. The right thumb is used in the lower 
right area of the screen to control the viewing direction [17]. 
In games that implement a 3rd-person perspective, a 
camera is used, which is aligned to the top of the PC to show 
him completely. Sometimes 3rd-person is implemented with 
„Trailing” option, then the camera is anchored at head height 
behind the PC. In classic video games, the control is similar to 
1st-person games [16] the same applies to the touch screen 
control. 
A God View perspective, also referred to by the terms 
'overhead', 'top down' and 'God Eye', provides a perspective in 
which the game map is shown from above. Usually, the 
control is realized with the mouse [15]. Touchscreen-based 
God View games are often implemented by touching directly 
on the device. In such case the 'touch' on the device is 
equivalent to a mouse click. Additionally, manipulations of 
the camera perspective are done by the usual multi-touch 
gestures (e.g., two-finger zoom). Consequently, any 3D 
gaming interaction system known from the Computer/Laptop 
can be adapted for touch screen based games. 
It has to be noted that the 1st-person and 3rd-person 
solution only replace mouse and keyboard through two 
equivalent virtual generated tools. By that, according to Schell 
[14], neocortex participation is still needed and whereby the 
advantage of a touchscreen solution is not exploited. Only the 
'God View' interaction systems provide a solution that’s 
natively transforms touch into interaction. As a result, this 
kind of game interaction should be manageable for 
inexperienced players and therefore is the right solutions for a 
touchscreen based CDG and GHOST. 
However, this question cannot be clarified for the intended 
target audience based on the state of scientific research. There 
is a lack of empirical research that investigates the suitability 
of existing touch screen-based control and camera tracking 
paradigms for 3D serious games. However, since a well-
functioning interaction system is elemental for the CDG 
success, a corresponding study has been carried out that will 
be briefly discussed in the next section. 
V. INTERACTION SYSTEM FOR A TOUCHSCREEN BASED CDG 
In the following different interaction systems are 
discussed and the study results are presented.  
A. Discussion of possible interaction systems 
The main objective of the study is to investigate wheatear 
it is possible to find an interaction-interface for a high quality 
tablet based video games that does not require any video game 
experience. Such an interaction-interface would connect 
requirements 3 and 5 that seem as if they exclude each other. 
The presence of such an interface would open the possibility 
to develop a cybersecurity awareness training that fulfills all 
seven requirements in the first place. 
From a theoretical point of view, a game that responds as 
intuitive as possible on touch screen input should be 
advantageous for the players. As shown in the last section 
even the ‘God View’ interaction system relies on not intuitive 
multi-touch gestures for camera control. For that reason, a 
new interaction system for the GHOST prototype was 
designed.  
These ‘optimized’ called interaction system provides the 
PC control via finger touch. The PC automatically moves to 
the location of the map where the map was touched. Even the 
interaction with game objects or non-player characters (NPC) 
works this way. If a player, e.g., touches a game object his PC 
will automatically move to the point next to the object. After 
arriving at this point an interaction dialog opens 
automatically. To remove the maybe not intuitive camera 
control the whole game map is divided in different camera 
zones (partly multiple zones in one room). Each zone provides 
its own static camera perspective. If the player controls his 
avatar from one camera zone to another, the camera angle 

278
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
changes automatically. The player is not aware of where the 
zone boundaries are, the camera angle change just happens. 
To help the CDG-Player’s orientation, there is also a second 
‘optimized+’ called interaction system where the camera 
change from one position to the next one appears in a smooth 
move. Additionally, to the three mentioned interactions 
systems (1st-Person, 3rd-Person, God View) both versions 
were examined in a blind study. For this purpose, a small 
game was designed where the participant had to find six game 
objects or NPCs to interact with. At the beginning of the test 
a participant is set in a game environment with six rooms and 
two corridors. The participant does not get any map because 
the study also refers to the orientation ability. Finally, the time 
needed to complete the interaction tasks was measured.  
A total of five mini games (demo versions) were 
developed: 
• 
Demo1: 1st-Person 
• 
Demo2: 3rd-Person 
• 
Demo3: God View 
• 
Demo4: optimized+ 
• 
Demo5: optimized 
Deviating from the previous explanation of 3rd-Person 
interaction-systems the 3rd-Person PC control was changed. 
Usually the PC is controlled with the left and right thumb as 
in a 1st-Person tablet game.  
Indeed, the interaction system in Demo2 uses a touch 
based PC movement control as in the ‘optimized’ demo 
versions. In addition, camera rotation was enabled by 
integrating a two-finger-rotate gesture for camera rotation. 
The classic two thumb control is still used in Demo1. Figures 
1 to 4 are screenshots made of each demo version, 
respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 1st-Person interaction system with dynamic appearing 
‘activate’-button for object interaction (Demo1). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 3rd-Person interaction system before and after two-finger-rotate 
(Demo2). 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Good-View before and after gesture based camera rotation 
(Demo3). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Adjacent camera zones in the optimized(+) interaction system 
(Demo4&5). 
 
B. Summary of Study Results 
TABLE I.  
SUBJECT DISTRIBUTION 
 
subject distribution 
 
Demo1 
Demo2 
Demo3 
Demo4 
Demo5 
age<=37 
7 
7 
7 
7 
6 
age>37 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
𝑥̅  age 
39 
38 
40 
41 
41 
SD age 
17 
16 
16 
15 
15 
n woman 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
n men 
7 
7 
7 
7 
6 
n 
13 
13 
13 
13 
12 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Average play time and 95% confidence interval. 
 

279
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In total 64 participants participated in the study. Table I 
provides information about the exact distribution of the test 
subjects to the individual demo versions. 
An ANOVA was calculated and, by that, proved that the 
playtime differences are statistically significant (𝛼 =
.05; 𝐹(4,59) = 4,26; p < 0,0011) . Figure 5 shows the 
average playtime for each demo version. It can be seen, that 
the playing time of the demo versions 4 and 5 are the shortest 
ones. As a result, the assumption that an intuitive interaction 
system simplifies the access to the game can be confirmed. By 
that, the ‘optimized’ or ‘optimized+’ interaction systems are 
the most suitable solutions for the GHOST-Prototype. 
Moreover, the results show that there are performance 
differences between the groups <=37 and >37 and that demo 
version 4 and 5 minimize these differences.  
VI. GHOST: A CDG BASED CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS 
TRAINING  
Following the remarks of this paper, GHOST is a turn-
based, tablet-based, serious game like, Competence 
Developing Game, which provides a cybersecurity awareness 
training for end users in companies. Furthermore, in GHOST 
a new intuitive interaction systems was implemented.  By that, 
it has the potential to fulfill the seven requirements which 
were derived in section two.  
Whether GHOST meets these requirements depends on 
the game design. First of all the game design tracks two 
aspects. It creates the space to experience which personal 
actions 
are 
positive 
respectively 
negative 
for 
the 
cybersecurity. Second, it demonstrates which and why IT-
department activities are necessary and meaningful. By that, 
it allows the end user to notice missing activities in his/her 
company and in addition it will increase the employee’s 
acceptance for such activities. 
In case of a cybersecurity training too many topics in a 
short time period increase the risk to overwhelm the exercisers 
[2]. Therefore, in the beginning each game round treats only 
one serious topic. The IT risks are hidden between other tasks 
and rarely occur, as in reality. In order to evaluate which 
serious content should find its way into the GHOST CDG, 
Annex ‘A’ of ISO 27001 was analyzed (ISO/IEC 27001: 
Information technology – Security techniques – Information 
security management systems – requirements, see [18]).  In 
Table II, the serious topic of each game round is presented. 
The idea behind GHOST’s game design is to minimize the 
organizational effort. By a trick, GHOST still provides player 
the illusion of playing together. Every GHOST training is 
designed for 8 players in two groups at the same time. The 
training consists of 16 units (game rounds) in total. However, 
each round gets a specific time period in which the round is 
active and ready for play. In this period each player can choose 
the moment to play the round individually. At the end of the 
time period the GHOST-System calculates, based on each 
individual result in a group, a common group result which is 
the starting point for the next round. If, e.g., a player misses to 
participate in one round the whole group result will be 
weakened. This kind of game design uses the business 
simulation advantages like group motivation and the 
enforcing of a specific continuous training cycle without the 
disadvantages of complicated appointment organization. 
Nevertheless, GHOST allows even real multiplayer 
experience. The Round 7&8 as 15&16 require all 8 players to 
participate the training at the same time. Each group has to be 
in one physical room, the merging of the groups takes place 
via internet. These real multiplayer rounds serve as highlights 
of the complete training cycle. However, since two 
multiplayer rounds are played at one appointment, 
accordingly only two appointments must be arranged. As a 
result GHOST provides 16 play rounds and only requires the 
coordination of two appointments, which results in a huge 
reduction of the organizational effort compared to business 
simulations. Table II shows the assignment between serious 
content and game rounds.  
As already mentioned, the serious content in GHOST is 
hidden between other tasks. To assure a simple knowledge 
transfer between the game environment and the real world it 
seems to be obvious to build an office environment inside the 
game. Accordingly, the player would solve every day work 
tasks inside the game world to come across serious content 
from time to time. This would result in a game that simulates 
an office for a game player whose position is currently an 
office, means playing-office in the office.   
TABLE II.  
GAME ROUNDS 
Round 
Serious topic 
1 
Screen lock 
2 
Handling of foreign flash drives 
3 
Phishing-Mails 
4 
Backups 
5 
Mobile Devices (especially Smartphones) 
6 
Websites, software installation, own IT infrastructure 
7&8 
(MP) 
Passwords, Information encoding, Emergency response, 
Environmental Security, Backups 
9 
Access rights 
10 
Environmental Security, safe workplace 
11 
Virus prevention, Keylogger, Work delegation 
12 
Network Devices, Audits,  
13 
Log files, Access Right Management 
14 
Quiz Round 
15&16 
(MP) 
Flash drive,  Information encoding, Phishing-Mails, Malware, 
Passwords, Emergency response 
MP = Multiplayer  
This would most likely ruin the fun aspect of the game, 
what would gamble away the main advantage of a CDG, the 
transfer of the motivation of a game situation to a serious 
context. For this reason, the game was moved 50 years into 
the future. The players find themselves in a science fiction 
scenario on a space ship named GHOST. They experience a 
journey of sixteen laps (one lap one round) and figure out 
quickly that someone tries to sabotage the mission by 
infiltrating the ship's computer systems.  
As a crew member each player has to handle a lot of day-
to-day tasks, which are intentionally similar to 2018 tasks in a 

280
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
normal office. Nevertheless, a player has to be constantly on 
guard while interacting with the computer systems or other 
aspects in his environment. The assailant could start the next 
cyber-attack in any moment, with any strategy.  
VII. 
PROTOTYPE FOR EVALUATION  
As shown in Section II, the awareness training should 
fulfill at least seven requirements to match employer and 
employee expectations. Most of them can be fulfilled through 
design decisions described in this paper: A GHOST training 
can take place at the place of work to reduce the time expense. 
Since an extensive preparation is not needed the 
organizational overhead is reduced. This helps to reduce the 
training costs (req. 2a-c). Because of its sophisticated 
empirical evaluated (see Section V) interaction system even 
employees without any game experience can participate the 
training (req. 3). In addition, this interaction system helps 
GHOST to have an entertainment game look and feel (req. 5). 
The turn-based, business game inspired, game design allows 
further a continuous training cycle, that is made possible with 
a computer-based training (req. 6 and 7). Moreover, the social 
significance of - and the increased attacks on- IT systems 
leave no doubt on the real-life relevance of the underlying 
problem (req. 4). Therefore, on to this point only requirement 
1 is left unmentioned. Requirement 1 demands a CDG to help 
an employee to develop skills, to increase his motivation and 
satisfaction and to strengthen the job relation. The last both 
aspects of requirement 1 can presumably only be evaluated 
when the GHOST CDG is completely developed (as described 
in Table II) and used in practice. But the first aspect of 
requirement 1 -to develop skills- can be evaluated with a 
prototype. Therefore, a prototype was developed that follows 
the principles shown in this paper (for an overview see Section 
VI). To provide a game situation to the participants with 
proper length to gain an intense impression the prototype 
should cover around one hour of gaming. Accordingly, to 
develop just one game round would not be purposeful.  Instead 
four serious topics: “Screen lock”, “Handling of foreign flash 
drives”, “Network Devices” and “Passwords” were combined 
to one large gaming round that is implemented for evaluation 
reasons only. 
In the beginning of the prototype an introduction video is 
presented to the participants. The video covers the control 
elements of the game and explains them. The whole 
interaction system is equal to the optimized+ interaction 
system as shown before. The camera moves automatically in 
a smooth way and for the game objects interaction the 
participant in every case needs a one finger touch to start 
interaction. 
 
A. Storyline overview  
During the gameplay the participant finds out that he is on 
a space ship called GHOST on a mission to find a new 
discovered high energy element: Industrium. Overall, the 
participant has to pass eight quests. He deals with the sabotage 
of the crew's mission. In the beginning, the participant is 
presented with the conundrum of what to do with an 
unfamiliar flash drive prompting an investigation by the chief 
of security into its origins. This is the first of several attacks 
that are made on the ship's security. As the game progresses, 
the crew becomes more nervous and the participant must 
assist in improving the ship's security. However, all efforts are 
too late as just after industrium collection is concluded the 
main systems of the ship suddenly shut down. The chief 
engineer explains that the systems responsible for keeping 
them alive and creating fuel from the harvested industrium are 
failing due to the disturbance. The participant is tasked with 
finding the devices that are causing the disturbance and 
restarting the system. Once he has finished this task, the crew 
is saved and prepares for a leap through space. 
 
B. Game play and serious content 
Quest 1 gameplay: The participant must activate the ships 
systems and he must find the ghost-drive of the quartermaster 
(a device that looks like a flash-drive). In doing so the 
participant has to find his way through the ship to find a 
computer console that is marked with an arrow. After that, the 
ships lights are activated, and the participant will find the 
ghost-drive nearby. In the end of the quest the participant is 
told to keep the found ghost-drive because he needs one for 
his next task anyway. 
Quest 1 serious content: The ghost-drive is infected with a 
virus (what the participant does not know about). From the 
moment the participant finds the drive he has the possibility 
to visit the security chief to get the problem fixed. (Serious 
goal: Flash-Drive security awareness) (see Figure 5) 
Quest 2 gameplay: The participant gets the task to collect 
status reports from five crew members who are in the rear 
sections of the ship. The crew members will transfer their 
reports to his ghost-drive. At the quest end the participant will 
merge the reports by using his terminal and sent them to the 
captain (only a few clicks needed). 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Finding the lost ghost-drive after activating the ship systems 
(cropped) 
 
Quest 2 serious content: The participant still has the 
opportunity to find and fix the virus problem by visiting the 
security chef. When the participant speaks to one of the five 
crew members and if his drive is still infected he can choose 
if he wants to do “something else” or if he gives his ghost-
drive to the person he is speaking with. If the participant 
infects a crew member's computer, the security chef will 
arrive in seconds, detect the problem, explain the problem and 
hand over a ghost-drive that is safe to use. The negative 
consequences are that the report is lost and that every other 

281
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
crew member mentions the incident later in quest 2. However, 
close to the quest end and after the participant sends the 
merged report away he has two options to leave the terminal: 
The more obvious option is to touch on “leave the terminal”. 
This is equal to leave a PC unlocked. Second, the participant 
can touch the “Show shutdown menu” Button that reveals the 
“lock” Button for leaving the terminal in a safe way. (Serious 
goals: Flash-Drive security awareness)  
Quest 3 gameplay: The participant is requested to the 
bridge. On the bridge the participant and the captain have a 
small talk about the ship systems and the merged report. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Options after touching the “Show shutdown menu” button 
(Button translation inserted) 
 
Quest 3 serious content: During the chat the camera 
suddenly moves onto the main screen of the bridge. 
Depending on whether the player locked his screen in Quest 2 
or not there is a different email-like message on the screen. If 
he forgot to lock his screen the participant is addressed 
directly by his name and the mail is sent from his terminal. 
But if he locked his screen in Quest 2 the message is addressed 
to a crew member and sent from the crew member's terminal. 
In both cases the captain points out that someone made a joke 
and that it is important to lock the screen always. (Serious 
goal: more frequent screen locking) (see Figure 6) 
Quest 4 gameplay: The participant will be requested to the 
security chef. They chat about the infected ghost-drive and the 
security chef points out that he needs help to generate new 
passwords that are good to remember.  
Quest 4 serious content: The password generation is 
wrapped in a mini-game. During the game, the participant has 
to shot on eight words that will be the long enough to be a 
good base for the password generation. If the participant 
shoots a short word he loses one of the already collected long 
words. However, after the collection of words the player 
modifies the words to passwords. For that, he selects a 
character he wants to change or add (e.g., a 1 for an i, etc.) and 
tries to shoot down the wished character. As he makes the 
changes, he sees a constantly changing display indicating how 
secure the password currently is. By that, the participant gets 
a feel for what makes a password secure. (Serious goal: teach 
how to build a safe password) (see Figure 7). 
 
 
Figure 7. Mini-Game for the password generation. Left: shoot long words; 
right: modify words to passwords 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Mini-Game for the industrium collection. Left: animated drone 
start; right: industrium collection 
 
Quest 5 gameplay: The participant gets a call that he has 
to check the current industrium research reports that are send 
as a message to his terminal.     
Quest 5 serious content: After using his terminal the 
participant has to remember to lock his screen comparable to 
quest 2. If he remembers to lock his screen he gets a positive 
feedback from the security chef after a while. If he forgets to 
lock the screen he gets an equivalent negative feedback. 
(Serious goal: more frequent screen locking)    
 Quest 6 gameplay: The participant has to collect 
industrium with a remote-controlled drone. The drone-flight 
is implemented as a mini game. The participant controls the 
drone with his finger. He has to hit the pink asteroids for 
collecting industrium while avoiding the other ones (see 
Figure 8). 
Quest 6 serious content: none.  
 
 
 
Figure 9. Mini-Game: “Network-Devices” 
 

282
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Quest 7 gameplay: There is a shipside system failure and 
it is not possible to reactivate the ship’s systems. The 
participant has to help to identify if there are any corrupt 
devices on the ship. His search area is the communication 
room and the mess. In the end of the quest the participant is 
able to reactivate the systems in the same way as in quest 1. 
Quest 7 serious content: The player has to check devices 
that are similar to network devices like network switches or 
repeaters. The checking is implemented as a mini game where 
the player compares a device on the ship with the manual (e.g., 
number of free ports, picture, serial number, etc.). The player 
has to decide if the device is safe or not. When he decided to 
report a device, he has to choose which aspect is corrupted. 
(Serious goal: Create awareness that new network devices 
could leak the security chain) (see Figure 9). 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Debriefing supported by drawings (current topic on screenshot: 
screen lock) 
 
Quest 8 gameplay: The quartermaster informs the 
participant, that his leap capsule is ready. After entering the 
capsule, the prototype finalizes.  
Quest 8 serious content: Before the end a debriefing is 
shown. The debriefing picks up all serious topics and explains 
them one last time. The debriefing presentation is supported 
by drawings (Serious goal: deepening and transfer) (see 
Figure 10). 
 
C. Experimental procedure 
Each participant playing the prototype is supported by a 
test leader. The test leader is allowed to offer help to the 
participant whereby the amount of help is strictly regulated 
through the test design. After playing the prototype the 
participant has to fill out a questionnaire. In addition, 
approximately two months after the prototype-based training 
the participant gets a second short questionnaire via email. 
The first questionnaire contains three objects of investigation: 
“game experience”, “prototype review” and “competence 
growth”. The second questionnaire is only about “competence 
growth”. 
To measure the “game experience” the core module of the 
“The Game Experience Questionnaire” is used. The core 
module assesses the game experience separated in seven 
components [19]. The items of the questionnaire are translated 
to the German language enabling the participants to use their 
native language.   
To receive a standardized game review from the 
participants a cross section of the work from Vohwinkel is 
used. Vohwinkel presents a well evaluated questionnaire for 
standardized game reviews [20]. He takes a variety of 
usability and game work into account and reorganizes them to 
a full-scale measuring instrument for commercial video 
games. 
As part of the research project it is not possible to measure 
the “competence growth” in a real-life work situation of the 
participants. Instead the participants are asked three times 
after a self-assessment. First, for each of the four serious 
aspects they are asked how they handled the aspect before they 
participated to the prototype-based training. In the end of the 
long questionnaire they are asked again with a changed focus. 
Now they should assess how they plan to act in the future. 
Then, in the questionnaire that the participants received after 
approximately two months, they are asked how they actually 
acted in the last months. In total, this creates an overall picture 
of the self-assessed competence situation. The self-assessment 
questions are formulated as follows, each adapted to the 
position in the questionnaire/s:    
• 
I locked my screen when leaving my place of 
work 
• 
If I recognized new IT-Devices on my place of 
work I was thinking about whether it is necessary 
to report them to somebody. 
• 
Before using a flash-drive I was thinking about if 
it is safe. 
• 
I knew exactly how to generate an easy to 
remember and safe password.  
As shown in the interaction system study there are 
differences in the play times between the groups “age<=37” 
and “age>37”. Other play time relevant factors were not 
identified. It was shown that the interaction systems optimized 
and optimized+ are able to reduce the play time differences. 
To further reduce these play time differences to a minimum 
an interactive map is added to the prototype. In addition, the 
participant gets navigational help through the test leader if 
necessary. In later implementations this kind of guiding 
should be made automatically by the game itself.  
However, one evaluation goal is to discover how 
differently the play performance and the game impression 
between the age groups still are. So, the described aspects of 
investigation are evaluated for each age group separately. 
Because there is approximately one year between the both 
empirical studies the age groups for this study are defined as: 
“age<=38” and “age>38”.   
VIII. 
EVALUATION  
In this section the game experience and the competence 
growth are discussed. 
A. Game experience & game review 
Overall 31 participants take part in the study and 
completed 1,777 minutes of play time. The follow-up 

283
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
questionnaire after two months got 14 responses. Table III 
shows the distribution of participants and Figure 11 shows an 
evaluation example.    
TABLE III.  
SUBJECT DISTRIBUTION 
 
Distribution 
Age<=38 
19 
Age>38 
12 
𝑥̅ 𝑎𝑔𝑒 
35.7 
𝑆𝐷 𝑎𝑔𝑒 
15.3 
n woman 
9 
n men 
22 
n 
31 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Evaluation  
 
The participants evaluated the game experience and 
reviewed the game on the same five-point scale (1 to 5).  
During this analysis the averaged answers are interpreted as 
school marks in the following way:  
• 
[>=1.0 “E” <1.8] (worst grade),  
• 
[>=1.8 “D” <2.6], 
• 
[>=2.6 “C” <3.4], 
• 
[>=3.4 “B” <4.2], 
• 
[>=4.2 “A” <=5] (best grade) 
On average the participants of both age groups assess the 
game experience with an B (3.5). Thereby, only the game 
experience “challenge” got a bad rating (D). One possible 
explanation is a too low level of difficulty.  Nevertheless, the 
data points out that both age groups had a similar positive 
game experience with little weaknesses only. Table IV shows 
the results of the seven components of the measured game 
experiences in both age groups. 
Beyond the game experience evaluation, the participants 
reviewed the prototype using an adapted measuring 
instrument for commercial video games. Again, both age 
groups reviewed in a very similar way by giving an B mostly. 
On detail, the participants who correspond to the group 
“Age>38” rated minimal better. Table V shows the results in 
detail. 
TABLE IV.  
GAME EXPERIENCE 
 
Age <= 38 
Age >38 
Component 
𝒙̅ 
mark 
𝒙̅ 
mark 
Competence 
3.6 
B 
3.8 
B 
Sensory and Imaginative 
Immersion 
3.0 
C 
3.2 
C 
Flow 
3.2 
C 
3.0 
C 
Tension/ 
Annoyance 
1.6 
(4.4) 
A 
1,3 
(4.7) 
A 
Challenge 
2.2 
D 
1.9 
D 
Negative affect 
1.9 
(4.1) 
B 
1.7 
(4.3) 
A 
Positive affect 
3.9 
B 
3.7 
B 
Average 
3.5 
B 
3.5 
B 
see [19] 
 
TABLE V.  
PROTOTYPE REVIEW 
 
Age <= 38 
Age >38 
Component 
𝒙̅ 
mark 
𝒙̅ 
mark 
Graphics / Camera / Control 
3.7 
B 
4.2 
B 
Narration / Avatar / NPCs 
3.7 
B 
3.7 
B 
Help / easy game learning 
3.9 
B 
4.1 
B 
Traceability / Game-Goals 
4.1 
B 
4.3 
A 
Average 
3.9 
B 
4.1 
B 
see [20] 
 
In addition, the play time of each participant was 
measured. The mean playing time of all participants was 57.4 
minutes. Thereby, the mean playing time difference between 
the both age groups was only about 5 minutes. The group 
“age<=38” needed an average of 55.4 minutes to play the 
prototype while the other group “age>38” needed with 60.4 
minutes a little more time. Figure 12 represents a scatter plot 
for the variables age and play time. A relationship between 
age and play time is visible. A Pearson's correlation was 
calculated with a result of 0.30, so a light correlation was 
detected. With a p-value of .285 in the present sample the 
correlation is not statistically significant. However, a five-
minute play time difference has no impact on the practical 
usability of the concept. 
The interpretation of the presented data indicates that the 
combination between interaction system and game design 
minimizes the differences between the age groups so far that 
these are no longer significant. This can be seen in all the three 
presented evaluation aspects. Further it can be determined that 
the participants evaluated the prototype’s gaming aspects in a 
positive way. This impression is strengthened through a 
further item in the questionnaire. The participants were 
directly asked about their overall impression and rated the 
prototype in mean with 7.7 out of 10 points (B). Accordingly, 
the differentiate review and the overall impression of the 
prototype are consistent and both positive.  

284
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 12. Scatter plot: Age->Playing time 
 
B. Competence growth 
In the following the growing of the participant's 
competences for each of the four serious aspects is evaluated. 
Thereby, only records allowing a competence growth are 
used. That means if a participant stated that he always locked 
his screen or that he perfectly knew how to generate a 
password even before he participated on the prototype-based 
training his record regarding the specific serious content is not 
used.    
For the measurement of the three serious topics “Screen 
lock”, “Handling of foreign flash drives” and “Network 
Devices” 
frequencies 
were 
queried 
(5-Point-Scale). 
According to the scale the mean results are interpreted in the 
following way:  
• 
[>=1.0 “Never” <1.8] (worst grade),  
• 
[>=1.8 “Rarely” <2.6], 
• 
[>=2.6 “Occasionally” <3.4], 
• 
[>=3.4 “Often” <4.2], 
• 
[>=4.2 “Always” <=5] (best grade) 
 
Figure 13 shows the results of the participants self-assessment 
regarding the serious content “Screen lock”. Before 
participating in the prototype usage, the group “age<=38” in 
mean stated to often lock the screen (3.6) (𝑥̅ before). After the 
training participation the average frequency value was 4.2 
(often) (𝑥̅  after) whereby 6 of 10 people improved their 
competences. The group “age>38” chose an average 
frequency of occasionally (2.9) before participating in the 
training. After the training they stated that they are planning 
to lock their screens in future always (4.9). Overall, 7 of 8 
participants were able to increase their performance. 
Summarized the measurements for both groups show 
satisfactory results after participating the prototype training. It 
is noticeable, that the group with less previous competences 
could leap higher, which results in a similar competence level 
between both groups. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Screen Lock  
 
The follow-up questionnaire (after two month) contained 
6 relevant records for the younger and 3 records for the older 
group. Overall, when asked how frequent they have locked 
their screen since prototype testing, the younger group shows 
two deviations in the size of: once -1 and once -2. That results 
in comparison to 𝑥̅𝑎 (𝑥̅𝑎 = 𝑥̅ after) in a mean loss of -0.03 
(𝑥̅𝑎+ − 𝑥̅𝑎) (Note: The differences are calculated precise with 
15 digits). The records of the older group contained one 
difference of -1, which results in a mean loss of -0.08. For the 
present sample this leads to the conclusion that the prototype 
has a long-lasting aftereffect regarding the serious content 
"screen lock".  The deviations can be neglected because of 
their low severity. Table VI gives an overview about the 
follow-up survey.  
TABLE VI.  
SCREEN LOCK FOLLOW UP SURVEY 
Group 
𝒙̅𝒂+ 
𝒙̅𝒂+ 
− 𝒙̅𝒂 
Absolute change 
AVG 
change 
-1 
-2 
age<=38 
4.17 
-0.03 
1 
1 
-0.5 
age>38 
4.67 
-0.08 
1 
- 
-0.3 
𝑥̅𝑎+ = mean frequency in the relevant follow up records 
 
Figure 14 shows the results of the “Flash Drives” 
assessment. The members of the group “age<=38” stated that 
they occasionally (2.4) think about whether the use of a flash-
drive is safe. After the training, the measured frequency-value 
grew into the "often" area (3.8). A total of 14 participants had 
the chance to increase their competence and 11 of them did 
so. The average of the group “age>38” was 3.5 (often) before 
the training. After participating in the training, the group 
stated to think about flash-drive security always (4.5) in the 
future. Overall, 6 of 8 participants were able to change their 
awareness. However, both groups achieved a change, where 
in this case the change for the younger group is more 
pronounced. It seems, that the development-potential depends 
on the individual foreknowledge and not on the group 
membership. 
 

285
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 14. Flash-drive 
 
The follow-up survey results in 8 relevant records for the 
younger and 4 records for the older group. The group 
“age<=38” shows 5 differences: three times -3, once -2 and 
once +1 which results in a mean loss of -0.29 compared to 
𝑥̅ 𝑎𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟. The other group points 3 differences: once -1, once 
-2 and once +1. This results in a mean loss of -0.50. By that, 
for the present sample, the deviation can be neglected again. 
The aftereffect is long-lasting too. It is noticeable, that two 
participants have changed their behavior more than planned. 
A possible explanation are exchanges with colleagues or 
deepening thoughts in the aftermath of the training. This 
emphasizes that the training’s serious topics remain in the 
consciousness of the subjects even beyond the training. The 
data are shown in Table VII. 
TABLE VII.  
FLASH-DRIVE FOLLOW UP SURVEY 
 
Group 
𝒙̅𝒂+ 
       𝒙̅𝒂+ 
− 𝒙̅𝒂 
Absolute change 
AVG 
change 
-1 
-2 
+1 
age<=38 
3.5 
-0.29 
3 
1 
1 
-0.5 
age>38 
4.0 
-0.50 
1 
1 
1 
-0.3 
 
Figure 15 shows the data related to the “Network devices” 
topic. The data indicates, that the competences before the 
training were very low. In total the group “age<=38” contains 
15 relevant records while the group “age>38” contains 8. The 
mean data of the younger participants shows that they were 
thinking rarely (1.9) about whether it could be necessary to 
report new devices. With a value of 1.8 (rarely) the results of 
the older participants are similar. Accordingly, a large 
competence increase was achieved through the training. Both 
groups stated that in future they will think always (4.5 and 4.9) 
about whether new IT-devices are authorized or not. 
Moreover, all 23 relevant participants achieved a competence 
growth. By that, the assumption potential of development 
depending on the individual foreknowledge and not on the 
group membership seems to be confirmed. The GHOST-
based Training works out for the whole target audience.  
 
 
 
Figure 15. Network Devices 
 
At the follow-up survey, 12 relevant records were 
recorded. Again, only small differences were found. The 
group “age<=38” shows 8 relevant records whereby 5 records 
show deviations. The mean difference is -0.22. In the other 
group 4 records were registered whereby 2 of them show 
differences. Overall, the average frequency in the group 
“age>38” dropped by -0.38. Therefore, for the present data, 
the deviation can be neglected again. A data overview is 
presented in Table VIII.  
TABLE VIII.  NETWIRK DEVICES FOLLOW UP SURVEY 
Group 
𝒙̅𝒂+ 
       𝒙̅𝒂+ 
− 𝒙̅𝒂 
Absolute change 
AVG 
change 
-1 
-2 
-3 
+1 
age<=38 
4.25 
-0.22 
1 
1 
1 
2 
-0.5 
age>38 
4..5 
-0.38 
2 
- 
- 
- 
-0.5 
 
Based on the assumption that the importance of secure 
passwords is common sense the password aspect of the 
prototype is not a classic awareness training. Rather the focus 
is to teach how to create a safe and simple to remember 
password. As shown in Section VII, the password mini-game 
represents an exception in the game design. Also, the mini-
game is controllable with one finger, its game mechanic 
includes action elements that require a quick gameplay. By 
that it is exploratory checked whether the older age group is 
able to participate on CDGs that require an action gameplay.  
Therefore, the participants were asked to self-assess their 
ability to generate safe and easy to use passwords. A 4-Point-
Scale was used (from strongly disagree to strongly agree). 
According to the scale, the ability to generate passwords are 
interpreted in the following way: 
• 
[>=1.0 “D” <1.75] (no ability),  
• 
[>=1.75 “C” <2.5], 
• 
[>=2.5 “B” <3.25], 
• 
[>=3.25 “A” <4.0], (fully capable) 
 
Figure 16 shows the evaluation results regarding the 
password generation. It is noticeable that the ability before 
training to generate passwords was already strong. Only 7 
participants of the Group “age<=38” and 4 participants of the 

286
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
group “age>38” had the option to strengthen their ability. This 
shows how well known the password security topic is 
especially to the older participants. Maybe another sub-topic 
of the password theme (e.g., sharing passwords or multiple 
using of password) would had been more useful for this 
evaluation to measure more results in the older group. 
However, for the participants that are 38 or younger the results 
shown that the measured mean ability to generate safe 
passwords starts within the B (3.0) area. After the prototype 
participation it growths into the A (3.9) area. Moreover, 6 of 
7 participants were able to achieve a development. The group 
“age>38” starts within the B (2.5) area and ends within the A 
(3.5) area but only the half (2 of 4) of the participants 
improved through the training the other half showed no 
change. That may indicate that the needed quick game-play 
required to solve the password mini game overwarm a part of 
the participants in that group. But because there are only 4 
relevant records in this sample that kind of assumption cannot 
be proved with this study. A further investigation is needed. 
Regardless to that, it could be shown that a calm-gameplay 
works out to convey serious content to the whole target 
audience.  
An evaluation of the follow-up survey is not made because 
of a lack of data. 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Passwords 
 
To determine whether the measured awareness (Screen 
Lock, Flash-drive, Network Devices) or ability (Password 
generation) changes statistically significant t-tests are 
performed. It is assumed that the training increases the 
awareness or ability. Therefore, one-tailed t-tests for 
dependent samples were calculated. An overview of the 
training effects and the corresponding t-test results are shown 
in Table IX. The results show that with a 𝛼 = .05 the changes 
are statistically significant. There was only one exception 
found. The group “Age>38” shows no statistic significant 
change regarding the password generation topic. A possible 
explanation can be found in two aspects. First, only the 
password mini-game requires a quick gameplay because of its 
action-based game mechanics. Second, there were only four 
participants in that group that had the possibility to improve 
their ability to generate passwords. Therefore, it is not 
possible to select which of these both aspects were the crucial 
one by studying the data. Nevertheless, the test leaders pointed 
out that they noticed many participants of the older group 
having trouble playing the password mini game. Such a 
subjective impression was not reported for any of the other 
training sections.  
TABLE IX.  
OVERVIEW OF THE TRAINING EFFECTS 
 
Age<=38 
Age>38 
 
𝐱̅ 
before 
𝐱̅ 
after 
p- 
value 
𝐱̅ 
before 
𝐱̅ 
after 
p- 
value 
Screen 
Lock 
3.6 
4.2 
.003 
2.9 
4.8 
.001 
Flash-
drive 
2.4 
3.8 
.0004 
3.5 
4.5 
.004 
Network 
Devices 
1.9 
4.5 
<.0001 
1.8 
4.9 
.0002 
Password 
3.0 
3.9 
.0005 
2.5 
3.5 
.09 
 
IX. CONCLUSION 
GHOST is a new approach to perform a cybersecurity 
awareness training for end users in companies. It was shown 
how the serious game content was systematically developed 
out of the well-known ISO 27001 and it was also elaborated 
what kind of requirements a cybersecurity awareness training 
should fulfill. Further it was shown that the majority of the 
resulting seven requirements could be fulfilled through an 
adequate game design. A GHOST training can take place at 
the place of work to reduce the time expense. Since an 
extensive preparation is not needed the organizational 
overhead is reduced. Both aspects also reduce the training 
costs (req. 2a-c). The turn-based, business game inspired 
game design allows further a continuous training cycle, that is 
made possible with a computer-based training (req. 6 and 7). 
Moreover, the social significance of - and the increased 
attacks on- IT systems leave no doubt on the real-life 
relevance of the underlying problem (req. 4).  
The requirements 1, 3 and 5 needed a further investigation. 
Requirement 5 asks for a game quality that is similar to 
entertainment games. It is shown that nowadays even mobile 
entertainment games have a sophisticated game environment 
often represented as a three-dimensional game world. 
Requirement 3 asks to make the training accessible for every 
target group member. To fulfill these both requirements a new 
kind of interaction design for three-dimensional tablet games 
is developed and evaluated through an empirical study.  
Requirement 1 asks amongst other things for a training 
that helps the participants to develop specific skills. To prove 
this aspect a prototype that includes the four serious topics 
Screen Lock, Flash-drive, Network Devices and Password is 
implemented. The prototype is designed to fulfill the 
awareness training requirements that are introduced in this 
paper. By that, the prototype is suitable for an evaluation of 
the GHOST concept. An appropriate evaluation was 
performed through an empiric study. The results indicate that 
the GHOST prototype leads to a grown cybersecurity 
awareness and at the same time is enjoyable. Thereby, it can 
be shown that the postulated requirements and the proposed 

287
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
implementation 
leads 
to 
a 
productive 
Competence 
Developing Game for the Cybersecurity Awareness Training. 
Future research could evaluate to what extend the GHOST 
concept is usable for CDGs for other serios topic. To 
considerate CDGs for related topics in first, could be a 
meaningful approach. In this context, it is planned to examine 
the usefulness of the GHOST concept for digitalization 
education as a next step. Additionally, the implementation of 
the whole 16 game round CDG in a commercial context is 
intended.   
REFERENCES 
[1] J. A. König, M. R. Wolf, “Cybersecurity Awareness Training 
provided by the Competence Developing Game GHOST”, 
ACHI 2018, pp. 81-87, 2018. 
[2] A. Nagarajan, J. M. Allbeck, A. Sood and T. L. Janssen, 
“Exploring game design for cybersecurity training”, Cyber 
Technology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems 
(CYBER), IEEE International Conference, pp. 256-262, 2012. 
[3] S. Culp, “Cyber Risk: People Are Often The Weakest Link In 
The 
Security 
Chain”, 
Forbes, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/steveculp/2016/05/10/cyber-
risk-people-are-often-the-weakest-link-in-the-security-chain, 
Last access: 13.11.2017, 2016. 
[4] J. A. König and M. R. Wolf, “A New Definition of Competence 
Developing Games,” ACHI 2016, pp. 95-97, 2016. 
[5] J. A. König and M. R. Wolf, “The Pyramid Assessment 
Framework for ‘Competence Developing Games’”, HCI 
International, pp. 232-237, 2016. 
[6] S. Seyda and Werner, “IW Continuous Vocational Training 
Survey 2014 - Companies Show In-creased Committed and 
Invest more in Enhancing their Employees’ Skills”, Cologne 
Institute for Economic Research, 2014. 
[7] Gesellschaft für Innovationsforschung und Beratung mbH., 
“Empirical monitoring to the qualification situation in the 
German economy” (original foreign title: “Empiriegestütztes 
Monitoring zur Qualifizierungssituation in der deutschen 
Wirtschaft”),  Berlin: Federal Ministry for Economics Affairs 
and Energy, 2014. 
[8] BIBB, “Data Expose to the Vocational Training Report 2017 – 
Information and analysis in on the development of vocational 
training” 
(original 
foreign 
title: 
„Datenreport 
zum 
Berufsbildungsbericht 2017 - Informationen und Analysen zur 
Entwicklung der beruflichen Bildung“), Federal Institute for 
Vocational Education and Training, 2017. 
[9] R. Hunicke, M. Leblanc and R. Zubek, “MDA: a formal 
approach to game design and game research” In: Proceedings 
of the Challenges in Games AI Workshop, Nineteenth National 
Conference of Artificial Intelligence, 2004. 
[10] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled and L. Nacke, “From game 
design elements to gamefulness: defining "gamification"”, 
Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek 
Conference: 
Envisioning 
Future 
Media 
Environments. 
Finland: ACM, pp. 9-15, 2011. 
[11] U. Blötz, “Business Games and Serious Games in Vocational 
Training” (original foreign title: “Planspiele und Serious 
Games in der beruflichen Bildung”), Bertelsmann, 2015. 
[12] D. Michael and S. Chen, “Serious Games: Games That 
Educate, Train, and Inform,” Thomson Course Technology 
PTR, 2005. 
[13] GTAI, “The Gaming Industry in Germany”, Berlin: Germany 
Trade and Invest, supported by Federal Ministery for 
Economics Affairs and Energy, 2016. 
[14] J. Schell, “The Art of Game Design – A Book of Lenses”, 2. 
Edition, mitp, 2016. 
[15] L. N. Taylor, “Video games: perspective, point-of-view, and 
immersion”, Master Thesis - University of Florida, 2002. 
[16] D. A. Bowman, E. Kruijff, J. J. LaViola Jr. and I. Poupyrev, 
“3D User interfaces: Theory and Practise“, Addison Wesley, 
USA, 2005. 
[17] T. Hynninen, “First-Person Shooter Controls on Touchscreen 
Devices: a Heuristic Evaluation of Three Games on the iPod 
Touch”, Master Thesis - University of Tampere, department of 
Computer Sciences, 2012. 
[18] ISO/IEC 27001:2013 - Annex A, information technology - 
Security techniques - Information security management 
systems – Requirements, 2013. 
[19] W. A. IJsselsteijn, Y. A. W. de Kort, K. Poels, “The Game 
Experience 
Questionnaire”, 
Eindhoven 
Univversity 
of 
Technology, 2013.  
[20] K. Vohwinkel, “Playability: Evaluation of computer and video 
games” (original foreign title: “Playability: Evaluierung von 
Computer- und Videospielen”), Thesis, University of Cologne, 
2010.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

