1
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards a Comprehensive  
Automotive Cybersecurity Reference Architecture 
 
Christoph Schmittner, Martin Latzenhofer,  
Shaaban Abdelkader Magdy, Arndt Bonitz, Markus Hofer 
Center for Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology  
Vienna, Austria 
Email: {christoph.schmittner | martin.latzenhofer |  
abdelkader.shaaban | arndt.bonitz | markus.hofer}@ait.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract— While interconnectivity, complexity, and software-
dependency are prerequisites for automated driving, they also 
increase cybersecurity risks for the whole transportation 
system. 
Information 
and 
communication 
technology 
infrastructure is becoming a second layer for critical 
transportation infrastructure. In the ongoing Austrian research 
project CySiVuS, we identified stakeholders which are involved, 
the services offered and consumed, as well as the risks to a 
cooperative intelligent transport system (C-ITS) in a structured 
manner. We collected and categorized different use cases and 
developed a specific service matrix for C-ITS. Based on an 
adapted security risk management process we conducted an 
exemplary security risk management process, using threat 
modelling. This serves as a fundamental preliminary step 
towards a comprehensive automotive cybersecurity reference 
architecture, which is the main objective of the CySiVuS 
project. Only if all components in the information and 
communication technology (ICT) infrastructure provide their 
services in a sufficient quality in accordance with the required 
security and safety demands, society can rely on an 
interconnected automotive system.  
Keywords- automotive cybersecurity; cooperative intelligent 
transport system; service matrix; reference architecture; risk 
management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In complex and multi-modal environments, smart urban 
mobility in form of automated driving requires new 
approaches, which interconnect vehicles with other road users 
and the road infrastructure. The paper contribution is extended 
from the authors' previous work [1], which refers to the 
Austrian national security research project “Cybersecurity for 
Traffic infrastructure and road operators” (CySiVuS), which 
aims to tackle cybersecurity and privacy as the key challenges 
for cooperative traffic infrastructures and automated driving 
of interconnected cars. The project shifts the perspective from 
OEMs to traffic infrastructure providers and road service 
operators. The existing and future road traffic system, together 
with the associated digital infrastructure is analyzed, and 
different automatic driving scenarios are collected. Various 
attack vectors based on different aspects of the whole 
automotive system require enhanced and further matured 
cybersecurity standards specific for the automotive domain. 
Based on these outcomes, the objective is to work out a 
comprehensive 
automotive 
cyber 
security 
reference 
architecture. As a step towards this goal, we identified use 
cases, their involved services and structured the services based 
on stakeholder offering and consuming services. Here, all 
interdisciplinary interests and objectives of stakeholders have 
been addressed and existing technologies and new 
technological innovations have been integrated. This article 
provides an overview of the project’s approach and highlights 
the urgent need for a complete reference architecture for a 
(cyber) secure automotive traffic infrastructure. 
Main benefits of connected vehicles are a reduction of 
accidents by communicating road conditions, hazards, and 
critical situations, as well as increasing traffic efficiency 
through techniques like platooning or real-time traffic 
monitoring and control [4]. Reliable connectivity is the 
mandatory prerequisite for processing various states of the 
automated vehicle and accelerating further development. 
Positioning and localization, the creation of complete 
situational awareness, the reduction of accidents and the 
increase of comfort and efficiency depend on cooperative and 
automated driving. Current approaches towards stand-alone 
vehicles are sufficient for driving on highway or country 
roads, but these vehicles are not yet ready for urban 
environments. In our position paper, the idea of a 
comprehensive 
automotive 
cybersecurity 
reference 
architecture was postulated [1]. In this paper we included a 
more detailed consideration of security aspects and additional 
uses cases, collected from different sources. This leads to a 
more substantial understanding of how a cooperative 
intelligent transport system (C-ITS), its components and its 
respective stakeholders interact with each other. A 
preliminary step to develop the reference architecture was to 
establish a service matrix showing the interdependencies of 
services. Especially in urban environments, it is necessary to 
integrate automated driving vehicles into a holistic, intelligent 
transportation system to take advantage of all the potential 
benefit [2]. Therefore, this paper will specify the infrastructure 
and connectivity related aspects of automated driving. 
Recent projects on a European level [3] identified 
cybersecurity as a key challenge and risk for future 
transportation systems. Like physical security and protection 
for transportation infrastructure, cybersecurity of ICT 
infrastructure for connected and automated vehicles cannot be 
left exclusively to the private sector, as their interests and 
objectives differ, as well as their scopes is restricted to their 

2
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
specific domain. Extensive mobility needs the cooperation of 
all stakeholders, i.e., automotive original equipment 
manufacturers (OEMs), infrastructure providers and road 
service operators, transport facilitators, end users, physical 
and ICT infrastructure providers, and authorities. All these 
actors with their different perspectives, as well as all the 
components together with their interrelationships are 
considered as one comprehensive infrastructure system. This 
system relies on extensive and reliable communication 
between these elements on different tiers. The communication 
should not be eavesdropped, compromised or manipulated. 
This makes cybersecurity a critical requirement for a 
connected automated transportation system, which is vital for 
the physical transportation infrastructure and a modern 
society.  
This paper is divided into seven sections. After this 
introduction in Section II, we first give a brief overview of the 
state of the art of a road transport system. Here we argue that 
there is no sustainable structured reference architecture that 
supports a broad perspective on automotive cybersecurity. 
Risks should be identified, assessed and addressed through an 
extensive risk management approach. In order to establish a 
clear reference architecture, we suggest a tailored risk 
management process as discussed in Section III. Additionally, 
concrete use cases provide information about the implicit 
structure of a C-ITS. Consequently, we discuss typical use 
case scenarios and form use case categories with the potential 
affecting the security of these automotive services from the 
infrastructure perspective in Section IV. Based on these 
specific use cases, we define the structure of a proposed C-
ITS service matrix in Section V. We introduce the core aspects 
and high-level guidelines in Section VI. The final Section VII 
provides conclusions and outlooks for the near future. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
For automated vehicles, the Society of Automotive 
Engineers (SAE) J3016 [5] defines five levels, which give a 
framework to classify automated vehicles. Currently available 
mass-market systems reach up to level three. Examples of 
level three are highway automation and parking assistance 
systems. The best-known example is Tesla’s autopilot and 
parking assistance system [6]. Higher levels, moving towards 
high driving automation or even complete automation, are 
already in a real-world test stage [7], but not yet publicly 
available. While systems up to level three can rely on in-
vehicle sensors and generate the world model on-demand 
based on local sensor data, higher levels of automation need a 
pre-mapping to create a world model in which the vehicle is 
placed via sensor data [8]. This implies that such vehicles 
require external input to have the latest information and react 
on permanent or temporary modification of the road 
infrastructure. This is especially important in urban 
environments where other localization approaches, relying on 
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) or road 
infrastructure (road markings or roadway detection) are more 
challenging [8]. 
In the United States, the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) [9] currently prepares regulations, 
which require connectivity for active safety features in all new 
vehicles sold in the US starting from 2020. Such features 
commonly referred as cooperative active safety, require a high 
level of trust on outside information and communication. 
Safety reasons were the primary motivation for OEMs to 
establish information communication initiated by the vehicle. 
Security issues – which are following a different paradigm 
than safety-related ones – are a rather new challenge, currently 
addressed by the different stakeholders from different 
viewpoints and with different maturities. Recent hacks show 
that the majority of their systems lack sufficient security 
protection [10], [11]. Naturally, OEMs and manufacturers 
tend to restrict their security focus on the vehicle itself and do 
not follow a holistic approach, analyzing the whole 
infrastructure system in which their cars are only elements. 
Despite first approaches, like the H.R.701 – Security and 
Privacy in Your (SPY) Car Study Act of 2017 [12], 
cybersecurity issues of the vehicle are still primarily handled 
by the vehicle manufacturer, not considering other 
stakeholders and their security measures. Especially when 
moving towards connected, intelligent and automated 
transportation systems, the road traffic infrastructure needs to 
be looked at in its entirety. As for the legal situation briefly 
summarized, new regulations are being developed, but they 
are not timely enough and significantly fragmented. In an 
automated driving scenario, ICT infrastructure becomes a 
second layer of critical transportation infrastructure. Hence, 
the European “Directive on Security of Network and 
Information Systems”, which is also known as the NIS 
Directive [13] and is enforced since the end of May 2018, 
applies to the road authorities responsible for traffic control 
and the operators of intelligent transport systems (ITS). The 
consequences for the OEMs are not yet clear, even while the 
car and its communication system are a key component in the 
superior ITS. There is also an ongoing effort to develop a 
regulation for considering cybersecurity and cybersecurity 
processes in modern vehicles through the type approval 
process [14]. The European directive seeks to ensure a high 
level of network and information security by improving the 
common security level of the provider of critical services and 
digital contents. We expect that the transport sector will 
become such a critical infrastructure due to the increasing 
interoperability, 
connectivity 
aspects, 
communication 
requirements, ICT in general, and privacy issues. Hence, there 
is an urgent need for full categorization and structured 
development. 
Autonomous and automated vehicles require detailed data 
about the environment to generate a situational awareness in 
real time and to ensure their safe movement. It is further 
evident that automated driving scenarios are not restricted to 
the vehicles as a stand-alone system. Instead, the vehicles 
must interact in real-time with the other vehicles and with the 
infrastructure to assess the current situation. Thus, 
interoperability is the first key requisite for efficient traffic 
management, co-operative functions and coordinative 
autonomy [15]. Furthermore, this implies that the integrity of 
all data is a prerequisite for autonomous inter-connected 
driving. 
Connectivity between vehicles and other traffic elements 
is currently still under development, even while standards 

3
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
such as 802.11p already exist [16]. While almost all new 
premium cars offer connectivity via Global System for Mobile 
Communication (GSM) or newer standards like long-term 
evolution (LTE) to a backend system of the manufacturer 
[17], the main motivation is to reduce costly recalls due to 
software adaptions and updates [18], as well as to be 
compliant with the European eCall initiative. Since April 
2018, all new vehicles sold in Europe are obliged to be able to 
automatically call the nearest emergency center in the case of 
a crash and submit position and crash-related information [3]. 
Applications like intelligent coordination are already tested 
and evaluated in real-world scenarios [19]. In such scenarios, 
vehicles and infrastructure need to communicate within a 
defined time frame and exchange information like traffic 
status, travel times, road conditions and road works warnings. 
There are higher requirements on the connectivity for the next 
level of cooperation and connectivity. Although there are ITS 
architecture and connectivity scenarios defined by European 
Telecommunications 
Standards 
Institute 
(ETSI) 
[20] 
available, it is unclear whether vehicles will possess multiple 
communication systems for each service provider or if the 
communication will be handled via a central data hub [21]. 
Different 
approaches 
to 
the 
future 
communication 
infrastructure are presented and discussed in a report of the C-
ITS platform [6]. One conclusion is that, in order to support 
interoperability, stay cost-efficient, reduce the number of 
attack surfaces and support future applications, the 
connectivity should follow some sort of coordinated model, 
considering not only the vehicle, but the complete 
infrastructure and service value chain [1]. 
Especially in the field of cybersecurity, multiple indicators 
show that the current state of the art cannot adequately protect 
the new and vital role ICT will play in transportation. 
Automotive cybersecurity is slowly rising to this aspect [22] 
triggered by research and governmental pressure [17], [23], 
[24], [25]. Technical developments and industrial awareness 
of new challenges are followed by the development of first 
guidelines for tackling the issues [26]. On a higher level, the 
ITS infrastructure security is also a known issue which is 
addressed [27]. There is still ongoing discussion who will 
control and provide the communication infrastructure [3]. 
Since all mobility and the complete road transportation sector 
will depend on the ICT system, it is of utmost importance to 
clarify responsibilities and to achieve a dependable balance 
between private and public control. 
As an additional security property, the protection of 
personally identifiable information is also an important aspect. 
A recent survey of the German consumer organization 
“Stiftung Warentest” showed that almost all connectivity 
solutions offered by automotive OEMs have weaknesses in 
protecting privacy [28]. Personal information is exchanged 
without encryption, and the excessive amounts of information 
is collected and transmitted, partially without informing the 
user and without explicit consent. One important discussion is 
here not only the protection, but also consent to data 
collection.  There are first efforts to develop processes for 
addressing these issues. 
III. 
RISK MANAGMENT 
There is currently no domain-specific risk management 
framework available for the automotive domain [1]. First 
approaches [26] are promising, but initial evaluations show 
certain challenges in the application [29]. A guidebook [26] 
was published at the beginning of 2012, and after being 
available for half a year again set to “work in progress” status. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 
SAE founded a common working group developing a 
standard for the cybersecurity engineering of road vehicles 
[30], but the publication is currently envisioned for 2020. 
There is an ongoing effort of the UNECE WP29 - UN Task 
Force on Cyber security and OTA issues (CS/OTA) to define 
a minimum required cybersecurity management system 
(CSMS), which includes a risk-based approach [14]. Due to 
the focus of the UNECE on type approval, there is a missing 
consideration of dynamic effects. Recent work focused on 
dynamic risk assessments in the IoT domain [49] and showed 
that traditional methods are often challenged by the dynamic 
nature regarding change times and system boundaries, focus 
to much on assets and not on the overall system context and 
did not consider assets as potential attack vectors. In the 
absence of applicable domain-specific frameworks, we 
propose to tailor ISO 31000 [31] for the application in the 
automotive domain. To set up the context, define the 
stakeholder and the application environment, an appropriate 
management framework has to be established first. A second 
main part of the risk management standard proposes the steps 
depicted in Figure 1.  
We start by presenting the framework with suggestions on 
how it can be tailored towards the area of application. The 
proposed tailoring will be partially carried out on a higher 
level. 
Establishing 
the Context
Risk 
Assessment
Risk 
Treatment
Monitoring 
and Review
Communication 
and Consultation
Figure 1: Risk management standard activities 

4
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Establishing the Context 
The previously given state of the art overview shows that 
currently there is no specific regulatory or legal framework 
for road traffic. Discussions are currently underway for a 
legal and regulatory framework for road transport, but no 
clear consensus has yet emerged. The automotive and 
transportation domain is an important part of ensuring and 
enabling our modern lifestyle, and therefore it should be 
avoided that a cybersecurity attack entails the consequences 
as described in Table I. We consider the following objectives 
necessary: 
TABLE I. CONSEQUENCES OF CYBERSECURITY ATTACKS 
Safety 
Causes immediate damage to environment or 
human lives. 
Privacy 
Causes the loss of control over personal 
information. 
Finance 
Causes financial damage. 
Operation 
Negatively impacts the operation and traffic 
flow. 
 
We propose two restrictions to these statements. First, we 
restrict the risk management to direct and immediate 
consequences. It means that we do not consider second-level 
consequences, e.g., an operational impact would also impact 
emergency services and could therefore cause damage to 
human lives. Our focus lies on the direct consequences. 
Second, we assess the impact rating on users and society 
higher than the impact on the organization. That means that 
safety impacts and financial impacts for users or society are 
prioritized compared with risks for individual organizations. 
Society needs to trust and rely on the transportation system, 
which is supported by ensuring their needs and protection 
first. 
B. Risk Assessment 
Risk assessment includes identification, analysis and 
evaluation of risks. While [32] presents examples of risk 
assessment techniques, none of them are tailored for 
cybersecurity in the road traffic domain. Multiple proposals 
exist to extend established safety risk assessment methods 
towards cybersecurity [33], [34] or to tailor cybersecurity 
methods for the automotive domain [35], [36]. It should be 
remarked that there is no general risk assessment 
implementation, each selected methodology needs to be 
justified. Depending on the abstraction level, different 
methods are favored. We propose threat modelling [37] for the 
analysis of risks. For risk evaluation purposes, we choose four 
impact levels, divided into four categories, as shown in Table 
II. This covers most forms of potential impact of attacks. This 
is an abstraction of the categories proposed by SAE J3061 [26] 
and EVITA [38]. Both use similar categories. 
 
 
 
TABLE II. IMPACT LEVELS 
 
User / Society 
Service provider 
/ organization 
Safety 
1 
- 
Operational 
3 
4 
Privacy 
2 
3 
Financial 
3 
4 
 
A critical factor for risk evaluation in cybersecurity is the 
consideration of likelihood. For example, the railway domain 
is discussing to consider the potential impact as only input for 
risk evaluation [39]. This can lead to unlikely risks being 
given higher priority. Details of the likelihood assessment we 
are using are presented in [29], but in short, we propose to 
evaluate the likelihood based on the following four 
parameters: 
• 
Assumed attacker capabilities  
• 
Ease of gaining information about the systems 
• 
Reachability and accessibility of the system 
• 
Required equipment for an attack 
C. Risk Treatment 
Risk treatment is based on an assessment whether the risk 
is tolerable for a specific stakeholder. CySiVuS focuses on the 
society as the most relevant stakeholder, which means that 
benefits of connected and automated road traffic scenarios 
should outweigh the risks, especially to human lives. Unless 
this is the case, we need to either modify the risk by 
implementing specific technical or organizational measures or 
avoid the risk altogether by deciding not to implement the 
scenario. Each risk treatment needs to be followed by an 
assessment of the effectiveness of the treatment, e.g., if the 
remaining risk is tolerable and can be accepted. Risk treatment 
assessment also includes the evaluation if the chosen 
measures influence other risks or scenarios. 
D. Monitoring and Review 
There are currently no clear responsibilities defined for 
monitoring and reviewing of risks. This is impeded by the 
hierarchical silo structure which currently dominates the 
automotive domain. OEMs only have a restricted system view 
and are only able to identify risks on their level. Suppliers are 
responsible for the implementation of risk treatment activities, 
in fact mitigation measures, for their specific components and 
identification of change requirements. There is no 
unambiguous allocation of risk monitoring responsibilities. 
Established approaches in the automotive domain mainly 
follow an incident based approach, i.e., reactive behaviour. 
For cybersecurity challenges, active monitoring and reaction 
are necessary. We propose to assign a reporting responsibility 
and develop a cyber incident response plan. In addition to that, 
risk treatments need to be coordinated between all 
stakeholders. 
E. Communication and Consultation 
As a continuous and parallel step along the risk 
assessment, treatment and monitoring, the complete 

5
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
management process needs to be recorded, documented and 
communicated to the stakeholders. This includes capturing the 
decisions, results and most importantly the justification for 
decisions and actions. Only this step makes risk management 
transparent and comprehensible. It should be remarked that 
such records are sensitive and could be potentially misused by 
attackers. 
IV. 
USE CASES 
In the CySiVuS project, we identified and collected 
various use cases for typical situations that a C-ITS has to 
cope with. The scoping of the use cases supports the 
identification 
of 
stakeholder, 
roles, 
components, 
communication types and data flows, interfaces, as well as all 
critical services. Thus, they form a starting point for further 
structuring the system and prepare a preliminary step to 
develop a comprehensive reference architecture. In the 
following we introduce the use case collection. 
A. C-ITS Day 1 Use Cases 
The first collection of use cases is based on the 
Cooperative Intelligent Transport System C-ITS Day 1 Use 
Case [40]. Day 1 refers to the first set of uses cases 
implemented and evaluated in the European Corridor – 
Austrian Testbed for Cooperative Systems (Eco-AT) project. 
One typical use case is the Road Works Warning (RWW) use 
case. This use case describes an interaction between vehicles 
and 
cooperative 
roadside 
elements, 
which 
provide 
information about short time modifications in the road 
infrastructure to optimize traffic flow and driving strategy. In 
Eco-AT the transmitted data will only be used as information 
for the vehicle driver. We will consider the next step and 
assume that in the future vehicles will automatically act based 
on the received information. In addition, we will also set up a 
third Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) use case, e.g., a vehicle is 
broadcasting information about position and speed to enable 
other vehicles, which cannot obtain the information by their 
built-in sensors to adapt their trajectories according to the 
current situation.  
Figure 2 depicts the introduced use cases. The Road Side 
Unit (RSU) sends information to all vehicles about a temporal 
change in the road shape. Vehicles A and B coordinate how 
B, which is not visible to A, enters the main road and all 
vehicles receive information from the traffic light system.  
B. CySiVuS Use Cases  
Examples of additional typical use cases in an ITS are 
listed in the following subsections. We categorized them in 
five different categories.  
 
1) Normal cases: The term normal refers to the most 
frequently encountered applications of an ITS or an 
automated vehicle. The typical generic forms in a transport 
system by using the road infrastructure and its technical 
equipments are: 
• 
Transport of people and goods from place A to place 
B. Some concrete use cases for transport of people are 
trips from home to work, to places for leisure 
activities, to fulfill daily needs, of service providers 
and time-critical blue-light emergency drives. 
Examples for transport of goods are home deliveries 
of daily goods, special transport of chemicals, heavy- 
or money-transports and time-critical transports like 
blood and organs. Another type of normal transport 
use cases are maintenance drives for snow removal, 
road cleaning or driving school trips. 
 
• 
Departing predefined routes (e.g., sightseeing) in a 
specific order or driving as a leisure activity for fun. 
 
2) Emergency cases: Emergency cases are cases in which 
the ITS needs to react on some unforseen event in order to 
esnure safety of human life and avaialability of the 
transportation service.  
• 
The function of vehicle components is suddenly no 
longer available (e.g., steering, brake, EMP). It 
requires reporting to other vehicles, roadside units, 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) backend, 
etc. It is necessary to transfer the vehicle to a safe 
location or condition and to call for support, e.g., the 
ambulance or service personnel. 
• 
The driver is not able to interact (e.g., impaired, 
unconscious, or dead);  
• 
Occurrence of an unexpected event (e.g., mudslide, 
avalanche) requires a report to the RSU. It is 
necessary to transfer the vehicle to a safe location or 
condition and to call for support, e.g., the ambulance 
or service personnel.  
• 
Unauthorized active or passive intervention of third 
parties (e.g., hacking, targeted scattering of 
misleading information) leads to a broadcast 
information to other vehicles, the RSUs, OEM 
backend disabling all the network functionalities of 
the concerned vehicle. 
• 
Authorized active or passive interference of third 
parties (e.g., targeted manipulation of the control unit 
from outside) requires verifying the authorization, 
broadcasting information to other vehicles, the RSUs, 
OEM backend when appropriate, applying the action 
needed, transmitting the location data and to transfer 
the vehicle to a safe location or condition. 
• 
Automatic acquisition of civil vehicles for emergency 
transports requires to transfer the vehicle to a safe 
Figure 2: Use cases 

6
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
location or condition, to verify the authorization and 
the execution of the action. 
 
3) Comfort cases: There are different perspectives of 
comfort features. These features are not really necessary for 
the fundamental task to transport persons or goods from A to 
B, but they make the process more convenient. This could be 
beneficial for the driver or passengers, for the OEM or 
manufacturer, the road or infrastructure operator or for other 
stakeholders. Some examples are driver assistance systems, 
intelligent route planning, entertainment routes, multimodal 
transport services, additional bookable driving performance 
or features, etc. 
 
4) Road safety and other special cases: These cases 
concern the road operator and aim to ensure the usability of 
road sections. Here cases like the distribution of information 
about dangerous zones or special situations, e.g., due to 
weather conditions, road works, atypical lane guidance, 
unusual behavior of other road users, outage of infrastructure 
elements, maintenance works, and traffic controls are 
collected. 
 
5) Traffic management cases: There are some situations 
for the road operator to interfere in the traffic flow to enforce 
speed limits, release service lanes as additional lanes, service 
announcements with alternative routes, telematic systems for 
road work areas. 
V. 
SERVICE MATRIX 
Based on the proposed risk management process described 
in Section III and the collection of use cases discussed in the 
previous Section IV, we set up a service matrix, where we 
clarify the inherent dependencies between the services 
provided by different stakeholders. Firstly, we introduce the 
different stakeholders, assign the specific components to their 
responsibility to finally document which stakeholder provides 
essential services within a C-ITS for the other stakeholders. 
A. C-ITS Stakeholder 
The various stakeholders, shown in Figure 3, were 
deducted from the use cases discussed in Section IV. Each 
stakeholder has their own view on the C-ITS, with different 
requirements, usage patterns or interests. 
• 
Vehicle users are direct users of the transportation 
system, and usually those who are transported in the 
vehicle itself. 
• 
Vehicle manufacturers (i.e., OEMs) and maintenance 
providers. 
• 
Infrastructure and road operators are typically 
responsible for the construction and maintenance of 
roads, road networks, bridges and tunnels and other 
infrastructure elements.  
• 
Authorities, for example, police, the ministry of 
transport or delegated organizations, are responsible 
for ensuring the proper functioning of the transport 
system. 
• 
Third-party service providers summarize all entities 
that provide services, for example, fuel stations, 
mobility 
clubs, 
insurance 
companies 
or 
telecommunication providers. 
• 
Society comprises all persons living, working and 
residing in a given area. 
B. C-ITS Infrastructure Components 
This section identifies the components and their structural 
connections. The following formulates the road transport 
system, seen in Figure 4 below. 
 
1) Communication in the Vehicle. There are various 
communication requirements in the vehicle between 
Electronic Control Units (ECU), sensors, and actuators. 
Different communication busses help to structure the data 
flow. 
• 
Classically, the Controller Area Network bus 
(CAN) is used for communication between 
control units [46]. The CAN protocol was defined 
in 1986. In 1991 the first vehicle with CAN was 
available on the market [47]. The CAN bus was 
developed as a standard vehicle protocol that 
minimizes 
cabling 
effort 
and 
enables 
prioritization of communication. The big amounts 
of data such as generated by sensors or camera 
systems can be a big challenge for a CAN 
network.  
• 
A Local Interconnect Network (LIN) [48] was 
developed to a network which an increasing 
number of sensors in the vehicle with the control 
units. Most of the sensors have requirements with 
fewer capabilities than the CAN network. 
Therefore, the CAN network can be useful for 
simple networks.  
Figure 3: Stakeholder of a C-ITS 
 

7
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
The Media Oriented Systems Transport (MOST) 
bus was developed to enable the communication 
of media content in the vehicle. It can be used, to 
transmit video content to monitors in the vehicle. 
 
2) Vehicle Interfaces: There are different types of 
interfaces, which allow the transfer of data to and from 
the vehicle: 
• 
On-board diagnostics (OBD) and increasingly 
USB interfaces require a physical connection. 
ODB is designed for Machine-to-Machine 
(M2M) communication between the diagnostic 
system and the vehicle system, while USB is a 
way for the user to exchange data with the 
vehicle. 
• 
WLAN, Bluetooth, and WLAN-based V2X 
protocols 
provide 
medium-range 
wireless 
communication. 
Normally, 
no 
additional 
infrastructure is required, and the devices 
communicate directly with each other. The 
interfaces are intended for communication 
between systems. 
 
• 
The last group consists of interfaces for long-
distance communication, such as radio receivers 
or mobile (cellular) radio transceivers. The radio 
receiver is the only unidirectional interface. 
 
3) Road 
Infrastructure 
Interfaces: 
The 
road 
infrastructure has the following general communication 
interfaces in order to provide data exchange with RSUs. 
• 
Interfaces to internal sensors and actuators, e.g., to 
traffic detectors or traffic control technology such 
as variable-message signs 
• 
Interfaces to vehicles moving on the road 
infrastructure such as radio interfaces from 
roadside units to vehicles 
• 
Interfaces to third-party providers, e.g., DATEX 
II Web Service  
4) Backend infrastructure and services. This category 
compromises all non-road specific background services, 
i.e., the backend systems of the car manufacturer or 
navigation service providers. Depending on the service, 
             
              
          
                     
                      
                                            
                    
               
              
         
                
                 
                 
  
                      
                      
                     
                   
                    
               
                    
             
                 
                        
                          
         
      
   
         
             
Figure 4: C-ITS Overview 
 
 

8
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the vehicle ECU might either be directly connected via a 
cellular radio modem to a background service (for 
example for accessing manufacturer updates) or use a  
modem integrated to a dedicated device, i.e., a navigation 
unit. 
C. C-ITS Service Matrix 
The types of services that can be implemented for 
automated driving applications are diverse. To gain a better 
overview and understanding, the identified services of the 
entire road traffic system should be visualized so that not only 
the actual basic components, but also their inherent 
connections can be easily grasped. The service matrix 
introduced in this section is one possibility which helps to get 
a good overview of the complexity by showing which services 
are offered by which stakeholders and which stakeholders in 
turn used them. This means, the possible services should be 
considered from different stakeholder perspectives, i.e., 
vehicle (user), infrastructure and road operators, vehicle 
manufacturers (OEM) and maintenance providers, third party 
service providers, authorities, and the society as a whole.  
The following service matrix in Figure 5 shows the 
evaluation being carried out by the project team as a type of 
expert evaluation. It shows how the importance of services 
provided by a certain entity for the user of the service, i.e., the 
extent to which the service user is impaired by the 
discontinuation of the service in the safe execution of his tasks 
and his responsibilities. 
The first step of generating this matrix was to find and 
define exemplary services for each combination of two of the 
stakeholders. For example, services being provided by 
infrastructure and road operators to vehicle users are 
numerous, including but not limited to traffic flow 
information, construction site warnings, traffic status 
information, and route information. Less strong, for example, 
is the connection between infrastructure and road operators 
and third-party service providers, the only relevant services 
here are traffic radio, and in some cases information for the 
modification of infrastructure.  
The final service matrix was derived from this 
intermediate matrix with all services found and then rated for 
criticality  by the experts in the project consortium. The scale 
used for rating goes from 0 (irrelevant), over 1 (little impact) 
and 2 (impairment) up to 3 (critical). As an example, the 
services provided by an infrastructure and road operator is 
crucial to a vehicle user, but not to OEMs or maintenance 
providers. A general observation revealed by the service 
matrix is that most of the stakeholder rely on services provided 
by others. This means that a C-ITS is a highly interdependent 
overall system and requires a well-structured reference 
architecture to be understandable by key players forming a C-
ITS like authorities, decision makers as well as the industry. 
 
Service 
 
Customer 
➔ 
Service  
Providers 
 
 
   Vehicle user 
   Infrastructure and Road Ops 
   OEM, Maintenance Provider 
   Third Party Service Provider 
   Society 
   Authorities 
Vehicle user 
2 
2 
2 
1 
0 
2 
Infrastructure and Road Ops 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
OEM, Maintenance Provider 
3 
1 
0 
2 
0 
2 
Third Party Service Provider 
0 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
Society 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
Authorities 
3 
2 
2 
1 
2 
2 
Figure 5. Service provider/service user matrix 
 
D. Security analysis example 
We identify security threats based on the data flow 
between vehicle A, B, and roadside units in Figure 2. We use 
the threat analysis tool [36] developed by Austrian Institute of 
Technology. The threat tool uses several source materials to 
ensure a range of threats is considered. The following source 
documents were used to develop the threats database:  
• 
Threat Modeling for Automotive Security Analysis 
[36] 
• 
Connected cars Threats, vulnerabilities and their 
impact [41] 
• 
The ENISA Threat Landscape 2015, Top Threats 
[42]. 
Figure 6 depicts the data flow between vehicle A, B, and 
RSUs. Based on the given input to the tool, and without any 
security mitigation measures, 55 threats were identified.  
 
The threat tool classifies the detected potential threats into 
six main classes according to the STRIDE model [43], i.e., 
Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Information disclosure, 
Denial of Service (DoS), and Elevation of privilege. Table III 
summarizes the numbers of the detected threats regarding the 
STRIDE model. 
TABLE III. DETECTED THREATS ACCORDING TO STRIDE CLASSIFICATION 
Type 
Numbers 
Denial of Service  
7 
Elevation of Privilege 
7 
Information Disclosure 
15 
Repudiation 
5 
Spoofing 
14 
Tampering 
7 
 
The tool performs a risk assessment process to classify the 
risk of the identified threats as an extreme, high, medium, or 
low risks. Figure 7 shows statistical percentages of risks in the 

9
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
identified threats. From the observed risk statistic, we see that 
the highest number of risks are medium risks.  
 
Figure 7: Statistical percentage of risks 
We focus in the following on the interaction type and the 
corresponding threat, seen in Table IV.  
TABLE IV. DELIVER MALICIOUS UPDATES TO VEHICLE B  
[PRIORITY: HIGH] 
Category 
Spoofing 
Description 
Deliver Malicious Updates to Vehicle B 
Justification 
<no mitigation provided> 
Attack 
method 
Spoofing vehicle A in order to send 
malicious updates. 
 
For 
connected 
automotive 
vehicles 
and 
their 
corresponding brakes control and steering algorithms, the 
correct and especially secure reception of safety and kinematic 
related messages is of utmost importance. A manipulated 
sending unit from some distance away could communicate 
status information, e.g., nonexistent barriers, road works or 
vehicle positions ahead leading to slow down or even stop of 
the traffic culminating to accidents. To prevent such a threat, 
we propose distance-bounding protocols that allow a safe 
decision if the communication partner is within a certain 
radius, defined as bubble [44], [45].  
The adapted Table V summarizes the considerations 
detailed above.  
TABLE V. DELIVER MALICIOUS UPDATES TO VEHICLE B  
[PRIORITY: LOW] 
Category 
Spoofing 
Description 
Deliver Malicious Updates to vehicle B 
Justification 
<no mitigation provided>  
Distance bounding avoids remote attacks and 
requires physical access to the environment in 
order to conduct the attack 
Attack 
method 
Spoofing vehicle A in order to send malicious 
updates. 
PrimitiveValueTypes     
Vehicle A
Vehicle
Detection
Sensor
ECU1
Brakes
Vehicle B
ECU2
Distance
Sensor
Steering
V2X Gateway
RSU
Map Update
Traffic Update
«Sensor Data»
«HTTPS»
«HTTPS»
«HTTPS»
«CAN Bus»
«CAN Bus»
«HTTPS»
«Sensor Data»
«Communication_flow»
«GPS Data»
Figure 6: Data flow model for threat assessment 
 
 

10
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This capability requires the introduction of a bidirectional 
communication link between Verifier (V) and Proofer (P) and 
a fast processing of the challenge sent from V to P. This 
reduces the evaluated attack likelihood by enforcing physical 
access to conduct such attacks and reduces the risk to a 
tolerable level. 
VI. 
REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 
An automotive reference architecture for security analysis 
was presented in [11]. While it includes the elements of 
communication between backend and vehicle, it does not 
consider all relevant scenarios for C-ITS like V2V 
communication. Furthermore, it only defines the technical 
elements and does not differentiate between environments, 
stakeholder, objects in the architecture a division. However, 
this pure technical approach is not sufficient and to apply the 
reference architecture in practice, this separation is vital. 
As a first approach, we divide the ITS into five clusters of 
elements as shown in Figure 8. On the physical side (blue, left 
side), we have vehicles, infrastructure and personal devices. 
The provider’s side (green, right side) contains elements 
which are maintained and operated by infrastructure operators 
and road service providers offering mobility services (grey, 
lower side) available to the users (yellow, upper side). All 
elements are interconnected by a communication system 
(orange, in the middle). It should be highlighted that these 
blocks can overlap, e.g., infrastructure providers can also 
provide services; and blocks can contain multiple diverse sub-
blocks, e.g., communication collects a multitude of techniques 
like wireless networking (WLAN) or GSM, which can be 
applied for V2V or Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) 
communication. 
 
 
Figure 9: Clustering of elements in the transportation system 
 
Moreover, the approach described above offers a 
relatively high-level view on the system, which is, to a certain 
degree, architecture independent. As it is discussed in [6] and 
[21], it is still in discussion how the connectivity architecture 
will finally look like, but all discussed architectural variants 
fit in the presented structural model. Such a structural model 
helps to identify the involved parties, allows assigning risk 
mitigations 
to 
technical 
elements 
and 
assigns 
the 
responsibility of implementing and maintaining these risk 
mitigations to involved parties. To be practically applicable, 
the identified risk mitigation measure is implemented in 
infrastructure and vehicle, conducted by system OEM and 
infrastructure providers, which is shown in Figure 9. 
 
A possible solution approach is a structured multi-tiered 
reference 
architecture. 
However, 
a 
consistent 
risk 
management methodology is a critical success factor for 
developing a unified architecture across all perspectives. Our 
approach is to take the widely accepted risk management 
standard ISO 31000 [31] as a basis and tailor it to the 
automotive requirements.  
We discuss the five main steps of the risk management 
process when we apply it to a road traffic system. It is crucial 
to restrict the proposed approach to direct risks only and to 
weight 
the 
impacts 
differently 
depending 
on 
the 
consequences. The risk management analysis steps are  
essential to finding an appropriate mixture of applicable 
methods to form a reliable methodology for the assessment. 
Additionally, the evaluation of the likelihood and the handling 
of uncertainty needs to be solved. Risk treatment in a complex 
and interconnected environment must consider different 
actors. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper we analyze the technological and legal state 
of the art of automated driving for smart urban mobility. We 
conclude that the current state of the art is not yet sufficient 
with the complex requirements of such an environment. We 
identified four current challenges to a comprehensive traffic 
road system: The interoperability of the components among 
the vehicles as well as the infrastructure elements, 
connectivity and communication tasks especially for 
interacting and cooperation of the different components, ICT 
in general and cybersecurity issues to address security threats, 
and privacy finally aspects which subsume protection 
requirements of personal data of the vehicle drivers. There are 
efforts to form a compliant legal and technological 
framework, but all these considerations are not yet completed. 
By considering a tailored risk management process and 
collecting and categorizing different use cases, we initially 
identified stakeholders and components. Based on this, we 
developed a C-ITS service matrix to visualize the service 
usage between the five stakeholder groups and to reveal their 
interdependencies among each other. This is a potential 
starting point for future cyber security investigations. 
Infrastructure 
Vehicles 
Personal Devices 
Communication  
Service Provider 
Infrastructure 
Operators 
System OEMs 
User 
Services 
Figure 8: Application of the structural model 
 
 

11
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Considering 
the 
challenges 
for 
cybersecurity 
risk 
management in dynamic environments like Internet of Things 
we already consider some of the challenges [49], [50]. By 
following a model-based approach we are able to 
automatically re-asses the system and our risk evaluation 
already considers assets as potential attack vectors. The 
model-based approach is challenged by systems with unclear 
boundaries or composition, e.g., new risks due to a change in 
system composition are difficult to measure. 
The primary task of the CySiVuS research project is to 
develop a wide-ranging model on all necessary perspective 
levels, which the rough approach introduced in this article 
could be a starting point. By conducting the risk management 
process and developing the reference architecture, we show 
the multidimensional nature of a road traffic system. The main 
upcoming challenges are a concrete in-depth-analysis of risk 
assessment by applying adapted risk management methods. 
The next step is to develop a comprehensive automotive 
reference architecture based on the considerations introduced 
in the previous section. The main objective is to determine an 
appropriate layered visualization taking the different 
stakeholders, components, services into account.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
research 
project 
“Cybersicherheit 
für 
Verkehrsinfrastruktur- und Straßenbetreiber” (CySiVuS, in 
English: „Cyber security for transport infrastructure and road 
operators“) (Project-Nr. 865081) is supported and partially 
funded by the Austrian National Security Research Program 
KIRAS (Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and 
Technology (BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion 
Agency (FFG) 2017). 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Schmittner, M. Latzenhofer, S. Abdelkader, and M. Hofer, 
“A Proposal for a Comprehensive Automotive Cybersecurity 
Reference Architecture,” in VEHICULAR 2018, The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, 
Technologies and Applications, Venice, 2018, pp. 30–36  
[2] Q. Xu, K. Hedrick, R. Sengupta, and J. VanderWerf, “Effects 
of 
vehicle-vehicle/roadside-vehicle 
communication 
on 
adaptive cruise controlled highway systems,” in Proceedings 
IEEE 56th Vehicular Technology Conference, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada, 2002, vol. 2, pp. 1249–1253  
[3] C-ITS Platform, “Working Group 6 Access to in-vehicle 
resources and data,” Dec. 2015.  
[4] European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), 
“ETSI TR 102 638 V1.1.1; Intelligent Transport Systems 
(ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; 
Definitions.” 
Jun-2009 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_tr/102600_102699/102638/0
1.01.01_60/tr_102638v010101p.pdf [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[5] SAE, “J3016 Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to 
Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles,” 
2016.  
[6] M. Dikmen and C. M. Burns, “Autonomous Driving in the 
Real World: Experiences with Tesla Autopilot and Summon,” 
in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular 
Applications, 2016, pp. 225–228  
[7] M. Aeberhard et al., “Experience, Results and Lessons 
Learned from Automated Driving on Germany’s Highways,” 
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, vol. 7, no. 
1, pp. 42–57, 2015.  
[8] G. Bresson, Z. Alsayed, L. Yu, and S. Glaser, “Simultaneous 
Localization and Mapping: A Survey of Current Trends in 
Autonomous Driving,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Vehicles, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 194–220, Sep. 2017.  
[9] NHTSA, “NHTSA | National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration.”  [Online]. Available: https://www.nhtsa.gov/ 
[28-05-2019] 
[10] A. Greenberg, “The Jeep Hackers Are Back to Prove Car 
Hacking Can Get Much Worse.”, Wired, 08.01.16  [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.wired.com/2016/08/jeep-hackers-
return-high-speed-steering-acceleration-hacks/ [Accessed: 28-
05-2019] 
[11] J. Brückmann, T. Madl, and H. J. Hof, “An Analysis of 
Automotive Security Based on a Reference Model for 
Automotive Cyber Systems,” SECURWARE 2017 : The 
Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security 
Information, Systems and Technologies [Online]. Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319932479_An_An
alysis_of_Automotive_Security_Based_on_a_Reference_Mo
del_for_Automotive_Cyber_Systems [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[12] Library Congress, “H.R.701 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): 
SPY Car Study Act of 2017.”  [Online]. Available: 
https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-
bill/701/text [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[13] European Union, Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning 
measures for a high common level of security of network and 
information systems across the Union, vol. L194. 2016 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L:2016:194:FULL&from=EN 
[Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[14] Secretary of the UN Task Force on Cyber Security and Over-
the-Air issues, “Draft Recommendation on Cyber Security of 
the Task Force on CyberSecurity and Over-the-air issues of 
UNECE WP.29 GRVA (Informal Document).” 20-Sep-2018 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/trans/doc/2018/wp29
grva/GRVA-01-17.pdf [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[15] NHTSA, “Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communications: Readiness of 
V2V Technology for Application,” National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, US Department of Transportation.  
[16] European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), 
“ETSI ES 202 663 V1.1.0; Intelligent Transport Systems 
(ITS); European profile standard for the physical and medium 
access control layer of Intelligent Transport Systems 
operatingin the 5 GHz frequency band.” Nov-2009 [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_es/202600_202699/202663/
01.01.00_50/es_202663v010100m.pdf 
[Accessed: 
28-05-
2019] 
[17] C. Valasek and C. Miller, “A Survey of Remote Automotive  
Attack 
Surfaces,” 
IOActive 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://ioactive.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/IOActive_Remote_Attack_Surfaces.
pdf [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[18] H. A. Odat and S. Ganesan, “Firmware over the air for 
automotive, Fotamotive,” in IEEE International Conference 
on Electro/Information Technology, 2014, pp. 130–139.  

12
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[19] EcoAT, “Der österreichische Beitrag zum Kooperativen ITS 
Korridor“ [Online]. Available: http://eco-at.info/  [Accessed: 
28-05-2019] 
[20] ETSI, “Automotive Intelligent Transport Systems,” European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute.  [Online]. Available: 
https://www.etsi.org/technologies-
clusters/technologies/automotive-intelligent-transport 
[Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[21] B. Datler, “A Road Operator’s View on Cloud-based ITS – 
Requirements and Cooperation Models,” 23rd ITS World 
Congress, 2016  
[22] E. 
Khayari, 
“SECURE 
AUTOMOTIVE 
ON-BOARD 
ELECTRONICS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE,” p. 9.  
[23] D. Spaar, “Car, open yourself! Vulnerabilities in BMW’s 
ConnectedDrive,” pp. 86–90, 2015.  
[24] J. Petit and S. E. Shladover, “Potential Cyberattacks on 
Automated Vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 546–556, Apr. 
2015.  
[25] D. C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Remote Exploitation of an 
Unaltered Passenger Vehicle,” p. 91.  
[26] Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems. 
SAE, 2016 
[27] ECo-AT, “ECo-AT SWP3.4 Security,” ECo-AT, 2016 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.eco-at.info/system-
spezifikationen.html [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[28] “Connected Cars: Die Apps der Auto-hersteller sind 
Daten-schnüffler.” 
26-Sep-2017 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.test.de/ 
Connected-Cars-Die-Apps-der-
Autohersteller-sind-Datenschnueffler-5231839-5231843/ 
[Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[29] C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, C. Reyes, O. Dillinger, and P. Puschner, 
“Using SAE J3061 for Automotive Security Requirement 
Engineering,” in Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 
2016, pp. 157–170.  
[30] International Organization for Standardization, Ed., ISO/SAE 
CD 21434 Road Vehicles - Cybersecurity engineering. ISO, 
Geneva, 
Switzerland 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/70918.html [Accessed: 28-05-
2019] 
[31] “ISO 31000:2009 Risk management -- Principles and 
guidelines,” 
ISO, 
Feb. 
2018 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/65694.html [Accessed: 28-05-
2019] 
[32] International Organization for Standardization, Ed., ISO 
31010:2009 Risk management - Risk assessment techniques. 
ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.  
[33] G. Macher, H. Sporer, R. Berlach, E. Armengaud, and C. 
Kreiner, “SAHARA: A security-aware hazard and risk 
analysis method,” in 2015 Design, Automation Test in Europe 
Conference Exhibition (DATE), 2015, pp. 621–624.  
[34] C. Schmittner, T. Gruber, P. Puschner, and E. Schoitsch, 
“Security Application of Failure Mode and Effect Analysis 
(FMEA),” in Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 2014, 
pp. 310–325.  
[35] “A case study of FMVEA and CHASSIS as safety and security 
co-analysis method for automotive cyber-physical systems,” 
ResearchGate. 
 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282792587_A_case
_study_of_FMVEA_and_CHASSIS_as_safety_and_security
_co-analysis_method_for_automotive_cyber-
physical_systems [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[36] M. Zhendong, and C. Schmittner. "Threat modeling for 
automotive security analysis." Advanced Science and 
Technology Letters 139 (2016): 333-339. 
[37] F. Swiderski and W. Snyder, Threat Modeling (Microsoft 
Professional). 2004.  
[38] “E-safety vehicle intrusion protected applications,” EVITA, 
2008 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.evita-
project.org/Publications/EVITAD0.pdf  [Accessed: 28-05-
2019] 
[39] J. Braband, “Towards an IT Security Framework for Railway 
Automation,” presented at the Embedded Real Time Software 
and Systems,” Toulouse, Feb. 2014.  
[40] “C-ITS Strategy Austria [C-ITS Strategy Austria],” Network 
Drivers, Promote Efficiency and Safety in Transport., Jun. 
2016 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.bmvit.gv.at/en/service/publications/transport/do
wnloads/citsstategy.pdf [Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
 [41] S. Strobl, D. Hofbauer, C. Schmittner, S. Maksuti, M. Tauber, 
and J. Delsing, “Connected cars — Threats, vulnerabilities and 
their impact,” in 2018 IEEE Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems 
(ICPS), 2018, pp. 375–380.  
[42] “ENISA Threat Landscape 2015 — ENISA.”  [Online]. 
Available: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/etl2015  
[Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[43] “Uncover Security Design Flaws using The STRIDE 
Approach,” MSDN Magazine, Nov. 2006 [Online]. Available: 
https://adam.shostack.org/uncover.html [Accessed: 28-05-
2019] 
[44] K. B. Rasmussen, S. Capkun “Realization of RF Distance 
Bounding”. InUSENIX Security Symposium 11-08-2010 (pp. 
389-402). 
[45] G. P. Hancke and M. G. Kuhn, “Attacks on Time-of-flight 
Distance Bounding Channels,” in Proceedings of the First 
ACM Conference on Wireless Network Security, New York, 
NY, USA, 2008, pp. 194–202 [Online]. Available: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1352533.1352566  [Accessed: 28-
05-2019] 
[46] “History of CAN technology.”  [Online]. Available: 
https://www.can-cia.org/can-knowledge/can/can-history/ 
[Accessed: 28-05-2019] 
[47] “Mercedes W140: First car with CAN.”  [Online]. Available: 
https://can-
newsletter.org/engineering/applications/160322_25th-
anniversary-mercedes-w140-first-car-with-can [Accessed: 28-
05-2019] 
[48] International Organization for Standardization, Ed., ISO 
17987-1:2016 Road vehicles; Local Interconnect Network 
(LIN); Part 1: General information and use case definition. 
ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2016.  
[49] J. R. C. Nurse, S. Creese, and D. De Roure, “Security Risk 
Assessment in Internet of Things Systems,” IT Prof., vol. 19, 
no. 5, pp. 20–26, 2017. 
[50] J. R. C. Nurse, P. Radanliev, S. Creese, and D. De Roure, “If 
you can’t understand it, you can’t properly assess it! The 
reality of assessing security risks in Internet of Things 
systems,” Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of 
the IoT - 2018,  

