Optimal Security Protection for Sensitive Data 
 
George O. M. Yee 
Computer Research Lab, Aptusinnova Inc., Ottawa, Canada 
Dept. of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada 
email: george@aptusinnova.com, gmyee@sce.carleton.ca 
 
 
 
Abstract—The growth of the Internet has unfortunately been 
accompanied by an increasing number of attacks against an 
organization’s computing infrastructure, leading to the theft of 
sensitive data. In response to such incursions, the organization 
installs security measures (e.g., intrusion detection system) for 
protecting its sensitive data. However, this installation is often 
done haphazardly, without any objective guidance regarding 
how many vulnerabilities must be secured in order to achieve 
an acceptable level of protection. This paper shows how an 
organization can calculate estimates of security protection, and 
objectively use them to adjust the number of security measures 
installed, until an optimal level of protection is achieved, 
subject to certain constraints. This work extends the paper 
“Assessing Security Protection for Sensitive Data” published in 
SECURWARE 2017. Additional explanations, application 
examples, and related works have been included.  
 
Keywords-optimal; security protection; assessment; sensitive 
data; vulnerability. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This work extends Yee [1] by adding explanations, 
application examples, and related works. 
Recent 
attacks 
against 
computing 
infrastructure, 
resulting in the theft of sensitive data, have grabbed the 
headlines, and have devastated the victim organizations.  
The losses have not only been financial (e.g., theft of credit 
card information), but more importantly the damage to the 
organization’s reputation. Consider the following data 
breaches that happened in 2016 [2] and 2017 [3]: 
• 
February, 2016, University of Central Florida: Data 
breach affected approximately 63,000 current and 
former students, faculty, and staff, with the theft of 
information including social security numbers, first and 
last names, and student/employee ID numbers. 
• 
February, 2016, U.S. Department of Justice: Hackers 
released data on 10,000 Department of Homeland 
Security employees one day, and the next day released 
data on 20,000 FBI employees. Stolen information 
included names, titles, phone numbers, and email 
addresses. 
• 
March, 2016, Premier Healthcare: Theft of a laptop 
containing sensitive data pertaining to more than 
200,000 patients, including names, dates of birth, and 
possibly 
social 
security 
numbers 
or 
financial 
information. 
• 
March, 2016, Verizon Enterprise Solutions: Hackers 
stole information for about 1.5 million customers; the 
information was found for sale in an underground 
cybercrime forum by cyber security journalist Brain 
Krebs. 
• 
September, 2016, Yahoo!: The company announced 
that a hacker had stolen information from 500 million 
accounts in 2014. The hacker, believed to be working 
for a foreign government, stole email addresses, 
passwords, full user names, dates of birth, telephone 
numbers, and in some cases, security questions and 
answers. 
• 
February and April, 2017, InterContinental Hotels 
Group (IHG): The company that owns popular hotel 
chains like Crowne Plaza, Holiday Inn, and Kimpton 
Hotels, announced in February a data breach that 
affected 12 of its properties. This number was enlarged 
to 1,200 properties in April. Malware was found on 
payment processing servers. The stolen data included 
cardholder names, card numbers, expiration dates, and 
internal verification codes.  
• 
March, 2017, Dun & Bradstreet: This business services 
company found its marketing database with over 33 
million corporate contacts shared across the web. The 
company claimed that the breach occurred to 
businesses, numbering in the thousands, that had bought 
its 52 GB database. The leak may have included full 
names, work email addresses, phone numbers, and 
other business-related data from millions of employees 
of organizations such as the US Department of Defense, 
the US Postal Service, AT&T, Walmart, and CVS 
Health. 
• 
July, 2017, Verizon: 14 million Verizon subscribers 
may have been affected by a data breach simply by 
having contacted Verizon customer service in the past 6 
months. The customer service records were kept on a 
server controlled by Israel based Nice Systems. The 
leaked data consisted of log files generated when 
Verizon customers contacted the company by phone. 
• 
September, 2017, Equifax: This is one of the three 
largest credit agencies in the US. It announced a breach 
that may have affected 143 million customers, one of 
the worst breaches ever due to the sensitivity of the data 
stolen. The compromised data included social security 
numbers, driver’s license numbers, full names, 
addresses, birth dates, credit card numbers, and other 
personal information. Hackers had access to the 
company’s system from mid-May to July by exploiting 
80
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a vulnerability in website software. Equifax discovered 
the breach on July 29, 2017. 
• 
November, 2017, Uber: Uber revealed that it became 
aware of a data breach in late 2016 that potentially 
exposed the personal information of 57 million Uber 
users and drivers. However, Uber chose to pay the 
hackers $100,000 to keep the breach a secret instead of 
immediately alerting the affected victims. The hackers 
gained access to the data stored on GitHub, which was 
used by Uber engineers for collaboration, and included 
names, email addresses, and phone numbers of Uber 
users worldwide. 
This is only a sampling, as there were many more breaches 
in 2016 and 2017, and in fact, no year can be said to have 
been breach-free. Moreover, the problem appears to be 
getting worst, as 2017 has been mentioned [4] as a “record-
breaking year for the numbers of publicly reported data 
breaches and exposed records in 2017 worldwide: a total of 
5,207 breaches and 7.89 billion information records 
compromised.” 
To protect themselves from attacks, such as the ones 
described 
above, 
organizations 
determine 
their 
vulnerabilities to attack, and then secure the vulnerabilities 
with security measures. Common measures include 
firewalls, 
intrusion 
detection 
systems, 
two-factor 
authentication, encryption, and training for employees on 
identifying and resisting social engineering. However, 
today’s organizations install security measures without any 
way of calculating the overall level of protection that will 
result. They proceed based on recommendations from 
consultants, in reaction to attacks that have been observed, 
or worst, as a result of having suffered an attack themselves. 
And in many cases, they are forced to stop this deployment 
once their security budget runs out. It would be far better if 
an organization can follow a top-down approach, by setting 
a target level of protection and then install security measures 
to achieve the target. The target would be set according to 
the expected threat situation, the nature of the business, the 
sensitivity of information kept, and an estimated financial 
budget. Before this can be done, it would be useful to have 
quantitative estimates of the level of protection based on the 
number of vulnerabilities secured. This work derives such 
estimates and shows how to apply them to not only set a 
protection target, but also how security measures can be 
installed to achieve the target. 
The objectives of this work are i) derive estimates of the 
resultant protection level obtained by an organization 
through the installation of security measures to secure 
vulnerabilities, ii) show how these estimates can be 
calculated, iii) show how the estimates can be applied in a 
structured, objective, quantitative approach to secure an 
organization, and finally iv) illustrate ii) and iii) using 
examples.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
discusses the nature of sensitive data and derives the 
estimates. Section III explains how the estimates are 
calculated and applied in a structured, objective, quantitative 
approach to secure an organization. Additional application 
areas are also included. Section IV presents two application 
examples. Section V discusses related work. Finally, 
Section VI gives conclusions and future research. 
II. ESTIMATING SECURITY PROTECTION LEVELS 
Before deriving estimates of security protection levels, it 
is useful to examine the nature of sensitive data. 
A. Sensitive Data  
We all have some sense of what is meant by sensitive 
data: first and foremost it is data that must be safeguarded 
from falling into the wrong hands, the consequence of 
which would be damaging to an individual or an 
organization.  
For an individual, sensitive data usually means private 
information, which is information about the individual and 
is owned by that individual.  The individual’s privacy then 
refers to his or her ability to control the collection, purpose 
of collection, retention, and distribution of that information 
by another party. Private information is also called personal 
information or personally identifiable information because it 
can be used to identify the individual. For example, an 
individual’s height, weight, or credit card number can all be 
used to identify the individual and are therefore considered 
as personal information. Continuing this example, the extent 
to which the individual has control over who collects this 
information, the purpose for which the collector will use this 
information, how long the collector will retain this 
information, and to which other parties the collector will 
disclose this information, determines the individual’s degree 
of privacy. The nature of private information will not be 
explored further here but the reader is encouraged to consult 
[5] for more details.  
For an organization, sensitive data may encompass 
private 
information, 
but 
may 
additionally 
include 
information that may compromise the competitiveness of 
the organization if divulged, such as trade secrets or 
proprietary algorithms and secret formulas. For government 
organizations, sensitive data may include information that is 
vital for the security of the country for which the 
government organization is responsible. For this work, 
sensitive data is defined as follows: 
DEFINITION 1: Sensitive data is information that must be 
protected from unauthorized access in order to safeguard the 
privacy of an individual, the well being of an organization, 
or the well being of an entity for which the organization has 
responsibility. 
This work considers losses arising from sensitive data or 
sensitive information being in the possession of unintended 
malicious parties or entities. This covers theft and any 
unintended exposure of sensitive information such as 
accidental leakage or posting. Per Definition 1, “sensitive 
data” and “sensitive information” are used interchangeably 
in this work. Some researchers make a distinction between 
these terms but the popular usage calls for no distinction. 
A.   Attacks on Organizations 
Attacks carried out against sensitive information 
81
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

residing with organizations may be categorized as “outside 
attacks” and “inside attacks”. We define these as follows. 
DEFINITION 2: An attack is any action carried out against 
sensitive information held by an organization that, if 
successful, results in that information being in the hands of 
the attacker. An outside attack (Ao) is an attack that is 
carried out by an outsider of the organization (i.e., the 
attacker is not associated with the organization in a way that 
gives her special access privileges to sensitive data, e.g., a 
regular member of the public). An inside attack (Ai) is an 
attack that is carried out by an insider of the organization 
(i.e., someone who has special access privileges to sensitive 
data by virtue of her association with the organization, e.g., 
employee).  
DEFINITION 3: A vulnerability of an organization is any 
weakness in the organization’s infrastructure, platform, or 
business processes that can be targeted by an attack with 
some expectation of success. A secured-vulnerability was 
originally a vulnerability that has had protective security 
measures put in place so that it is no longer a vulnerability. 
For example, a vulnerability is private information stored in 
the clear. This becomes a secured vulnerability if the private 
information is encrypted. 
Outside attacks target a range of security vulnerabilities, 
from software systems that can be breached to access the 
sensitive information to simple theft of laptops and other 
devices used to store sensitive information. An example of 
an outside attack is the use of a Trojan horse planted inside 
the organization’s computer system to steal sensitive 
information.  
Inside attacks arise from the attacker making use of her 
privileged position (e.g., as an employee) to cause a loss of 
sensitive data. In this case, the attack is often difficult to 
detect, since it would appear as part of the normal duties of 
the insider attacker. An example of an inside attack is where 
a disgruntled employee secretly posts the organization’s 
sensitive information on the Internet to try to harm the 
organization. An inside attack can also be unintentional 
(e.g., an employee casually providing client names for a 
survey). 
Both outside and inside attacks target the organization’s 
vulnerabilities. Vulnerabilities that invite outside attacks 
include the use of badly provisioned firewalls, the failure to 
encrypt data, and simple carelessness (e.g., leaving a laptop 
containing sensitive information in a car). Vulnerabilities 
that attract inside attacks include a) poor business processes 
that lack mechanisms to track which data is used where, 
used for what purpose, and accessed by whom, b) poor 
working conditions that give rise to employees feeling 
unfairly treated by management which can lead to 
employees seeking revenge, and c) poor education and 
enforcement of company policies regarding the proper care 
and handling of sensitive information (e.g., the above survey 
example). 
The location of an attacker carrying out an attack does 
not determine whether the attack is an inside attack or an 
outside attack. An inside attack can be carried out outside 
the organization’s premises; similarly, an outside attack can 
be carried out inside the premises. 
We have so far used the expressions “level of 
protection” and “protection level” informally relying on 
their everyday meaning. We now formalize this meaning in 
terms of vulnerabilities, introducing the idea of “security 
protection level”. 
DEFINITION 4: An organization’s security protection level 
(SPL) is the degree of security protection from attacks that 
results 
from 
the 
organization 
having 
secured 
q 
vulnerabilities, leaving p vulnerabilities unsecured, where 
the organization has a total of p+q vulnerabilities. Each pair 
of values (p, q) corresponds to a different SPL. 
Suppose an organization has a total of N vulnerabilities, 
where p + q = N.  Then each organization has a value of N 
that corresponds to a set of SPL points lying on a straight 
line in the (p, q) plane, where the higher values of q 
correspond to higher or greater security protection levels. 
Figure 1 shows this relationship for two organizations 
having N=50 and N=100. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Deriving the Estimates 
Intuitively, for the same organization, SPL A is more 
capable of protecting from sensitive information loss than 
SPL B if A is composed of more secured vulnerabilities 
than B, where all vulnerabilities have roughly the same level 
of loss risk. This is the idea behind the derivation below.  
We seek the capability C of an organization’s SPL to 
protect sensitive data. Suppose that an organization’s SPL 
has p vulnerabilities and q secured-vulnerabilities, where no 
distinction is made between outside and inside attacks. The 
number of original vulnerabilities before any vulnerabilities 
were secured is p+q. Let P(e) represent the probability of 
event e. For convenience, “data” is understood to be 
“sensitive data”.  We have 
C = P(no data losses) = 1-P(data losses)             (1) 
Since a data loss is the result of a successful attack on a 
vulnerability,  
P(data losses)≈ p/(p+q)                       (2) 
where we have applied the additive rule for the union of 
probabilities of attacks on the p vulnerabilities, assuming 
that 2 or more attacks do not occur simultaneously. This is a 
Figure 1.  SPL points on lines corresponding to two 
organizations, one with N=50 and the other with N=100. 
0  10  20  30  40 50  60 70 80 90 100 
100 
  90 
  80 
  70 
  60 
  50 
  40 
  30 
  20 
  10 
    0 
p 
 
q 
SPL = (20, 80) 
SPL =  
(20, 30) 
N = 100 
N = 50 
Greater security 
Greater 
security 
82
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

fair assumption confirmed by experience. Substituting (2) 
into (1) and adjusting for a possible zero denominator gives 
C ≈ 1-[p/(p+q)] = q/(p+q)    if  p+q > 0             (3) 
  = 1               if  p+q = 0             (4) 
Since C is a probability, its value is between 0 and 1, 
attaining 0 if the organization has no secured vulnerabilities 
(q=0, (3)) and 1 if either all of its vulnerabilities are secured 
(p=0, (3)) or if the organization has no vulnerabilities 
(p+q=0, 
(4)). 
Since 
an 
organization 
having 
no 
vulnerabilities is highly improbable, (4) is unlikely to apply.  
The above derivation can be done within each of the 
categories of outside attacks and inside attacks (we did not 
distinguish between outside and inside attacks above). Let 
Co, Ci represent the capabilities of an organization’s SPL to 
protect sensitive information from outside attacks and inside 
attacks, respectively. Let po, pi represent the number of 
vulnerabilities to outside attacks and inside attacks, 
respectively. Let qo, qi represent the number of secured 
vulnerabilities to outside attacks and inside attacks, 
respectively. Then, repeating the above derivation for 
outside attacks and inside attacks gives 
             Co ≈  qo/(po+qo)      if  po+qo > 0                           (5) 
               ≈  1                     if  po+qo = 0                           (6) 
             Ci ≈  qi/(pi+qi)         if  pi+qi > 0                            (7) 
               ≈  1                      if  pi+qi = 0                            (8) 
As above, Co (Ci)  have values between 0 and 1, attaining 
0 if the organization has no secured vulnerabilities to 
outside (inside) attacks ((5) and (7)) and 1 if either all of the 
vulnerabilities are secured ((5) and (7)) or if the 
organization has no vulnerabilities ((6) and (8)). Since an 
organization having no vulnerabilities to outside and inside 
attacks is highly improbable, (6) and (8) are unlikely to 
apply. 
The estimates of data protection capability are now 
assigned as follows for a given SPL (no distinction between 
inside and outside attacks), SPLo (for outside attacks), and 
SPLi (for inside attacks). Let E be an estimate of data 
protection capability, where no distinction is made between 
outside and inside attacks. Let Eo be an estimate of data 
protection capability against outside attacks. Let Ei be an 
estimate of data protection capability against inside attacks. 
Then for the SPL, SPLo, and  SPLi             
              E  = q/(p+q)            if  p+q > 0                            (9) 
                   = 1                      if  p+q = 0                          (10) 
Eo = qo/(po+qo)       if  po+qo > 0                         (11) 
                  = 1                     if  po+qo = 0                         (12) 
            Ei  = qi/(pi+qi)        if  pi+qi > 0                          (13) 
               =  1                    if  pi+qi = 0                          (14) 
 
E has the advantage of providing a single number for ease of 
comparison between different SPLs within an organization. 
A threshold T for E may be pre-determined such that for E 
above T, the security measures installed by the organization 
to secure vulnerabilities against both outside and inside 
attacks (corresponding to a SPL) are deemed adequate. For 
given SPLo and  SPLi, Eo and Ei have the advantage of 
focusing in separately on where an organization stands in 
terms of its security measures against outside and inside 
attacks. Thresholds To and Ti may be pre-determined for Eo 
and Ei respectively, such that for both estimates above their 
respective thresholds, the corresponding installed security 
measures against outside and inside attacks are deemed 
adequate. If this is the case, we call the corresponding SPL 
an adequate SPL. In practice, Eo and Ei may be expressed as 
percentages that define a region in a 100 x 100 plane in 
which an organization’s capability to protect data is 
adequate (acceptable), as represented by the shaded region 
in Figure 2. Each point in this shaded region corresponds to 
an adequate SPL. An organization strives to have the “best” 
adequate SPL (one which has highest number of security 
measures possible against both outside and inside attacks) as 
allowed by its financial budget for adding security measures 
(see Section III). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. APPLYING THE ESTIMATES 
This section shows how an organization may use the 
estimates to establish  “best” adequate SDLs as permitted by 
its financial budget.  The description below separates 
outside attacks from inside attacks since organizations 
would need to account for them separately.  
A. Determining the Vulnerabilities 
For outside attacks, we recommend a threat analysis of 
security vulnerabilities in the organization’s systems that 
could allow outside attacks to occur. Threat analysis or 
threat modeling is a method for systematically assessing and 
documenting the security risks associated with a system 
(Salter et al. [6]). Threat modeling involves understanding 
the adversary’s goals in attacking the system based on the 
system’s assets of interest. It is predicated on that fact that 
an adversary cannot attack a system without a way of 
supplying it with data or otherwise accessing it. In addition, 
an adversary will only attack a system if it has some assets 
of interest. The method of threat analysis given in [6] or any 
other method of threat analysis will yield No = po + qo, 
which is the total number of vulnerabilities to outside 
attacks. The method presented here for threat modeling is 
based on [6], and consists of the following steps:  
 
1. Identify threats: examine all available details of the 
system and enumerate possible threats. 
0  10  20  30  40 50  60 70 80 90 100 
100 
  90 
  80 
  70 
  60 
  50 
  40 
  30 
  20 
  10 
    0 
Eo (%) 
Ei (%) 
To 
 
Ti 
Figure 2.  Sufficiency of Security Measures Against Outside 
Attacks (A o) and Inside Attacks (A i) 
Insufficient 
measures for A i 
Insuffi-
cient 
measures 
for A o 
Insufficient 
measures for 
A o and A i 
Sufficient 
measures for A o 
and A i 
83
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2. Create attack trees for the system: for each threat, 
take the attacker’s view and find the weak points in 
the system and the paths that can lead to realizing 
the threat. 
3. Apply weights to the leaves: for each leaf, assign 
qualitative values for risk, access, and cost to the 
attacker.  
4. Prune the tree so that only exploitable leaves remain: 
prune leaves that represent objectives that are 
beyond the attacker’s capabilities or that offer an 
inadequate return. 
5. Generate corresponding countermeasures: identify 
security measures for rendering the threat non-
realizable. 
 
As an illustration of the above method for threat 
analysis, consider the hypothetical software system of an 
online seller of merchandise (e.g., Amazon.com). Figure 3 
shows the essential components of this system, using solid 
arrows to represent sensitive data flow, dashed arrows to 
depict non-sensitive data flow, circles to represent 
processing modules, squares to represent data storage, and a 
dashed square to enclose components that execute on the 
same computing platform. Additionally, data items are 
identified using numbers; all other components are 
identified with letters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suppose the goal of an attacker is to steal sensitive data 
from this system. The above steps are applied as follows: 
 
1. Identify threats: An examination of the system in 
Fig. 3 found the following threats: a) theft of 
sensitive data flowing into A, D, and E, b) theft of 
sensitive data from A, C, D, and E, and c) theft of 
sensitive data from B.  
2. Create attack trees: the weak points in the system 
that can lead to realizing the threats found in step 1 
are: i) the paths for data flowing into A, D, and E 
can be exploited using man-in-the-middle attacks, ii) 
the processing modules A, C, D, and E can be 
exploited using Trojan horse or hacker attacks, and 
iii) the database B can be exploited using SQL 
attacks. These locations correspond to vulnerabilities 
in the system. Note that the paths of data flow into B 
and C are excluded as weak points because they are 
not considered externally accessible, due to the fact 
that A, B, and C all run on the same computing 
platform. This attack tree can be represented using 
hierarchical numbering as follows: 
 
0 Theft of sensitive data from system 
1.1 Theft of sensitive data flowing into A, D, E 
2.1 Man-in-the-middle attack on data paths  
Into A, D, E 
1.2 Theft of sensitive data from A, C, D, E 
2.2 Trojan horse or hacker attack on A, C, D,  
E 
1.3 Theft of sensitive data from B 
2.3 SQL attacks on B 
 
This can also be depicted graphically as the attack 
 tree in Figure 4, using the same number labels as  
 above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Apply weights to the leaves: the leaves are 2.1, 2.2, 
and 2.3. Assigning weights L (low), M (medium), 
and H (high) to each of risk, access, and cost in turn 
yields (L, H, L) for 2.1, (L, M, L) for 2.2, and (L, M, 
L) for 2.3. This is read as low risk, high access, and 
low cost for 2.1, for example, meaning that there is 
low risk to the safety of the attacker (he is attacking 
from a remote location), high access to the path, and 
low cost to the attacker in carrying out the attack. 
The attacker’s access for 2.2 and 2.3 are rated as 
medium because he or she has to actually get into 
the system.  
4. Prune the tree so that only exploitable leaves remain: 
in this case, no pruning is necessary because all the 
leaves are within the capability of the attacker to 
exploit. If there was a leaf with a weighting of say, 
(H, L, M), i.e., high risk to the attacker’s safety, low 
access, and medium cost, then this leaf may be 
pruned, in that the attacker would be unlikely to 
exploit the leaf. 
5. Generate 
corresponding 
countermeasures: 
the 
countermeasures or security measures for the 
1, 2, 3 
2 
3 
B 
D 
E 
4 
5 
6 
Legend: 
A: receive and store data 
1: name and address 
B: database 
 
2: item selected 
C: print shipping label  
3: credit card number 
D: pack item for shipping  
4: company account 
E: charge credit card  
     number  
F: send shipping status   
5: payment status 
     to buyer 
 
6: shipping status 
 
 
Figure 3.   Software system of an online seller of merchandise. 
1, 2, 
3 
A 
C 
1 
F 
6 
0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
Figure 4. Attack tree for the online seller system in Fig. 3 
84
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

vulnerabilities identified in step 2 are: i) encrypt the 
data that flow along paths into A, D, and E, ii) use 
firewalls to protect against Trojan and hacker attacks 
on A, C, D, and E, iii) use a combination of firewall 
and database hardening to defend against SQL 
attacks on B. 
 
The threat analysis may be carried out by a project team 
consisting of the system’s design manager, a security and 
privacy analyst, and a project leader acting as facilitator. In 
addition to having expertise on privacy and security, the 
analyst must also be very familiar with the organization’s 
systems. 
For inside attacks, we recommend that the above project 
team carry out a special insider threat analysis, to identify 
vulnerabilities to inside attacks and identify measures to 
secure these vulnerabilities. The team would accomplish 
this by brainstorming answers to the questions in Table I, or 
other 
questions 
from 
experience, 
identifying 
the 
vulnerabilities and measures to secure the vulnerabilities in 
the process. In Table I, questions 1 to 6 address motivational 
or environmental vulnerabilities, which may also be 
“secured” by applying mitigating measures. Questions 7 and 
8 
address 
security 
vulnerabilities. 
In 
identifying 
vulnerabilities to inside attack, the project team may weigh 
the vulnerabilities in terms of how likely they are to lead to 
attacks, and eliminate the unlikely ones. The weighing 
process may consider such factors as risk to the attacker that 
she could be caught as well as her motivation for the attack. 
The value of Ni = pi + qi would be determined at the end of 
this process. 
B. Determining the Thresholds To and Ti 
The values of To and Ti should be determined by the 
same threat analysis team mentioned above. The values 
would depend on the following: 
• 
The potential value of the sensitive data – the more 
valuable the data is to a thief, a malicious entity, or a 
competitor, the higher the thresholds should be. 
• 
The damages to the organization that would result, if 
the sensitive data were compromised – of course, the 
higher the damages, the higher the thresholds. 
• 
The current and likely future attack climate – consider 
the volume of attacks and the nature of the victims, say 
over the last 6 months; if the organization’s sector or 
industry has sustained a large number of recent attacks, 
then these thresholds need to be higher. 
• 
Consider also potential attacks by nation states as a 
result of the political climate; attacks by individual 
hacktivist groups such as Anonymous or WikiLeaks 
may also warrant attention.  
In general, an organization would like to be as secure as 
possible and establish a “best” adequate SPL. Therefore, 
values above 80% would not be uncommon. However, 
whatever the thresholds, the organization must find them 
acceptable after considering the above factors. The financial 
budget available for securing vulnerabilities also plays an 
important role here, since higher thresholds call for securing 
more vulnerabilities, which means more financial resources 
will be needed.  
 
TABLE I. QUESTIONNAIRE TO IDENTIFY VULNERABILITIES TO INSIDE 
ATTACK 
 
Question 
Rationale 
1. 
Is the sensitive information of 
high value to outside agencies or 
a competitor? 
The higher the value, the 
more an inside attacker will 
be tempted to steal and sell 
the information. 
2. 
Does the organization have an 
employee assistance program 
that includes counselling and 
help with financial difficulties? 
Such a program may 
eliminate some financial 
motivation for an inside 
attack. 
3. 
Does the organization have an 
ombudsman or other impartial 
agent to assist employees with 
their grievances? 
Such an impartial agent may 
eliminate or reduce the 
motivation to seek revenge 
by committing an inside 
attack. 
4. 
Does the organization have a 
history of perceived injustices to 
employees? 
If the answer is ‘yes’, 
employees may be 
motivated by revenge to 
commit an inside attack. 
5. 
Does the organization conduct a 
stringent background and 
reliability check on a candidate 
for employment prior to hiring 
the candidate? 
While a background and 
reliability check is not 
guaranteed to weed out 
potential inside attackers, it 
should eliminate those with 
criminal pasts.  
6. 
Does the organization require 
candidates for employment to 
disclose any potential conflicts 
of interest they may have with 
respect to their new employment 
and any outside interests prior to 
hire? Does the organization 
require ongoing disclosure of 
conflicts of interest after hire? 
Eliminating conflicts of 
interest should reduce 
related motivations for 
malicious inside attacks. For 
example, an inside attacker 
may secretly compromise 
private information in 
favour of an outside interest, 
believing that the compro-
mise is undetected. 
7. 
What are some possible ways 
for an insider to gain access to 
sensitive information she should 
not be accessing? How to 
secure? 
This question will identify 
security weaknesses. 
8.  
What are some possible ways 
for an insider to transmit 
sensitive information outside the 
organization undetected? How 
to secure? 
This question will identify 
additional security 
weaknesses. 
 
C. Applying the Estimates to Determine Optimal or “Best” 
Adequate SPLs 
We now have values for the following: No = po + qo, Ni 
= pi + qi (Section IIIA), and To, Ti (Section IIIB). Rewriting 
(11) and (13) and using the ceiling function to avoid 
fractional numbers of secured vulnerabilities gives: 
qo = ⎡NoEo⎤               where  To ≤ Eo  ≤  1               (15) 
      qi = ⎡NiEi⎤                          where  Ti ≤ Ei  ≤  1               (16) 
Equations (15) and (16) give all possible values of qo and qi 
such that the associated Eo and Ei (with po = No - qo and pi = 
Ni – qi) fall within the shaded region of Figure 1. In other 
words, these equations give all possible values of qo and qi 
85
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for adequate SPLs. The ceiling function biases the security 
level 
upward 
by 
taking 
the 
number 
of 
secured 
vulnerabilities to the next higher integer where applicable, 
which should be fine since more security should be better 
than less security. The quantities qo = ⎡NoTo⎤ and qi = ⎡NiTi⎤ 
from (15) and (16), termed respectively the threshold qo and 
the threshold qi, will be useful below. 
To obtain an optimal “best” adequate SPLo and an 
optimal “best” adequate SPLi from among the adequate 
SPLs generated by (15) and (16), the organization applies 
the constraint that the total cost of implementing the (qo + 
qi) security measures from (15) and (16) must be less than or 
equal to the financial budget for security measures. The 
organization separately prioritizes its outside attack and 
inside attack vulnerabilities in terms of urgency, and then 
selects them for securing in order of high priority to low 
priority, until both the financial budget is exhausted and the 
number of secured vulnerabilities are at least as great as the 
threshold qo and the threshold qi. In this way, the 
organization determines the qo and qi, as well as the po and 
pi (which are just No - qo and Ni – qi respectively) that define 
its “best” adequate SPLo and “best” adequate SPLi, 
respectively. This procedure may be precisely described in 
the form of a computer algorithm as follows. Let u1, u2, … 
uNo and v1, v2, … vNi be the organization’s outside attack and 
inside attack vulnerabilities prioritized in terms of urgency, 
respectively, such that u1 has higher or equal priority 
(urgency) than u2, u2 has higher or equal priority (urgency) 
than u3, and so on. Similarly, v1 has higher or equal priority 
(urgency) than v2, v2 has higher or equal priority (urgency) 
than v3, and so on. Figure 5 illustrates these relationships in 
which equal priority does not occur. Let Bo and Bi represent 
the budgets for securing against outside and inside attacks, 
respectively. Let Co and Ci be the costs of securing the 
vulnerabilities to outside and inside attacks respectively. Let 
k be a counter variable. Then the pseudo code in Figure 6 
comprises a computer algorithm for obtaining “best” 
adequate SPLs. Running this algorithm will produce the 
following: a) qo and qi, defining the “best” adequate SPLo 
and “best” adequate SPLi, or b) one or two “insufficient 
budget” messages, in which case the organization has to 
increase the corresponding budgets and re-run the 
algorithm. Only result a) would be acceptable. If result b) is 
obtained, decreasing the thresholds To and Ti may result in 
fewer vulnerabilities needing to be secured, and may 
therefore generate result a). However, decreasing To and Ti 
is not recommended at this point, since these values were 
determined only after thorough analysis and consideration 
(see Section IIIB). 
Prioritizing the vulnerabilities may be based on four 
aspects of an attack, namely “risk”, “access”, “cost”, and the 
resulting damages from the attack, where “risk” is risk to the 
safety of the attacker, “access” is the ease with which the 
attacker can access the system under attack, “cost” is the 
monetary cost to the attacker to mount the attack, and 
resulting damages is self evident. A full explanation of this 
prioritization procedure is given in Yee [5].  
D. Application Areas 
The main application area for the approach proposed in 
this paper is to secure an organization from attacks that 
target the sensitive data in the organization’s computer 
system. An organization would implement security using 
the following steps: 
 
1. Identify vulnerabilities to inside and outside attacks 
using threat analysis and prioritize them in terms of 
urgency. Identify the costs of security measures 
required to secure the vulnerabilities. 
2. Identify “how secure” the organization needs to be 
given its nature and the existing attack environment, 
i.e., determine the values of To and Ti. Identify the 
organization’s security budget. Identifying how 
secure it needs to be is necessary, since securing all 
vulnerabilities is probably not feasible due to a 
finite financial budget. 
3. Run the algorithm in Fig. 6 to obtain qo and qi. 
Secure 
the 
prioritized 
outside 
and 
inside 
vulnerabilities up to and including qo and qi 
respectively. 
 
The above steps may be carried out by a security consulting 
firm or by the organization’s security department, 
Begin; 
     Co = 0; Ci = 0; k = 0; 
     While k ≤ No and Co ≤ Bo; 
          k = k + 1; 
          Co = Co + cost of securing uk; 
     EndWhile; 
     If (k ≥ threshold qo) qo = k; 
     Else Print “qo unavailable -insufficient budget”; 
     k = 0; 
    While k ≤ Ni and Ci ≤ Bi; 
         k = k + 1; 
         Ci = Ci + cost of securing vk; 
    EndWhile; 
    If (k ≥ threshold qi) qi = k; 
    Else Print “qi unavailable – insufficient budget”; 
End; 
 
Figure 6. Algorithm for obtaining a “best” adequate SPL. 
 
Increasing 
Priority and 
Urgency 
u1 
u2 
u3
… 
uNo 
Increasing 
Priority and 
Urgency 
v1 
v2 
v3
… 
vNi 
Figure 5. Vulnerabilities with increasing priorities and urgencies. 
86
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

depending on the latter’s level of confidence. A good 
compromise may be to hire a consultant for steps 1 and 3, 
since step 2 involves careful consideration that may be 
better done internally within the organization. The above 
steps can also be performed for an organization that already 
has some vulnerabilities secured. In this case, the already 
secured vulnerabilities would simply not be part of the 
above steps and the security budget and qo, qi found would 
be for the unsecured vulnerabilities. 
Another application area is in marketing and gaining 
consumer confidence. Organizations that hold sensitive 
private information and provide services to the public may 
wish to advertise the fact that they have high SPLs in order 
to gain consumer confidence and gain competitive 
advantage. 
A third application area lies in standardization. Studies 
could be undertaken by standards bodies to determine 
recommended “best” adequate SPL values for organizations, 
based on organization type, size, activity, the quantity and 
nature of the sensitive data held, history of information 
breaches, and so on. These values could be published and 
made available as targets or guidance for organizations 
seeking to implement security using this approach. 
One comment received while presenting the original 
paper at SECURWARE 2017 was that the structured 
approach of securing vulnerabilities against an objective 
security target is not how “things are done” in industry and 
therefore this approach would be useless. Well, of course its 
not how security is implemented today – that’s the whole 
point of this paper, to suggest a better way, one that is more 
quantitative, and structured, as opposed to guessing and 
reacting emotionally when an attack has occurred. How 
implementing security is currently done was described at the 
beginning of this paper. 
IV. APPLICATION EXAMPLES 
This section presents two examples of applying the 
proposed approach. The first example is that of an online 
seller of merchandise implementing security for the first 
time. The second example looks again at the online seller in 
the first example, but 5 years later than in the first example, 
when the online seller decides to replace its computer 
system for a new more high performance model. Naturally, 
this introduces new vulnerabilities that need to be secured. 
A. Implementing Security for the First Time 
Alice Inc., an online seller of goods (e.g., Amazon.com),  
has an  objective to secure  its vulnerabilities to  outside and  
inside attacks and to establish corresponding “best” 
adequate SPLs using the  approach in  this work.  The 
company hires a security consulting firm to perform threat 
analyses of its systems, resulting in a report of 
vulnerabilities found that could be targeted by outside and 
inside attackers. The report also provides values for the 
number of vulnerabilities as No = 10 and Ni = 8, and 
includes prioritizations of outside and inside vulnerabilities. 
For each type of vulnerability (i.e., outside or inside) the 
prioritizations identified which vulnerability required 
securing first, which one second, and so on, in declining 
order 
of 
urgency. 
Based 
on 
the 
consultant’s 
recommendations, as well as its own internal deliberations, 
Alice Inc. assigned the following values: 
To = 0.80, Ti = 0.90, Bo = $100,000, Bi = $150,000 
Therefore 
           threshold qo = ⎡NoTo⎤ = ⎡10 x 0.80⎤ = 8 
           threshold qi = ⎡NiTi⎤   = ⎡8 x 0.85⎤ = 7 
meaning that at least 8 vulnerabilities to outside attacks and 
7 vulnerabilities to inside attacks must be secured in order to 
have “best” adequate SPLo and “best” adequate SPLi. Table 
II identifies the costs of securing the prioritized 
vulnerabilities where vulnerability 1 has the highest priority 
(urgency), vulnerability 2 has the next highest priority 
(urgency), and so on.  
TABLE II. COSTS OF SECURING OUTSIDE AND INSIDE 
VULNERABILITIES 
uk 
Cost of 
Securing 
vk 
Cost of 
Securing 
1 
$7,000 
1 
$10,000 
2 
$15,000 
2 
$40,000 
3 
$5,000 
3 
$5,000 
4 
$10,000 
4 
$20,000 
5 
$8,000 
5 
$40,000 
6 
$20,000 
6 
$5,000 
7 
$10,000 
7 
$30,000 
8 
$5,000 
8 
$5,000 
9 
$3,000 
 
 
10 
$2,000 
 
 
 
As in Section III, outside and inside vulnerabilities are 
denoted as uk and vk respectively. Running the algorithm in 
Figure 6 yields Co = $85,000 at qo = 10 and Ci = $150,000 
at qi = 7. The budget for securing outside vulnerabilities 
was more than enough to secure all outside vulnerabilities. 
The budget for securing inside vulnerabilities was only 
enough to secure 7 inside vulnerabilities. Given the existing 
budgets, Alice Inc.’s “best” adequate SPLo is realized with 
qo = 10, po = 0 and its “best” adequate SPLi has qi = 7, pi = 
1. Any additional security measure against inside attacks 
would require an increase in the budget. 
B. Securing Additional Vulnerabilities 
We return to Alice Inc., 5 years after implementing 
security in the first example. The company has grown 
rapidly and decides to replace its aging computer system 
with a new more high-performing one. However, a new 
system brings new vulnerabilities, so Alice Inc. decides to 
re-apply the proposed approach to generate new “best” 
adequate SPLs to make sure that the new vulnerabilities are 
secured. The company hires the same security consulting 
firm as before (the firm does good work) to perform threat 
analyses of its systems, resulting in a report of 
vulnerabilities found that could be targeted by outside and 
inside attackers. The report also provides values for the 
number of vulnerabilities as No = 6 and Ni = 3, and includes 
87
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

prioritizations of outside and inside vulnerabilities. The 
vulnerability numbers are lower than 5 years ago because i) 
the new system did not introduce very many additional 
vulnerabilities, ii) the company’s internal work processes 
have not changed very much, so that there are not many 
additional vulnerabilities to inside attacks, and iii) 
vulnerabilities secured 5 years ago are still secured. For 
each type of vulnerability (i.e., outside or inside) the 
prioritizations identified which vulnerability required 
securing first, which one second, and so on, in declining 
order 
of 
urgency. 
Based 
on 
the 
consultant’s 
recommendations, as well as its own internal deliberations, 
Alice Inc. assigned the following values: 
To = 0.80, Ti = 0.90, Bo = $60,000, Bi = $30,000 
Therefore 
 threshold qo = ⎡NoTo⎤ = ⎡6 x 0.80⎤ = 5 
 threshold qi = ⎡NiTi⎤   = ⎡3 x 0.90⎤ = 3 
meaning that at least 5 vulnerabilities to outside attacks and 
3 vulnerabilities to inside attacks must be secured in order to 
have “best” adequate SPLo and “best” adequate SPLi. Table 
III identifies the costs of securing the additional 
vulnerabilities, where vulnerability 1 has the highest priority 
(urgency), vulnerability 2 has the next highest priority 
(urgency), and so on, as in example 1. 
 
TABLE III. COSTS OF SECURING ADDITIONAL OUTSIDE AND INSIDE 
VULNERABILITIES 
uk 
Cost of 
Securing 
vk 
Cost of 
Securing 
1 
$9,000 
1 
$7,000 
2 
$10,000 
2 
$10,000 
3 
$7,000 
3 
$8,000 
4 
$8,000 
 
 
5 
$16,000 
 
 
6 
$10,000 
 
 
 
Running the algorithm in Figure 6 yields Co = $60,000 at qo 
= 6 and Ci = $25,000 at qi = 3. The budget for securing 
outside vulnerabilities was just enough to secure all outside 
vulnerabilities. 
The 
budget 
for 
securing 
inside 
vulnerabilities was more than enough to secure all 3 inside 
vulnerabilities. Given the existing budgets, Alice Inc.’s 
“best” adequate SPLo is realized with qo = 6, po = 0 and its 
“best” adequate SPLi has qi = 3, pi = 0. Alice Inc. has 
budgeted enough funds to obtain “best” adequate SPLs that 
secured all vulnerabilities. 
V. RELATED WORK 
Related work found in the literature includes risk and 
threat analysis applied to various domains as well as 
research on vulnerabilities and countermeasures.  No work 
was found that is similar to this work. One work, Duffany 
[7], is related in that it looks at protecting an enterprise’s 
information infrastructure. This author develops an 
economic model for optimal resource allocation in terms of 
countermeasures to protect an enterprise information 
infrastructure. The model is solved as a linear program to 
determine the optimal resource allocation. However, the 
author does not distinguish between sensitive and non-
sensitive data, but considers the organization’s overall 
information infrastructure, including its computing devices. 
In addition, the author employs an economic model for 
optimization whereas this work optimizes based on the 
increase in security obtained through the addition of security 
measures. 
In terms of risk analysis, Jing et al. [8] present an 
approach that uses machine learning to continuously and 
automatically assess privacy risks incurred by users of 
mobile applications. Aditya et al. [9] catalog privacy threats 
introduced by new, sophisticated mobile devices and 
applications. Their work emphasizes how these new threats 
are fundamentally different and inherently more dangerous 
than prior systems, and present a new protocol for secure 
communications between mobile devices. Islam et al. [10] 
present a risk assessment framework specifically tailored for 
the automotive industry. The framework starts with a threat 
analysis followed by a risk assessment to estimate the threat 
level and the impact level. This leads to an estimate of a 
security level, which is used to formulate high level security 
requirements. It is interesting that these authors also 
consider security levels, although the levels they use are 
only descriptive, such as “low”, “medium”, and “high”. 
In terms of threat analysis, Schaad and Borozdin [11] 
present an approach for automated threat analysis of 
software architecture diagrams. Their work shows that 
automated threat analysis is feasible. Shi et al. [12] describe 
a hybrid static-dynamic approach for mobile security threat 
analysis, where the dynamic part executes the program in a 
limited way by following the critical path identified in the 
static part. Sokolowski and Banks [13] describe the 
implementation of an agent-based simulation model 
designed to capture insider threat behavior, given a set of 
assumptions governing agent behavior that pre-disposes an 
agent to becoming a threat. Panou et al. [14] propose a cyber 
investment management framework named RiSKi that 
detects and continuously monitors insiders’ societal 
behavior, as permitted by law, to proactively treat implied 
anomalies, threats, and their potential business impacts and 
risks. RiSKi also provides access to security incidents data 
to enable businesses to advance their understanding of cyber 
security and breaches. Sanzgiri and Dasgupta [15] present a 
taxonomy and classification of insider threat detection 
techniques based on strategies used for detection. Their 
classification should assist researchers and readers of this 
work to better understand the insider threat landscape. 
Baluta et al. [16] propose a discrete-event simulation model 
to investigate the effect of insider threats on system 
vulnerabilities. Their model considers both users and 
computer systems along with their interactions. The authors 
claim that the model is useful for “what-if” analysis and for 
gaining insights into anti-cyber intrusion strategies. Kul et 
al. [17] present two attack models that pose high risks for 
sensitive data stored in an organization’s database. They 
discuss the complexities of both models and the defense 
mechanisms available in the literature. 
88
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

With regard to vulnerabilities, Gawron et al. [18] 
investigate the detection of vulnerabilities in computer 
systems and computer networks. They use a logical 
representation of preconditions and postconditions of 
vulnerabilities, with the aim of providing security advisories 
and enhanced diagnostics for the system. Spanos et al. [19] 
look at ways to improve the open standard to score and rank 
vulnerabilities, known as the Common Vulnerability 
Scoring System (CVSS). They propose a new vulnerability 
scoring system called the Weighted Impact Vulnerability 
Scoring System (WIVSS) that incorporates the different 
impact of vulnerability characteristics. In addition, the 
MITRE Corporation maintains the Common Vulnerability 
and Exposures (CVE) list of vulnerabilities and exposures 
[20], standardized to facilitate information sharing. In terms 
of vulnerability mitigation, Oladimeji et al. [21] present a 
goal-centric and policy-driven framework for obtaining 
security and privacy risk mitigation strategies for health 
information interchange. They use scenario analysis and 
other techniques to model security and privacy objectives, 
threats, and mitigation strategies. Alqahtani et al. [22] 
propose a security vulnerability analysis framework that 
establishes bi-directional traceability links between security 
vulnerability databases and traditional software repositories. 
Their framework allows researchers to take advantage of 
semantic inference services to determine both direct and 
transitive dependencies between reported vulnerabilities and 
potentially affected software projects.  
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Organizations need to protect their sensitive data from 
outside and inside attacks against their computer systems 
that store the data. This protection is achieved by adding 
security measures to secure vulnerabilities to attack. 
However, organizations have been implementing security 
measures without any way of setting security protection 
level targets, or knowing how an added security measure 
contributes to the protection target. Organizations also did 
not have a way of selecting which security measures to 
implement in order to stay within the financial budget. This 
work proposes a structured, objective, quantitative approach 
to estimate, set, and achieve safe, acceptable security 
protection levels in terms of securing outside and inside 
vulnerabilities. In addition, the work proposes an algorithm 
for selecting which security measures to implement in order 
to achieve optimal adequate protection levels against outside 
and inside attacks, within the allowable financial budget. 
This work has extended [1] in terms of updating the 
definition of sensitive data and adding a) more examples of 
attacks on sensitive data, b) more explanation and Fig. 1 on 
the nature of SPLs, c) an explanation and example of how to 
do threat analysis, d) a second application example, and e) 
additional references. 
Future work includes investigating other formulations 
of security protection levels, such as incorporating the 
effectiveness of security measures, as well as improving the 
methods for threat analysis and prioritization. In addition, it 
would be interesting to explore how this work complements 
existing work in the standardization community. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Yee, “Assessing Security Protection for Sensitive Data,” 
Proc. The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging 
Security 
Information, 
Systems 
and 
Technologies 
(SECURWARE 2017), pp. 111-116, 2017. 
[2] Identity Force, “The Biggest Data Breaches in 2016,” 
retrieved: 
 
July, 
2017, 
https://www.identityforce.com/blog/2016-data-breaches 
[3] Identity Force, “2017 Data Breaches – The Worst So Far,” 
retrieved: 
February, 
2018, 
https://www.identityforce.com/blog/2017-data-breaches 
[4] Dark Reading, “2017 Smashed World’s Records for Most 
Data Breaches, Exposed Information,” retrieved: February, 
2018, 
https://www.darkreading.com/attacks-breaches/2017-
smashed-worlds-records-for-most-data-breaches-exposed-
information/d/d-
id/1330987?elq_mid=83109&elq_cid=1734282&_mc=NL_D
R_EDT_DR_weekly_20180208&cid=NL_DR_EDT_DR_we
ekly_20180208&elqTrackId=700ff20d23ce4d3f984a1cfd31cb
11f6&elq=5c10e9117ca04ba0ad984c11a7dfa14b&elqaid=831
09&elqat=1&elqCampaignId=29666 
[5] G. Yee, “Visualization and Prioritization of Privacy Risks in 
Software Systems,” International Journal on Advances in 
Security, issn 1942-2636, vol. 10, no. 1&2, pp. 14-25, 2017, 
http://www.iariajournals.org/security/  
[6] C. Salter, O. Saydjari, B. Schneier, and J. Wallner, “Towards 
a Secure System Engineering Methodology,” Proc. New 
Security Paradigms Workshop, pp. 2-10, 1998. 
[7] J. Duffany, “Optimal Resource Allocation for Securing an 
Enterprise Information Infrastructure,” Proc. 4th International 
IFIP/ACM Latin American Conference on Networking 
(LANC ’07), pp. 35-42, 2007. 
[8] Y. Jing, G.-J. Ahn, Z. Zhao, and H. Hu, “RiskMon: 
Continuous and Automated Risk Assessment of Mobile 
Applications,” Proc. 4th ACM Conference on Data and 
Application Security and Privacy (CODASPY '14), pp. 99-
110, 2014. 
[9] P. Aditya, B. Bhattacharjee, P. Druschel, V. Erdélyi, and M. 
Lentz, “Brave New World: Privacy Risks for Mobile Users,” 
Proc. ACM MobiCom Workshop on Security and Privacy in 
Mobile Environments (SPME '14), pp. 7-12, 2014. 
[10] M. Islam, A. Lautenbach, C. Sandberg, T. Olovsson, “A Risk 
Assessment Framework for Automotive Embedded Systems,” 
Proc. 2nd ACM International Workshop on Cyber-Physical 
System Security (CPSS ’16), pp. 3-14, 2016.  
[11] A. Schaad and M. Borozdin, “TAM2: Automated Threat 
Analysis,” Proc. 27th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing (SAC ’12), pp. 1103-1108, 2012. 
[12] Y. Shi, W. You, K. Qian, P. Bhattacharya, and Y. Qian, “A 
Hybrid Analysis for Mobile Security Threat Detection,” Proc. 
IEEE Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics & Mobile 
Communication Conference (UEMCON), pp. 1-7, 2016. 
[13] J. Sokolowski and C. Banks, “An Agent-Based Approach to 
Modeling Insider Threat,” Proc. Symposium on Agent-
Directed Simulation (ADS '15), pp. 36-41, 2015. 
[14] A. Panou, C. Ntantogian, and C. Xenakis, “RiSKi: A 
Framework for Modeling Cyber Threats to Estimate Risk for 
Data Breach Insurance,” Proc. 21st Pan-Hellenic Conference 
on Informatics (PCI 2017), article no. 32, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[15] A. Sanzgiri and D. Dasgupta, “Classification of Insider Threat 
Detection Techniques,” Proc. 11th Annual Cyber and 
Information Security Research Conference (CISRC ’16), 
article no. 25, pp. 1-4, 2016. 
[16] T. Baluta, L. Ramapantulu, Y. Teo, and E. Chang, “Modeling 
the Effects of Insider Threats on Cybersecurity of Complex 
Systems,” Proc. 2017 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), 
pp. 4360-4371, 2017. 
89
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[17] G. Kul, S. Upadhyaya, and A. Hughes, “Complexity of 
Insider Attacks to Databases,” Proc. 2017 International 
Workshop on Managing Insider Security Threats (MIST ’17), 
pp. 25-32, 2017. 
[18] M. Gawron, A. Amirkhanyan, F. Cheng, and C. Meinel, 
“Automatic 
Vulnerability 
Detection 
for 
Weakness 
Visualization and Advisory Creation,” Proc. 8th International 
Conference on Security of Information and Networks (SIN 
’15), pp. 229-236, 2015. 
[19] G. Spanos, A. Sioziou, and L. Angelis, “WIVSS: A New 
Methodology 
for 
Scoring 
Information 
System 
Vulnerabilities,” Proc. 17th Panhellenic Conference on 
Informatics, pp. 83-90, 2013. 
[20] MITRE, “Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures”, retrieved: 
July, 2017, https://cve.mitre.org/ 
[21] E. Oladimeji, L. Chung, H. Jung, and J. Kim, “Managing 
Security and Privacy in Ubiquitous eHealth Information 
Interchange,” 
Proc. 
5th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication 
(ICUIMC ’11), article no. 26, pp. 1-10, 2011. 
[22] S. Alqahtani, E. Eghan, and J. Rilling, “SV-AF – A Security 
Vulnerability Analysis Framework,” Proc. 2016 IEEE 27th 
International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering 
(ISSRE), pp. 219-229, 2016. 
90
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

