184
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Collaborative and Secure Sharing of Healthcare Records Using Attribute-Based
Authenticated Access
Mohamed Abomhara
Department of Information and Communication Technology
University of Agder
Grimsatd, Norway
Email: mohamed.abomhara@uia.no
Huihui Yang
NISlab and CCIS
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Gjøvik, Norway
Email: huihui.yang@ccis.no
Abstract—The electronic health records are a widely utilized
system in electronic health. It offers an efﬁcient way to share
patient health records among those in the medical industry, such
as physicians and nurses. The barrier that currently overshadows
the effective use of electronic health records is the lack of security
control over information ﬂow where sensitive health information
is shared among a group of people within or across organizations.
This study highlights authorization matters in cooperative en-
gagements with complex scenarios in the collaborative healthcare
domain. The focus is mainly on collaborative activities that are
best accomplished by organized groups of healthcare practition-
ers within or among healthcare organizations with the objective
of accomplishing a speciﬁc task (a case of patient treatment). In
this study, we ﬁrst investigate and gain a deep understanding of
insider threat problems in the collaborative healthcare domain.
Second, an authorization schema is proposed that is suitable
for collaborative healthcare systems to address the issue of
information sharing and information security. The proposed
scheme is based on attribute-based authentication, which, is a way
to authenticate users by attributes or their properties. Finally,
we evaluate the security of the proposed scheme to ensure our
proposed scheme is unforgeable, coalition resistant, and traceable
as well as it providers conﬁdentiality and anonymity.
Keywords–Healthcare; Access control; Authorization; Collabo-
ration environments; Attribute based authentication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The electronic health records (EHRs) [1], [2], [3] is a
widely utilized application in healthcare sector. It offers an
efﬁcient way to share patient health records among those in
the medical industry, such as physicians and nurses. Here,
patient data is captured over time and electronically stored in
databases to enable secure and reliable access. EHRs are highly
beneﬁcial to end users and health providers alike. Advances in
EHRs systems will likely reduce the cost of care by facilitating
easy collaborative support from multiple parties to fulﬁll the
information requirements of daily clinical care [4], [3], [5].
Patient and healthcare providers can cooperate continuously
with one another to attain health services at lower prices [6],
[7]. In addition, enhancing the quality and delivery of health
services by giving healthcare providers access to information
they require to provide rapid patient care [1], [3]. Typically,
rapid patient care requires the collaborative support of different
parties including primary care physicians, specialists, medical
laboratory technicians, radiology technicians and many other
medical practitioners [1], [8], [9]. Moreover, collaboration
among healthcare organizations is required for patients being
transferred from one healthcare provider to another for spe-
cialized treatment [10], [11].
Although EHRs systems may improve the quality of
healthcare, the digitalization of health records, the collection,
evaluation and provisioning of patient data, and the trans-
mission of health data over public networks (the Internet)
pose new privacy and security threats [5], [12], [13] such
as data breaches and healthcare data misuse, leaving patients
and healthcare providers vulnerable to these threats. However,
security control over information ﬂow is a key aspect of such
collaboration where sensitive information is shared among a
group of people within or across organizations.
The patient health record is a sensitive collection of in-
formation that calls for appropriate security mechanisms to
ensure conﬁdentiality and protect integrity of data as well as
ﬁlter out irrelevant information to reduce information overload
[14], [15]. According to the Health Information Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [16], [17], the keepers of
health records are required to take the necessary steps needed
to protect the conﬁdentiality, integrity and privacy, among
others, of the patient health records [18]. As a result, ensuring
conﬁdentiality and protect integrity of data in EHR systems
with proper authorization control has always been viewed as
a growing concern in the healthcare industry.
In this study, focus is mainly on authorization issues when
EHRs are shared among healthcare providers in collaborative
environments with the objective of accomplishing a speciﬁc
task. The main concern with EHRs sharing during collab-
orative support is having an authorization mechanism with
ﬂexibility to allow access to a wide variety of authorized
healthcare providers while preventing unauthorized access.
Since healthcare services necessitate collaborative support
from multiple parties and healthcare teamwork occurs within
a dynamic group, dynamic authorization is required to allow
team members to access classiﬁed EHRs.
A. Access Control Mechanism
Access control enables determining if the person or object,
once identiﬁed, is permitted to access the resource. As shown
in Figure 1, access control is a combination of authentication
and authorization processes aimed at managing and securing
access to system resources while also protecting resources’
conﬁdentiality and integrity, among others.

185
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Policy Enforcement Point
(PEP)
Policy Decision Point
(PDP)
Authorization Database
Request
Response
Administrator
User 
Resources
Authorization 
Authentication
Authentication 
Method
Access Request 
Access Control Mechanism
Access
Figure 1. Authorization mechanism
Authentication entails validating the identity establishment
between two communicating parties, showing what or who
the user is? Authorization checks if the user can access the
resources he/she has requested or not. When a user requests
an access to resource on the system, ﬁrst, the user has to au-
thenticate himself/herself to the system, then the authorization
process decides on the access request to be permitted or denied
based on the authorization policies. The policy enforcement
point (PEP) (Figure 1) intercepts a user’s request to access a
resource. The PEP forwards the request to the policy decision
point (PDP) to obtain the access decision (permit or deny).
PEP then acts on the received decision. The PDP is used
to evaluate access requests against authorization policies and
makes decisions according to the information contained in the
request before issuing access decisions [19].
In the literature, two main access control models have
been developed: role-based access control (RBAC) [20] and
attribute-based access control (ABAC) [21]. RBAC allows or-
ganizations to enforce access policies based on user’ roles (job
functions) rather than users or groups [10]. RBAC promotes
the management of related permissions instead of individual
ones. The sets of permissions are compiled under a particular
role. Consequently, all permissions are managed based on the
role itself. Any changes in the permission within the role will
impact the subjects who are assigned the corresponding role. In
ABAC [21], permissions to access the objects are not directly
given to the subject. It uses attributes of the subject (e.g.,
name, age or role in organization) and attributes of object (e.g.,
metadata properties) to provide authorizations as shown in
Figure 2. The permissions in ABAC depend on a combination
of a set of attributes and their relative values [22]. When a
user wants to access an object, it sends an access request to
the system with its attributes. PDP receives the request from
PEP and combines the user’s attributes, the object’s attributes
and environmental conditions (e.g., time and location), then
check if they satisfy the authorization policies (Figure 2). If
so, the subject’s access request will be allowed and it will be
enforced by the PEP [23]. During the process described above,
PDP’s decision making part can be considered as a part of
authentication, while the authorization policy enforcing part
by PEP be can considered as authorization.
Policy Enforcement Point
(PEP)
Policy Decision Point
(PDP)
Authorization Database
Request
Response
Administrator
User 
Resources
Access 
Attribute-Based Access Control
Authentication
Attribute Database
Enviroment Database
Policy Information Point
(PIP)
Subject 
Attribute
Object 
Attribute
Figure 2. Access control mechanism for ABAC
To combine the strengths of both approaches without being
hindered by their limitations, we proposed the work-based
access control (WBAC) model [10], [24], [25], [26]. WBAC
model is proposed by introducing the team role concept and
modifying the user-role assignment model from RBAC and
ABAC. The main goals of WBAC are ﬂexibility, easy man-
ageability, security, as well as suitability to support cooperative
work of dynamic teams in healthcare environments [25]. In the
proposed model, a secondary RBAC layer, with extra roles
extracted from team work requirements, is added to RBAC
and ABAC Layers to manage the complexity of cooperative
engagements in the healthcare domain. Policies related to
collaboration and team work are encapsulated within this
coordinating layer to ensure that the attribute layer is not overly
burdened. In this study, focus is mainly on authentication using
attribute-based authentication (ABA) [27], [23], [28], [29]. We
propose an authentication scheme using ABA to authenticate
users by attributes or their properties.
ABA is part of ABAC and the authentication result of
ABA is an important factor to decide whether a user’s access
request can be enforced or not. ABA is used as an approach
to authenticate users by their attributes, so that users can get
authenticated anonymously and their privacy can be protected
[28]. Since there have already been lots of research on the
cryptographic construction of attribute-based signatures (ABS)
[30], [31] and attribute-based encryption (ABE) [32], it must
be a good choice to utilize these results to construct ABA
schemes for for collaborative healthcare systems.
B. Study Contribution
The main contribution of this work are as follows:
1)
Investigate and gain a deep understanding of collab-
orative healthcare environment and insider security
threats associated with it.
2)
Design an attribute-based group authorization model
that is suitable for collaborative healthcare systems
to address the concern with information sharing and
information access. The proposed model ensures that
access rights are dynamically adapted to the actual
needs of healthcare providers. Healthcare providers
can access the resources associated with a work task,
but only while the work task is active. Once the task
is completed, access rights should be invalidated.
3)
Evaluate and analysis the security of the proposed
model.

186
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Collaborative Environment
 Process
Tool
Work 
A
User1
Work 
B
User2
Work A and B
Completion of 
work A and B
Figure 3. Collaborative environment and work sharing
C. Structure of the Study
The remaining parts of this study are organized as fol-
lows. In Section II, a brief description of the collaboration
environment and insider threats in healthcare is presented.
An overview of the EHRs systems architecture and usage
scenario are provided in Section III. Security assumption and
requirements are given in Section IV. Section V presents the
proposed scheme. Security analysis is provided in Section VI.
Finally, conclusions and aspects for future work are given in
Section VII.
II.
BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE
In this section, relevant work related to the study is re-
viewed. An overview of healthcare collaboration environment
is presented, followed by a brief summary of the insider threat
problem in the healthcare domain is highlighted. The main
aim of this section is to understand the security requirements
and propose an attribute-based group authorization model that
ensures sufﬁcient security, which strikes a balance between
collaboration and safeguarding sensitive patient information.
A. Collaborative Environment
A collaborative environment is a virtual infrastructure that
allows individuals to cooperate with greater ease to perform
their duties. It provides the necessary processes and tools to
promote teamwork among individuals with similar goals [33].
For example, work can be divided amongst the team and
performed separately (Figure 3). Afterwards, the outcome of
each individual is assembled into a cohesive whole.
Collaboration at a medical facility is an integral part of the
work process, whereby experts with different specializations
and backgrounds must contribute together as a group in order
to ensure treatment success. This necessity is further ampliﬁed
with the increasing complexity of the medical domain. Health-
care services necessitate collaborative support from multiple
parties to fulﬁll the information requirements of daily clinical
care and provide rapid patient care. Collaborative support is re-
quired within healthcare organizations such as hospitals, where
patient records must be moved among healthcare professionals,
laboratories and wards, to name a few [10]. Collaboration
among healthcare organizations is also essential for patients
being transferred from one healthcare provider to another for
specialized treatment. Such collaboration within or among
User 1
Resource 1
User 2 
User 3 
Resource 2
Resource 3
(a) Resource in isolation
User 1
Resource 1
User 2 
User 3 
Resource 2
Resource 3
(b) Resource sharing in collaborative environment
Figure 4. Resource in isolation and resource sharing
healthcare organizations has been shown to provide cost-
effective healthcare services [10]. EHRs improve how people
work and enables more ﬂuent cooperation between personnel
at a medical facility. To cite an example, collaborative medical
imaging [34] demonstrates the importance of sharing between
medical practitioners. It utilizes cloud computing to provide
a repository of medical imaging for physicians to discuss,
diagnose and treat a particular disease effectively as a team.
One of the key aspects of a collaborative environment is the
sharing of resources. To cooperate, each team member must
be prepared to gather and share their ﬁndings with the rest
of the team members. In Figure 4, initially each individual
is accessing their own resource in isolation (Figure 4(a)).
However, once collaboration is established, the process of
sharing transpires (Figure 4(b)). Resource sharing is vital in
collaboration. In order to analyze, decide and solve a certain
problem collaboratively, team members must have similar
knowledge of the deﬁning situation. This way, cooperation can
be achieved without the aggravating friction. However, balanc-
ing between collaboration and security of shared information
is difﬁcult. On the one hand, collaborative systems are targeted
towards making all system elements (i.e., hardware, software,
data, humans, processes) available to all who need it. On the
other hand, security seeks to ensure the availability, conﬁden-
tiality, and integrity of these elements while providing them
only to those with proper authorization. Therefore, avoiding
security and privacy violation are very important while sharing
resources with others [10], [35].
B. Insider Threats
Although a collaborative environment can help enhance
healthcare quality, it may also render the shared resources
more vulnerable to insider threats [36], [37], [38]. This hap-
pens when someone within the collaborative team accesses
shared resources for unethical reasons, for instance accessing
a patient’s private information for personal gain. In Figure 5,

187
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Alice personal 
information 
Contact
number
Alice is attractive!
I can get her contact
number easily.
Unethical
access
User 1
Resources 1
User 2 
User 3 
Resources 2
Resources 3
Figure 5. Insider Threat during collaboration
it is assumed that three physicians are working collaboratively
on a case at the hospital. They are discussing the possible
treatment for a patient named Alice. To do so, they must
analyze her medical ﬁle, but not her personal information.
However, the 2nd physician is attracted to the patient. He
exploits the collaborative environment to obtain her contact
number without permission.
Insider threats pose a serious concern in the healthcare in-
dustry. In 2015, it was reported [39] that 35.5% of documented
breaches involved medical counterparts. It is the second highest
category in comparison. Breaches include stealing protected
health information for later use to launch numerous fraud
attacks on related medical parties. The danger with insider
threats that occur due to the collaborative effort in healthcare
is their low detectability. In other words, an incident could
happen repeatedly over an extended period of time without
being discovered by authorities. Actual attacks on victims can
therefore be attempted at any time, which makes the threat
harder to combat. Given the severity of insider threats within
the healthcare sector, a number of countermeasures have been
developed. These measures can be divided into two main
categories: passive and active [36], [40], [41]. Passive measures
are more geared toward detecting the perpetrators while active
measures protect targeted assets from being compromised
altogether.
To begin insider threat analysis, applying a framework can
be quite useful [42], [43]. Insider threats are analyzed from
four main aspects: the catalyst that can lead to an attack,
the actor, the attack and the organization characteristic. These
aspects can provide authorities with a method of formalizing
the dominant patterns in an attack. Authorization and access
control are the most popular approaches for developing an
active form of mitigating insider threats [44], [10], [45],
[46]. For instance, in order to secure a shared repository on
epidemics, the group-based discretionary access control [47]
is employed. It allows certain individuals to access the data
and prohibits others based on their group membership.
III.
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS
Healthcare providers deal with large number of sensitive
healthcare records, which are shared and collaboratively used
Multidisciplinary 
team
Singed medical 
report 
Group signature
   ..
Access to various 
EHRs
Patient (Alice)
Classified EHRs (Class A or Class B)
File 1
File 2
File n
Cara
Bob
Alex
Team  manager 
(Dean)
Figure 6. An example scenario of collaboration and sharing of healthcare
data
among different healthcare practitioners [8]. Collaboration
occurs when a healthcare provider such as primary care doctor
requests help from another healthcare provider to treat a case.
To better understand collaborations in the healthcare domain,
in this section, we present a usage scenarios provide examples
of collaboration and healthcare data sharing, followed by the
EHRs system architecture.
A. Usage Scenario: Multiple Healthcare Practitioners Coop-
eration Among Multiple Healthcare Organizations
As shown in Figure 6, a typical use case scenario adopted
from [4] is presented. A patient named Alice is recently
diagnosed with gastric cancer. Surgical removal of the stomach
(gastrectomy) is the only curative treatment. For many patients,
chemotherapy and radiation therapy are given after surgery
to improve the chances of curing. Alice entered a cancer-
treatment center at her chosen hospital (e.g., hospital A in
Figure 8). Alice has a general practitioner (Dean) who she
regularly visits. Upon entering the hospital, Alice also sees an
attending doctor (Bob) from the hospital. Alice’s health con-
dition has caused some complications, so her attending doctor
would like to seek expert opinions and consultation regarding
Alice’s treatment from different hospitals (e.g., hospital B in
Figure 8), including Alice’s speciﬁc general practitioner who
is fully informed about Alice’s medical history. Note that the
invited practitioners are specialized in different areas, where
some are specialists and others are general practitioners. In
such group consultation, every participant needs to obtain the
medical records they request based on the health insurance
portability and accountability act (HIPAA) [16] minimal dis-
closure principle.
In such group consultation, also so-called multidisciplinary
team consultation [48], [49], [50], it is noticeable that, sev-
eral healthcare professionals are involved in various roles
to provide patient care. That includes primary care doctors,
general physicians and specialists. Every participant needs to
obtain the medical records they request based on HIPAA [16]
minimal disclosure principle [4], [8]. In this case, the act of
managing the collaborative work must be clearly deﬁned. By
default, only the main practitioner should be aware of the
patient’s personal information. The other medical practitioners
with supporting roles are given information based on their

188
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
contributing roles (need-to-know principle) [51]. For instance,
if the supporting party is included solely for consultation
purposes concerning the disease, only information essential for
diagnosis is provided. It is not necessary to allow perusal of
personal information related to the patient.
Hospital personnel roles are often simplistically split into
medical practitioners, nurses and administrators [52], [53].
However, in [10], we further categorized personnel roles into
a total of nine roles per group, which are classiﬁed into main,
action, thought and management roles, as shown in Figure 7.
Dean 
Bob
Cara
Alex
Main
Implementation 
Thought
Management
Practitioners 
Team Role
Personnel
Work
Resource
Patient
Alice
 resource1
 ...
 ...
resource n
Medical 
Information 
Personal 
Information
Figure 7. EHRs usage scenario
The workﬂow of every healthcare practitioner is as follows:
1)
The general practitioner (Dean) could not solve Al-
ice’s case. He invites multidisciplinary team including
Bob, Cara and Alex to help. In this team consid-
eration, Dean is the core physician of the collab-
orative work. He serves as the group manager. He
is responsible for initiating the work (treatment of
Alice’s case) and choosing the practitioners (group
of doctors) who may be required to attend Alice’s
consultation and treatment. This implies that his pos-
sesses the main team role (Figure 7). In other words,
he owns the collaborative work initiated. Therefore,
full access is given to Dean with regard to the
information related to the patient. He can access the
personal information of the patient as well as the
medical records. Moreover, the general practitioner
must revoke the team upon completion of the patient’s
diagnosis consultation.
2)
Bob helps Dean with the operational part of the case.
Operation refers to a series of responsibilities that
entail interaction with the patient. Bob needs to see
Alice on a face-to-face basis to perform various tasks
that are related to her recovery. In this respect, there
is a need for Bob to know personal and medical in-
formation about Alice to perform his duty effectively.
It must be reminded however, that access to a collab-
orative resource can be tailored more speciﬁcally by
harnessing the stipulated team roles. Bob is involved
in the action part of the collaboration. Therefore, his
team provider falls under the category of action.
3)
Cara has more of a thought role. She is responsible
for helping Dean solve the medical case. There is no
need for Cara to meet Alice personally on a day-to-
day basis. In fact, Cara is only required to analyze
the medical situation and suggest a possible solution.
Cara’s strategic role within the team implies a rather
clear indication of the access that she needs. Since
Cara is predominantly preoccupied with diagnosing
the disease, there is no urgent need for her to know
the patient’s personal information. As such, she is
only given access to the patient’s medical information
as per her strategic team role.
4)
With the increasing number of physicians working
on Alice’s case, their interaction can become more
complex. For instance, if there exists a competition
between conﬂicting diagnoses given by Bob and
Cara, which would gain priority? This is where Alex
comes in. He contributes to the team by coordinating
the interaction of the other members by taking on the
team management role. To work effectively, Alex does
not really need to know the patient’s personal infor-
mation. However, he must be aware of the patient’s
medical information to enable coordination.
In addition, Alice may have some historical health informa-
tion (e.g., mental illness or sexual issues, etc.), to which the
group (or some of the team) of specialists and practitioners
do not have to have access. In WBAC, we assume that each
resource (EHR ﬁles) in the system are divided into two types,
mainly private and protected during the collaborative work.
The collaborative resources required for work are enumerated
in Table form as proposed by Abomhara and Køien in [10].
Each resource is tied to the set of collaborative roles or team
roles that can access it. In effect, the selected roles will
determine the extent of collaborative access.
B. EHRs Systems Architecture
EHRs system is considered in this study. Multiple owners
(referring to patients who have full control of their EHRs) and
healthcare providers, such as physicians and nurses, among
others, who require access to these EHRs to perform a task. In
Figure 8, the architecture of the reference system is illustrated.
The reference system includes the following main domains:
1)
EHRs: The medical records are collected, stored
and provisioned by the electronic health records
system to achieve the features of low cost opera-
tion, collaborative support and ubiquitous services.
The EHRs can reside in a centralized or distributed
systems depending on the deployment needs [54].
Authorized healthcare providers, including hospitals
and healthcare practitioners can access EHRs through
different services such as web portals and health apps
[55]. In WBAC, we assumed that all the medical
records covered by WBAC are classiﬁed into two
sets of objects (private and protected) listed in the
permissions that are assigned to roles and team roles,
which will be accessed by a users.

189
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Attribute Authority 
System Setup 
Key Generation 
Revocation 
Other Services
EHRs Server Hospital B 
EHRs Server Hospital A 
Cloud-Based EHR System 
Authorization Database
Attribute Database
Enviroment Database
Authentication 
method
Broker/Aggregator Authorization for EHR 
Healthcare Providers
Healthcare Organization  
Emergency 
Room
Doctor
Nurse
Admin
Treatment 
Team 
Hospital (A)
Healthcare Providers
Healthcare Organization  
Emergency 
Room
Doctor
Nurse
Admin
Treatment 
Team 
Hospital (B)
Work-Based 
Access control
Figure 8. Reference system architecture overview
a)
Private object contains medical records re-
lated to personal information such as names
and addresses as well as resources that are
not related to the current patient case such
as family medical history and sexual health,
among others.
b)
Protected object contains resources related
to current patient case. For example, con-
sider Alice’s case (Section III-A), we could
say that protected objects contains resources
related to Alice’s current case such as past
surgical history, data related to abdominal
CT scan (computed tomography scan) and
gastroscopy data, to name a few.
The access to medical records is controlled via the
team roles and the requirements of attributes. For
each medical records, the access policy is represented
by a combination of attributes. When a user (health-
care providers who have already joined a team and
assigned to team role) requires to access (read, write,
etc) the ﬁle on EHRs, it should show an evidence that
it satisﬁes the required attributes. Only if the evidence
is valid, the user’s access can be granted. This process
will be implemented by an ABA scheme presented in
Section V-A.
2)
Trusted authority: A fully trusted authority such as
the Ministry of Health is responsible for key genera-
tion, distribution and management of users’ keys. The
main responsibilities of the trusted authority include
the following:
a)
Generate the main system public and private
keys.
b)
Generate user keys for each user.
c)
Generate public and attribute keys for each
attribute in the system.
d)
Generate attribute keys for attributes pos-
sessed by each user.
As for implementation, it is possible to have dif-
ferent authorities to perform these responsibilities
separately, such that the compromise of one authority
will not lead to the compromise of the whole system.
More speciﬁcally, healthcare delivery organizations
(e.g., hospitals) perform as a registration center with a
certain qualiﬁcation certiﬁed by the trusted authority.
Healthcare delivery organizations are responsible for
checking their healthcare practitioners’ professional

190
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
expertise and send their attributes to the trusted au-
thority to issue the corresponding attribute-based cre-
dentials. As for implementation, it is possible to have
different authorities to perform these responsibilities
separately, such that the compromise of one authority
will not lead to the compromise of the whole system.
More speciﬁcally, healthcare delivery organizations
(e.g., hospitals) perform as a registration center with a
certain qualiﬁcation certiﬁed by the trusted authority.
3)
Healthcare providers: Healthcare providers from
various domains, such as doctors, nurses, radiology
technicians and pharmacists, among others, require
access to patients’ records to perform a task. Once
a new healthcare practitioner joins a system, the
healthcare delivery organization must send healthcare
practitioner’ attributes to the trusted authority to
obtain attributes based credentials. Healthcare practi-
tioners apply their authentication credentials obtained
from the trusted authority to access classiﬁed EHRs
through authorization mechanisms in the EHR aggre-
gator. In case of group collaboration, multiple EHRs
have to be shared with various healthcare providers
and practitioners. A group manager is responsible for
registering healthcare practitioners to form a group.
The hospital’s (registration center) responsibility is to
verify the authenticity of each healthcare practitioners
in the group based on the professional expertise and
required access, and send it to the trusted authority
to issue the corresponding group credentials for the
group.
IV.
SECURITY ASSUMPTION AND REQUIREMENTS
In this study, we consider the healthcare providers are
honest and trusted but curious. That means, they will try to
ﬁnd as much as conﬁdential and private information just for
curiosity. Therefore, healthcare providers will try to access ﬁles
on EHRs, which are beyond their privileges (i.g, healthcare
providers intend to access the medical records that needed to
fulﬁll their tasks but sometimes they intentionally or uninten-
tionally access patients’ medical records that are irrelevant
to their task [56]). For example, as shown in Figure 5, a
healthcare provider may want to obtain information about the
patient for his/her own interest. To do so, healthcare provider
may impersonate other healthcare provider. Also, healthcare
provider may collude with other healthcare providers to gain
an access to information. Thus to achieve a secure sharing
of EHRs, a core requirements of a well-designed ABA sys-
tem were presented by Yang [28], [29]. According to our
assumption and usage scenarioa, the system should fulﬁll the
following requirements:
•
Conﬁdentiality: Unauthorized users who do not pos-
sess enough attributes satisfying the authorization pol-
icy should be prevented from reading EHR documents.
•
Minimum attributes leakage: To be authenticated,
a healthcare provider only need to provide required
attributes rather than the whole package of attributes
it possesses.
•
Signature: The ﬁnal medical report of Alice’s treat-
ment should be signed by appropriate practitioners
using digital signatures.
Alice should be able to verify the authenticity of the
consultation results through the practitioner’s digital
signature. Note that the practitioner’s digital signa-
ture can be opened (reveal the practitioner’s identity)
depending on the requirements. In some cases, prac-
titioners do not want to reveal their identities when
participating in group treatment.
•
Unforgeability: An adversary who does not belong
to the group should not be able to impersonate a
group member and forge a valid signature to get
authenticated.
•
Coalition resistance: Group members should not be
able to pile up their attributes to forge a signature to
help a member to get authenticated.
V.
PROPOSED SCHEME
In this section, the system setup and security analysis are
presented.
A. System setup
System setup, including key generation, distribution and
revocation are explained in this subsection. As mentioned
before (Section III-B), the trusted authority is responsible for
users’ key and attribute key generation. For each user in the
system, the trusted authority will generate a unique user key
that represents the user’s identity information and will be used
to trace users’ identities if necessary. The proposed scheme is
based on bilinear mapping [57], [58].
Deﬁnition 1: [Bilinear Mapping] [59] Let G1, G2 and G3
be cyclic groups of prime order p, with g1 ∈ G1 and g2 ∈ G2
as the generators. e is an efﬁcient bilinear map if the following
two properties hold.
1)
Bi-linearity: equation e(ga
1, gb
2) = e(g1, g2)ab holds
for any a, b ∈ Z∗
p.
2)
Non-degenerate: e(g1, g2) ̸= 1G3, where 1G3 is the
unit of G3.
Firstly, the proposed ABA scheme needs to set up the
system, which is considered as a preparation for the phase of
signature generation, veriﬁcation and opening. During system
setup, the system main parameters, such as main public and
private key sets will be generated by the trusted authority.
Based on the main private and public key sets, the trust
authority will generate system attribute keys and users’ keys.
More importantly, the trusted authority will authorize Dean the
power to generate attribute keys for group members. This is
how Dean gains the control over the group.
Assume k0 is the system security parameter. G1, G2 are
two multiplicative groups of prime order p with g1 ∈ G1 and
g2 ∈ G2 as their generators. Let e : G1 × G1 → G2 be
a bilinear mapping. Select h ∈ G1, ξ1, ξ2 ∈ Z∗
p, where Z∗
p =
{a ∈ Zp|gcd(a, p) = 1} is a multiplicative group modulo a big
prime number p. Set u, v ∈ G1 such that uξ1 = vξ2 = h. Select
x0, β0 ∈ Z∗
p as the top secret and compute w0 = gx0
1 , f0 =
g1/β0
1
and h0 = gβ0
1 . The public key set of the trusted authority
is denoted by MPK =< G1, G2, g1, g2, h, u, v, f0, h0, w0 >
and the private key set is MSK =< x0, β0, ξ1, ξ2 >, where
the pair < ξ1, ξ2 > is handed to the opener as its tracing key
tk.
Then the system setup proceeds as follows.

191
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1)
Dean authorization: Dean described in our usage
scenario can be considered as an attribute domain
authority in the scheme proposed in [60]. To authorize
Dean, ﬁrst, the trusted authority selects a secret xd ∈
Z∗
p and computes Ad = g(x0+xd)/β0
1
and wd = gxd.
The pair DSK =< Ad, xd > is the Dean’s private
key and Ad should be registered in the opener’s
database for identity tracing. DPK =< wd > as
the Dean’s public key.
2)
User key generation: All users in the system should
register themselves and obtain their users’ key from
the trusted authority. Assume there are N users in
the EHRs usage case. To generate the secret key of
user Ui (1 ≤ i ≤ N), the trusted authority randomly
selects xi ∈ Z∗
p and computes Ai = g(x0+xi)/β0
1
.
bski =< Ai, xi > is Ui’s secret key base and Ai
should be handed to the opener.
3)
Attribute key generation: Assume the attribute set
owned by all members in the EHRs usage case is
denoted by Ψ = {att1, · · · , attNa} (Na = |Ψ|). To
generate a pair of private and public attribute key for
an attribute attj ∈ Ψ (1 ≤ j ≤ Na), the trusted
randomly selects tj ∈ Z∗
p as its private attribute key
and computes apkj = g1tj as its public attribute key.
4)
Attribute key authorization: The trusted authority
authorize attribute keys to Dean. For attribute attj,
the trusted authority selects rj ∈ Z∗
p and computes
Td,j = g(x0+xd)/β0
1
H(attj)tj+rj and apkdj = grj
1 as
Dean’s private and public attribute keys for attribute
attj respectively.
5)
User attribute key generation: To be active in
the EHRs usage case described above, each member
should gain their attribute keys from Dean. Assume
the attribute set possessed by user Ui is denoted
by Ψi
= {atti1, · · · , attiNi} and attribute attik
(1 ≤ k ≤ Ni) corresponds to attj
∈ Ψ. For
simplicity, we will use attj to represent attik instead.
To generate a private attribute key of attj (1 ≤ k ≤
Ni) for Ui, Dean interacts with Ui and computes
Ti,k = f xi
0 Td,j = g(x0+xd+xi)/β0
1
H(attj)tj+rj as
Ui’s private attribute key for attribute attj.
All these attribute keys are only active during the period
of a speciﬁc workload. When this workload is ﬁnished, all
attribute keys of users in this group should be revoked. This
requirement can be realized by combining these attribute keys
with a timing token. Thus, these attribute keys are only valid
during this ﬁxed time period.
B. Signature Generation, Veriﬁcation and Opening
After the system setup, all entities in the group of the
EHRs usage case have obtained their users’ keys and attribute
keys for authentication. As described before, each medical ﬁle
is bound with access policies represented by a combination
of attributes. More specially, this combination of attributes is
represented by an attribute tree [28]. An attribute tree is a tree
structure that represents the logical relations among required
attributes, based on, which a user generates a signature as a
proof of possessing the required attributes.
The user can only be authenticated when the signature is
valid. However, it is also possible that the user’s access request
is reject even though the signature is valid because of other
factors, such as system time, locations and so on.
Assume that Ui is a user to the authenticated, V
is
the veriﬁer and f is the ﬁle that Ui wants to access. The
veriﬁer here can be the access system or another entity that is
responsible for users’ authentication. It depends on the speciﬁc
enforcement of the system. The authentication phase proceeds
as follows:
1)
(Ui) access request sending: Ui sends a request to
the veriﬁer V wants to access ﬁle f.
2)
(V ) attribute requirement embedding: In this step,
the veriﬁer embeds a secret key Ks and the attribute
requirements in an attribute tree and sends related
parameters to Ui. The details are as follows:
Once V receives the access request, it retrieves the
access policy related to the requested access and ﬁle
f. Next, V will generate an attribute tree Γ with root
value αr ∈ Z∗
p for root r to represent the access
requirement as described in [28]. The same as in [60],
we use qNode() to denote the polynomial bound to an
interior node Node. For a leaf node y whose parent is
interior node Node, qy(0) is computed by qNode(0).
Thereafter, the veriﬁer computes
Ks = (e(f0, w0)e(g1, wd))αr
= e(g1, g1)(x0+xd)αr/β0.
Let L(Γ) be the leaf node set of the attribute tree
Γ. V
computes ∀y
∈
L(Γ), Cy
=
gqy(0)
1
and
C′
y = H(y)qy(0) and sends {Γ, gαr
1 , ∀y ∈ Leaf(Γ) :
Cy, C′
y} to Ui.
3)
(Ui) signature generation: In this step, Ui recovers
the embedded secret key Ks as Kv ﬁrst if it owns all
the required attributes. Next it generates a signature
as a proof that it possesses the required attributes and
to provide traceability, which means that an opener
can trace the identity information of Ui given this
signature.
The details are as follows. Assume Ui possesses all
the required attributes represented by attribute tree
Γ and attik owned by Ui is the attribute related to
leaf node y in attribute tree Γ. After Ui receives the
message from V , it computes
DecryptNode(Ti,k, Cy, C′
y, y)
=
e(Ti,k, Cy)
e(apkjapkdj, C′y)
= e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+uk)qy(0)/β0.
If x is an interior node, DecryptNode(Tk,j, Cy, C′
y,
y) proceeds as follows: for all x’ children z,
DecryptNode(Tk,j, Cy, C′
y, y) is called and the out-
put is stored as Fz. Assume Sx is the subset of all
x’s children z and ind(x) is the index of node x. We
deﬁne
∆Sx,ind(z) =
Y
l∈{Sx−ind(x)}
l
ind(z) − l.
Then we have

192
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fx =
Y
z∈Sx
F
qz(0)∆Sx,ind(z)
z
=
Y
z∈Sx
(e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)qz(0)/β0)∆Sx,ind(z)
=
Y
z∈Sx
(e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)qpar(z)(ind(z))/β0)∆Sx,ind(z)
=e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)qx(0)/β0.
Ui calls DecryptNode(Ti,k, Cy, C′
y, y) for the root
and gets the result
Fr = e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)αr/β0.
Next Ui computes
Ks = Fr/e(gxi
1 , gαr
1 ) = e(g1, g1)(x0+xd)αr/β0 = Kv.
Until here, Ui has successfully recovered the em-
bedded secret key Ks as Kv. In the following, Ui
generate a signature to provide traceability.
The signer randomly selects ζ, α, β, rζ, rα, rβ, rx,
rδ1, rδ2 ∈ Z∗
p and calculates
C1 = uζ, C2 = vβ, C3 = Aihζ+β,
δ1 = xiζ, δ2 = xiβ,
R1 = urζ, R2 = vrβ, R4 = Crx
1 u−rδ1 , R5 = Crx
2 v−rδ2 ,
R3 = e(C3, g1)rxe(h, wd)−rζ−rβe(h, g1)−rδ1−rδ2 ,
c = HKs(M, C1, C2, C3, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5) ∈ Z∗
p
sζ = rζ + cζ, sβ = rβ + cβ, sα = rα + cα,
sx = rx + cxi, sδ1 = rδ1 + cδ1, sδ2 = rδ2 + cδ2.
Finally, the signer sends the signature σ
=<
M, C1, C2, C3, c, sζ, sβ, sα, sδ1, sδ2 > to the veriﬁer.
4)
(V ) signature veriﬁcation: V computes
R′
1 =usζC−c
1 , R′
2 = vsβC−c
2 , R′
4 = u−sδ1 Csx
1 , R′
5 = v−sδ2 Csx
2 ,
R′
3 =e(C3, g1)sxe(h, wd)−sζ−sβe(h, g1)−sδ1−sδ2 (e(C3, wd)
e(g1, g1) )c
and c′ = HKv(M, C1, C2, C3, R′
1, R′
2, R′
3, R′
4, R′
5).
If c′ equals to c that V has received from Ui, V
believes that Ui owns the required attributes and the
authentication succeeds.
5)
(The opener) signature opening: The opener com-
putes Ai = C3/(Cε1
1 Cε2
2 ), where Ai was registered
in the opener’s database as Ui’s identity information
during system setup.
C. Group Operations
As described in Section III-A, Bob needs to read patients’
personal and medical information, but Cara only needs to have
access to patients’ medical records. To achieve this goal, we
ﬁrst express these access policies based on attributes. When
group members want to access the documents, they generate
a signature based on the required attributes deﬁned in the
access policies. If their signatures are valid, we believe that
they satisfy the access policies and will be granted with the
required access.
In addition, Dean needs to revoke this temporary group and
the privileges granted to group members after the workload is
ﬁnished. There are two possible solutions. The ﬁrst solution
is to combine all keys generated for this temporary workload
with a time token, but it requires a precise estimation about the
time period how long this task will last. If the time period is too
short, all keys will be revoked before the task is ﬁnished and
the system has to be set up again. To the contrary, if the time
period is too long, group members will still be able to access
to patients’ documents after the task is completed, which may
cause security and privacy issues. The second solution is to
add the temporary attribute public keys in a revocation list.
Before signature veriﬁcation, the veriﬁer ﬁrsts check whether
the related attribute public keys are valid. If not, the veriﬁer
will abort the signature veriﬁcation, and group members will
not gain additional access privileges when the temporary task
ﬁnishes.
VI.
SECURITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the security requirements of
the proposed model based on the security analysis described
in Section IV, including conﬁdentiality, minimum attributes
leakage, signature, unforgeability and coalition resistance.
Conﬁdentiality: When a user Ui wants to read EHR
documents, he should successfully be authenticated by the
ABA scheme proposed in Subsection V-B. From [60], we
know that our ABA scheme satisﬁes the security requirement
traceability, which means that a user without the required
attributes cannot generate a valid signature to successfully
authenticated. As a result, as long as user Ui is required to
pass the authentication described in Subsection V-B before he
accesses EHR documents, the conﬁdentiality can be satisﬁed.
Unforgeability: requires that a user outside the group (an
outsider) cannot generate a valid signature in the ABA scheme
proposed in Subsection V-B. We assume that an outsider does
not possess any valid required attributes. From the analysis of
conﬁdentiality, we know that a valid user who does not possess
all required attribute cannot generate a valid signature, so an
outsider without any valid required attributes cannot generated
a valid signature.
Coalition resistance: This security requirement is weaker
than traceability, because it is one way to try to forge a valid
signature that the opener cannot trace its identity. Assume
that the ABA scheme proposed in Subsection V-B is not
coalition resistant, it means that a couple of users can pile
up their attributes and generate a valid signature. Since these
attributes do not belong to the same user in the group and
it is valid, the identity retrieved from the signature does not
belong to any user in the group. It contracts with the security
requirement traceability. Therefore, the ABA scheme proposed
in Subsection V-B is coalition resistant.
Minimum attributes leakage: This security requirement
is straight forward. To generate a valid signature, a user only
needs to use the required attributes other than the whole
package of attributes he possesses.
Signature: This property can be satisﬁed by requiring
Alice’s practitioner to generate a signature using its attribute
keys based on the ABA scheme proposed in Subsection V-B,
where as the veriﬁer, Alice can deﬁne the required attributes
and therefore can check the validity of the signature. When
necessary, the signature can also be identiﬁed by the opener
in the system.

193
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
A. Discussion
The central trusted authority within the healthcare system
sustains an EHRs data source of aggregated to ensure availabil-
ity and to provide an easy access to the health professionals.
However, accessing patient’s health records raises patient con-
cerns about the security of their data. This is because patients
generally want to make sure that their sensitive information
is accessed by authorized and trusted healthcare providers. As
such, a health supplier needs to be sure that actual legal entity
is the only party to grant access to the EHRs. Furthermore,
patient permission must also be considered to create a EHRs
accessibility role.
The goal of this study is to have attribute veriﬁcation
within a group of healthcare providers. The main purpose
of our scheme is authenticating users by attributes or their
properties to achieve security requirement (Section IV) in-
cluding conﬁdentiality, anonymity, traceability, unforgeability,
coalition resistance and signature.
Conﬁdentiality protects system resources and informa-
tion from unauthorized disclosure. In our study, healthcare
providers who join a team of treatment (e.g., Cara and
Alex) should register themselves to obtain their authorization
key from the trusted authority (Section V-A). Therefore, all
the healthcare providers who join Alice’s treatment will be
identiﬁed by the team manager (Dean) and authorized to access
Alice’s EHRs once they obtain their authorization keys. An
important concerns about user’ identity are anonymity and
traceability of healthcare provider’s identity. In other words,
the veriﬁer cannot get any identifying information related
to the user during the authentication process [23]. On the
one hand, anonymity is important to keep a patient’ privacy.
For example, in our scenario (Figure 6), assume that Alice
dose not need anyone to know that she was treated by a
gastroenterologist (Cara). Therefore, keeping the identity of
Cara anonymized is a very impotent aspect. On the other
hand, tracing of healthcare providers’ identities is of great
importance. When disputes happen and the identify of the
healthcare provider are treated as legitimate evidence, tracing
of the identity is useful. The main purpose of our scheme is to
achieve anonymity and allow tractability. Since our scheme
is based on group signatures, it is traceable. In our ABA
scheme the system tracing the signers’ identity is done by the
attribute authority (opener). The identity revealing can only
be performed when a disputes happens and a legal authority
should authorize it. There are two requirements for identity
reveal [60], [23]. First, given a valid signature, the opener
should be able to trace the signature and reveal the identity
information. Second, the revealed identity should belong to
real signer rather than a forged one.
Digital signature forgery is another concern when design-
ing of ABA schemes. Forgeability is the ability to create a
signature by illegitimate signer such as an adversary. Our
proposed scheme ensures that, a user (healthcare provider or
adversary) who does not possess all required attribute cannot
generate a valid signature. It is said the scheme is strongly
unforgeable if the signature is existentially unforgeable under
chosen-message attack [61], [62] and, given signatures on
some messages, the adversary cannot produce a new signature.
In this study, we have not analyze our scheme against chosen-
message attack. But we assume that it is unforgeable since the
adversary need a number of required attributes to generate a
valid signature.
Coalition attack is one of the most difﬁcult tasks in devel-
oping a group signature, It occurs when a malicious collisions
of group members that produce untraceable signatures [63].
Considering the coalition resistance, in our scheme the user
can only generate the signature if he or she has all the required
attributes. As we showed in security analysis (Section VI) it is
not possible for different users to collude and generate a valid
signature together if they as a whole have all the required
attributes.
The security requirement ”signature” is very important
because it provides three properties. First of all, the signature
should be able to be veriﬁed by Alice that it is generated by a
legal practitioner according to Alice’s treatment requirements.
This property can prevent the case that the signature was forged
by an illegal practitioner or an adversary. Secondly, the practi-
tioner can keep itself anonymous if he wants, and this property
is provided by the security requirement anonymity of the ABA
scheme proposed in Section V. Finally, the practitioner cannot
deny that the signature was actually generated by him since
there is an opener who can ”open” the signature and retrieves
the practitioner’s identity, and this property is provided by the
security requirement traceability of the proposed ABA scheme.
B.
Conclusions and Further Work
In this work, an authorization scheme was proposed for
collaborative healthcare system to address the problem of
information sharing and information security. The proposed
scheme provides an efﬁcient solution to security challenges
related to authorization. The security analysis has showed that
our proposed scheme is unforgeable, coalition resistant, and
traceable as well as it providers conﬁdentiality and anonymity.
In the future, the plan is to develop and prototype the func-
tionality to be implemented as well as evaluate the validity of
the scheme based on its efﬁciency and practicality. Efﬁciency is
the scheme’s performance in terms of resource consumption,
e.g., time and computational capability. Practicality denotes
the possible difﬁculties in managing the model during actual
implementation. The motivation behind studying the issue of
efﬁciency and practicality is to simplify decentralized admin-
istrative tasks, and enhance the practicability of authorization
in dynamic collaboration environments. It is very important to
design a system to not only ensure shared information con-
ﬁdentiality but also to avoid administration and management
complexity.
Furthermore, in recent years, cloud computing and in-
formation technology adaptation to healthcare has become
increasingly important in many countries [7], [64]. EU coun-
tries are seeking new ways to modernize and transform their
healthcare systems using information and communications
technology in order to provide EU citizens (patients) with safe
and high quality treatment in any European Union country
[65], [66] (EU directive 2011/24/EU framework on cross-
border health care collaboration in the EU [67], [68], [69]).
Access to cross-border healthcare in the EU has undergone
many developments in both academia and industries in order
to meet EU healthcare domain needs. The eHealth Action Plan
2012-2020 [70] and the EU-funded project UNIversal solutions
in TELemedicine deployment for European HEALTH care
(United4health) [71] are among such developments. The aim

194
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of these projects is to provide solutions to improve healthcare
quality, provide access to a high-quality healthcare system to
all EU citizens around Europe, and support close cooperation
between healthcare professionals and care providers from
different organization.
Therefore, in future, the proposed scheme will be further
investigated towards cross-border healthcare collaboration. The
plan is to evaluate the validity of the scheme to provide
solutions to improve healthcare quality, provide access to
a high-quality healthcare system to all EU citizens around
Europe, and support close cooperation between healthcare
professionals and care providers from different organization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Geir M. Køien for the
support in investigating and typesetting this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Abomhara and H. Yang, “Attribute-based authenticated access for
secure sharing of healthcare records in collaborative environments,”
in the Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2016), 2016, pp. 138–144, ISBN:978-1-
61208-470-1.
[2]
C. Bain, “The implementation of the electronic medical records system
in health care facilities,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, 2015, pp.
4629–4634.
[3]
S. Silow-Carroll, J. N. Edwards, and D. Rodin, “Using electronic health
records to improve quality and efﬁciency: the experiences of leading
hospitals,” Issue Brief (Commonw Fund), vol. 17, 2012, pp. 1–40.
[4]
R. Zhang and L. Liu, “Security models and requirements for healthcare
application clouds,” in Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2010 IEEE 3rd
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 268–275.
[5]
M. Abomhara, M. Gerdes, and G. M. Køien, “A stride-based threat
model for telehealth systems,” Norsk informasjonssikkerhetskonferanse
(NISK), vol. 8, no. 1, 2015, pp. 82–96.
[6]
U. D. of Health, H. Services et al., “Expanding the reach and impact
of consumer e-health tools,” Washington, DC: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Ofﬁce of Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, 2006.
[7]
M.-H. Kuo, “Opportunities and challenges of cloud computing to
improve health care services,” Journal of medical Internet research,
vol. 13, no. 3, 2011, p. e67.
[8]
B. Fabian, T. Ermakova, and P. Junghanns, “Collaborative and se-
cure sharing of healthcare data in multi-clouds,” Information Systems,
vol. 48, 2015, pp. 132–150.
[9]
M. Li, S. Yu, Y. Zheng, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Scalable and secure shar-
ing of personal health records in cloud computing using attribute-based
encryption,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 24, no. 1, 2013, pp. 131–143.
[10]
M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, “Towards an access control model
for collaborative healthcare systems,” in In Proceedings of the 9th
International Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and
Technologies (BIOSTEC 2016), vol. 5, 2016, pp. 213–222.
[11]
O. Moonian, S. Cheerkoot-Jalim, S. D. Nagowah, K. K. Khedo,
R. Doomun, and Z. Cadersaib, “Hcrbac–an access control system for
collaborative context-aware healthcare services in mauritius,” Journal
of Health Informatics in Developing Countries, vol. 2, no. 2, 2008.
[12]
M. Meingast, T. Roosta, and S. Sastry, “Security and privacy issues
with health care information technology,” in 28th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
2006. EMBS’06.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 5453–5458.
[13]
A. Appari and M. E. Johnson, “Information security and privacy in
healthcare: current state of research,” International journal of Internet
and enterprise management, vol. 6, no. 4, 2010, pp. 279–314.
[14]
R. Gajanayake, R. Iannella, and T. Sahama, “Privacy oriented access
control for electronic health records,” electronic Journal of Health
Informatics, vol. 8, no. 2, 2014, p. 15.
[15]
B. Alhaqbani and C. Fidge, “Access control requirements for processing
electronic health records,” in Business Process Management Workshops.
Springer, 2008, pp. 371–382.
[16]
S. J. Dwyer III, A. C. Weaver, and K. K. Hughes, “Health insurance
portability and accountability act,” Security Issues in the Digital Med-
ical Enterprise, vol. 72, no. 2, 2004, pp. 9–18.
[17]
K. E. Artnak and M. Benson, “Evaluating hipaa compliance: A guide
for researchers, privacy boards, and irbs,” Nursing outlook, vol. 53,
no. 2, 2005, pp. 79–87.
[18]
H. Bidgoli, Handbook of Information Security, Information Warfare,
Social, Legal, and International Issues and Security Foundations.
John
Wiley & Sons, 2006, vol. 2.
[19]
N. Li, Q. Wang, W. Qardaji, E. Bertino, P. Rao, J. Lobo, and D. Lin,
“Access control policy combining: theory meets practice,” in the 14th
ACM symposium on Access control models and technologies.
ACM,
2009, pp. 135–144.
[20]
D. F. Ferraiolo, R. Sandhu, S. Gavrila, D. R. Kuhn, and R. Chan-
dramouli, “Proposed nist standard for role-based access control,” ACM
Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC), vol. 4,
no. 3, 2001, pp. 224–274.
[21]
V. C. Hu, D. Ferraiolo, R. Kuhn, A. Schnitzer, K. Sandlin, R. Miller, and
K. Scarfone, “Guide to attribute based access control (abac) deﬁnition
and considerations,” NIST Special Publication, vol. 800, 2014, p. 162.
[22]
A. Ubale Swapnaja, G. Modani Dattatray, and S. Apte Sulabha,
“Analysis of dac mac rbac access control based models for security,”
International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 104, no. 5, 2014.
[23]
H. Yang, “Cryptographic enforcement of attribute-based authentication,”
doctoral Dissertations at the University of Agder, 2016, ISBN: 978-82-
7117-826-0.
[24]
M. Abomhara, H. Yang, and G. M. Køien, “Access control model
for cooperative healthcare environments: Modeling and veriﬁcation,” in
IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics 2016 (ICHI
2016), 2016.
[25]
M. Abomhara and M. Ben Lazrag, “Uml/ocl-based modeling of work-
based access control policies for collaborative healthcare systems,” in
IEEE 18th International Conference on E-health, Networking, Appli-
cations, and Services (IEEE Healthcom 2016), 2016, doi: 978-1-5090-
3370-6/16.
[26]
M. Abomhara and H. Nergaard, “Modeling of work-based access con-
trol for cooperative healthcare systems with xacml,” in the Fifth Inter-
national Conference on Global Health Challenges (GLOBAL HEALTH
2016 ), 2016, pp. 14–21, ISBN: 978-1-61208-511-1.
[27]
D. Khader, “Attribute based authentication schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Bath, 2009.
[28]
H. Yang and V. A. Oleshchuk, “A dynamic attribute-based authen-
tication scheme,” in Codes, Cryptology, and Information Security.
Springer, 2015, pp. 106–118.
[29]
——, “An efﬁcient traceable attribute-based authentication scheme with
one-time attribute trees,” in Secure IT Systems.
Springer, 2015, pp.
123–135.
[30]
H. K. Maji, M. Prabhakaran, and M. Rosulek, “Attribute-based signa-
tures,” in cryptographers Track at the RSA Conference. Springer, 2011,
pp. 376–392.
[31]
J. Li, M. H. Au, W. Susilo, D. Xie, and K. Ren, “Attribute-based signa-
ture and its applications,” in Proceedings of the 5th ACM Symposium
on Information, Computer and Communications Security. ACM, 2010,
pp. 60–69.
[32]
S. Yu, C. Wang, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Attribute based data sharing
with attribute revocation,” in the 5th ACM Symposium on Information,
Computer and Communications Security.
ACM, 2010, pp. 261–270.
[33]
C. Shah, “A framework for supporting user-centric collaborative
information seeking,” in PhD Thesis. University of North Carolina,
2010, pp. 1–268. [Online]. Available: http://comminfo.rutgers.edu/
∼chirags/papers/Shah Dissertation.pdf
[34]
I. H. Arka and K. Chellappan, “Collaborative compressed i-cloud
medical image storage with decompress viewer,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 42, 2014, pp. 114–121.
[35]
K. Asif, S. I. Ahamed, and N. Talukder, “Avoiding privacy violation
for resource sharing in ad hoc networks of pervasive computing envi-
ronment,” in Proceedings of the 31st Annual International Computer

195
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Software and Applications Conference-Volume 02.
IEEE Computer
Society, 2007, pp. 269–274.
[36]
C. W. Probst, J. Hunker, D. Gollmann, and M. Bishop, Insider Threats
in Cyber Security.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010, vol. 49.
[37]
Y. Chen, S. Nyemba, and B. Malin, “Detecting anomalous insiders in
collaborative information systems,” Dependable and Secure Computing,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 9, no. 3, 2012, pp. 332–344.
[38]
Y. Chen, S. Nyemba, W. Zhang, and B. Malin, “Leveraging social
networks to detect anomalous insider actions in collaborative envi-
ronments,” in Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2011 IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 119–124.
[39]
ITRC, “Identity theft rsesource centre (itrc) data breach reports,”
2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.idtheftcenter.org/images/breach/
DataBreachReports 2015.pdf
[40]
N. T. Nguyen, P. L. Reiher, and G. H. Kuenning, “Detecting insider
threats by monitoring system call activity.” in IAW.
Citeseer, 2003,
pp. 45–52.
[41]
M. Kandias, N. Virvilis, and D. Gritzalis, “The insider threat in cloud
computing,” in Critical Information Infrastructure Security.
Springer,
2011, pp. 93–103.
[42]
J. R. Nurse, O. Buckley, P. A. Legg, M. Goldsmith, S. Creese, G. R.
Wright, and M. Whitty, “Understanding insider threat: A framework
for characterising attacks,” in Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW),
2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 214–228.
[43]
M. B. Salem, S. Hershkop, and S. J. Stolfo, “A survey of insider attack
detection research,” in Insider Attack and Cyber Security.
Springer,
2008, pp. 69–90.
[44]
W. Tolone, G.-J. Ahn, T. Pai, and S.-P. Hong, “Access control in
collaborative systems,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 37,
no. 1, 2005, pp. 29–41.
[45]
S. Alshehri, S. Mishra, and R. Raj, “Insider threat mitigation and access
control in healthcare systems,” 2013.
[46]
C. E. Rubio-Medrano, C. D’Souza, and G.-J. Ahn, “Supporting secure
collaborations with attribute-based access control,” in Collaborative
Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing (Collaborate-
com), 2013 9th International Conference Conference on.
IEEE, 2013,
pp. 525–530.
[47]
J. , D. Domingos, M. J. Silva, and C. Santos, “Group-based discre-
tionary access control for epidemiological resources,” Procedia Tech-
nology, vol. 9, 2013, pp. 1149–1158.
[48]
C. Borrill, M. West, D. Shapiro, and A. Rees, “Team working and
effectiveness in health care,” British Journal of Healthcare Management,
vol. 6, no. 8, 2000, pp. 364–371.
[49]
C. Taylor, A. J. Munro, R. Glynne-Jones, C. Grifﬁth, P. Trevatt,
M. Richards, and A. J. Ramirez, “Multidisciplinary team working in
cancer: what is the evidence?” BMJ, vol. 340, 2010, p. c951.
[50]
P. Mitchell, M. Wynia, R. Golden, B. McNellis, S. Okun, C. E. Webb,
V. Rohrbach, and I. Von Kohorn, “Core principles & values of effective
team-based health care,” Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, 2012.
[51]
R. S. Sandhu and P. Samarati, “Access control: principle and practice,”
IEEE communications magazine, vol. 32, no. 9, 1994, pp. 40–48.
[52]
M. A. Valentine and A. C. Edmondson, “Team scaffolds: How
mesolevel structures enable role-based coordination in temporary
groups,” Organization Science, vol. 26, no. 2, 2015, pp. 405–422.
[53]
N. Meslec and P. L. Curs¸eu, “Are balanced groups better? belbin roles
in collaborative learning groups,” Learning and Individual Differences,
vol. 39, 2015, pp. 81–88.
[54]
D. Patra, S. Ray, J. Mukhopadhyay, B. Majumdar, and A. Majumdar,
“Achieving e-health care in a distributed ehr system,” in e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services, 2009. Healthcom 2009. 11th
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 101–107.
[55]
S. de Lusignan, F. Mold, A. Sheikh, A. Majeed, J. C. Wyatt, T. Quinn,
M. Cavill, T. A. Gronlund, C. Franco, U. Chauhan et al., “Patients online
access to their electronic health records and linked online services: a
systematic interpretative review,” BMJ open, vol. 4, no. 9, 2014, p.
e006021.
[56]
Q. Wang and H. Jin, “Quantiﬁed risk-adaptive access control for patient
privacy protection in health information systems,” in Proceedings of the
6th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications
Security.
ACM, 2011, pp. 406–410.
[57]
T. Okamoto, “Cryptography based on bilinear maps,” in Applied Al-
gebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, vol.
3857, pp. 35–50.
[58]
R. Sahu and S. Padhye, “Efﬁcient ID-based signature scheme from
bilinear map,” in Advances in Parallel Distributed Computing, ser.
Communications in Computer and Information Science.
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 203, pp. 301–306.
[59]
Y. Qin, D. Feng, and X. Zhen, “An anonymous property-based attesta-
tion protocol from bilinear maps,” in 2009 International Conference on
Computational Science and Engineering (CSE ’09), vol. 2, Aug 2009,
pp. 732–738.
[60]
H. Yang and V. A. Oleshchuk, “Traceable hierarchical attribute-based
authentication for the cloud,” in Communications and Network Security
(CNS), 2015 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 685–689.
[61]
D. Boneh, E. Shen, and B. Waters, “Strongly unforgeable signatures
based on computational difﬁe-hellman,” in International Workshop on
Public Key Cryptography.
Springer, 2006, pp. 229–240.
[62]
S. Goldwasser, S. Micali, and R. L. Rivest, “A digital signature scheme
secure against adaptive chosen-message attacks,” SIAM Journal on
Computing, vol. 17, no. 2, 1988, pp. 281–308.
[63]
G. Ateniese, M. Joye, and G. Tsudik, On the difﬁculty of coalition-
resistance in group signature schemes.
IBM Thomas J. Watson
Research Division, 1999.
[64]
M. Dekker, “Critical cloud computing-a ciip perspective on cloud
computing services,” Report of the European Network and Information
Security Agency, 2012.
[65]
D. Byrne, Enabling Good Health for All : A Reﬂection Process for a
New EU Health Strategy.
Commission of the European Communities,
2004.
[66]
M. Wismar, W. Palm, J. Figueras, K. Ernst, E. Van Ginneken et al.,
“Cross-border health care in the european union: mapping and analysing
practices and policies.” Cross-border health care in the European Union:
mapping and analysing practices and policies, 2011.
[67]
E.
Commission,
“Expert
panel
on
effective
ways
of
investing
in
health:
Cross-border
cooperation,”
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://ec.europa.eu/health/expert panel/opinions/docs/009
crossborder cooperation en.pdf
[68]
——, “Overview of the national laws on electronic health records
in the eu member states and their interaction with the provision of
cross-border ehealth services,” EU Health Programme (2008-2013),
2013. [Online]. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/docs/laws
report recommendations en.pdf
[69]
I.
Passarani,
“Patient
access
to
electronic
health
records,”
Report
of
the
eHealth
Stakeholder
Group,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://ec.europa.eu/health/expert panel/opinions/docs/009
crossborder cooperation en.pdf
[70]
E. Commission, “ehealth action plan 2012-2020 innovative healthcare
for the 21st century,” European Commission staff working document for
informative purposes, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=SWD:2012:0413:FIN:EN:PDF
[71]
United4Health,
“P7
eu
project
united4health
2013.”
[Online].
Available:
Umbrellaproject:http://www.united4health.eu/
;Norwegianproject:http://www.united4health.no/.

