Simulating Blast Effects on High Security Vehicles with 3D Fluid-Structure Interaction
Arash Ramezani, Burghard Hillig, Hendrik Rothe
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology
University of the Federal Armed Forces
Hamburg, Germany
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, burghard.hillig@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de
Abstract—The present time is shaped by a variety of religious,
political and military conﬂicts. In times of asymmetric warfare
and constantly changing sources of danger from terrorist attacks
and other violence based crimes, the personal need for protection
continues to rise. Aside from military applications, there is a large
area for the use of high security vehicles. Outwardly almost
indistinguishable from the basic vehicles, security vehicles are
used for protecting heads of state, as well as individuals. To
remain state of the art it is necessary for security vehicles
to permanently continue to develop protection against modern
weapons and ammunition types. It is enormously cost intensive
to check any new technology by ﬁring or blasting of real vehicles.
Therefore, more and more calculations of new security concepts
and materials are carried out by numerical computer simula-
tions. However, product simulation is often being performed by
engineering groups using niche simulation tools from different
vendors to simulate various design attributes. The use of multiple
vendor software products creates inefﬁciencies and increases
costs. This paper will present the analysis and development
of an interface between the most common Computer Aided
Engineering applications ANSYS Autodyn and Abaqus to exploit
the advantages of both systems for the simulation of blast effects.
As a result, the interaction between a shock wave from ANSYS
Autodyn and a vehicle model in Abaqus is shown. As part of this
publication, the underlying material models and the connection
between simulation and interface will be presented.
Keywords–CFD-FEM coupling methods; fully automatic struc-
ture analysis; high-performance computing techniques; blast load-
ing; vehicle structures.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This article is based on the developments, which were
presented at the SIMUL 2017 in Athens [1]. A new approach
has been made to exploit the full potential of the two leading
software providers for Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) /
Finite Element Method (FEM) calculations ANSYS (Canons-
burg, USA) and Abaqus FEA from Dassault Systmes (Vlizy-
Villacoublay, France). Therefore, an interface between these
two software platforms has been developed to combine their
individual strengths.
Since the 1960s, the simulation of physical processes has
been a steadily growing and integral part of Computer Aided
Engineering (CAE). Especially, the Computational Fluid Dy-
namics and the discretization of complex models using the
Finite Element Method have made an impressive development
from individual highly specialized applications to the standard
of industrial product development [2] [3]. This process was
supported by the progressive development of increasingly
powerful and less expensive computer hardware. Together with
specialized software, a triumph of the simulation of physical
processes in everyday technical work has emerged. Positive
effects due to the use of simulation tools have been shorter
development times, lower production costs, more innovative
products, improved security and higher quality. The previous
modeling of components and objects of the real world by
Computer Aided Design (CAD) software is an important
prerequisite for the efﬁcient use of the simulation tools. This
has been established as a standard in the automotive industry,
so that almost every part of a vehicle can be constructed by
using CAD. These complete and realistic vehicle models can
be analyzed virtually by available simulation software.
The two leading software providers offer software with
similar features available. One key difference is that ANSYS
is able to simulate blast propagation and, in contrast, Abaqus
does not [4]. Additionally, their performance is characterized
by different spreads and focuses. For example, Abaqus and
CATIA, a CAD software, which is also distributed by Dassault
Systmes, is predominantly used by the automotive industry
and provides excellent opportunities for the simulation and
modeling of complete vehicles. This includes screwed and
adhesive connections. On the other hand, ANSYS offers a
wide range of sophisticated simulation capabilities in the
ﬁeld of CFD, which includes the modeling and simulation
of explosive detonations and the subsequent propagation of
shock waves [5]. The different focuses of the performance of
ANSYS and Abaqus yield to a mixed, demand-based use of
the software in the research and development area, so that
different software is used even within the same company on the
same project in different areas of activity. This circumstance is
ampliﬁed by the fact that product simulations are performed by
engineering groups using niche simulation tools from different
vendors to simulate various design attributes. Unfortunately,
the software providers avoid the effective interaction of their
simulation tools due to mutual competition. This complicates
the development effort and results in longer development
times in research and industry. Particularly, in the area of
armored security vehicles, it is necessary to remain state of
138
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the art and to constantly consider the ongoing development of
modern weapon and ammunition types. Experimental tests of
the harmful effects of new technologies by blast or impact is
associated with enormous time and ﬁnancial costs.
This paper reports on the development of an interface
between ANSYS and Abaqus, which will enable combining
the strengths of the two leading software providers with the
aim of generating synergies that result in short development
times and lower costs. This interface allows an iterative transfer
of the blast simulation of ANSYS to the structural mechanic
solver of Abaqus, which simulates the effects on the vehicle
model and vice versa. The development of such an interface
represents an absolute novelty. The goal of this development
is to combine the advantages of ANSYS, with its advanced
CFD / blast simulation capabilities, and Abaqus, which is
widely used in the automotive industry. One step to achieve
this, is to export the blast simulation data at a certain point
depending on space and time. Then the exported data has to
be inserted in Abaqus. Hereby, the restrictions for importing
data and scripting has to be considered. The newly created
interface ensures that Abaqus places the data in the correct
position. Now, Abaqus can use this imported data to simulate
the interaction between the model and the blast wave. Some
results of this working interface are also demonstrated in this
paper.
After the introduction in this section, the different methods
of space discretization and fundamentals of simulation are
described in Section II. In addition, there are short subsections
on material models and on ballistic trials where the experimen-
tal set-up is depicted, followed by Section III describing the
analysis with numerical simulations. The paper ends with a
concluding paragraph in Section IV.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. State of the Art
A ﬁrst step in developing an interface between ANSYS
and Abaqus has already been reported in [6]. The developed
interface allows accessing a set of data and passing them to
Abaqus. Python was used as a programming language. ANSYS
provides the data records for the interface as .txt ﬁles. These
ﬁles contain data points with Cartesian coordinates, which
describe the propagation of shock waves after blasting. The
interface takes this data and splits it into separate information.
In a further step, the data is stored in a list, linked with the
corresponding time points, pressure data and coordinates. It is
also possible to use a set of data and to interpolate between the
time points to produce a larger data set. After the data has been
written and saved in a linked form, the interface retrieves the
CAD model. Subsequently, the explosion data can be projected
onto a selectable surface of the model. Then, an iterative loop
realizes the coupling between CFD and FEM simulations. This
approach for a coupled CFD-FEM analysis is called ”strong
coupling”. In another approach, the ”semi-strong coupling”, a
smaller amount of data is used and mathematically interpolated
for a sufﬁcient approximation. The third concept is a ”weak
coupling” solution. In the weak or loose coupling methods the
coupled problem is partitioned into ﬂuid and structural parts,
which are solved separately. The data exchange on the interface
is done only once per time step and even not at every time-
step. Here, neural networks and deep learning can be used to
replicate blast effects on different vehicle structures. Until now,
the basic functionality of the interface could be validated on
different models, including the model of a safety vehicle.
B. Fundamentals of Simulation
In the security sector, the partly insufﬁcient safety of people
and equipment due to failure of industrial components are
ongoing problems that cause great concern. Since computers
and software have spread into all ﬁelds of industry, extensive
efforts are currently being made in order to improve the safety
by applying certain computer-based solutions. To deal with
problems involving the release of a large amount of energy
over a very short period of time, e.g., explosions and impacts,
there are three approaches, which are discussed in [7].
As the problems are highly non-linear and require in-
formation regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading
rates, which are generally not available, most of the work
is experimental and may cause tremendous expenses. Analyt-
ical approaches are possible if the geometries involved are
relatively simple and if the loading can be described through
boundary conditions, initial conditions, or a combination of
the two. Numerical solutions are far more general in scope
and remove any difﬁculties associated with geometry [8].
For structures under shock and impact loading, numerical
simulations have proven to be extremely useful. They provide
a rapid and less expensive way to evaluate new design ideas.
Numerical simulations can supply quantitative and accurate
details of stress, strain, and deformation ﬁelds that would
be very expensive or difﬁcult to reproduce experimentally. In
these numerical simulations, the partial differential equations
governing the basic physical principles of conservation of
mass, momentum, and energy are employed. The equations
to be solved are time-dependent and non-linear in nature.
These equations, together with constitutive models describing
material behavior and a set of initial and boundary conditions,
deﬁne the complete system for shock and impact simulations.
The governing partial differential equations need to be
solved in both time and space domains. The solution over
the time domain can be achieved by an explicit method. In
the explicit method, the solution at a given point in time is
expressed as a function of the system variables and parameters,
with no requirements for stiffness and mass matrices. Thus,
the computing time at each time step is short but may require
numerous time steps for a complete solution. The solution for
the space domain can be obtained utilizing different spatial
discretization, such as Lagrange [9], Euler [10], Arbitrary
139
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Lagrange Euler (ALE) [11], or mesh free methods [12].
Each of these techniques has its unique capabilities, but also
limitations. Usually, there is not a single technique that can
cope with all the regimes of a problem [13]. The crucial factor
is the grid that causes different outcomes. More details are
discussed in Section IV.
Due to the fact that all engineering simulations are based on
geometry to represent the design, the target and all its compo-
nents are simulated as CAD models. Real-world engineering
commonly involves the analysis and design of complicated
geometry. These types of analysis depend critically on having
a modeling tool with a robust geometry import capability in
conjunction with advanced, easy-to-use mesh generation algo-
rithms [14]. It often is necessary to combine different simula-
tion and modeling techniques from various CAE applications.
However, this fact can lead to major difﬁculties, especially in
terms of data loss and computational effort. Particularly the
leading software providers prevent an interaction of their tools
with competing products. But to analyze blast loading and its
effects on vehicle structures, different CAE tools are needed.
Therefore, it is important that an interface is provided that
allows a robust interaction between various applications. Using
a CAD neutral environment that supports direct, bidirectional
and associative interfaces with CAE systems, the geometry
can be optimized successively and analysis can be performed
without loss of data [15].
Various approaches are possible when it comes to solving
problems that involve the release of large amounts of energy
in very short periods of time, which then propagate as shock
waves or act as impact on structures. Analytic solutions offer a
very powerful way to describe such a process. Unfortunately,
their applicability is restricted to problems with simple ge-
ometries and few boundary and initial conditions. In contrast,
numerical simulations offer much more general applications
with complex structures and feasible solutions.
The underlying physical model of numerical simulations is
provided by physical conservation laws, the equation of state
and the constitutive model. Partial differential equations for
the conservation of energy, momentum, and mass form the
physical conservation laws. Furthermore, the equation of state
combines the internal energy or temperature and the density
or volume of a material with the pressure. As a result, changes
in the density and irreversible thermodynamic processes such
as shock-like heating can be considered. In addition, the
constitutive model includes the inﬂuence of the material to be
simulated and describes the effect of deformation, i.e. changes
in shape and material strength properties.
Together, these equations form a set of coupled, time- and
location-dependent, highly non-linear equations, which can
be solved by computer calculations. The governing partial
differential equations need to be solved in both time and space
domains. The solution over the time domain can be obtained
by an explicit method, which is an iterative method and leads
to a step by step solution in the time domain. Software for
numerical simulation of shock and impact processes is called
a hydrocode [16].
C. Methods of Space Discretization
All existing structural dynamics and wave propagation codes
obtain solutions to the Differential Equations (DEs) governing
the ﬁeld by solving an analogous set of algebraic equations.
The governing DEs are not solved directly, because currently
only a handful of closed-form solutions for DEs are available.
The equations of structural dynamics, being a coupled set of
rate equations, which account for the effects of severe gradients
in stress, strain and deformation, material behavior ranging
from solid to ﬂuid to gas, temperatures from room temperature
to melt temperature are highly non-linear and do not lend
themselves to closed-form solutions in the general case.
To get a solution over the spatial domain a discretization
of the material with a mesh is necessary. FEM uses such
a discretization by dividing the problem space into separate
elements. These elements can have different shapes: In two
dimensions, the shape of quadrilaterals or triangles, in three di-
mensions hexahedrons and tetrahedrons are usually used. Even
complicated geometries can be formed with these elements.
Each FEM element has a certain number of nodes, which are
located at its corners and have known spatial coordinates. The
displacement of these nodes represents the unknowns of the
partial differential equations to be solved. There are multiple,
different spatial discretization methods related to FEM, such as
Lagrange, Euler, Arbitrary Lagrange Euler (ALE) or mesh free
methods. Each of these methods can be used independently,
but some speciﬁc problems need a combination of different
discretization methods.
1) Lagrange: The Lagrange method divides an object into a
spatial grid where the grid is ﬁxed to the object and moves with
it. The material components within an element do not change.
If forces are acting on a node, it is displaced, and thus the
forces are transmitted to its neighboring nodes, similar to a
spring-mass system. This results in deformations of the grid.
The nodes of the edge elements of an object remain unchanged
so that the boundary and interface conditions can be easily
applied. Clear material boundaries are also available so that
space outside the material does not require an extra grid and
therefore the conservation of mass is automatically satisﬁed.
Figure 1 shows two objects with its mesh as an example of
the Lagrange method.
Two objects consisting of different materials represented by
the colors blue and green before (left side) and after impact
(right side). The two colors stand for different materials in
such a way, that the green material is harder than the blue
one. Additionally, the green object has an initial velocity in the
direction of the blue object. The right side of the ﬁgure shows
the discretization dependent deformation after the impact with
the Lagrange solver. The mesh is bound to the objects and
divides them into multiple elements. After an impact the
140
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Lagrange method example: A blue target gets hit by a green bullet
before (left side) and after the impact (right side).
objects deform due to the deformation of the elements. A weak
point of the Lagrange method is a strong distortion of the mesh
in heavily loaded regions, as shown in Figure 1 in the area
adjacent to the green and blue object.
In general the Lagrange method is best suited for complex
geometries and structures, projectiles and other solids. A dis-
advantage of Lagrange is the occurrence of strong distortions
of mesh element at high loads. Such a distorted element can
adversely affect the temporal solution of the simulation since
the time step is proportional to the size of the smallest element.
2) Euler: In the Euler method the coordinates of the nodes
are ﬁxed and form the entire mesh of the region to be solved.
The material ﬂows through the mesh as a function of time and
changes the value of the element, while the spatial coordinates
and the nodes remain ﬁxed. This is the reason why no element
distortion is possible in the Euler method. In contrast to
Lagrange, boundary nodes do not necessarily coincide together
with material boundary conditions. Thereby difﬁculties can
arise with the application of boundary and interface conditions.
Figure 2 shows two objects and the mesh as an example of
the Euler method. Two objects consisting of different materials
represented by the colors blue and green before (left side) and
after impact (right side). In contrast to the Lagrange frame, the
mesh ﬁlls the entire space. Again, the green object has an initial
velocity in the direction of the blue object. The right side of
the ﬁgure shows the discretization dependent deformation after
the impact with the Euler solver. The mesh is not bound to the
objects like in the Lagrange frame. Instead the mesh ﬁlls the
whole space with the objects and empty space between them.
During the simulation the material of the objects is transported
through the mesh of the space. After an impact the mesh stays
clear but its content is partly deformed.
Figure 2. Euler method example: A blue target gets hit by a green bullet
before (left side) and after the impact (right side). At both sides, the mesh
ﬁlls the entire space.
In general the Euler method is used to model the propagation
of gases and ﬂuids as a result of an explosion or impact. In the
investigation of solids, the Euler method has a disadvantageous
effect, since additional calculations are needed to transport the
stress tensor and the history of the material through the lattice.
In this case, Euler needs more computing performance and
smaller elements to resolve the occurring shock waves.
3) ALE: The Arbitrary Lagrange Euler (ALE) method is a
mix of Lagrange and Euler method. ALE allows an arbitrary
redeﬁnition of the mesh on each calculation step. Different
predeﬁned grid motions can be speciﬁed, such as free (La-
grange), ﬁxed (Euler), equipotential, equal spacing and others.
As an advantage distortions can be avoided. On the other hand,
additional computation steps are necessary to move and to
convert the grid. An example of ALE is shown in Figure 3.
Two objects consisting of different materials represented by
the colors blue and green before (left side) and after impact
(right side). The blue object has an initial velocity in the
direction of the green object. The right side of the ﬁgure shows
the discretization dependent deformation after the impact with
the ALE solver. In comparison to the pure Lagrange method
(Figure 1), no lattice distortions occur here.
4) SPH: Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics is a method
which is not based on a ﬁxed topological lattice but on a
ﬁnite set of particles. These particles are embedded to the
material similar to the nodes of the Lagrange method, but
their connections are not ﬁxed. However, the particles represent
not only mass points, but also interpolation points for the
calculation of the physical variables. The calculations are based
on the data of the neighboring particles and are scaled by a
weighting function. Unlike Lagrange, no grid distortion can
occur at SPH, since no grid exists. Related to the Euler
141
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3. ALE method example: A blue target gets hit by a green bullet
before (left side) and after the impact (right side). Between the individual
simulation steps the mesh was redeﬁned using either the Lagrange or the
Euler method.
method, SPH has the advantage that all material boundaries
and interfaces are clearly deﬁned. Figure 4 illustrates two
objects consisting of different materials in the SPH frame
represented colored particles before (left side) and after impact
(right side). The green object has an initial velocity in the
direction of the blue object. The right side of the ﬁgure shows
the discretization dependent deformation after the impact with
the SPH solver. As seen in Figure 4 two objects consist of
small particles in the SPH frame. Their behavior before and
after an impacts differs from the solutions in the Lagrange,
Euler or ALE frame.
The SPH method has proven especially useful in the sim-
ulation of impact processes on brittle materials [7]. It should
be noted that the modeling of the material as particles leads
to signiﬁcantly higher computing effort per time step.
For problems of dynamic ﬂuid-structure interaction (FSI)
and impact, there typically is no single best numerical method
which is applicable to all parts of a problem. Techniques to
couple types of numerical solvers in a single simulation can
allow the use of the most appropriate solver for each domain
of the problem.
5) Mesh Size: One of the more important issues, which have
to be carefully considered is the issue of mesh size. Different
results are obtained if the number of cells per unit length is
not adequate. For example, it was found that for penetration
studies with eroding long rods, the number of cells on the
rod’s radius should be at least eleven. The same density of
cells should be kept in the target, at least for several projectile
radii around its symmetry axis. In order to save computing
time, the cell size at farther zones can be gradually increased
Figure 4. SPH method example: A blue target gets hit by a green bullet
before (left side) and after the impact (right side). Both objects consist of a
multitude of particles.
according to their distance from the symmetry axis. The mesh
cell size depends on the speciﬁc problem. As an example,
a small cell size should be considered in cases where there
is a fracture in the projectile or target. It is recommended
that while preparing the code for its ﬁnal runs, the numerical
convergence with respect to mesh cell size should be checked.
Another important issue, especially when material elements
are expected to deform considerably, is the issue of erosion
with Lagrangian codes. At large deformations the code may
run into trouble when treating heavily deformed elements. The
use of the erosion threshold condition is then necessary in order
to eliminate elements at a predetermined value of the plastic
or geometric deformation. The erosion should be monitored
constantly, and when it is too high one should replace the
Lagrangian with an Eulerian code.
The goal of this paper is to evaluate an interface between
different hydrocodes, computational tools for modeling the
behavior of continuous media. In its purest sense, a hydrocode
is a computer code for modeling ﬂuid ﬂow at all speeds. For
that reason, a structure will be split into a number of small
elements. The elements are connected through their nodes (see
Figure 5). The mesh divides the object into small elements
connected by its nodes.
The behavior (deﬂection) of the simple elements is well-
known and may be calculated and analyzed using simple equa-
tions called shape functions. By applying coupling conditions
between the elements at their nodes, the overall stiffness of
the structure may be built up and the deﬂection/distortion
142
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5. The left side shows the cross-section of a bullet over millimeter
paper, which could theoretically divide the bullet into multiple elements. The
right side shows an example of a mesh in the numerical simulation.
Different parts are color coded in the representation of the bullet.
of any node
and subsequently of the whole structure
can
be calculated approximately [17]. Therefore, several runs are
necessary: From modeling to calculation to the evaluation and
subsequent improvement of the model.
Hydrocodes, or wave propagation codes, are a valuable
adjunct to the study of the behavior of metals subjected to high-
velocity impact or intense impulsive loading. The combined
use of computations, experiments and high-strain-rate material
characterization has, in many cases, supplemented the data
achievable by experiments alone at considerable savings in
both cost and engineering man-hours.
A large database exists of high-pressure Equation-Of-State
(EOS) data. Considerable data on high rate deviatoric behavior
exists as well although, unlike EOS data, it is not collected in a
few compilations but scattered throughout a diverse literature.
Experimental techniques exist for determining either EOS or
strength data for materials not yet characterized under high-
rate loading conditions.
By contrast, computations with non-metallic materials such
as composites, concrete, rock, soil and a variety of geological
materials are, in effect, research tasks. This is due to several
reasons: lack of deﬁnitive computational models for high strain
rate-temperature-pressure response; lack of a database for EOS
and high rate strength data for such materials; lack of test
methodologies for anisotropic materials subjected to high-rate
loading.
A large number of ad hoc models exist for explosives, ge-
ological materials, concrete and other non-metallics. Many of
these lack a ﬁrm theoretical foundation. This is an area where
considerable research is required, both to devise appropriate
test techniques to measure material response under high strain
rates, elevated temperatures and high pressures as well as to
develop appropriate constitutive models.
D. Material Models
To understand the completed set-up which produces the
necessary data that can be used by the interface, the underlying
material models and its interactions have to be examined.
The source of an explosion can be a gas, a liquid or solid
material. The consequence of the ignition of such sources is
the rapid release of the compressed energy. The rapid release
causes relatively huge displacments of the gas molecules in
the surrounding air. As the gas molecules interact with each
other, a propagating wave is formed. If this wave has its origin
in the detonation of an explosive charge, it is called a ”blast
wave” [18]. This wave is a non-linear wave, which means that
it travels faster than the sound speed in the ﬂuid. Every point
in space reached by the wave suffers a rapid and sharp change
in pressure, temperature and density of the medium. That is
the reason why a blast wave affects the thermodynamic, state
and dynamic of ambient air. In addition, when the blast wave
reaches a solid target, an interaction of the wave and the solid
material in form of stress and deformation must occur. this
interaction can be simulated through material models of the
solid materials.
1) Air: Air is called the gas mixture of the atmosphere. Dry
air mainly consists of the two gases nitrogen and oxygen.
An equation that describes the hydrodynamic response of a
material is called equation of state. For gases, a hydrodynamic
behavior is assumed, so that their reaction to the dynamic load
is done by a variation of pressure as a function of density
and internal energy. A hydrodynamic reaction is the primary
response for gases and liquids that can not suffer shear stress.
One of the simplest forms of equation of state is that for
an ideal gas, which can be used for air. But the ideal gas
equation is also used in applications involving the motion of
other gases. In ANSYS Autodyn the used ideal gas equation
has the following form [19]:
P = (γ − 1) · ρ · E
(1)
In this form of equation of state, P describes the pressure,
γ the value of the adiabatic exponent, ρ the density and E is
the internal energy of the gas. A complete set of values for
these properties can be found in Table I.
TABLE I. PROPERTIES AND VALUES OF THE EQUATION OF STATE OF AIR.
Property
Value
Unit
Density ρ
1.225
kg m−3
Speciﬁc Heat Cp
434
J kg−1 ◦C−1
Adiabatic Exponent γ
1.4
Reference Temperature T
15.05
◦C−1
Speciﬁc Internal Energy E
2E+5
J kg−1
An additional strength or failure model for air is not needed
because air is a gas and it does not suffer stresses and negative
pressures.
2) Explosive: At the beginning of the simulation in ANSYS
Autodyn a blast wave is created. As explosive charge TNT is
used, which is a very common explosive and used in a wide
range of applications.
The Jones-Wilkins-Lee (JWL) equation of state describes
the detonation product expansion down to a pressure of 1 kbar
for high energy explosive materials and has been proposed by
143
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Jones, Wilkins and Lee [20]. It is a function of density, which
is expressed as relative volume η = ρ0/ρ, and of the internal
energy E [19]:
P = A

1 − ω · η
R1

·e
R1
η +B

1 − ω · η
R2

·e
R2
η +ω·ρ·E (2)
The values of the material constants A, B, R1, R2 and ω
have been determined in dynamic experiments and are listed
in Table II.
TABLE II. PROPERTIES AND VALUES OF THE JWL EQUATION OF STATE.
Property
Value
Unit
Density ρ
1630
kg m−3
Parameter A
3.7377E+11
Pa
Parameter B
3.7471E+9
Pa
Parameter R1
4.15
Parameter R2
0.9
Parameter ω
0.35
An important consequence for the blast wave is that the
smaller the relative volume, the higher the pressure generated
by the explosion. Figure 6 illustrates this behavior as inverse
function of density. The individual parts of the JWL equation
of state are colored accordingly.
Figure 6. Pressure p as function of relative volume v for the JWL equation
of state. Adapted from [21]
3) Steel: Solid materials can react elastically under dynamic
loads. If the stress reaches a certain value, the so called yield
stress, changes of the shape of an object occur, which are
not elastic. If the load continue to increase to a very high
dynamic load, the material reach states of stress that exceed
their yield strength and plastically deform. This deformation
can stay permanent or partly return to the entry state. Material
strength laws describe this nonlinear elastic-plastic behavior.
For the modeling of the vehicle in this simulation, the
material model of ”structural steel” has been used. It consists
of several values, which can be found in Table III. It should
be noted that this material uses an isotropic elasticity model.
In this model the stress-strain behavior equals in every axial
direction [19].
TABLE III. PROPERTIES AND VALUES OF THE MATERIAL MODEL OF
STRUCTURAL STEEL.
Property
Value
Unit
Temperature
22
◦C
Density ρ
7850
kg m−3
Young’s Modulus
2E+11
Pa
Poissons’s Ratio
0.3
Bulk Modulus
1.6667E+12
Pa
Shear Modulus
7.6923E+10
Pa
Speciﬁc Heat Cp
434
J kg−1 ◦C−1
The Young’s modulus is a material parameter that describes
the proportional relationship between stress and strain in the
deformation of a solid body in linear-elastic behavior. Another
elastic constant is the Poissons’s ratio, which is the signed ratio
of transverse strain to axial strain. The next material property
of Table III is the Bulk modulus. It describes which pressure
change is necessary to produce a certain volume change.
Finally, the Shear modulus, which provides the information
about the linear-elastic deformation of a component due to a
shear force or shear stress.
These individual properties form a material model that
emulates a material response due to acting forces in the
simulation. For this reason, the right choice of material model
for a material is critical to the exact result of a simulation.
E. Interface
In general, an interface connects systems that have different
properties with the purpose of exchanging information. For
computers, this is mainly the case between software, hardware,
peripheral devices and humans. Communication at the inter-
face can be either in one direction, such as a remote control
or keyboard, or in both directions, such as a touch screen or
a network adapter [22].
In the context of numerical simulation of blast and impact
processes, an interface is necessary to ensure an effective
coupling of CFD / FEM simulations between the software
Abaqus and ANSYS. For our research, ANSYS is to be
used to provide data from simulated explosions using Euler-
Lagrange coupling. On the other hand, the structure, which is
affected by the blasting is simulated by Abaqus. The developed
Interface has the task of conveying the data between ANSYS
and Abaqus, so that the individual simulation steps can be
performed successively with respect to the successive transfer
of data.
144
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In computing, an interface is a shared boundary across
two separate components of a computer system exchange
information. The exchange can be between software, computer
hardware, peripheral devices, humans and combinations of
these. Some computer hardware devices such as a touchscreen
can both send and receive data through the interface, while
others such as a mouse, microphone or joystick operate one
way only [22].
Coupled FEA/CFD analysis is an alternative technique,
where separate FEA and CFD codes are used for solid and ﬂuid
regions, respectively, with a smooth exchange of information
between the two codes to ensure continuity of blast loading
data. The main merit of the approach is to enable users to take
full advantages of both CFD and FEA capabilities.
The objective of this work is to develop an interface between
ANSYS Autodyn and Abaqus. The software ANSYS is used
to solve linear and non-linear problems of structural me-
chanics, computational ﬂuid dynamics, acoustics and various
other engineering sciences [23]. Here, ANSYS will provide
data from the simulation of blast effects. The capability to
couple Eulerian and Lagrangian frames in ANSYS is helpful
in blast ﬁeld modeling. The Eulerian frame is best suited
for representing explosive detonations, because the material
ﬂows through a geometrically constant grid that can easily
handle the large deformations associated with gas and ﬂuid
ﬂow. The structure is modeled with the Lagrangian frame in
Abaqus. Abaqus supports familiar interactive computer-aided
engineering concepts such as feature-based, parametric model-
ing, interactive and scripted operation, and GUI customization
[24].
First, every possibility of transferring the data from ANSYS
outputs to Abaqus inputs has to be detected. A summary of this
process is shown in Figure 7. ANSYS will provide the data
by generating a data set for the blast loading. Figure 8 shows
the color coding of the shock wave goes from low pressures
(0 hPa) in blue to high pressures in red (> 3500 hPa). The last
picture shows the shock wave when the simulated vehicle is
reached. This data set will include snapshots of given points
in time. At this stage there is a data set of ﬁve points in time,
between 0.0291 s and 0.0475 s (after detonation). Related to
the points in time this data set includes the pressure values with
Cartesian coordinates based on the simulation of the spread
of explosive materials. A script is coded to read the blast
loading data in Abaqus. This script, coded in Python, uses
the line interface in Abaqus directly. First, a blast loading data
is generated in ANSYS and saved as a normal text ﬁle in
.txt format. The data set will be split to separate the different
types of information. After that, a list will be created to save
the data and connect the related time points to the coordinates
and pressure values. At this point, there is a possibility to use
linear interpolation between the ﬁve time points to generate
a larger data base. After reading and saving the data set, the
script will load the model used for impact tests in Abaqus. A
surface of the model must be selected to project the blast data
on it.
The goal is to investigate the impact of the blast data on a
full vehicle model in Abaqus. This work (in progress) starts
with a less complex model to validate the function of the
script and the interface itself. The ﬁrst model was a basic
rectangle to be strained by the pressure data. Afterwards, two
more complex models were tested successfully. This approach
will lead to a surface similar to the silhouette of high security
vehicles (see Figure 9).
Figure 7. Inputs and outputs for an interface between Ansys and Abaqus.
Blast data consisting of several ﬁles is exported by Ansys and read via a
python script in Abaqus.
Figure 8. Progressive expansion of a blast in ANSYS Autodyn with a
representation for a vehicle on the right side.
The coupling is realized through an iterative loop between
the FEA and CFD simulations, with communications ensuring
continuity of shock compression data across the coupled
boundaries between the FEA and CFD models. In the coupling
145
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 9. Testing structure in Abaqus with the coarse appearance of a
vehicle.
process, intermediate individual FEA and CFD solutions are
obtained in turn with dynamically updated boundary condi-
tions.
To avoid exceptional deadlock of the individual CFD sim-
ulations, appropriate maximum numbers of iterations are as-
signed for each CFD model. Testing means that the spatially
discretized model is loaded with pressure. The change over
time is decisive. An example is shown in Figure 10. The
unarmored SUV model was loaded with a typical explosive
charge. The load on the vehicle is made visible by color
coding from low strain (blue) to very high strain (red). The
deformation on the sheet metal body parts is clearly shown.
This data can be used to simply analyze vulnerabilities. The
goal is, however, to use complete vehicle models and to carry
out realistic investigations.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A technique for efﬁciently coupling FEA/CFD for the sim-
ulation of blast effects is described. The goal was to combine
the strengths of ANSYS in the ﬁeld of CFD, especially the
modeling and simulation of explosive detonations and the
subsequent propagation of shock waves, and Abaqus, which
is a sophisticated FEA tool an widely used in the automotive
area. A newly created interface allows an iterative transfer of
the blast data from ANSYS to Abaqus. To enable this, the blast
data of a speciﬁc simulation step in time and space could be
exported. The data sets from ANSYS include snapshots from
the blast simulation saved at different points in time. The newly
created interface is coded in Python and is able to process the
data. One possibility of processing is to use linear interpolation
on the data sets. After processing, Abaqus could take the data
and insert it in the right positon for solving the FEA. The
impact of the blast data on a less complex vehicle model due
to the processing of the interface was investigated. In addition,
a more complex model was used to the successfully test and
validate the interface. The results of this tests are shown in
this paper.
Figure 10. Simulated test structure (unarmed SUV) and deformation process
after 3, 5, 10 and 20 ms (images arranged from top to bottom in order of
increasing time).
146
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A good agreement of blast load test data and simulation
results were observed. Furthermore, it is shown that the
coupled solutions can be obtained in sufﬁciently short turn-
around times for use in design. These solutions can be used
as the basis of an iterative optimization process. They are a
valuable adjunct to the study of the behavior of vehicle struc-
tures subjected to high-velocity impact or intense impulsive
loading. The combined use of computations, experiments and
high-strain-rate material characterization has, in many cases,
supplemented the data achievable by experiments alone at
considerable savings in both cost and engineering man-hours.
There are a variety of approaches in implementing the
coupled FEA/CFD analysis. One is generally called ”strong
coupling”, where data have to be transferred between ANSYS
Autodyn and Abaqus in every single time step. In a strongly
coupled algorithm both parts of the FSI problem are solved
simultaneously. For this purpose one system of equations is
created after discretising the governing ﬂuid and structural
equations and taking into account the boundary conditions
on the interface. A ”semistrong coupling” can get along with
a smaller set of date, using mathematical interpolation for
a sufﬁcient approximation. The third concept is a ”weak
coupling” solution. Here, neural networks and deep learning
can be used to replicate blast effects on different vehicle
structures. These approaches are going to be tested in a next
step. Since the ﬂuid and the structural dynamics subproblems
are based on different types of partial differential equations, the
use of different numerical methods for their efﬁcient solutions
might be advantageous.
The main advantage of the loose coupling approach is that
it allows already developed efﬁcient and well validated solvers
for each of the ﬂuid and structure subtasks to be combined.
Therefore, both parts of the FSI problem are solved in the
best ways. Depending on the generality of the two codes,
arbitrary complex ﬂows and structures can be considered and
successfully modelled. The only programming effort lies in
creating suitable subroutines for information exchange between
the solvers. Unfortunately, due to the explicit nature of this
coupling convergence problems may arise. Consequently, there
is a restriction on the choice of the time-step even if implicit
time-stepping schemes are used by the two solvers. In contrast
to the loose coupling approach, the strong coupling algorithms
are more difﬁcult to create and to program. The simultaneous
solution of the whole FSI problem normally requires reformu-
lation of the systems of equations and sets restrictions on the
choice of the numerical methods to be applied. Additionally,
special strategies may be needed for modelling the non-
linearities in each of the physical domains. This leads to a
restriction on the range of tasks that a certain strong coupling
algorithm is able to solve. Tremendous programming efforts
are needed to create and to validate a new program applicable
to various problems. However, because of the simultaneous
solution of both parts of the FSI problem, there are no
approximation errors and no convergence problems due to
the data transfer between the ﬂuid and structural domains.
Therefore, the strong coupling strategy is more stable but more
difﬁcult to program than the loose coupling approach that is
more general but connected with convergence problems.
Furthermore, a larger blast loading data set has to be created
in ANSYS. This will allow a more accurate illustration of
blast effects on vehicle structures. Smaller time steps will
enable a linear interpolation with a higher accuracy. Different
explosives are going to be tested to expand the data base. The
next step will be a model for the reﬂection of blast waves
and dynamic changes of pressure values. Using a full vehicle
model will provide important information about the behavior
of armored structures under blast effects. But to validate the
results of the simulation, more ballistic trials are needed.
Based on the difﬁculties of full vehicle model simulations,
the implementation of an automatic surface detection has to
be taken into consideration. This could be helpful if a large
number of different vehicles are investigated. In order to create
a user-friendly interface it is possible to generate the script as
a plug-in which can be started from the Abaqus user surface
directly.
By using pre-deﬁned blast data to create forces as vectors
on our vehicle structures, the proposal can be generalized.
Then, FEA analysis can be done with other software suites
as well. Right now, the concept is not applicable to other
systems. This is a major disadvantage and part of our future
work. Furthermore, a parallelization of the problem should be
considered.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Ramezani, B. Hillig, and H. Rothe, “A Coupled CFD-FEM Analysis
to Simulate Blast Effects on High Security Vehicles Using Modern
Hydrocodes,” in SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference
on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 2017) Athens, Greece.
IARIA, Oct. 2017, pp. 74–81, ISBN: 978-1-61208-594-4.
[2]
J. D. Anderson and J. Wendt, Computational ﬂuid dynamics. Springer,
1995, vol. 206.
[3]
O. Ziekiewicz, “The ﬁnite element method in engineering science,”
McGrawe Hill, London, 1971.
[4]
A. Documentation, “Abaqus analysis user guide,” 2014.
[5]
“Blast,
Explosion
and
Impact,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.ansys.com/solutions/solutions-by-
industry/construction/blast-explosion-and-impact
[accessed:
2018-
05-28].
[6]
E. Hansen, N. Ehlers, A. Ramezani, and H. Rothe, “Developing an
Interface between ANSYS and Abaqus to Simulate Blast Effects on
High Security Vehicles,” in SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International
Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 2016). IARIA,
Aug. 2016, pp. 73–76, ISBN: 978-1-61208-442-8.
[7]
A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Investigation of Solver Technologies for
the Simulation of Brittle Materials,” in SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth
International Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL
2014).
IARIA, Oct. 2014, pp. 236–242, ISBN: 978-61208-371-1.
[8]
J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes.
Elsevier, 2004, vol. 49.
[9]
A. Hamouda and M. Hashmi, “Modelling the impact and penetration
events of modern engineering materials: characteristics of computer
codes and material models,” Journal of materials processing technology,
vol. 56, no. 1-4, 1996, pp. 847–862.
147
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10]
D. J. Benson, “Computational methods in lagrangian and eulerian hy-
drocodes,” Computer methods in Applied mechanics and Engineering,
vol. 99, no. 2-3, 1992, pp. 235–394.
[11]
M. Oevermann, S. Gerber, and F. Behrendt, “Euler–lagrange/dem
simulation of wood gasiﬁcation in a bubbling ﬂuidized bed reactor,”
Particuology, vol. 7, no. 4, 2009, pp. 307–316.
[12]
D. Hicks and L. Liebrock, “Sph hydrocodes can be stabilized with
shape-shifting,” Computers & Mathematics with Applications, vol. 38,
no. 5, 1999, pp. 1–16.
[13]
X. Quan, N. Birnbaum, M. Cowler, B. Gerber, R. Clegg, and C. Hay-
hurst, “Numerical simulation of structural deformation under shock and
impact loads using a coupled multi-solver approach,” in Proceedings of
5th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Shock and Impact Loads on Structures,
2003, pp. 12–14.
[14]
N. V. Bermeo, M. G. Mendoza, and A. G. Castro, “Semantic representa-
tion of cad models based on the iges standard,” in Mexican International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Springer, 2013, pp. 157–168.
[15]
J. Sarkar, Computer Aided Design: A Conceptual Approach.
CRC
Press, 2014.
[16]
C. E. Anderson Jr, “An overview of the theory of hydrocodes,” Interna-
tional journal of impact engineering, vol. 5, no. 1-4, 1987, pp. 33–59.
[17]
G. S. Collins, “An introduction to hydrocode modeling,” Applied Mod-
elling and Computation Group, Imperial College London, unpublished,
2002.
[18]
I. Sochet, Blast Effects: Physical Properties of Shock Waves. Springer,
2017.
[19]
A. AUTODYN, “Autodyn user’s manual, release 18.0,” 2017.
[20]
J. Kury, H. Hornig, E. Lee, J. McDonnel, D. Ornellas, M. Finger,
F. Strange, and M. Wilkins, “Metal acceleration by chemical explo-
sives,” in Fourth (International) Symposium on Detonation, ACR-126,
1965.
[21]
“ANSYS Mechanical Application 19.0: Explicit Dynamics Analysis
Guide,” 2018, URL: http://www.ansys.com/ [accessed: 2018-02-27].
[22]
K. Breitfelder and D. Messina, “The authoritative dictionary of ieee
standards terms,” Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE), 2000.
[23]
“ANSYS
CAE:
Structures:
FEA
Simulation,”
2017,
URL:
http://www.ansys.com/ [accessed: 2017-05-01].
[24]
“Abaqus:
Complete
Solutions
for
Realistic
Simu-
lation,”
2017,
URL:
http://www.3ds.com/products-
services/simulia/products/abaqus/abaquscae/ [accessed: 2017-06-01].
148
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

