223
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Role-based Access Control in the Digital Grid –  
A Review of Requirements and Discussion of Solution Approaches  
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
Chaitanya Bisale 
Energy Management 
Siemens AG 
Nuremberg, Germany 
e-mail: {chaitanya.b}@siemens.com
 
Abstract—Critical infrastructures are increasingly under 
investigation regarding the reliable operation and resilience to 
ensure their provisioning of essential services to the citizens. 
One example for such critical infrastructures is the digital 
energy grid. It targets the control of increasingly fluctuating 
demand and generation of energy. Besides generation also the 
path to the final consumer has to be taken into account, 
resulting in the need for securing the reliable transmission and 
distribution of centrally and decentrally generated energy. 
Control is accomplished by utilizing a communication 
infrastructure in parallel to the actual power system 
infrastructure. The connection between both worlds is 
provided by sensors and actuators. In the past, this control 
communication network was mostly isolated from other 
communication networks, but today it is getting connected 
increasingly with external systems to support innovative cross-
system services. This surge in connectivity also exposes the 
digital grid to cyber attacks. Therefore, access to resources like 
accumulated measurement information or control data needs 
to be protected to ensure a reliable operation. Legislation and 
operational best practice guideline activities have taken this 
into account and meanwhile provide the necessary framework 
for defining specific communication security requirements. 
From the technical perspective, different security counter 
measures exist to cope with the given requirements. However, 
it has to be ensured that these technical means are not only 
provided technically, but are in fact applied correctly in 
operation. This paper reviews the requirements for role-based 
access control (RBAC), as well as currently targeted technical 
approaches to achieve RBAC in the digital grid. The goal is to 
provide more insight into the existing application of RBAC 
mechanisms and to identify gaps for future enhancements. 
Proposals to address the identified gaps are described, which 
are 
intended 
to 
be 
brought 
to 
the 
International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) to enhance the security 
standard IEC 62351 for power system automation.  
 
Keywords–security; user and device authentication; role-
based access control; substation automation; digital grid; cyber 
security; critical infrastructure; IEC 62351 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Critical Infrastructures (CI) are technical installations that 
are essential for the daily life of the society and the economy 
of a country. Typical critical infrastructures in this context 
are 
the 
power 
grid, 
telecommunication, 
healthcare, 
transportation, water supply, just to state a few. Power 
system and communication networks even span across 
country borders, thereby are of  multinational priority. 
Digital grids, which are constantly a target of security 
investigations and enhancement as outlined in [1][2], are one 
example of CI. Especially their cyber security has gained 
more momentum over the last years. The increased threat 
level becomes visible, e.g., through reported attacks on 
critical infrastructure, but also through reactions in 
legislation, which explicitly require specific protection of 
critical infrastructures and reporting about serious attacks. 
There is a clear trend towards increased connectivity and 
tighter integration of systems from Information Technology 
(IT) in common enterprise environments with the Operation 
Technology (OT) part of the automation systems in the 
energy and industrial domains to provide enhanced services. 
This requires security measures to avoid negative effects of 
the formerly isolated OT. IT security in this context evolves 
to cyber security to underline the mutual relationship 
between the security and physical effects. Additionally, IT 
and OT environments have different characteristics in 
management and operation, which led to distinct domain 
specific security requirements in the past. This has to be 
taken into account when designing interconnected cyber-
physical energy systems.  
Cyber security measures typically are technical and 
organizational in nature. Operators of CI need to maintain 
their systems by complying with an Information Security 
Management Framework while also coping with regulatory 
requirements. This requires technical support in the 
deployment environment. Such technical requirements relate 
to authentication and access control, or to secure and reliable 
communication for example. Within this paper, the focus is 
placed on access control, or more specifically on Role-based 
Access Control (RBAC).   
RBAC is already a proven concept in IT systems. It is 
realized by many (operating) systems to control access to 
system resources. RBAC for the power automation 
environment is already considered in several requirements 
standards, guidelines, and also in regulatory requirements. 
Beside the requirements supporting this functionality, 
technical 
standards 
ensuring interoperability 
between 
different vendor’s products and solutions have been 
developed.  

224
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1. Overview Digital Energy Grid as Example for Critical Infrastructures  
This contribution investigates into RBAC in general and 
specifically on the application in digital grid as depicted in 
Figure 1 below. Section II provides an overview of 
requirements from guidelines, standards, and regulations 
targeting access control specifically. Section III provides an 
overview of several state-of-the-art approaches for RBAC, 
while Section IV discusses the basic RBAC concept 
currently deployed in the digital grid. The identified 
shortcomings are addressed in Section V with first solution 
proposals that are intended to be brought to standardization. 
Section VI describes a realization example for the proposed 
migration approach. Section VII investigates further 
identified challenges when integrating RBAC, while section 
VIII concludes the document. 
Note that this paper addresses first ideas to tackle 
identified gaps in RBAC in the Digital Grid domain. Further 
investigation is necessary. 
II. 
EXAMPLES OF DOMAIN-SPECIFIC 
GUIDELINES/STANDARDS/REGULATIONS   
IT security in communication infrastructures is not a new 
topic. It has been addressed specifically in office IT 
environments 
for 
years. 
Although there 
are 
some 
commonalities through the convergence of networks of IT 
and OT, specifically regarding the utilized communication 
protocols and networks, there are some large differences in 
the management and operation of these infrastructures as 
seen in Figure 2 below.  
 
Figure 2: Comparison IT/OT management and operation 
These differences in management and operation of the IT 
systems consequently lead to different security requirements 
as outlined in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3: Comparison IT/OT high level security requirements  
As outlined in [2] for secure communication, a variety of 
security requirements exist for digital grids. An overview of 
the most relevant standards, guidelines, and regulations is 
shown in Figure 4 below.  
As visible guidelines are available from the National 
Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) of the U.S. 
through the “Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security” in 
NIST IR 7628 [3] or the Report of the Smart Grid 
Coordination Group addressing the European Mandate 
M/490 [4] and the report of the successor activity, the Smart 
Energy Grid Coordination Group (SEG-CG) [5], which 
explicitly recommend the support of RBAC in the context of 
system configuration, operation, and maintenance.  In 
particular, the last referenced document from the SEG-CG 
explicitly addresses the authentication and authorization of 
users and processes in the context of substation automation.  
Specifically for Germany and Austria, the BDEW White 
Paper [6] guideline has been published, addressing RBAC in 
the context of user management as applied to operations of 
energy and water utilities. This white paper was one main 
source for developing ISO 27019:2013 [7] as a domain-
specific profile of the Information Security Management 
System defined in ISO 27002 [8]. Both ISO documents 
address requirements for an operator regarding the handling 
of information security and require support for RBAC. 
Similar requirements can also be found in IEC 62443-2-1 for 
industrial environments. IEC 62443-3-3 [9] goes one step 

225
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
beyond by specifically defining, which foundational security 
requirements can be technically addressed with RBAC, 
without prescribing a specific technical solution. IEEE 1686 
[10] is even more specific here, as it defines a minimum 
number of roles and also the associated rights. The last 
standard to be mentioned is IEC 62351-8 [11], providing 
specific technical means for binding RBAC information to 
entities in access tokens and to utilize them in 
communication. The latter can already be used to address 
some of the requirements stated before. 
 
 
Figure 4. Examples for sources for security requirements for digital grid 
From a regulatory perspective, examples are provided 
through the American NERC-CIP [12], the German IT-
Security Act [13], and the IT security catalogue of the 
German network regulator group BNetzA, and the French 
ANSSI [14]. They all require security measures to support 
reliable grid operation, which are mapped in the first place to 
processes and organizational means, but finally, these need 
to be supported by appropriate technical means to operate the 
infrastructure appropriately. The following section elaborates 
technical means to address these requirements focusing on 
authentication and authorization to achieve access control. 
III. 
ROLE BASED ACCESS CONTROL – RBAC 
This section provides an overview about the RBAC 
concept in general followed by an investigation into different 
technical approaches realizing this general concept in 
different ways. 
 Security administration is simplified through the use of 
roles and constraints to organize subject access levels. 
RBAC in general can reduce costs within an organization, as 
it accepts that changes in roles and responsibilities of 
(especially) employees occur more frequently than the 
changes in the rights within roles. The basic idea of RBAC is 
to define roles according to responsibilities within the 
business organization. Permissions required to perform the 
duties of a role are assigned to the respective role. A subject, 
i.e., typically human user (but may also be an application or 
software process or an intelligent electronic device - IED), is 
assigned roles according to his business responsibilities. This 
helps to achieve separation of duty by ensuring that a user is 
assigned only the roles according to his responsibilities, and 
possesses only the permissions required to fulfill his duties. 
Restrictions can be placed to prevent a single subject from 
being assigned to roles having a conflict of interest. RBAC 
also includes the concept of temporary roles to realize 
dynamic separation of duty: Over time, a subject may act in 
different roles. At any point in time, the subject only 
possesses the permissions of the currently active role or 
roles. 
The general concept of RBAC is shown in Figure 5, 
which is the enhanced approach explained in [11]. As shown, 
the role separates the subject from the permissions. The 
permissions define certain rights on objects, like read or 
write operations on specific objects (e.g., files). The role 
itself bundles a set of permissions, which can be assigned to 
users. This subject assignment enables separation of duty, 
which is necessary to also support auditing of actions. 
Additionally, constraints may further be used to either 
restrict roles or to enable special handling in situations like 
emergency cases. Examples of constraints required in digital 
grids specifically are: 
- Area of Responsibility or scope allows restricting the 
effectiveness of an issued RBAC token, e.g., to an 
organizational unit or a geographical location or area, or 
a specific communication network area (subnet). 
- Operational constraints allow a local augmentation of 
the associated rights if the (hosting) object detects or is 
informed about specific circumstances. As an example, 
an Engineer may not be allowed to perform certain 
actions, e.g., on a protection relay, in an emergency case. 
Note that these constraints are typically defined and 
handled in a device-centric manner and may not be 
included in the subject specific role assignment. 
 
Figure 5. General concept for RBAC  
The separation of the assignment of subjects-to-role and 
role-to-rights enables a flexible and centralized management 

226
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of subject-to-role assignment that tends to be dynamic. At 
the same time, it can be combined with a well-defined role-
to-permission-assignment that has more static character.  
Figure 6 illustrates the concept of RBAC on a user base. 
In the upper part, the subject-role-right association is shown. 
Here “Tom” is assigned the role “Engineer”. Acting in this 
role “Tom” is entitled to “view” and “control” objects. 
Objects may include status values or switching objects. It 
also shows the dynamic and static assignments between 
subjects, roles and rights. The example illustrates that 
granting the right ”view” to “Mary” can be added by 
assigning the role “Engineer” to “Mary” without changing 
the associated rights on objects. 
 
Figure 6. Basic RBAC concept applied in Digital Grids  
To allow a subject to act in a distinct role, authentication 
is often a precondition, ensuring that the subject is who it 
claims to be and that it is entitled to act in this role. For this 
there already exist various solutions, often relying on a three-
party-model, in which an identity and access server issues 
some form of security tokens or tickets to provide 
authorization information. Examples are Kerberos [15], the 
security assertion markup language (SAML) [16], OAuth 2.0 
[17], and OpenID Connect [20]. Also domain specific 
approaches like X.509 certificate enhancements in IEC 
62351-8 [11] for power automation have been standardized, 
which will be briefly introduced in the following. While they 
all rely on a security token mechanism, they differ, e.g., in 
the communication relations for the token exchange 
(protocols), the token format, the underlying cryptographic 
algorithms and the target application use cases. 
A. Kerberos 
Kerberos v5, specified in RFC 4120 [15], is a three-party 
system and protocol to be used for network authentication. In 
this system there exists a trusted third party, to which all 
participants authenticate as shown in Figure 7.  Kerberos is 
widely used in different operating systems to allow access to 
network domain services or to realize single-sign-on. 
As shown, the trusted third party grants tickets upon 
request to allow access to specific services or resources. 
Kerberos relies on symmetric cryptography for the 
authentication and also the ticket protection and binding and 
uses ASN.1 for the encoding. The Key Distribution Server is 
responsible for the user authentication and the granting of 
service 
specific 
tickets. 
These 
tickets 
provide 
an 
authorization of the user to utilize the services. The tickets 
also allow for the distribution of a session key to the user and 
the service to secure the service access. This is enabled by 
another symmetric key, which is a long term key shared 
between the KDC and the service component. User 
authentication is also done using symmetric shared secrets, 
like a username and password. Besides this there also exist 
enhancements to allow for a certificate based user 
authentication. 
 
Figure 7. Kerberos authentication and authorization  

227
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) 
SAML 2.0 was defined by OASIS in [16] and is an XML 
based protocol to exchange authentication and authorization 
information between a client, an identity provider (the 
SAML server) and the service provider. The SAML server 
uses so called SAML assertions to provide statements or 
claims about the client. Three types can be roughly 
distinguished: authentication, assertions, and authorization. 
Especially the latter allows realizing RBAC. SAML builds 
on assertions symmetric and asymmetric cryptography. 
Hence, SAML assertions are security tokens utilizing XML 
signatures and XML encryption to protect the contained 
information. For the authentication at the identity provider, 
SAML does not require a specific method and thus may be 
used with username/password combinations or X.509 
certificate based authentication or others. SAML is often 
used in Single-Sign-On solutions and federation scenarios. It 
may be used also in open authorization (OAuth 2.0) for the 
token realization, as described in the following subsection. 
C. Open Autorization (OAuth 2.0)  
The OAuth 2.0 framework is specified in RFC 6749 [17] 
and defines an authorization method for accessing a 
resource. Since OAuth 2.0, this framework can be used with 
various applications and protocols, whereas the original 
OAuth was bound to the HTTP protocol. OAuth 2.0 also 
relies on tokens, which are requested by a user agent, issued 
by an authorization server and verified at the resource server. 
The tokens may be provided by reference or by value. OAuth 
2.0 defines the handling of the security tokens (access 
token), as well as the format but allows for an own definition 
of the token content. Beside the pure request of access 
tokens, a client may request for a token for a specific scope. 
The supplied tokens are provided according to the bearer 
model or the proof-of-possession (PoP) or holder of key 
(HoK) model. Bearer token can be used to get access to an 
associated resource without demonstrating possession of a 
cryptographic key. In contrast, the PoP/HoK token model, 
requires the proof of possession of a corresponding 
cryptographic key in order to utilize the token, as defined in 
RFC 7800 [18]. Note that according to [19], plain OAuth 2.0 
is intended for authorization. It may support authentication, 
e.g., in the combination with OpenID Connect (see the next 
subsection). OAuth addresses typical Web-based access 
scenarios.  
D. OpenID Connect  
OpenID Connect is a security protocol to offload user 
authentication from a server hosting a resource to a trusted 
third party. It is defined by the OpenID Consortium. The 
core is specified in [20]. It utilizes the OAuth 2.0 protocol 
flows to obtain ID tokens, which are encoded as JSON web 
token (JWT, see also [21]). These ID tokens contain 
assertions about authenticated users from an authorization 
server. Optionally, access tokens as defined in OAuth 2.0 can 
be 
utilized 
to 
retrieve 
asserted 
user 
authorization 
information. OpenID Connect is used for web-based clients 
and also native clients in a variety of applications.  
E. RADIUS  
Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS) 
[22] is a protocol used to realize access control of users and 
devices to networks. The protocol itself is typically applied 
for the communication between an authenticator and a 
repository performing the actual authentication.  
 
Figure 8. IEEE 802.1X Network Access Authentication  
The RADIUS protocol may also be used in conjunction 
with the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP, IETF 
RFC 3748 [23]) to allow for direct entity authentication. 
EAP itself describes a container, which in turn allows for 
different authentication methods. Depending on the method 
chosen, is allows for authentication and also key 
establishment. This approach allows transmitting the 
authentication information from the accessing entity via the 
access node to the RADIUS server for verification. This 
approach is utilized for network access authentication in the 
context of IEEE 802.1X as shown in Figure 8. 
F. Digital Grid specific X.509 Certificate Enhancements 
Another option to support RBAC has been taken in IEC 
62351-8 [11] for power system automation. This standard 
relies on the authentication based on X.509 [24] certificates 
and corresponding private keys. In digital grids protocols 
like TLS are applied, which utilize X.509 key material.  
IEC 62351-8 leverages the option to enhance the ASN.1 
structure of X.509 certificates with a specific extension. This 
extension carries information about the roles and constraints 
and can be added to X.509 public key certificates or X.509 
attribute certificates as shown in Figure 9. 
The flexibility of attribute certificates can be leveraged in 
use cases, in which the user to role association is rather 
dynamic. User-bound public key certificates typically have a 
longer validity, while attribute certificates may have a much 
shorter validity and are only valid in conjunction with the 
associated public key certificate. Via the corresponding 
private key it can be proven that a user may act in a certain 
role. As this approach is defined as an extension, protocols 
utilizing X.509 key material can directly leverage the 
approach. Note that for the token issuer, i.e., a certification 
authority, enhancements are likely to be necessary to support 
the RBAC extension. 

228
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 9. X.509 certificate enhancements (adopted from [11]) 
Besides the definition of the access token format as 
extension to X.509 certificates, the standard IEC 62351-8 
already defines a set of mandatory roles and associated rights 
as shown in Figure 10. 
 
Figure 10. IEC 62351-8 defined roles and associated rights [11] 
The definition of these roles ensures a minimum level of 
interoperability for different vendors’ products.  
IV. 
RBAC SPECIFICS IN THE DIGITAL GRID 
As shown in Figure 9, for power systems supporting IEC 
62351-8, an extension for carrying role information in X.509 
certificates has been standardized, which may belong to a 
user, a device, or an application. This approach can be 
directly applied in use cases, in which protocols utilizing 
X.509 key material like Transport Layer Security (TLS, RFC 
5246) are used. Moreover, this approach also supports 
application layer authentication and authorization, which can 
be required, if the communication link spans multiple hops. 
In both cases, beside the certificate validation it also involves 
the verification of the relying party that the applicant entity is 
entitled to utilize the X.509 certificate by checking the 
possession of a corresponding private key. This involves 
asymmetric cryptography for digital signature generation and 
verification. Compared to pure symmetric cryptography 
based approaches, this is costly. Hybrid methods addressing 
this establish a session, in which a X.509 certificate is 
involved in the negotiation of a symmetric session key, 
which is used in (different) security services to protect the 
session. The whole session is then executed in the context of 
a specific user, having an assigned role. As substation 
automation protocols like IEC 61850 utilize a session based 
approach for the transport or the application connection, this 
concept is immediately applicable. Note that for the 
generation of a digital signature, access to the private key is 
necessary. This private key needs to be protected 
accordingly, as it is necessary as proof, that the user is 
authorized to act in a certain role via the corresponding 
certificate. For devices or applications this protection may be 

229
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
achieved with secured memory or specific hardware modules 
that allow operation but not exporting of the private key. For 
a service technician, this protection will most likely be 
offered by a security token like a smart card or similar.  
Current installations in digital grids often utilize a 
different concept by performing a local form of RBAC 
depending on the environment. Communication between 
entities in a control center for instance is performed based on 
either locally or centrally associated users to permission 
groups. This ensures that the local execution of commands 
can only be done if the appropriate permissions are granted, 
but does not necessarily provide a remote entity to verify 
who is going to perform a dedicated operation. This 
information may be necessary for audit purposes, and a 
complete audit trail would require having the complete chain 
from the remote point to the executing entity to comprehend 
the specific action. The approach described in IEC 62351-8 
supports also a local audit trail through the capability to 
connect identity and access information in the access token. 
In substations, the local physical access may already be 
sufficient to get access to communicating entities. 
While the approach utilizing X.509-based access tokens 
has its merits, it is not immediately applicable in all use 
cases. Also, one has to keep in mind that the infrastructure of 
the power grid has grown over many years and that the 
lifetime of installed devices is long, reaching 20-25 years.  
Two examples are used here to show potential 
shortcomings.  
1. In substation automation, field devices often feature a 
local human-machine-interface (HMI) handled by a 
service technician. These field devices typically do not 
feature a local interface for a smart card, but only a small 
screen and a number keyboard pad allowing entering a 
personal identification number (PIN) or a passcode. 
Hence, RBAC information cannot be provided directly, 
but may be fetched by the field device. 
2. As outlined in [25] web-based services based on XMPP 
are specified for the integration of decentralized energy 
resources (DER) into the digital energy grid. These 
services may leverage already existing technologies that 
support RBAC, such as OpenID Connect or OAuth 2.0 
instead of building a parallel infrastructure for handling 
X.509 based RBAC.  
Proposals are discussed in the next section for both 
examples.  
V. 
PROPOSALS FOR RBAC ENHANCEMENTS 
In the following, solutions are proposed to handle RBAC 
in legacy devices and in upcoming web-based applications 
building on consistent RBAC information. The real-world 
applicability of these proposals has to be evaluated. The goal 
for the proposals is the enabling of a smooth migration for 
the enabling of RBAC from existing environments not 
supporting certificate-based RBAC to a public key certificate 
or attribute certificate-based RBAC environment. The 
approach taken relies on a minor reduced data structure, as 
defined for certificate-based RBAC and transported in a 
different way for the migration case. This reliance enables to 
establishment of processes and interfaces, which serve for 
both, legacy and new equipment.  
A. Enabling RBAC on local HMI of legacy devices 
As noted, a variety of field devices may not feature an 
appropriate interface to interact with a X.509 credential of a 
service technician. Despite the missing local interface, these 
devices may be enabled to work with the X.509 credentials. 
One approach to be used here is the fetching of the X.509 
credential from a trusted third party utilizing the local login 
and password of the service technician. Once the service 
technician provides his login credentials, the field device 
may query a central repository for the corresponding X.509 
certificate also providing the login credentials for 
verification. This X.509 certificate needs to be enhanced 
with the RBAC extension defined in IEC 62351-8 and can 
then be verified by the field device. The verification of the 
corresponding private key is neglected here, as the X.509 
certificate is rather used as an assertion by the third party. By 
already relying on X.509 certificates with RBAC extensions, 
this approach may be used as a migration path without 
involving device-local asymmetric cryptographic operations.  
The central repository may generate the credentials on 
demand or they may be provisioned with the X.509 
certificates. In either case, the certificates may have a rather 
short lifetime, which simplifies the revocation handling on 
the field device. This approach has been considered in IEC 
62351-8 with the focus on Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP) [26]. While LDAP support is typically 
available in control centers, it is not too widespread in 
substations. Mechanisms like the Remote Authentication 
Dial In User Service (RADIUS) [22] are rather used.  
If one would want to use RADIUS out-of-the-box, access 
information can be provided as RADIUS allows extensions 
using vendor-specific attributes. The drawback is the 
limitation of this field to effectively 250 bytes. As X.509 
certificates are typically larger (even if used with shorter 
ECDSA key material instead of the larger RSA key 
material), this field can only be used to transmit a subset of 
the RBAC information. A necessary subset is proposed as: 
BEGIN-VENDOR IEC 
ATTRIBUTE RoleID  
 
1 integer 
ATTRIBUTE roleDefinition 2 string 
ATTRIBUTE AoR  
 
3 string 
ATTRIBUTE revision  
 
4 integer 
ATTRIBUTE ValidFrom  
 
5 string 
ATTRIBUTE ValidTo 
 
6 string    
END-VENDOR IEC 
The semantic of the parameter would be kept the same as 
in IEC 62351-8 and therefore also supports a later processing 
of other token formats containing the same information. As 
RADIUS has some shortcomings, like missing message 
integrity or confidentiality or the application of the weak 
MD5 hash algorithm, it is recommended to use TLS 
according to [27] to protect the message exchange between 
field devices and the RADIUS server. As stated above, this 
approach is intended to support migration in restricted use 
cases without changes or enhancements to RADIUS itself.  

230
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Supporting RBAC in web service scenarios  
Integration of DER into the digital grid will be supported 
with IEC 61850-8-2 [28]. Here XMPP is used to enable the 
connection of field devices (DER controller) to the control 
site using a publish-subscribe infrastructure.  While in [28] 
the application of session-based end-to-end RBAC in 
conjunction with X.509 credentials is enabled, further 
services offered by the publish-subscribe infrastructure may 
utilize a message-based approach and may require an end-to-
middle RBAC approach. Applications could be presence 
monitoring, notification, or discovery of resources, which 
may be utilized by a virtual power plant operator. Here the 
application of OpenID Connect is envisioned, which would 
need to map the existing access token information to the 
access token format in the OpenID Connect context. 
VI. 
REALIZATION EXAMPLE    
In order to support power system operators in taking their 
first step towards centrally managed RBAC in substations 
that applies not just to the station level (as is typically the 
case today) but also to the field level, technology vendors 
providing field equipment, such as RTUs and protection 
relays, should consider offering RADIUS-based centralized 
user management and RBAC as currently proposed for 
standardization in IEC 62351-8. This has the clear advantage 
that operators can leverage their existing RADIUS 
infrastructure (or install afresh with reasonable effort) in 
their substations and can utilize the standardized vendor-
specific attribute schema to centrally assign roles and other 
constraints for each of the users.  
As a second migration step towards centralized user 
management, operators may couple the RADIUS user 
management with substation-spanning LDAP infrastructure, 
which is typically realized using Windows Active Directory 
services. This approach enables operators to choose between 
a bottom-up centralization of user management and RBAC, 
starting first with the critical substations and then moving a 
level higher to incorporate multiple substations with the 
LDAP-RADIUS coexistence. Alternatively, a top-down 
approach could also be realized, with a centralized LDAP-
based user management that is made available to field 
devices in substations over RADIUS. Both approaches do 
not require supporting LDAP directly on the field device but 
only the capability to handle the RBAC information received 
via RADIUS. This is seen as advantage specifically for 
devices with limited resources or for field devices which are 
in the field for a long time already. A consequent subsequent 
step over time would be to employ a purely LDAP-based 
RBAC infrastructure from the substation-spanning level 
down to the field device level in order to benefit from a more 
secure and manageable operation as described in the 
previous section. 
Figure 11 and the following description depict a 
realization example for a migration path. Integrating into this 
centralized user management infrastructure, field device 
vendors can support RBAC for user interactions in 
substations as illustrated in figure 6 with a user-IED 
interaction, using the pull-model described in IEC 62351-8. 
When a user initiates an interactive session with the IED, his 
username and password are collected and sent to the IED (1). 
The IED, capable of centralized user management 
authenticates the user with the central user management 
system, which may be a RADIUS or LDAP server (2). 
Depending on whether the user-provided credentials could 
be successfully verified, the central user management system 
responds with an authentication success or failure message to 
the IED (3). Also in this step, if authentication is successful, 
the server either additionally sends the role / authorization 
information in its response to the IED (as with RADIUS) or 
the IED retrieves this information itself from the server (as 
with LDAP.) The IED accordingly informs the user of the 
authentication status (4) and creates a new session for the 
user with the required authorization level and permits the 
user to interact with it (5). From this point on, the central 
user management server is no longer involved in the logged-
in user’s interactions with the IED. 
 
Figure 11. Central user management and RBAC as per IEC 62351-8 

231
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII. FURTHER IDENTIFIED RBAC CHALLENGES 
Beside the stated solution approaches for binding RBAC 
information bound to a communication session and 
supporting migration from existing environments towards 
certificate supported RBAC, there are further challenges for 
the integration of a system spanning and vendor independent 
RBAC solution. These challenges relate to: 
1. User- to-role assignment  
Currently, there is a heterogeneous landscape of options 
available to assign roles to users, which strongly depends 
on the target environment and on the operator assigning 
the roles. As in the case of information RBAC 
information transmission, it is expected to provide 
migration options between the different approaches. This 
is directly related with the next challenge.  
2. Role-to-right assignment 
As shown in Figure 9 before, IEC 62351-8 already 
defines a set of mandatory roles. While these roles are 
intended to ensure a minimum level of interoperability, 
they are likely to be not flexible enough for all 
deployments, as an operator may have an own definition 
of roles and associated rights to be used. To enable a 
system-wide application of operator defined roles, an 
exchange format is necessary to describe the role to right 
association. This issue has also been recognized in 
standardization, which currently discusses the application 
of the eXtensible Access Control Markup Language 
(XACML, [29]) file format and syntax to address this. 
3. Right-to-data object assignment 
The last challenge identified relates to the right to data 
object assignment. This is necessary to have the same 
interpretation and granularity of actions performed by a 
role on a component. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper discusses role-based access control in the 
digital grid, starting from an analysis of requirements in 
regulation, standardization, and guideline activities. It 
provided an overview about existing technical approaches 
from other domains and discusses the specifics of the digital 
grid, the target domain. Feasibility of the migration of 
existing deployments using legacy devices to a standardized 
RBAC approach over multiple evolutionary steps has been 
shown. From an implementation and market adoption point 
of view, an interoperable vendor-neutral operation for central 
user management and RBAC according to IEC 62351-8 is 
yet to be seen, given the extremely hybrid and generation-
spanning installed base of power system automation 
technologies in use today. The proposals made in this paper 
are intended to address these challenges in an incremental 
manner, leveraging existing infrastructure and paving the 
way for a sustainable, secure and manageable infrastructure 
of the years to come. The outlined proposal has been adopted 
by IEC for a revision of the currently revised standard IEC 
62351-8 to better cope with the migration of existing 
installations to a future certificate supporting RBAC 
infrastructure. For this proposal a realization example has 
been discussed outlining a possible migration from RBAC in 
an existing environment utilizing the RADIUS protocol to a 
(user) certificate supported RBAC. Besides the discussion of 
solutions for identified integration problems also further 
challenges have been identified. This shows that further 
investigation and technical development is necessary to cope 
with all facets of a system spanning RBAC.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Fries, R. Falk, and C. Bisale, “Handling Role-based Access 
Control in the Digital Grid,” Proccedings IARIA Energy 
2017, 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-556-2, 
pp. 
27-32, 
https://thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=energy_2017_2
_20_30024, [retrieved July 2017]. 
[2] S. Fries and R. Falk, “Ensuring Secure Communication in 
Critical Infrastructures,” Proceedings IARIA Energy 2016, 
June 
2016, 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-484-8, 
pp. 
15-20, 
https://thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=energy_2016_1
_30_30060, [retrieved: March 2017]. 
[3] NIST IR 7628, “Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security,” 
Sep. 
2014, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.7628r1, 
[retrieved: March 2017]. 
[4] SGIS “Smart Grid Information Security,” Dec. 2014, 
ftp://ftp.cencenelec.eu/EN/EuropeanStandardization/HotTopic
s/SmartGrids/SGCG_SGIS_Report.pdf, 
[retrieved: 
March 
2017]. 
[5] SEG-CG “Cyber Security and Provacy,” Feb. 2017, 
ftp://ftp.cencenelec.eu/EN/EuropeanStandardization/Fields/En
ergySustainability/SmartGrid/CyberSecurity-Privacy-
Report.pdf, [retrieved: July 2017]. 
[6] BDEW White paper “Requirements for Secure Control and 
Telecommunication Systems,” BDEW, February 2015.  
[7] ISO TR 27019: Information security management guidelines 
for process control systems used in the energy utility industry 
on the basis of ISO/IEC 27002, March 2013. 
[8] ISO/IEC 27002:2005  Information technology – Security 
techniques – Code of practice for information security 
management, June 2005.  
[9] IEC62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
Network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels,” Edition 1.0, August 2013. 
[10] IEEE 1686, “IEEE Standard for Intelligent Electronic Devices 
Cyber Security Capabilities,” December 2013. 
[11] ISO/IEC 62351-8, “Role-based access control for power 
system management,” June 2011. 
[12] NERC, 
North 
American 
Reliability 
Corporation, 
http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx, 
[retrieved: March 2017]. 
[13] German 
IT 
Security 
Law, 
July 
2015, 
http://www.bgbl.de/xaver/bgbl/start.xav?startbk=Bundesanzei
ger_BGBl&jumpTo=bgbl115s1324.pdf, (German), [retrieved: 
March 2017]. 
[14] ANSSI Technical Note, Recommandations de sécurité 
concernant l’analyse des flux HTTPS, October 2015, 
http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/uploads/IMG/pdf/NP_TLS_NoteTech.
pdf (French) [retrieved: March 2017]. 
[15] C. Neuman, T. Yu, S. Hartman, and K. Raeborn,  “The 
Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5),” RFC 4120, 
July 
2005, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4120, 
[retrieved: 
March 2017]. 
[16] S. Cantor, J. Kemp, R. Philpott, and E. Maier, “Assertions and 
Protocols for the OASIS Security Assertion Markup 
Language (SAML) V2.0,” March 2005, http://docs.oasis-
open.org/security/saml/v2.0/saml-core-2.0-os.pdf, [retrieved: 
March 2017]. 

232
International Journal on Advances in Security, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/security/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[17] D. Hardt, “The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework,” RFC 
6749, 
October 
2012, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749, 
[retrieved: March 2017]. 
[18] M. Jones, J. Bradley, H.Tschofenig., “Proof-of-Possession 
Key Semantics for JSON Web Tokens (JWTs),” RFC 7800, 
April 2016, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7800, [retrieved: 
March 2017]. 
[19] J. 
Richter, 
“User 
Authentication 
with 
OAuth 
2.0,” 
https://oauth.net/articles/authentication/, 
[retrieved: 
March 
2017]. 
[20] J. Bradley et al., “OpenID Connect Core 1.0 incorporating 
errata set 1,” November 2014, http://openid.net/specs/openid-
connect-core-1_0.html, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[21] M. Jones et al., “JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 
2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants,” May 
2015, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7523, [retrieved: March 
2017]. 
[22] C. Rigney et. al., “Remote Authentication Dial In User 
Service 
(RADIUS),” 
RFC 
2865, 
June 
2000, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2865, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[23] B. Aboba et. al., “Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)”, 
RFC 3748, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3748, [retrieved: 
March 2017]. 
[24] D. Cooper et al., “Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile,” 
RFC 5280, May 2008, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280, 
[retrieved: March 2017]. 
[25] S. Fries, R. Falk, H. Dawidczak, and T. Dufaure, 
“Decentralized Energy in the Smart Energy Grid and Smart 
Market – How to master reliable and secure control,” 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 
9 no 1& 2, ISSN: 1942-2679, pp. 65-75, September 2016. 
[26] J. Sermersheim, “Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 
(LDAP): 
The 
Protocol,” 
RFC 
4511, 
June 
2006, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4511, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[27] S. Winter et al, “Transport Layer Security (TLS) Encryption 
for 
RADIUS,” 
RFC 
6614, 
May 
2012, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6614, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[28] ISO 61850-8-2: Communication networks and systems for 
power utility automation, Part 8-2: Specific Communication 
Service Mapping (SCSM) – Mapping to Extensible 
Messaging Presence Protocol (XMPP), Work in Progress. 
[29] eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) 
Version 
3.0, 
OASIS 
Standard, 
January 
2013, 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/xacml/3.0/xacml-3.0-core-spec-os-
en.html, [retrieved: July. 2017]. 

