Netflow Based HTTP Get Flooding Attack Analysis
Jungtae Kim, Jong-Hyun Kim and Ikkyun Kim 
Information Security Research Division 
Electronics & Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {jungtae_kim, jhk, ikkim21}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
 
Koohong Kang 
2Dept. of Information and Communications Engineering 
Seowon University 
Cheongju, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: khkang@seowon.ac.kr 
Abstract— The paper proposes a security analysis method 
using the netflow information to analyze the HyperText 
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) get flooding attacks. As it is hard to 
distinguish from the normal Web accesses and further severely 
disturb the normal Web user accesses, the attack is considered 
as one of the most effective Distributed Denial-of-Service 
(DDoS) attacks. In this paper, we propose an analysis method 
of the HTTP Get flooding attacks based on the netflow 
information. In particular, the byte over packet per flow ratio 
helps to achieve the attack detection without the individual 
packet processing overheads. 
Keywords-HTTP Get Flooding; Netflow; DDoS Attack; . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Netflow is a feature that was introduced on Cisco routers 
that provides the ability to collect IP network traffic as it 
enters or exits an interface [1]. The major advantage of 
utilizing the flow data is that it helps to analyze the network 
traffic usage and further enables network security 
enhancement.  The flow is generally defined by the 7 unique 
key fields including the following information: source and 
destination IP address, source and destination port, layer 3 
protocol type, type of service byte, and the input logical 
interface [2]. In order to utilize the netflow information to 
analyze the DDOS traffic, a system requires to have the 
following components: flow exporter, which processes 
packets to produce flow data, the preconfigured flow 
collectors and storages. Consequently, the flow collectors 
store and index the collected flows for search purposes. 
Later, an analysis application then analyzes the stored flow 
data for the network traffic or security analysis purposes. 
Based on the above systems components with the netflow 
information, we propose a network anomaly detection 
method based on the detailed analysis on the HTTP Get 
Flooding Attacks.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The HTTP Get flooding attacks are being exploited in the 
most efficient way among Denial-of-Service (DoS) type 
attacks aimed at the Web server application layer [3]. The 
attack is specially designed to send a large volume of the 
HTTP-Get requests to the targeted Web applications and 
servers. The attacks are initiated by virus infected zombie 
PCs under the control of Command and Control (C&C) 
server. Consequently, the victim’s Web server is unable to 
reply to the normal user requests due to the processing 
overheads. Since these attack packets contain the normal 
HTTP requests, Web servers cannot easily distinguish 
between normal user’s HTTP-Get request messages and the 
malicious requests [4]. The advantage of the approach 
presented in this paper is that the netflow helps the network 
administrator to identify network anomalies by monitoring 
the detailed traffic flows information rather than the 
conventional network security devices including the firewall, 
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) or Intrusion Prevention 
System (IPS), which obviously involve an extra cost of 
deploying the devices, as well as a change of network 
settings to capture the traffic information for signature based 
analysis. Although the default setting for the netflow 
information exports is set depending on the switch or router 
manufacturers, such as the inactive timer set at 15 sec and 
the active timer set at 1800 sec, the flow analysis is helpful 
in case of the HTTP Get Flooding attack, which has a 
unique characteristic with the repeated short TCP 3-Way 
Handshake periods. The paper introduces an experimental 
setting with system and network configurations in Section 
III. Details of the attack analysis technique using netflow 
information with the analysis results are described in 
Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper with 
future works. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS 
Figure 1 shows 2 minute attacks to conduct the HTTP Get 
flooding attacks. The Command and Control server, with 
the Netbot Attacker [5], was installed in a separate external 
network from the attack target network. The target network 
was configured with 3 zombie PCs with 2 Web servers 
hyperlinked unidirectional. 
 
Figure 1. Network Configuration of the HTTP Get flooding attack using 
Netbot Attacker. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

IV. 
ATTACK ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE USING NETFLOW 
Although conventional HTTP Get flooding attack 
detection adopts a method that specifically analyzes the 
contents of the packet, especially installed and operated in 
the input of particular Website or Web server [4], our 
approach proposes an analysis method of the HTTP Get 
flooding attacks based on the netflow information rather 
than the detailed network traffic statistics. Figures 2-4 show 
the flow information for the attack caused by using the 
Netbot Attacker by flow duration, number of packet, and 
byte size, respectively. The attack flow is generated for 2 
minutes (Figure 2), and the number of packets (Figure 3) 
within the flow is fixed in its size. The flow analysis 
experiment was conducted considering a 2 minutes attack 
from 3 zombie PCs with a break. The total number of flows 
measured were approximately 22,985 at each zombie PC 
which includes the recursive HTTP Get request and reply 
messages with the TCP 3-way Handshake packets (48 Byte 
SYN & SYN ACK and 40 byte ACK, FIN & RST ACK).  
 
 
Figure 2. Flow Duration for HTTP Get flooding attack patterns. 
 
The results, as depicted in Figure 2, show that most of the 
attack related flow duration fell into within the 2000 ms (2 
secs) boundary with short TCP sessions. Figures 3 and 4 
show the total number of packets and bytes per flow record 
of the attack. The machine generated attack by zombie PCs 
was fixed in its packet size of 6 with 285 byte size and 
additional 5 & 7 packets with 245 and 333 byte size, 
respectively, due to the reset (RST) packet. Figure 5 
provides a Byte over Packet Ratio (BPR) per flow record for 
the HTTP Get flooding attack and the results are listed in 
Table I. The proposed analysis result shows that, the BPR is 
47~49 for the HTTP Get flooding attack. 
 
 
Figure 3. Number of packets per flow for HTTP Get flooding attack. 
 
Figure 4. Byte size per flow for HTTP Get flooding attack patterns. 
 
 
Figure 5. Byte / Packet per flow for HTTP Get flooding attack. 
 
TABLE I. HTTP GET FLOODING ATTACK PATTERNS. 
No. PACKET 
BYTE SIZE 
BYTE/PACKET 
5 
245 
49.00000 
6 
285 
47.50000 
7 
333 
47.57143 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We propose an analysis method of the HTTP Get 
flooding attacks based on the netflow information rather 
than the detailed network traffic statistics, such as the 
packer per second (pps) and total byte size. In particular, 
machine generated attack patterns show that a specific BPR 
can be applied to detect the DDoS attack. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion(IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government(MSIP) (No.R-20160222-002755, 
Cloud based Security Intelligence Technology Development 
for the Customized Security Service Provisioning). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cisco IOS NetFlow, Cisco Systems, Inc. 
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/ios-nx-os-software/ios-
netflow/index.html [accessed July 2017] 
[2] NetFlow Export Datagram Format, Cisco Systems, Inc. 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/net_mgmt/netflow_collection_
engine/3-6/user/guide/format.html [accessed July 2017] 
[3] Y. Choi and et. al, “AIGG Threshold Based HTTP GET Flooding 
Attack Detection, ” in Proc. of WISA 2012, pp 270-284, 2012. 
[accessed July 2017] 
[4] Y. Kim and et. al, “HTTP Get Flooding Detection Technique based 
on Netflow Information,” in Proc. Of Internet 2016, pp 26, 2016. 
[accessed July 2017] 
[5] Netbot Attacker VIP 4.7 Version.  
http://cfs13.tistory.com/image/5/tistory/2009/02/19/18/02/499d20310
1657 [accessed July 2017] 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

