Improving Online Account Security: Implementing Policy and Process Changes  
Pankaj Goyal 
MicroMega Inc. 
Denver, USA 
e-mail: Pgoyal@micro-mega.biz 
 
 
Abstract— User authentication, a difficult problem, suffers 
from various shortcomings with the prevalent use of passwords 
as an authentication method. Requirements for password 
memorability and usability make them easy to break. 
Password reuse across sites, including insecure sites, phishing 
and spoofing attacks, requires that financial institutions 
examine security by analyzing end-to-end processes and 
identities involved. This paper presents an approach for 
intrusion tolerance, and the necessitated changes to processes 
and policies.  
Keywords - online security; transaction security; identity 
security; security policy; financial systems; intrusion tolerance 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
User authentication is one of the most difficult problems 
in Internet security [19]. Passwords are ubiquitous in their 
use for authenticating users and pose the biggest security 
challenge. Users frequently forget passwords, necessitating 
expensive customer support calls or automated backup 
authentication schemes often involving challenge questions, 
that are even weaker forms of authentication.  Users also 
can have their passwords stolen through phishing [5, 11], 
social engineering, man-in-the-middle (MITM) [13], and 
key-logging attacks, or they may share [32]. Most of the 
issues related to passwords have been well documented and 
numerous efforts to alleviate some of these issues have been 
proposed and implemented; a complete survey of the 
literature is beyond the scope of this paper but some of the 
methods are surveyed in Section II. Passwords because of 
their usability, ease of implementation, etc., are unlikely to 
be dislodged as the user authentication method of choice for 
online services; Herley et al. [19] lists a number of barriers 
to move away from passwords with a major obstacle being 
the diversity of requirements. 
People today, are subscribers of an increasing 
assortment of online services: news, social networking, 
shopping, financial and medical. Unfortunately, users have a 
difficulty in creating unique, easily memorizable, secure 
passwords for all the services that they use. Thus, users tend 
to use something from their background (family, friends, 
pets, history, likes, dislikes, etc.) for creating passwords and 
overwhelmingly tend to reuse passwords across services; it 
should be noted that the security mechanisms of these 
service sites is as varied as their nature and content. Users 
password entropy is likely to remain constant, while the 
number of services that a user subscribes to increases and as 
does the adversary’s computational power) and access to 
users personal information. 
Attempts to address some of the weaknesses in password 
security include multi-factor authentication to increase 
security 
of 
a 
password-based 
system. 
Multi-factor 
authentication involves the use of more than one mode in 
the authentication processes, for example, two-factor 
authentication can be implemented by coupling the use of 
passwords with (1) a security-challenge or (ii) a code sent 
over another communication channel (example, mobile 
phone) that the user is then required to enter. These schemes 
still suffer from vulnerabilities, in particular, the real-time 
man in the middle attack. Password management, including 
password retrieval and resets, are major issues and areas of 
vulnerability. The efficacy of security-challenge questions, 
however, in the era of easy availability of personal data is in 
serious doubt. 
In this paper, we present an approach for intrusion 
tolerance of a security system for a financial institution (FI). 
As part of the analysis, many best practices, their 
advantages and risks were examined and attempts made to 
find robust solutions to address these risks.  In addition, the 
design attempted to protect victims of phishing or other 
attacks where the victim’s password has been compromised. 
The analysis led to definition of policies and processes to 
ensure authorization of all sensitive actions – actions that 
can negatively impact the legitimate user and/or FI. 
Authorization is implemented using only an out-of-band 
communication channel, so that it is not susceptible to a 
real-time man in the middle attack over the primary 
interaction channel. 
Section II presents an overview of  the current 
approaches and their limitations. Passwords (or their 
predecessor watch-words) and associated vulnerabilities 
have existed for millennia. It is a given that attacks on 
authentication schemes will continue and get more 
sophisticated. It is, thus, not enough to attempt to secure 
passwords, use processes to manage password change and 
use of a separate channel for on-time passwords (OTP) or 
authorization codes. If a password change requires 
authentication but, say, the email address in the profile does 
not, then an attacker on gaining entry would first alter the 
email address thereby by blinding the actual owner of all 
changes to its account. In the natural world, a financial 
transaction 
involve 
multi-channel 
interactions 
and 
authentications. Thus, what is required, in the online world, 
are methods and processes that minimize damage in case of 
password compromise.  In Section III, this paper presents a 
systems approach to identify at risk items and activities 
from a compromise of authentication systems, and methods 
and processes for intrusion tolerance so as to mitigate 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

financial losses. The proposed schemes use bi-directional 
multi-channel  interactions, use methods and processes to 
authenticate profile changes.  
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
The increased use of computer systems is accompanied 
by an increased, and increasingly well-organized, attempts 
to breach their security. One of the most vulnerable 
elements of security is the password. This is also the most 
common method of user authentication. Once authenticates, 
the user is restricted to perform only authorized activities. 
Authentication: is a means of verifying that a user is 
who they claim to be. In the process the user presents a 
user-identifier, representing the user’s identity, and a set of 
credentials (e.g., password or certificates). The user is 
granted access to the service only on verification of the 
user-identifier and the credentials. 
Authorization: determines whether the client is allowed 
to perform certain tasks or operations. Authorization 
enforces policies that controls access to activities, resources 
or services. 
Identity 
management 
is 
concerned 
with 
users’ 
credentials 
and 
their 
access 
to 
services. 
Identity 
management systems consist of an authentication part which 
is used to verify the correctness of an entity’s claim to 
identity, and an access control part, authorization, which 
grants access to applications and resources. User-identifiers 
represent our digital identities, who we are, when engaging 
in online activities and transactions. Ideally, users should 
choose different user-identifiers (user-ids) for each service, 
however, this would require users to memorize user-id’s in 
addition to passwords; this is not practical as analysis of 
passwords use has shown that users tend to reuse passwords 
[14]. Identity management is also a major issue of concern 
but is not the focus of this paper; for an introduction into 
issues related to usability and privacy, see [20]. 
A. 
Password Management 
A big inconvenience in password based authentication is 
that ideally a user should memorize and use different 
passwords for different services and that these passwords 
should not be easily breakable.  If a common password is 
used across all services then a service (or an attacker with 
knowledge of the common password) can impersonate a 
user to another service or a service can impersonate another 
service to the user. Password reuse across multiple services 
increases their vulnerability as compromising a single 
password allows an attacker access to multiple accounts. 
Gaw and Felton [14] conducted an experiment and found 
that password reuse rates increased over time because 
people subscribed to more services but did not create more 
passwords as reusing passwords made passwords easier to 
manage. Also sharing passwords among relatives and close 
friends has been found to be a sign of trust and intimacy 
[32].  
Forcing people to choose and remember strong 
passwords - those that tend to be long character strings 
including both Roman letters and digits - is unworkable 
because such passwords are also unmemorable [12, 23]. 
Bellovin and Merritt [3, 4], Gong et al. [17], and Lomas et 
al. [25] have proposed authentication protocols that are 
resistant to password guessing attacks but with the added 
cost of additional messages; Gong [16] optimized the 
number of messages and cycles required. 
Passwords are frequently deployed in an insecure 
manner. The large inconsistency of implementations 
between sites and the frequency of simple mistakes show an 
unanticipated level of insecurity and confusion [2]. While a 
site may not hold critical information and, thus, use simple 
security measures, a compromise of its security can allow 
the attacker to gain access to a compromised user’s critical 
account on another site because of the reuse of user-id’s and 
passwords. Given this threat of cross-domain password 
attacks, insecure sites collecting passwords have the 
potential to impose a costly externality on more careful 
sites.  
Mobile phones and various other types of trusted mobile 
devices have been suggested as a means of achieving a two-
factor authentication through devices that we routinely 
carry. Alternatives to passwords for authentication include 
Public-key infrastructure (PKI) but PKI security has been 
successfully compromised. Sotirov et al. [33] identified a 
vulnerability in the Internet Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
used to issue digital certificates for secure websites. They 
executed a practical attack scenario and successfully created 
a rogue Certification Authority (CA) certificate trusted by 
all common web browsers. This certificate would have 
allowed them to impersonate any website on the Internet, 
including banking and e-commerce sites secured using the 
HTTPS protocol; successfully used in a number of high 
profile cyber-attacks including compromise of Microsoft 
Update program (allowed ‘Flame’ malware to spread). It 
should be noted that the CA issuing authorities GlobalSign, 
Comode and DigiNotar have all been hacked. Biometrics 
suffer from deployment scaling, privacy and authentication 
from untrusted hardware.  
Weir et al. [37] compared three different authentication 
processes, a 1-factor and two 2-factor methods. They found 
that convenience and personal ownership as some of the 
most important criterion in user preference of authentication 
methods and majority of the study participants perceived the 
1-factor method as being the most secure and most 
convenient option. In their study experienced users gave 
higher usability scores to the 1-factor method they currently 
use. 
Over the years, a variety of solutions have been 
proposed to the issue of password management. Bonneau 
and Preibusch [7] provide a broad overview of password 
history and management research. Anderson [2] provides a 
comprehensive overview of security engineering. 
B. 
Password Management Systems (PMS) 
Typical PMSs allow password resets online, including 
when a user runs out of the allowed number of retries, and 
some inform the user by email that a password change was 
made. In the era of email overload (and phishing attacks), 
by the time a user reacts to this informational message the 
damage might be done.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

For example, certain sites that do not engage in any 
financial transactions may implement loose security policies 
and controls, such as, easy retrieval of passwords (clear 
text). But with the prevalence of passwords use across 
cross-sites this is a serious vulnerability. Some sites use 
security challenge questions to allow a user to reset their 
passwords; this is also allowed when a user runs out of 
password tries. These challenge questions, and their 
answers, are typically based on the user’s background. With 
the increasing availability of online personal data, including 
through social networking sites of even such information as 
friends and pets, the efficacy of these security challenges is 
seriously in doubt. Secondly, they are vulnerable to real-
time man in the middle attack.  
 FIs are starting to deploy dynamic challenge questions 
and two-factor authentication; the term FI includes online 
shopping, gaming, etc., as the issues faced by these online 
systems are similar. Challenge questions are commonly 
used to authenticate users who have lost their passwords. 
The PMSs that allow password resets on successful answer 
to a set of challenge questions suffer from the fact that 
increasing amounts of personal data is widely available 
online. Patterns have been found to exist in the security 
questions [21, 28]. An analysis of user-generated challenge 
questions found that 34% of user questions asked for a 
human name, 15% asked for a pet name and 20% asked for 
a place name [21]. Of the remainder, 22% asked for a user's 
favorite item amongst films, singers, car brands, etc., 5% 
asked for a time, date, or number, and the remainder were 
ambiguous. Thus, a few simple categories of proper names 
cover roughly 70% of real-world questions. While personal 
security questions may have had their use when there was 
scarce online or easy availability of personal information, 
however, with the ubiquitous availability of personal 
information online, the security provided by such questions 
is doubtful. 
C. 
Password Managers 
The objective of password managers is to be able to use 
complex, not easily breakable, unique passwords for user 
authentication by service providers while the user utilizes a 
simple easily memorizable password for password manager 
access. 
One 
approach 
is 
to 
create 
centralized, 
trusted 
authentication services, such as Microsoft’s Passport 
initiative [26] and its security has been analyzed [24]. Such 
centralized services require both users and service providers 
to place their trust onto a centralized service (“Big Brother”) 
and every service that would use the centralized system for 
authentication would need to make changes to their systems. 
Another proposal lets users choose their own passwords 
and then store them in a safe, for example, Password Safe 
application [31] stores the data in an encrypted database on 
the user’s machine, secured with a user-chosen master 
password. 
Another method assigns fixed passwords for each site or 
service that can be computed whenever they are needed. For 
example, the Lucent Personal Web Assistant [15] operates 
as an HTTP proxy server that users access with a master 
username and password. They can then tag web site 
password fields to be automatically filled in with values 
derived from a hash-based function of the user’s master 
password and the domain name of the web site. 
PwdHash [29], a user web browser plug-in, applies a 
similar hash-based technique. Password Multiplier [18], is 
also a user web browser plug-in, extend the approach of 
Kelsey et al. [22]. In Kelsey et al’s method [22], the 
password is derived by repeatedly iterating a hash function 
on the original master password. Halderman et al. [18] 
compute the site-password in two steps. In the first step, an 
interim value is derived by applying the secure hash 
function is iterated k1 times on the concatenation of the 
username and master password. In the second step, the site 
password is derived by applying the secure hash function is 
iterated k2 times on the concatenation of the site name, 
master password and the interim value from step 1. 
Chiasson et al. [9] evaluate PwdHash and Password 
Multiplier suffer from major usability problems that cause 
security exposures – exposures that the users are unaware 
of. Also, password managers cannot prevent MITM attacks.  
D. Single Sign On (SSO) 
Fundamentally, Web single sign-on (SSO) systems shift 
the functions of identity collection and authentication from 
the content servive provider (CSP) to Identity Providers 
(IdP); in the process the CSP becomes a relying party (RP) 
of the IdP.  An IdP issues identities or credentials to users, 
while an RP depends on the IdP(s) to assert the user 
credentials before allowing access to its services. This 
enables users to leverage one identity across multiple RPs.  
An inherent risk of usingWeb SSO is that one 
compromised account on an IdP can result in breaches on all 
services 
that 
use 
this 
compromised 
identity 
for 
authentication. The SSO introduces a single point of failure 
or compromise -- the IdP systems and infrastructure [27].  
An inherent characteristic of web applications is that some 
of the internal information flows are inevitably exposed on 
the network and encryption is insufficient to safeguard 
against information leaks [8]. Users may become 
accustomed to being redirected to identity provider web-
sites for authentication. To prevent phishing attacks, users 
must verify the authenticity of an identity provider before 
entering their credentials.  
Users and the RP have to trust the integrity of the IdP. In 
web SSO ecosystems, the issue of liability becomes highly 
complex as the integrity of the ecosystem depends upon the 
quality of the implementation of the IdP and all RP clients 
of the IdP; Wang et al [36] list the issue of implementation 
complexity as a major issue for SSO's. A number of 
researchers have investigated flaws in the protocols and 
implementations of such systems and surveyed  [8, 27, 34, 
36]. 
E. 
Man-In-the-Middle Attack (MITM) 
It is possible for an attacker to intercept the 
communication between the customer and the FI server and 
impersonate them both [13]. The attacker tricks the 
customer into logging into the attacker’s website, and 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

masquerade as the real FI. This can for example happen 
through the attacks commonly known as web spoofing and 
pharming [5, 13]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Authorizing bank transactions via SMS (from AlZomai  [1]) 
To counter MITM, some FIs use an OTP (One-Time-
Password) to authorize each transaction (Fig. 1); also, 
referred to as the authorization code. It is common to send 
the authorization code through an out-of-band channel, for 
example, email or a mobile SMS; out-of-band channels are 
also referred to as authorization channels while the primary 
interaction channel is known as the in-band channel. The 
transaction authorization method based on SMS messages 
was introduced by FIs in response to phishing attacks. 
However, an investigation of the security and usability of 
SMS-based transaction authorization method and found that 
it is vulnerable to stealthy attacks, such as minor changes to 
account numbers [1]. The scheme also suffers from the fact 
that the user has to enter the authorization code using the in-
band channel  – potential for mistakes and still subject to a 
sophisticated MITM attack. 
F. Combining Text and Graphics 
In an attempt to counter password theft through phishing 
attacks and to differentiate real sites from spoofed sites, mix 
of text and graphic passwords have been proposed [10, 35]. 
Some online FIs employ site verification schemes; for 
example, SiteKey [6] displays a user selected image back to 
them at login. But, an empirical study [30] found that users 
will still enter their passwords when presented with 
fraudulent messages claiming that the image authentication 
server is down. 
III. FINANCIAL INSTITUTION (FI) SITUATION AND ANALYSIS 
The FI allows users to perform financial transactions 
online, including deposits, bill and recurring payments, and 
also sells certain financial and FI-related items (coin 
collections, piggy-banks, etc.) that are then shipped to the 
user specified address. 
A. Problem 
Based 
on 
analysis 
of 
available 
literature 
and 
experimental results (some of these are referenced in  
Section II), it was clear that (a) all identity credentialing and 
authentication schemes are vulnerable, and that these 
credentials can become known to attackers; and (b) 
passwords have to be used for user authentication. It was 
also clear that in the current environment challenge 
questions are ineffective and, while they would be 
implemented for psychological comfort, will not play any 
role in user authentication. The FI was interested in 
intrusion tolerance mechanisms that could minimize impact 
of, say, MITM attacks, and in using transaction 
authorizations. 
B. Challenges 
Let us consider the situation where the attacker has 
gained access to the users’ identifier and password; the 
attacker takes control of the account and make changes to, 
say, the email address and mobile phone number, or add 
payees, etc. 
It is not typical of online sites to inform users if, say, 
their email address or phone number have been changed. 
The email address change prevents the victim from 
receiving notices of password change, including links that 
allow password changes to be made; instead the attacker 
will receive them. The mobile phone number change allows 
the attacker to receive the transaction authorization SMSs. 
TABLE I.  
TERMS 
(…) 
tuple of items 
{…} 
set of items 
Ai
Attribute name 
ai
value for attribute Ai 
Account
( Account-Type, Account-Identifier, 
{(Account-Actions, Limit), …} )
Address
mailing, shipping, billing, 
primary/secondary email, SMS
Authorization Action 
Channels (AAC)
are associated with a ROC and user 
action 
Channels
postal mail, email, Fax, Voice call, 
browser, smart phone app
Identity
{ (Identity-Attribute, value), ….. }
Identity-Attribute
Name, Address, Phone, Account, 
Identity-Category 
Identity-Category
Self, Payee, Beneficiary
Name
User/Account Holder, Payee, 
Beneficiary [e.g., Family-Friends]
Phone
Home, Work, Mobile, Other, Fax
Request Originating 
Channel (ROC) 
channel through which any user action 
is requested (for example, logging in)
User Actions
login, delete/add/change any profile 
information 
 
A number of other challenges were analyzed. During the 
analysis a number of terms were identified (Table 1; not all 
terms identified) and it became clear that users needed to be 
informed of any identity changes. A more stringent and 
secure criterion is that any identity change needed to be 
authorized through an authorization channel distinct from 
the request originating channel; this is different from the 
currently used methods where the authorization is 
performed on the request originating channel.  The primary 
purpose of the analysis and the formalization of terms was 
to identify at risk items – items that can contribute to 
circumvent security. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

C. Interaction Channels 
At the FI, the following channels can be used to 
originate requests, including changes to user profiles and 
accounts: 
 
Paper, typically signed forms and letters 
 
Telephone (only from registered phones) 
 
Web site 
 
In person 
For each of these requesting originating channels, 
alternate authorization channels are specified (Table 2); it is 
possible for users to choose a preferred authorization 
channel. Emails are used as a notification method and 
contain instructions on how to perform the requested 
authorization. Originating requests in person allows the FI 
personnel to physically authenticate the user and the user 
authorizations the actions by signing documents (may be 
online).  
TABLE II.  
AUTHORIZATION CHANNELS FOR REQUEST ORIGINATING 
CHANNELS 
Request Originating Channel 
Authorization Channels
Paper 
Email, Paper (signature), 
SMS, 
Telephone 
Telephone - Landline 
Email, Paper (signature), SMS
Telephone - Mobile 
Email, Paper (signature)
Web site 
Email, Telephone, SMS
In Person (face to face) 
At service/interaction point; receipts 
may be transmitted by Email
 
D. Policy Changes 
 
All changes, including add/delete, to identity require 
explicit user authorization 
 
New financial transactions require explicit user 
authorization 
 
On users’ initiation of a change to identity or a new 
financial activity, the change/activity will be put in 
pending status and, thus, are effectively inactive. 
 
All authorizations must be made through a channel 
distinct from the request originating channel. 
 
Both authorization requests and user responses  to 
these requests must be made on the authorization 
channel. 
 
A change in pending status is made active or inactive 
based on the user authorization response. 
 
Challenge questions shall play no role in making 
decisions about a users’ identity 
 
In person (physical presence) on the presentation of 
valid photo-id shall allow the user to request 
immediate changes with authorization received in 
the form of users’ signature. 
E. Process Changes 
Every process that deals with users (interactions), user 
profiles, and user accounts is affected.  Some of the major 
process changes were to call center processes as the policy 
changes impacted a number of processes. For example, 
customer service representatives could no longer reset 
passwords on the phone, or make changes to emails – any 
change to identity; they should mark the requested changes 
to be pending status and await authorization through an 
alternate channel. 
F. Impact of these Changes 
1) Password compromise 
The affect of these changes is that even with the attacker 
logged into the victims’ account, the attacker is prevented 
from making changes to the victims’ identity. Thus, for 
example, the attacker cannot make a change to the victims’ 
registered email address or mobile number; any changes 
will need to be authorized by the victim before they can take 
effect and such authorization will occur through a different 
channel.  Similarly, the attacker cannot add a new 
beneficiary or payee or make changes to their addresses or 
account details. Thus, the attacker is effectively prevented 
from causing any harm to the victim.  
2) Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) Attack 
Similar to the password compromise scenario (above), 
the attacker is unable to authorize its illegal gain activities, 
as all authorization will occur on a channel different from 
the channel that the attacker has spoofed. 
It should be noted that there is no defense against an 
attacker who has total control over the victim, viz., the 
attacker has control over all possible communication 
channels. 
G. Other Design Options 
It is possible to construct channel use charts where for 
each request originating channel a set of approved 
authorization action channels are defined. During the design 
phase it was decided against including this extra level of 
complexity as the potential benefits were not clear. 
There was considerable debate on whether authorization 
should be required for any transactions above a certain 
minimum amount. Since, any beneficiary or payee identity 
would be created only on explicit authorization any benefits 
of a transaction would accrue to members of the account 
holder’s circle and that any benefit would be subject to the 
upper limit for that identity. The problem with creating 
exceptions is that there is a cost of implementation and 
ongoing costs as changes to exceptions are made.  Secondly, 
any activity not initiated by the account holder is still a 
major inconvenience both to the account holder and the FI. 
H. Usability 
Users have the option to opt out of out-of-band 
authorization for certain profile changes and low-value 
financial transactions; users can  not opt-out of financial 
transactions above a  FI defined threshold, nor can they opt 
out of authorizing changes to their passwords, email address 
and authorization channel information.  Given that an 
attacker would be unable to gain financially it is expected 
that attackers would concentrate their attention elsewhere. 
Authorizations utilize automated systems, similar to 
those utilized to automatically activate credit and debit 
cards. Thus, there is no extra burden on call center 
representatives. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

IV. CONCLUSIONS 
Passwords are likely to retain their predominant position 
in 
user 
authentication. 
With 
the 
increase 
in 
the 
sophistication of phishing and man-in-the-middle attacks, 
cross site use of passwords by users, sharing of passwords 
and the wide availability of personal information, requires 
that 
FIs 
assume 
password 
compromise, 
including 
knowledge, and devise intrusion tolerant processes and 
policies to minimize adverse effect on their customers and 
themselves. Most of the methods proposed by researchers 
address one or two shortcomings of passwords, for example, 
password breakability.  Security implementations at online 
sites do not consider end-to-end impacts of password 
compromise.  This paper has presented some of the 
outcomes of a comprehensive analysis and methods 
incorporated in the design of an FIs security system tolerant 
to malicious intrusions. One of the characteristics of the 
design requires that any change to an identity/profile 
requires user authorization, say, using mobile networks as 
an authorization channel. With near ubiquitous use of 
mobile devices these methods are not onerous. 
Identity credentialing and authentication methods, other 
than passwords, are also not immune from compromise. The 
complexity of some implementations [36] may introduce 
vulnerabilities that require new methods and tools to detect. 
In the absence of faultless systems and processes, it is 
incumbent on organizations to analyze intrusion impacts, 
and introduce intrusion tolerant systems, processes and 
policies. These intrusion tolerant schemes have to be 
designed by each organization based on their risk exposure. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. AlZomai, B. AlFayyadh, A. Jøsang, and A. McCullagh, “An 
Experimental Investigation of the Usability of Transaction 
Authorization in Online Bank Security Systems,” Sixth Australasian 
Conference on Information Security, pp. 65-73, 2008. 
[2] 
R. Anderson, Security Engineering: A Guide to Building Dependable 
Distributed Systems, Second Edition, Wiley Publishing, 2008. 
[3] 
S.M. Bellovin and M. Merritt, “Augmented Encrypted Key 
Exchange: A Password-Based Protocol Secure Against Dictionary 
Attacks and Password File Compromise,” 1st ACM Conference on 
Computer and Communications Security, pp. 244-250, 1993. 
[4] 
S.M. Bellovin and M. Merritt, “Encrypted Key Exchange: Password-
Based Protocols Secure Against Dictionary Attacks,” IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 72-84, 1992. 
[5] 
H. Berghel, ‘Phishing mongers and posers’, Communications of the 
ACM, 49(4), pp. 21–25, 2006.  
[6] 
Bank of America SiteKey. 
http://www.bankofamerica.com/privacy/sitekey/ [retrieved: March 
2012]. 
[7] 
J. Bonneau and S. Preibusch, “The password thicket: technical and 
market failures in Human authentication on the web,” The Ninth 
Workshop on the Economics of Information Security  (WEIS 2010), 
2010. 
[8] 
S. Chen, R. Wang, X. F. Wang, and K. Zhang "Side-Channel Leaks 
in Web Applications: a Reality Today, a Challenge Tomorrow," IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 191-206, 2010. 
[9] 
S. Chiasson, P.C. van Oorschot, and R, Biddle, “A Usability Study 
and Critique of Two Password Managers.” 15th USENIX Security 
Symposium, 2006. 
[10] S. Chiasson, Usable Authentication and Click-Based Graphical 
Passwords. PhD thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada, January 
2009. 
[11] R. Dhamija, J. Tygar, and M. Hearst, “Why Phishing Works,” 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 
581-590, 2006 
[12] D.C. Feldmeier and P.R. Karn. UNIX Password Security - Ten Years 
Later. Crypt0 ‘89, volume 435, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Springer-Verlag, pp.  44-63. 1989. 
[13] E. Felton, D. Balfanz, D. Dean, and D. Wallach. Web Spooﬁng: An 
Internet Con Game. 20th National Information Systems Security 
Conference, also Technical report 540-96, Princeton University, 
1997, 
http://www.princeton.edu/sip/pub/spoofing.html 
[retrieved: 
February 2012] 
[14] S. Gaw and E.W. Felton, “Password management strategies for online 
accounts,” SOUPS '06 Proceedings of the second symposium on 
Usable privacy and security, pp. 44-55, 2006. 
[15] E. Gabber, P.B. Gibbons, Y. Matias, and A.J. Mayer, “How to make 
personalized web browsing simple, secure, and anonymous”  
Financial Cryptography, pp. 17–32, 1997. 
[16] L. Gong, “Optimal Authentication Protocols Resistant to Password 
Guessing Attacks,” Eighth IEEE Computer Security Foundations 
Workshop (CSFW '95), pp. 24-29, 1995. 
[17] L. Gong, T.M.A. Lomas, R.M. Needham, and J.H. Saltzer, 
“Protecting Poorly Chosen Secrets from Guessing Attacks,” IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 11(5).pp. 648-656, 
1993. 
[18] J.A. Halderman, B. Waters, and E.W. Felten,  “A Convenient Method 
for Securely Managing Passwords,” 14th Intl Conf on World Wide 
Web (WWW’05), pp. 471-479, 2005. 
[19] C. Herley, P.C. van Oorschot, and A.S. Patrick  “Passwords: If We're 
So Smart, Why Are We Still Using Them?” Financial Cryptography 
and Security, pp. 230-237, 2009. 
[20] M. Josang, S. AlZomai, and S. Suriadi, “Usability and Privacy in 
Identity Management Architectures,” Fifth Australasian Information 
Security Workshop: Privacy Enhancing Technologies (AISW 2007), 
pp. 143-152, 2007. 
[21] M. Just and D. Aspinall, “Personal Choice and Challenge Questions: 
A Security and Usability Assessment,” 5th Symposium on Usable 
Privacy and Security (SOUPS’09), 2009. 
[22] J. Kelsey, B. Schneier, C. Hall, and D. Wagner, “Secure applications 
of low-entropy keys” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1396, pp. 
121–134, 1998. 
[23] D.V. Klein, “Foiling the Cracker: A Survey of, and Improvements to 
Password Security,” 2nd USENIX Unix Security Workshop, pp. 5-14, 
1990. 
[24] D.P. Kormann and A.D. Rubin, “Risks of the Passport single signon 
protocol” 9th International World Wide Web Conference on 
Computer Networks, North-Holland Publishing Co., pp. 51–58. 2000. 
[25] T.M.A. Lomas, L. Gong, J.H. Saltzer, and R.M. Needham, “Reducing 
Risks from Poorly Chosen Keys” 12th ACM Symposium on 
Operating System Principles, ACM Operating Systems Review, 
23(5), pp. 14-18, 1989. 
[26] Microsoft Passport service. http://www.passport.net [retrieved: July 
2011]. 
[27] D. Pham and A. K. Sood, "An Intrusion Tolerance Approach to 
Enhance Single Sign on Server Protection," 2010 Third International 
Conference on Dependability, pp. 98-103, 2010. 
[28] A. 
Rabkin, 
“Personal 
Knowledge 
Questions 
for 
Fallback 
Authentication: security questions in the era of Facebook,” 4th 
symposium on Usable privacy and security (SOUPS 2008), pp. 13-23, 
2008. 
[29] B. Ross, C. Jackson, N. Miyake, D. Boneh, and J.C. Mitchell,  “A 
browser plug-in solution to the unique password problem,” 2005. 
Technical report, Stanford-SecLab-TR-2005-1. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[30] S.E. Schechter, R. Dhamija, A. Ozment, and I. Fischer, “The 
Emperor's New Security Indicators,” IEEE Symposium on Security 
and Privacy, pp. 51-65, 2007. 
[31] B. 
Schneier 
et 
al. 
Password 
Safe 
application. 
http://www.schneier.com/passsafe.html [retrieved: July 2011]. 
[32] S. Singh and A. Cabraal, C. Demosthenous, G. Astbrink, M. Furlong, 
“Password Sharing: Implications for Security Design Based on Social 
Practice,” SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems (CHI ’07), pp. 895–904, 2007.  
[33] A. Sotirov, M. Stevens, J. Applebaum, A. Lenstra, D. Molnar, D.A, 
Osvik, and B. de Weger, “Creating a Rogue CA certificate," 25th 
Chaos 
Communication 
Congress 
in 
Berlin 
2008. 
Also: 
http://www.phreedom.org/research/rogue-ca/ [retrieved: July 2011]. 
[34] S. T. Sun, Y. Boshmaf, K. Hawkey, and K. Beznosov, "A billion 
keys, but few locks: the crisis of web single sign-on,"  2010 
Workshop on New Security Paradigms (NSPW'10), pp. 61-72, 2010. 
[35] P.C. van Oorschot and T. Wan, “TwoStep: An Authentication 
Method Combining Text and Graphical Passwords,” 4th MCETECH 
Conference on eTechnologies, Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing, E-Technologies: Innovation in an Open World, pp. 233-
239, 2009. 
[36] R. Wang, S. Chen, and X. F. Wang, "Signing Me onto Your Accounts 
through Facebook and Google: a Traffic-Guided Security Study of 
Commercially Deployed Single-Sign-On Web  Services," IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 365-379, 2012. 
[37] C.S. Weir, G. Douglas, T. Richardson, and M. Jack, “Usable security: 
User preferences for authentication methods in eBanking and the 
effects of experience,”  Interacting with Computers, 22 (3), pp. 153-
164, 2010. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

