An Approach for Enhancing the Security of Remotely Accessible, Sensitive Services
with On-Site Monitoring
Tuomas Kekkonen
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland
Oulu, Finland
tuomas.kekkonen@vtt.ﬁ
Teemu Kanstr´en
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland
Oulu, Finland
teemu.kanstren@vtt.ﬁ
Abstract—Commonly, the deployment environment of soft-
ware based services cannot be predicted in advance, which
leads to need to have speciﬁc solutions to monitor their
security and reliability during runtime. These services are also
commonly accessed remotely, leading to further complexity in
their monitoring and analysis. The work presented in this
paper proposes a solution for enhanced security monitoring
of such services, providing for increased conﬁdence in the
service security and reliability. The proposed solution uses
near-real time information collected about the service and its
environment during its use. The approach is evaluated using
a case study of monitoring a mobile payment service showing
increased awareness and conﬁdence of service security.
Keywords-network monitoring; security situation awareness;
security management; security policy; network capture
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern software intensive systems are increasingly per-
vasive and used to perform critical and sensitive operations.
In many cases, the service is provided as remotely accessible
through various terminals, such as mobile devices. For
example, a push-mail service can be used to deliver email to
mobile devices from corporate and Internet service provider
networks, or a mobile payment system can be used to
make payments with a mobile device over various vendor
and provider networks. These services deal with sensitive
corporate or personal information, and handle transactions
related to real world assets such as money. These types
of services are commonly deployed in unpredictable envi-
ronments, where their security and reliability are impacted
by varying constraints and evolves over time. The hosting
infrastructure itself varies across deployments and the clients
used to access these services can be varied and mobile.
Typically for such services, their criticality and sensitivity
is recognized and thus a security policy is deﬁned describing
their security aspects and the required countermeasure to
possible security threats. However, extensive and relevant
management of such security policies is an exhaustive and
resource draining task. Tasks such as monitoring of speciﬁc
services and their auditing are important but often difﬁcult to
make cost effective. Especially in multi-domain environment
where services are widely deployed and serving sensitive
data, such as described above, the assurance of the operation
is vital but difﬁcult to maintain. The operating environment
sets limitations to the monitoring and also affects the opera-
tion efﬁciency. However, the affected efﬁciency may not be
perceived without some means of monitoring.
A perceived weakness of security monitoring is also the
inability to respond to different situations during monitoring.
In a complex system the management of countermeasures is
often tedious and handled by the administration. However,
in case of remotely accessed services, it is often possible to
apply an approach where a certain proﬁle of the expected
system behavior is deﬁned and a speciﬁc response is deﬁned
for such observed situations. As a response, for business
purposes it is often enough to deny the service when
problems are observed until the situation has been analyzed
and resolved. If this early response is not applied, later
problems can escalate into more serious issues, complaints
and reclamations.
This paper presents an easily deployable and ﬂexible
monitoring solution for remotely accessed services. It gives
the security management a source of information for the
observed services and the ability to evaluate the capability
of the service prior to transactions. We present our approach
from the viewpoint of generally monitoring different aspects
of software-intensive remotely accessible services, and use
a case study of its application on a mobile payment system
to evaluate the efﬁciency of the approach. The nature of
the mobile payment service as widely spread to multiple
and technically varying locations helps illustrate the different
aspects of the approach.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we discuss the problem domain of monitoring networked
services. In Section III, we present our approach for security
monitoring. In section IV, we describe a case study of ap-
plying our approach on a mobile payment system. In Section
V, we discuss the results and the observed applicability of
our approach. Finally, conclusions end the paper.
II. NETWORK MONITORING
Network monitoring can have different motives and tar-
gets. A common goal is to detect failing or slow compo-
nents to be able to address possible issues promptly and
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

to gain more successful operation. Network monitoring is
also used to enhance security or performance. Typical solu-
tions applied for network security monitoring are intrusion
detection and prevention systems [1]. These solutions are
based on detecting anomalies and tracking signatures on
network trafﬁc and behavior (e.g., [2], [3]). These systems
can support a wide range of analysis and reaction, providing
protection for, and information about, vulnerable states in
a system. They operate best in large scale networks and
can identify great amount of different types of events.
However, due to their operational constraints such as the
vast amounts of information for large-scale network trafﬁc
that needs to be processed, they generally can only focus on
a shallow analysis of e.g., network packet headers. A com-
prehensive analysis would require deep packet inspection
level of analysis, which would require large-scale resources
that would make their applicability non cost-effective. This
enhancement is studied by [4].
The effectiveness of these tools also depends on the
quality of their signature databases and algorithms that are
used to analyze the captured information. These are provided
and updated by the product manufacturer or community.
Thus their relevance depends on the activity of the signature
providers.
The target of intrusion detection and prevention is specif-
ically to provide information about the activity the system
is facing. This information is usually used to block some
trafﬁc in the network and is an administrative task. Security
management on the other hand has the intent to deﬁne
security policies and to know that the system is implemented
according to the speciﬁcation. In a growing and dynamically
changing systems where maintenance and installations are
done regularly the upkeep of the security policy requires
audits on systems to evaluate its conformity with security
policy.
In any case, continuous monitoring of the deﬁned security
policies is needed to gain conﬁdence on the secure and
reliable operation of the deployed services. To be commonly
applicable, such monitoring solutions need to be deﬁned as
addressing the security and reliability requirements while at
the same time to be deﬁned within capabilities of network
capture based feature inspection. The goal should be to
minimize the intrusiveness of the monitoring by making the
implementation of security monitoring possible without re-
quiring additional installation or changes in the environment
where the product is delivered.
Requirements and capabilities for network monitoring are
set by the target network and service. Optimally, we should
be able to monitor as much as possible with a minimal
set of deployed monitoring points. For example, a single
Ethernet based subnet environment could be monitored from
a single accessible location when all data is broadcast to all
parties. When possible, the network architecture can also be
optimized for the monitoring purposes by adding monitoring
to a central location.
A. Network Security Management
A product, which requires to be deployed in varying types
of environments can face various issues such as malicious
users and excessively loaded networks. When deployed to
such unsafe environments, the operation cannot be assured
and the cause for this can be difﬁcult to track down.
Again, security management needs to assure that the system
implements the required security policy. In an optimal case,
this can be assured by providing the service product with
a complete setup including hardware and software that is
conﬁgured according to all the security policy requirements.
Other approaches include providing just the software to be
run on the customer environment, which is often a more
practical scenario, especially for smaller customers. The
choice of deployment strategy impacts also the complex-
ity of governing the service security and reliability in its
environment. A more complete deployment can mitigate the
possible risks but not completely eliminate them, including
the need to manage the infrastructure, its updates and other
security and reliability aspects.
Most network security breaches originate from poorly
deﬁned or implemented security and lack of security man-
agement. According to annual Symantec survey [5], the most
common reason for data breaches in 2009 was the theft or
loss of material. The second highest category of the survey
is named insecure policy, referring to the failure to create
and administer policies to enhance security, including the
user operation.
Technical breaches in software security are caused by
vulnerabilities, which are exposed to the hacker through
their own investigation or through other venues. Effective
security management needs to react to the discovery of these
vulnerabilities before they are widely in use by the hacker
community. The required responses such as software updates
and counter-measure conﬁgurations need to be managed by
the users or the administration.
Overall, we can state that the overall security of a network
is a sum of the combined operation of all participants in the
network. Therefore the behavior of all users in the network
is of interest to the different parties using the network
and should be monitored. For example, the presence of
clients with diverging trafﬁc patterns or outdated software
can be taken as indicators of potential security and reliability
conﬁdence lowering aspects in the overall system. Similarly,
any issues observed on the server side are obvious indicators
for the expected service quality. Our approach adds the
valuable information of the network monitoring to cover the
shortages of typical security management solutions to make
it more interactive.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

III. OUR APPROACH
The goal of the work presented in this paper is to enhance
security awareness for remotely deployed services handling
sensitive information. Here this information is provided not
only for the service administration but also the end user
as a mobile payment application. This includes deﬁning a
security policy for the remotely deployed software that can
be used as a basis to provide assurance of its operation.
Because we cannot assume to have complete knowledge
of the actual deployment environment, the policy needs to
specify generic requirements that reﬂect security awareness
in the context of that speciﬁc service. To cover the security
policy, the available monitoring information in an actual
deployment environment is mapped to each requirement
speciﬁed in security policy. This model is then used as
a basis to monitor the system and to evaluate its security
capabilities in a continuous manner.
Security management usually deﬁnes the monitored policy
by evaluating the risks the system might encounter. In busi-
ness minded information security the risks can be classiﬁed
into assets, vulnerabilities, countermeasures and threats [6].
Here these classes are used to deﬁne an example security
policy and security features based on this risk analysis.
This is to show an example of the process of adapting a
risk analysis into security policy and network monitoring
features. We will present an example of a concrete security
policy for a mobile payment system in Section IV-D.
Our approach consists of the following steps
1) Risk analysis
2) Security policy deﬁnition
3) Infrastructure analysis
4) Monitoring point deﬁnition
5) Continuous monitoring
6) Information synthesis and presentation to user
We focus in this work on the monitoring aspects, but it
is worth noting that we use input from the previous steps
that are assumed to be present. In this work we build on the
work presented in [7]. As a security policy deﬁnition assume
the presence of documents such as Assurance Proﬁles as
described in [8].
Risk analysis evaluates the key points in the system and
determines the value of their successful operation. It also
attempts to list the situations the system might face and
prioritize the risks related to those situations according to
their severity. These risks are covered with certain security
measures deﬁned in a security policy. It speciﬁes, which
features the system components need to implement to lower
the possibility of a risk and to decrease its effect in case of
occurring. What also needs to be deﬁned is the details of
the actual monitored variables used to determine the state
of requirements on the security policy.
After this it is up to the security management to assure that
the policy is followed. To arrange an automated monitoring
on the security awareness inside the system the security
management needs to analyze the infrastructure to identify
the points where a certain security policy should be present.
This analysis is a source of information when the moni-
toring is deployed into the system. Successful deployment
of monitoring with appropriate security policy deﬁnitions
results in providing a continuous view of the security policy
compliance on the system.
A multi-domain monitoring solution has to be ﬂexible in
supporting different types of target network environments.
This includes being able to perform within the limitations
set by the communication protocols and network monitoring
capabilities available. To organize the monitoring informa-
tion, we use a four way model based on security events,
trafﬁc rations, security presence and online testing. The
following subsections describe each of these attributes and
the type of variables they consist of. Variables are deﬁned
in accordance to security policy that is deﬁned according to
the risk analysis. In addition to these aspects, the security
policy needs to deﬁne the expected values for the variables,
including the limits for each value to remain within accepted
range. Practically, choosing the variables is also affected by
what is possible to monitor in the service infrastructure,
which is affected by factors such as infrastructure access
and available monitoring tools.
A. Security events
With the term security events we refer to the input events
generated from security monitoring tools such as intrusion
detection systems. Security situation awareness is a related
term used in research to gather, combine, and understand
constantly updating security state of the overall system.
Methods for security situation awareness are presented, for
example, by [9] and [10], largely based on combining
of observed security events. The security events are the
events that are used as a basis to for the analysis of the
current security situation, providing a basis for assessing
the conﬁdence in the security and reliability status of the
observed system.
For example, an intrusion detection system generates
alerts based on rules, which have different priorities and
cause different types of alarms. Alarm priority can also be
used to provide added value for security situation awareness,
for example, to make a more informed decision on how
to respond. Automated analysis systems such as intrusion
detection systems often cause false alerts and therefore the
response needs to be managed manually.
In this work, the information provided by security events
constitutes of alerts generated by Snort intrusion detection
system and errors reported by the target mobile payment
service. When the analysis of their combination is observed
as revealing a potential issue, the security situation in the
network is considered reduced.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

B. Trafﬁc Ratios
We deﬁne expected network trafﬁc patterns in terms of
network protocol distributions. This describes the expected
ratio of observed trafﬁc in terms of different protocols,
including the encrypted and non-encrypted versions of the
same protocols. Additionally, speciﬁc protocols can also be
classiﬁed as insecure and thus their presence at all can be
considered a feature for analysis. For example, existence of
bittorrent protocols can lead to high trafﬁc loads and de-
creased performance on network, and thus bittorrent can be
classiﬁed as unwanted because of possibly causing decreased
availability.
The ratio of these different types of protocols is compared
to the amount of total observed trafﬁc and to observed ratios
between different types of communication in the network.
These deﬁned ratios are taken as rules for the expected
trafﬁc distribution between the different trafﬁc types. Tradi-
tional methods of anomaly detection or pattern recognition
methods can be applied to enforce these rules. However,
more speciﬁc rules can also be deﬁned to monitor speciﬁc
protocols in a presumably known network, simplifying the
required monitoring process.
C. Security Presence
Security presence is a term we use to refer to a system
having security related features and mechanisms present in
the network. Its security value is in estimating the general
security awareness. Security presence related variables are
those detected from the application variables communicated
over the network protocols.
Practically, security presence is detected by monitoring
identiﬁers in the trafﬁc such as short passwords, clear text
passwords, old software versions and insecure operating
system versions reported in communication messages and
security events. Those are mainly gathered from HTTP
messages and this is implemented by analyzing pcap ﬁles
produced by Wireshark.
D. Online Testing
Online testing refers to active stimulation of running
service elements and observation and analysis of the results.
An online testing tool can test the service with simulated
requests and evaluate the correctness of responses. While it
is possible to create customized tools for these purposes,
we prefer to use existing tools for genericity and cost-
effectiveness purposes. Basic examples of online test tools
available on existing systems, which are also used in this
work are ping and port scanning tools such as nmap.
Online tests provide information of the systems con-
formity with requirements and current capability to serve
requests with tests that simulate actual operation. A false
reply to a request can identify an issue in the authenticity
of the communication partner. Additionally the delay in
responses imply a general failure in service to respond to
requests. These are clear indication of service operation
capabilities.
IV. MOBILE PAYMENT CASE STUDY
In this section, we present a case study of applying
our approach in the domain of mobile payment. Based
on a previously performed risk-analysis and the available
monitoring options for the service infrastructure of a mobile
payment service, we deﬁne a set of relevant security events
and network trafﬁc properties and ratios. From this we deﬁne
what we consider the relevant properties for observing the
security presence of the mobile payment service in our
environment. Further, we show how using a set of existing
network monitoring tools we monitor this security presence
from the service infrastructure and use the information in
the process of the mobile payment.
A. Mobile Payment
Mobile payment services allow customers to make pur-
chases using their mobile devices as means of payment.
A scenario with monitoring goals and end user delivery is
presented on Figure 1 Presented is the typical architecture
for a mobile payment that includes:
• Vendor node that receives information of payment for
the product delivery.
• Cellular operator provides a phone number for the
product and informs the mobile payment operator that
a call has been made.
• Payment network instructs the vendor node to commit
the delivery when cellular operator informs about the
call. Also manages the communications to possible
mobile vendor nodes.
• Client device makes a call to the cellular operator pro-
vided number that is operated by the mobile payment
operator.
Remote deployed service
Unknown environment, 
target of monitoring
Safe service 
infrastructure
Known 
environment
Current 
monitored 
security status for 
the user
Security 
informed 
user
Figure 1.
Architecture of the monitoring approach including the mobile
payment process with the user, mobile payment provider and a product.
Mobile payment systems are not standardized and imple-
mentations in different countries and companies are varied
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[11]. Connection from the mobile payment provider to the
vendor node is implemented by the mobile payment provider
and does not have speciﬁc standards. The different aspects
of the provided service such as the information security
vary and their quality is up to the different operators. Our
target systems operate in Finland, where currently most
implementations use a premium billing method based on
billing the customer through the cellular provider. As mobile
payment systems operate over networks provided by differ-
ent operators and varying communication links to vendor
nodes, it serves as a suitable case to evaluate our approach.
In premium billing the customer places a call to a given
number and uses the phone keypad to provide input to the
service. Product is billed as a normal service number without
any form of identity veriﬁcation, allowing anyone to use the
service with any available phone. This can be a negative
factor enabling the illicit use of the device but also a usability
enhancing feature increasing sales because of the ease of
use. Downsides in this form of billing is the traceability
of transaction and reliability of delivery. Network provider
might charge the customer even if theres a problem with
delivery and the customer needs to place a reclamation to
get refunded. The mobile payment provider and cellular
network provider operate as separate entities without direct
communication, which makes tracing the transactions over
network boundaries difﬁcult. Possible technologies in mobile
payment ﬁeld to address these issues include secured sim-
cards capable of requesting pin code on authorization re-
quest, near ﬁeld communication and credit card involvement
but none of these are standardized for this domain.
There is a need to improve the reliability of the delivery of
products and security of the information exchange. The sys-
tem cannot observe if the product is successfully delivered.
Therefor it is beneﬁcial to have a solution to monitor that the
system is operating in desired conditions. Even if we cannot
completely remove these issues, we need to strive for an
optimal operational environment for the service. We cannot
monitor the mobile payment service parameters directly
due to conﬁdentiality requirements and due to available
access over different networks. For this reason, we aim to
monitor generic network parameters according to monitoring
parameters deﬁned as relevant for the service in the security
policy deﬁnition phase.
For conﬁdentiality reasons, we describe here a simulated
service environment rather than a production system. We
constructed our simulation system using actual production
systems as input to deﬁne a realistic environment for our
evaluation. This also included deﬁning a security policy
and test scenarios to address real situations on network
operation and typically appearing problems according to
input gathered from a mobile payment operator.
To illustrate how the provided monitoring information
could be utilized by the service end user, we developed a
mobile phone application to display the observed payment
service security status to the user. This application is de-
scribed in Section IV-E.
Considering our general targeted domain of remotely
accessed services being hosted over several partners infras-
tructure, we see mobile payment as a good example. It
needs to have parts installed in every vendor that provides
possibility for the payment to be done with a mobile phone.
Because of this, the environment for those services is varying
and assuring its operation through monitoring is beneﬁcial.
B. Environment
Our test environment was constructed with a set of virtual
machines, requiring some speciﬁc monitoring approaches.
To optimize our ability to capture monitoring information,
the network in a virtual environment can operate in a way
where all the virtual hosts receive all the trafﬁc. This is
possible because the typical network latencies and transmis-
sion capabilities are not limited in a way they are in actual
networks. Ease of setup and maintenance also helped us in
our experiments.
The virtual network environment consisted of three hosts.
One host was running the target service and had been set
up as described below on Table I. Second was running
monitoring software. All the tools required for monitoring
were installed on this host and run on intervals. Third host
was running simulation software, responsible for generating
trafﬁc and different situations on the network. These situa-
tions are described in Table II.
The tests were run on two different systems. Both were
put under test with two different usage scenarios. With this
setup the capability of the measuring system for providing
useful information was evaluated. The ﬁrst system was to
demonstrate a typical dated system, which cannot perform
according to todays security requirements. The second sys-
tem was an up to date system with operating system less
vulnerable to security attacks and up to date software. The
setups of both systems are described in Table I. The setups
and simulations were set so that not only mobile payment
related features but general security features that can affect
performance in the target could be detected. This is why
HTTP server and browser types are relevant.
C. Simulation Scenarios
Both systems were put under test with two types of
simulation. This results in four different scenarios where
reaction of the two systems can be observed. The scenarios
are described on Table II.
Network load and behavior was simulated using ping
ﬂooding and simulated HTTP requests. This is used to
cause computers to suffer from the increased network and
therefor processing load. HTTP requests were made with the
Curl application and scripted to be performed in intervals.
Slowloris is a HTTP ﬂooding tool that attempts to create a
denial of service situation by sending partial HTTP requests
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Table I
DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEMS USED IN TEST RUNS.
Type
Feature
State
Less secure
Operating system
Windows XP
Operating system version
SP2 retail
Apache version
2.2.10
Browser type
Internet Explorer
Browser version
6
Other services
2
Highly secure
Operating system
Linux
Operating system version
Kernel 2.6.32-26
Apache version
2.2.16
Browser type
Mozilla Firefox
Browser version
3.6.8
Other services
0
Table II
DESCRIPTION OF USAGE SIMULATION DURING TEST RUNS.
Load level
Description
Method
Value
Low load
Network load
ping ﬂood
none
System load
cpuburn
none
HTTP load
Timed requests
normal
HTTP vulnerability
Slowloris
none
Payments
Scripted
few
Logins
scripted ssh logins
few
Behavior
HTTP passwords
none
High load
Network load
ping ﬂood
full
System load
cpuburn
full
HTTP load
Timed requests
10/second
HTTP vulnerability
Slowloris
run
Payments
Scripted
10/second
Logins
scripted ssh logins
1/second
Behavior
HTTP passwords
few
to keep multiple sockets to the server open. It was used to
exploit the old version of apache HTTP server.
The goal of the scenarios was to evaluate the ability of
the monitoring system to prevent the billing of any excess
payment from the customer. This can be handled either
at the service provider end or at the customer end. The
service provider can refuse the service request based on
observed issues in the service infrastructure when a request
is received. At the client end the terminal can produce a
warning to the user about potential security and reliability
issues observed in the mobile payment service that is being
accessed, when this information is available.
Payment requests are included in the simulation scenarios.
Their success rate is the measure of successful operation of
the mobile payment system. The success rate of providing
useful security status information to the monitoring system
client (service provider or customer) in terms of correctly
identifying the simulated security problem scenarios is the
measure of our approach in evaluation. Payments were
simulated with tool developed by a mobile payment service
provider.
D. Monitoring
As described before, our solution is mainly targeted as an
automated and easily deployed security policy monitoring
system. For our case study we deﬁned a security policy to
see different levels of implemented security in the set of
chosen scenarios. The policy deﬁnes a feature and a risk
type it is covering. Some features target the host running
the service and some measure the relevant properties of the
overall network environment. The target system was desired
to comply with features speciﬁed on Table III. In this table
examples of monitoring sources used are also described.
Single requirement is usually covered with multiple sources.
Table III
DEFINED SECURITY POLICY. DESCRIBES THE SECURITY
REQUIREMENTS ORDERED BY THE RISK TYPES THEY ARE COVERING.
ONE MONITORING SOURCE IS ALSO DESCRIBED FOR EACH.
Deﬁnition
Source
Asset
Hardware operates properly.
Produces trafﬁc
Stays connected to network.
Ping response time
Responds quickly to requests.
Service response time
Service is not under heavy load.
No service errors
Vulnerability
Follows generally secure behavior.
Vulnerability scan
Does not have extra ports open.
Port scan
Trafﬁc proﬁle.
Ratio of HTTP
Does not send clear text passwords.
HTTP passwords
Does not use short passwords.
HTTP auth
Uses latest software versions.
HTTP Server ﬁeld
Uses secure operating system.
TCP ﬁngerprint
Countermeasure
Uses ﬁrewall.
Port scan
Encryption is used.
HTTPS messages
Uses secure browser.
HTTP agent ﬁeld
Monitor system does not fail.
New monitor data
Threat
Non familiar users on network.
Failed SSH logins
Service is not abused.
IDS alerts
Host is not under attack.
IDS alerts
This model was constructed to detect issues in implemen-
tation of the security policy and the relevant security fea-
tures. This is based on identifying security related features
through monitoring the messaging in the on-site network.
The monitored values were combined to derive a binary
statement of each deﬁned security feature. These statements
construct the model for the overall security. Variables from
network trafﬁc were chosen to provide needed information
to cover the points deﬁned in security policy. The variable
types are described on Section III.
E. Deployment
A mobile application was developed to list available
mobile payment services and to display their current security
level. This was to demonstrate the usability of the informa-
tion also for the service end user. Information was delivered
through a socket connection from the monitoring network
to a mobile application. The information was visible to the
user at any time as a status bar indicating the current level
of security in terms of the number of features reported as
ok. Then it is up to the users decision to determine when
the security level is acceptable. In a more reﬁned version
the service provider can decide how a certain security level
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

affects the transaction and the detailed security information
can be hidden from the end user if that is desired.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The goal of our case study was to evaluate the effective-
ness of the applied approach in detecting any reliability and
security issues in the current security implementation level
and the usage of the network. Gained beneﬁt would have
been shown as better success rate on service. This would
result in reduction of failed attempts due to early rejection
of requests, which is desired for the transaction process.
Running the tests shows that the pre deﬁned rules are
easily detected in the deployed systems and the security
features are correctly mapped. Results of each scenario is
listed on Table IV. This speciﬁc set of scenarios also shows
that the information is usable in determining the reliability of
the service delivery. The less secure system setting is clearly
vulnerable. This is mainly based on the research on outdated
software being less secure and effect of security awareness
of users in overall security. Outdated Windows system and
Apache server alone constitute vast amount of vulnerabili-
ties. This is caused by the fact that they are highly popular
and therefor highly exploited. Resulted product delivery
effect was however only observed as slight increased delay.
The best scoring scenario is the high security setup with low
load. On that scenario the monitoring detects the situation
to be less loaded and security setup to be proper. This is
what was intended to be discovered with the monitoring.
A more detailed simulation scenario could have exploited
the target systems more and affected the operation more
dramatically. This was not intended but a general simulation
scenario was more useful to illustrate the capabilities to
detect general security situation, not a scenario where the
system is under carefully planned attack.
With this monitoring two aspects of the network security
are known. The intrusion detection system style monitoring
provides information about the current usage the target
system is facing. Here this is combined with knowledge of
the level of security implemented in the target system. This
information is used to evaluate the capability of the system
under different circumstances since both details are known.
Then the service requests can be rejected when there is a
bigger change of information leakage or failed transaction.
The viewpoint here is to observe the monitoring as the
service provider. Their goal is not to let consumers make
requests when there is a high possibility that the request will
fail or information will get captured. They can deﬁne rules
to remain in a certain level of conﬁdence in the successful
delivery. They do not need to require all the requirements
to be fulﬁlled but some might complement others. For
illustration in this work the service provider sets their rules
as deﬁned here:
• Hardware must not fail.
• Must respond on network.
Table IV
RESULTS FROM THE FOUR SCENARIOS. 1. LOW SECURITY, HIGH LOAD
2. HIGH SECURITY, HIGH LOAD 3. LOW SECURITY LOW LOAD 4. HIGH
SECURITY LOW LOAD
Feature
1
2
3
4
Hardware operates properly.
OK
OK
OK
OK
Stays connected to network.
OK
OK
OK
OK
Does not have extra ports open.
FAIL
OK
FAIL
OK
Uses ﬁrewall.
FAIL
OK
FAIL
OK
Responds quickly to requests.
FAIL
FAIL
OK
OK
Trafﬁc proﬁle.
FAIL
OK
OK
OK
Follows generally secure behavior.
FAIL
FAIL
OK
OK
Encryption is used.
FAIL
OK
OK
OK
Does not send clear text passwords.
FAIL
FAIL
OK
OK
Does not use short passwords.
FAIL
OK
OK
OK
Uses latest software versions.
FAIL
OK
FAIL
OK
Uses secure operating system.
FAIL
OK
FAIL
OK
Uses secure browser.
FAIL
OK
FAIL
OK
Service is not abused.
FAIL
FAIL
OK
OK
Host is not under attack.
OK
OK
OK
OK
Service is not heavy load.
FAIL
FAIL
OK
OK
Non familiar users on network.
FAIL
FAIL
OK
OK
Monitor system does not fail.
OK
OK
OK
OK
• If service is under load software needs to be up to date.
• If service is abused ﬁrewall has to be used.
With these rules the service provider would refuse re-
quests on scenario 1. When put under loaded situation the
system evaluated as a high security system would still allow
requests to be made according to the rules speciﬁed. The
low security system would reach a state of refusing requests
when facing the load. The efﬁciency to reject requests
in early stage based on the assumption that the request
would fail later anyway is the key to provide enhanced
operability for the system in business sense. Without this
type of information, each failed transaction has to be dealt
individually to refund the customer.
Various viewpoints can be taken on the application of
the monitoring information we provide. From the service
provider viewpoint it may be bad to show detailed security
level information to the user. Instead it may be better to just
refuse service and notify the administration to address any
observed issues. However in some cases the user can make
better use of the information such as when reading email
using a publicly accessible network. Simple level of security
was presented to the user in our case as illustrated on Figure
1. In this case, the more detailed information can be provided
to let the user make a more informed decision. This is
ultimately a business decision based on different properties
such as the operating environment and the business domain.
Depending on the interests of the company in question
and the liability responsibilities the service provider may or
not have interests in securing the service or identifying the
customer. In an environment where the legislation is highly
consumer protective the provider needs to have mechanisms
for traceability and strengthened security.
In implementing any monitoring solution there is also
always the trade-off between implementing speciﬁc moni-
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

toring for a chosen service and system and in implement-
ing more generic monitoring approaches. Here we apply
a generic monitoring approach that aims to make use of
generic network parameters, although the same approach
could also be used to make use of more service speciﬁc
parameters. However, in many cases there are factors such
as legislation that prevent the use of speciﬁc service informa-
tion such as customer identiﬁers or email message identiﬁers
for any such purposes and the generic approach is the best
suited one. The generic approach is also easier to reuse
across different systems. On the other hand, we recognize the
possibility of more speciﬁc monitoring approach to provide
more service speciﬁc information. Here our environment and
domain has limited our access to service speciﬁc information
and thus we apply a more generic approach. In other cases,
an analysis of different possibilities is needed to identify the
best suitable approach in this regard.
The used infrastructure was based on virtualized network,
which slightly affects the credibility of the results. The
virtual network has greatly reduced latencies and higher
transfer rate capabilities than physically built network. How-
ever if the monitoring was deployed on a physically imple-
mented network, the results could actually be more accurate.
Then the effect of the simulations would be more easily
observable because of the reduction in performance. The
latencies measured from the network could be affected by
load more easily since the physical network performs worse
than virtual one. Switching into physical network would
cause the need of monitoring to be deployed in a way where
the network infrastructure would allow the monitoring to see
all the trafﬁc in the network.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a monitoring approach for
providing increased conﬁdence in the security and reliability
of remotely accessed services. While it is not a silver bullet,
it helps in providing increased conﬁdence in the service
operation and to mitigate damage from observed issues. The
presented approach is based on six speciﬁc steps starting
from risk analysis and ending in information synthesis and
presentation, and makes use of four types of monitoring
information. The application of the approach in a mobile
payment case study was used to illustrate the approach in
practice.
Results of our case study show a beneﬁt in maintaining
a security situation aware monitoring and using it when
determining the current capability of the service. The used
simulation scenarios can be more reﬁned to show a higher
or lower advantage and the monitored security policy can
be further developed. While our use of a virtualized envi-
ronment is slightly different from a typical situation in the
mobile payment domain, it can also be taken to provide
insights into the increasingly virtualized domain of services
and cloud computing of today.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Sabahi and A. Movaghar, “Intrusion detection: A survey,”
in 3rd International Conference on Systems and Networks
Communications, 2008. ICSNC ’08., oct. 2008, pp. 23 –26.
[2] G. Shen, D. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Anomaly detection based
on aggregated network behavior metrics,” in International
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and
Mobile Computing, 2007. WiCom 2007., Sept. 2007, pp. 2210
–2213.
[3] H. A. Nguyen, T. Tam Van Nguyen, D. I. Kim, and D. Choi,
“Network trafﬁc anomalies detection and identiﬁcation with
ﬂow monitoring,” in 5th International Conference on Wireless
and Optical Communications Networks, 2008. WOCN ’08.,
May 2008, pp. 1 –5.
[4] H. Salehi, H. Shirazi, and R. Moghadam, “Increasing overall
network security by integrating signature-based nids with
packet ﬁltering ﬁrewall,” in International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, April 2009, pp. 357 –362.
[5] M. Fossi, D. Turner, E. Johnson, T. Mack, T. Adams, J. Black-
bird, S. Entwisle, B. Graveland, D. McKinney, J. Mulcahy,
and C. Wueest, “Symantec Global Internet Security Threat
Report–Trends for 2009,” Technical Report XIV, Symantec
Corporation, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[6] A. Herzog, N. Shahmehri, and C. Duma, “An Ontology of
Information Security,” International Journal of Information
Security and Privacy, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 1–23, 2007.
[7] E. Bulut, D. Khadraoui, and B. Marquet, “Multi-agent based
security assurance monitoring system for telecommunication
infrastructures,” in Communication, Network and Information
Security, July 2007, pp. 1 –5.
[8] B. Marquet, S. Dubus, and C. Blad, “Security assurance
proﬁle for large and heterogeneous telecom and it infrastruc-
tures,” in The 7th International Symposium on Risk Manage-
ment and Cyber-Informatics: RMCI 2010, July 2010, pp. 1
–5.
[9] Z. Yong, T. Xiaobin, and X. Hongsheng, “A novel approach
to network security situation awareness based on multi-
perspective analysis,” in International Conference on Com-
putational Intelligence and Security, 2007, 15-19 2007, pp.
768 –772.
[10] F. Lan, W. Chunlei, and M. Guoqing, “A framework for
network security situation awareness based on knowledge
discovery,” in 2nd International Conference on Computer
Engineering and Technology (ICCET), 2010, vol. 1, 16-18
2010, pp. V1–226 –V1–231.
[11] S. Mohammadi and H. Jahanshahi, “A study of major mobile
payment systems’ functionality in europe,” in 11th Interna-
tional Conference on Computer and Information Technology,
2008. ICCIT 2008., dec. 2008, pp. 605 –610.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

