Risk-based Dynamic Access Control for a Highly Scalable Cloud Federation 
Daniel Ricardo dos Santos, Carla Merkle Westphall, Carlos Becker Westphall 
Networks and Management Laboratory 
Federal University of Santa Catarina 
Florianópolis, Brazil 
{danielrs, carlamw, westphal}@inf.ufsc.br 
 
Abstract— Cloud Computing is already a successful paradigm 
for distributed computing and is still growing in popularity. 
However, many problems still linger in the application of this 
model and some new ideas are emerging to help leverage its 
features even further. One of these ideas is the cloud 
federation, which is a way of aggregating different clouds to 
enable the sharing of resources and increase scalability and 
availability. One of the great challenges in the deployment of 
cloud federations is Identity and Access Management. This 
issue is usually solved by the creation of identity federations, 
but this approach is not optimal. In this paper, we propose an 
access control system for a highly scalable cloud federation.  
The presented system is dynamic and risk-based, allowing the 
use of cloud federations without the need of identity 
federations. 
We 
also 
present 
results 
of 
a 
prototype 
implementation and show that it is scalable and flexible enough 
to meet the requirements of this highly dynamic and 
heterogeneous environment. 
Keywords- cloud computing; access control; risk; cloud 
federation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing is a model for enabling on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of computing resources [1]. 
It is widely adopted and provides advantages for customers 
and service providers. 
As cloud computing grows in popularity, new ideas and 
models are developed to exploit even further its full capacity, 
increasing efficiency and scalability. One of these ideas is 
the deployment of cloud federations [2, 3]. A cloud 
federation is an association among different Cloud Service 
Providers (CSPs) with the goal of sharing data and resources 
[4].  
However, to make such a scenario feasible it is necessary 
to develop authentication and authorization models for 
largely 
distributed, 
dynamic 
and 
heterogeneous 
environments. 
This problem is usually treated by the deployment of 
identity federations. An identity federation is a model of 
identity management where identity providers and service 
providers share users’ identities inside a circle of trust [32]. 
This solution, nevertheless, is not optimal, since identity 
federations present problems such as the necessity of 
attribute and trust agreements, interoperability issues and, in 
practice, show limited scalability [5]. This paper shows that 
it is possible to provide authorization in cloud federations 
without the need for an identity federation. 
The difference between cloud federations and identity 
federations is that cloud federations are built to share 
resources and identity federations are built to share users and 
identity information.    
In this paper, we propose to use a risk-based dynamic 
access control to enable authorization in a cloud federation 
without the necessity, but allowing the possibility, of using 
identity federations. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the related work; Section III discusses the concept 
of cloud federations; Section IV analyses dynamic access 
control; Section V presents our proposal; Section VI shows 
some results and Section VII is the conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are two main kinds of work which are related to 
this paper: those which study cloud federations and 
authorization in these scenarios and those which propose 
dynamic access control models. 
CLEVER Clouds [6, 7, 8] is a “horizontal federation” 
model, built on top of a component called Cross Cloud 
Federation Manager (CCFM), responsible for the discovery 
of clouds in the federation, finding the best match for 
resource requests and handling authentication. Based on this 
architecture, there is the proposal of using federated identity 
management with a third party identity provider to handle 
authentication and authorization [9]. 
The Contrail project [10] is a framework for the 
construction of cloud federations. It is built upon a set of 
core components: the Virtual Execution Platform (VEP), the 
XtreemFS and the Cloud Federation. Contrail is a big project 
funded by the European Union and is under active 
development. It also uses federated identity management and 
provides support for eXtensible Access Control Markup 
Language (XACML) authorization and the Usage Control 
(UCON) access control model. 
A basic blueprint for the Intercloud is presented in [11] 
and [12]. In those papers the aggregate of clouds is 
envisioned based on  an architecture comprised of an 
Intercloud Root, responsible for naming and trust; Intercloud 
Gateways, responsible for enabling communication between 
protocols and standards; and finally the clouds. These papers 
propose that trust be managed by the Intercloud Root, in a 
configuration that is similar to an identity federation. 
Some challenges for access control in highly distributed 
environments are presented in [13], which compares the 
Attribute-based Access Control (ABAC), UCON and Risk-
adaptive Access Control (RAdAC) models. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The idea of using risk-based access control in cloud 
computing is presented in [14], where the authors claim this 
model is adequate to solve the problems presented by multi-
tenancy and also that a dynamic environment requires a 
dynamic access control model. The paper presents a scenario 
where RAdAC is used to enforce access control among the 
tenants of a cloud, considering the risks of illegal access to 
tenants' data by other tenants or by administrators. The 
paper, however, shows only an overview of the proposal and 
lacks validation.   
Arias et al. [15] proposed a set of metrics, organized in a 
taxonomy, to be used in the establishment of identity 
federations in the cloud and to handle access requests. The 
authors claim that the federated identity management model 
is hindered by the underlying trust models that must be pre-
established, and that the use of risk metrics can mitigate this 
problem. 
The main difference between our approach and the 
related work is the use of a risk-based access control model 
to enable the deployment of cloud federations without the 
need for identity federations. This proposal is detailed in 
Section V, and a deeper comparison to the related work can 
be found in the conclusions. 
III. 
CLOUD FEDERATIONS 
The cloud computing paradigm has reached a relative 
success due to its well-known advantages in scalability and 
cost reduction, but to enable its full potential we must step 
forward towards cloud federations [16].  
As seen in Section II, there are several proposals of 
architectures for cloud federations in the literature, but they 
all share a common goal of aggregating different clouds 
through standard protocols, enabling their interaction and the 
sharing of resources available in each one. Cloud federation 
comprises services from different providers aggregated in a 
single pool supporting resource migration, resource 
redundancy and combination of complementary resources or 
services [4].  
The main benefits of this new approach are an increase in 
scalability, availability and interoperability. It also helps in 
reducing costs of single providers, since the workload may 
be shared among the members of the federation.  
Thinking even further, there are already proposals for an 
Intercloud, which is a global aggregate of clouds, such as the 
Internet is a global aggregate of networks [11, 17]. 
The establishment 
of cloud 
federations presents 
challenges such as the definition of standard protocols and 
the migration of virtual resources among diverse providers, 
but the focus of this work is in the security aspects of the 
federations, especially Identity and Access Management. 
Cloud 
security 
is 
a 
challenge, 
since providing 
availability, integrity and confidentiality for a huge number 
of users and resources in an Internet-accessible environment 
is not easy. Cloud federations tend to increase concerns 
because of the increase in the number of users and resources, 
the use of different protocols and the exchange of sensitive 
data among providers. Issues such as governance, auditing 
and risk management are being actively researched for 
clouds [18]; these studies must be extended to understand the 
influences of a cloud federation. 
Compliance to regulations and the definition and 
fulfillment of Security Service Level Agreements (SecSLAs) 
are also indispensable. 
One of the most important issues in the establishment and 
running of a cloud federation is Identity and Access 
Management (IAM) [28].  
When in a single cloud, it is possible to use traditional 
IAM procedures and authorization models to handle access 
control because all of the users and resources are within the 
same security domain. When resources and subjects are 
scaled to a federation of clouds, nevertheless, there is the 
concern with the fact that subjects may come from a different 
security domain than the resource to which they are 
requesting access.  
To implement authorization using models such as Role-
Based Access Control (RBAC) or Attribute-Based Access 
Control (ABAC), the cloud must use information provided 
by a system about a user. This information may be, for 
instance, the user's identity or attributes of this identity, such 
as name, organizational role and date of birth. 
For a cloud to trust the identity or attribute information of 
a user that comes from another cloud, both clouds must share 
some agreement of trust. That is why this process is 
commonly mediated by an identity federation. With 
Federated Identity Management (FIM), every participant of 
the federation is expected to agree that the information 
received by another participant is correct, in what is called a 
Circle of Trust (CoT). 
A problem with this approach is the fact that this 
agreement requires previous negotiation, which may be an 
extensive process and hinder dynamic collaboration. 
Dynamic collaboration is achieved when entities which have 
a need to collaborate can instantly form a federation, without 
the need for a previous trust agreement. 
Another problem faced by identity federations is the 
extensive number of protocols and standards, which actually 
reduces interoperability. Federations tend to get bigger and 
bigger and users may participate in different federations. All 
of those facts combined lead to, in practice, a limited 
scalability 
of 
identity 
federations, 
reducing 
their 
effectiveness in real world. 
But even with the formation of identity federations and 
the possibility of using ABAC, there are challenges to be 
considered. The static policies which are predefined to be 
used in traditional access control models cannot comprehend 
every possible access situation, because in the cloud this is 
an ever changing process, with users and resources being 
deployed and deleted all the time. Static models, thus, lack 
the flexibility necessary to support exceptional situations, 
which are common in military and medical applications, 
among others [19] and important for collaboration and 
information sharing [20]. Examples of these exceptional 
access requests are given in the next section and are 
abundant in the literature.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

IV. 
DYNAMIC ACCESS CONTROL 
Identity and access management encompasses several 
processes related to the identification, authentication, 
authorization and accountability of users in computer 
systems [21]. Authorization or access control is the process 
through which a system guarantees that access requests are 
validated using well-established rules. These rules are known 
as policies and the way through which the policies are 
enforced together with the mechanisms used in this 
enforcement is known as an access control model. 
Classical access control models are known to present 
problems in highly distributed and dynamic environments 
[13], especially scalability and flexibility limitations and the 
use of static policies [14]. Role-based models, for instance, 
lack granularity of control, because roles share their 
permissions with every user they are attributed to.  
To enable more flexible access control decisions, which 
reflect current needs for information sharing and allow for a 
secure handling of exceptional requests, dynamic access 
control models were developed [22, 26, 29, 33].  
In contrast with classical models, dynamic access control 
has the characteristic of using more than predefined policies 
to compute access decisions. These models are based on 
dynamic characteristics, which are assessed in “real time” as 
the subject requests access to a resource. Characteristics such 
as trust, context, history and risk are often used to reach 
decisions, and exactly which characteristics to use and how 
to measure them is discussed in several works [23, 24, 25, 
26]. 
Risk-based access control models are often used as a 
“break-the-glass” mechanism, allowing for exceptional 
access requests to be handled by the system more effectively 
than simply granting full access [13, 30].  
Exceptional requests and special access are sometimes 
necessary in medical and military applications, among 
others. A well-known example is in a healthcare facility 
where only doctors have access to patients’ histories, but in 
the case of an emergency, a nurse may need to access this 
information to save a patient’s life. If this kind of situation 
was not predicted in any policy, either the nurse won’t be 
able to perform his/her duty or the nurse may be given a 
doctor’s access, which may grant a broader access than the 
necessary in this case, allowing misuse. In either case, it 
represents a greater risk to the system than if a dynamic 
access control system were used and the access control needs 
were evaluated per request. 
Granting special access in exceptional cases usually 
involves some form of monitoring by the system. It may be 
in the form of: obligations, which are post-conditions that a 
user must fulfill in order to keep his or her access right [13]; 
a reputation system, which logs users' actions and assigns 
rewards and penalties to them [26]; or a market system, in 
which users have a limited amount of points that may be 
used to “buy” exceptional accesses [27].  
Supporting this kind of access control involves an 
effective logging system for posterior audit and incident 
response. 
There are several different approaches to risk-based 
access control, but they all share some common features. Fig. 
1 presents an overview of a risk-based access control model. 
 
Figure 1. Risk-based access control overview 
 
The figure is based on common points found in diverse 
models, and the main elements present are the subject, the 
resource and the risk estimation engine. 
The subject tries to access a resource by issuing an access 
request, which is then processed by a risk estimation engine 
that uses all the information it deems necessary to come to a 
decision. Usually there is a risk threshold defined by the 
system administrators, and if the risk is lower than this 
threshold, access is granted. Other variations measure risk 
versus benefit of an access, and decide based on which one is 
greater [31]. 
V. 
PROPOSAL 
In this paper, we propose that it is possible to provide a 
way to establish cloud federations without the need for 
identity federations, by using risk-based access control and 
relying on the authentication provided by each cloud. This 
can increase the scalability of this model and handle 
exceptional requests. 
A. Cloud Federations 
      Fig. 2 presents an overview of the cloud federation 
architecture that we are considering. This architecture is 
based on the common points found in the main federation 
projects currently being developed, some of which were 
described in Section II. 
The main application scenarios for such federations are 
medical, military and scientific collaborations, which require 
large storage and processing capabilities, as well as efficient 
information sharing. In this architecture we have the 
following components: 
CloudProvider: this is the Cloud Service Provider (CSP) 
itself, who provides the infrastructure over which the virtual 
resources are allocated (they are represented by the clouds in 
the figure); 
CloudManager: 
responsible 
for 
attaching 
a 
CloudProvider to the federation. It is composed of several 
services that deal with users, resources, policies, service-
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

level agreements, security and the CloudProvider. It is 
modular so that it can be attached to different cloud 
management software just by changing one of its services. 
FederationManager: responsible for coordinating the 
federation. It acts as a naming service and is also 
responsible for message passing. 
 
Figure 2. Overview of the federation 
B. Access Control 
As shown in Fig. 2, some of the participating clouds may 
form identity federations among themselves. 
Under the point of view of a user there are two types of 
clouds in this architecture: a home cloud (the user’s original 
CSP) and foreign clouds (the other clouds in the federation). 
Users can deploy and access resources in both types of 
cloud, but access control behaves differently for each case. 
When users deploy a resource in their home cloud they 
may choose if it will be available for users of foreign clouds. 
In any case the user must upload an XACML policy file 
together with the resource, which will be used for ABAC. 
Users may also deploy resources in a foreign cloud and it 
will automatically be available to every user of the 
federation. Finally, users may access resources in their home 
cloud or shared resources in foreign clouds.  
When a user tries to access a resource in their home 
cloud, this request is handled by a classical ABAC model. 
Based on user attributes and XACML policies the system 
grants or denies the requested access. 
When a user tries to access a resource in a foreign cloud,    
the system first verifies if both clouds are in an identity 
federation, in which case the access will also be handled by 
ABAC, but if there is not an identity federation between 
them, the “break-the-glass” mechanism is activated and the 
risk-based access control Policy Decision Point (PDP) is 
called. 
The PDP is located in the cloud handling the access 
request (foreign to the requester) and the metrics and 
parameters of risk estimation are defined by the 
administrators of this cloud and the users who own the 
resources.  
These metrics are informed in an eXtensible Markup 
Language (XML) file, containing definitions of risk metrics 
and how to measure and aggregate them, as well as a 
threshold level for granting access to the resource and 
possible obligations that users will have to follow. This file 
is known as a risk policy.  
Each cloud provider must provide a set of basic metrics 
with their quantification rules. Those will be used to create a 
baseline risk policy for the provider. This guarantees that a 
cloud provider is able to maintain their minimal security 
requirements. 
Each resource has its own risk policy, which must respect 
what is defined in the baseline policy, but may be extended 
to become more or less restrictive as the user desires. The 
XML file of the policy must be uploaded by users when they 
choose to deploy a shared resource. The system does not 
generate risk policies on the fly and all the risk policies must 
follow a predefined XML schema, so that different clouds 
can communicate. 
If a user chooses to define a risk metric that is not 
available in the server, he/she must provide a way for the 
CSP to quantify this risk. This is done by defining a Web 
Service that will be called by the PDP upon the evaluation of 
the access request. The PDP will forward the access request 
to the Web Service, which will have to parse it, process it 
and return a numeric value representing the associated risk 
for the metric being evaluated.  
To handle the access request for a given resource all of 
the metrics are valued, based on the rules defined by the CSP 
and the Web Services defined by the user. The chosen 
aggregation engine is used to reach a final risk value. This 
value is then compared to the defined threshold and, if lower, 
the subject is given special access.  
Before granting access, however, the policy is analyzed 
in search of obligations that were defined by the user. Those 
obligations are stored in a system monitor, which will watch 
and log every user action once the access is granted. 
Fig. 3 shows an example of a risk policy file. In this 
example a metric for transport layer encryption will be 
quantified, along with other metrics. They will be aggregated 
based on a maximum value rule. If the final value is lower 
than 10, access will be granted. 
 
Figure 3. XML risk policy example 
 
Fig. 4 presents a step-by-step flow of the handling of an 
access request in a foreign cloud. In this figure, step 1 is the 
issuing of an access request from a user to a foreign shared 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

resource (since resources that are not shared are not visible 
to foreign users). The Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) 
receives this request and forwards it to a PDP (step 2). The 
PDP verifies if the user's home cloud and the foreign cloud 
participate in the same identity federation. If they do, then 
the PDP requests the XACML policies applicable to the 
resource (step 3a), the Policy Access Point (PAP) responds 
to this request (step 4a), and the PDP retrieves the necessary 
attributes from the Policy Information Point (PIP) in steps 
5a and 6a. 
 
Figure 4. Access control step-by-step 
 
Steps 3a to 6a represent a classical XACML access 
control decision. However, if the user's home cloud and the 
foreign cloud are not participants of the same identity 
federation, the PDP will forward the access request to a risk 
engine (step 3b). This risk engine will then parse the XML 
risk definition file associated with the resource and quantify 
the metrics defined. If the quantification rules are local, the 
predefined functions are called, if any of the rules are 
defined in a web service, then it is invoked, having the 
access request as a parameter (step 4b). The risk 
quantification web service performs its role and returns a 
risk value. After all of the metrics are valued, the risk engine 
applies an aggregation rule, which is always local. The 
aggregated risk is then returned to the PDP, which uses this 
value to decide upon the granting of the access request, once 
again based on what is defined in the XML file. After 
reaching a decision, the PDP returns it to the PEP, which 
applies the necessary obligations.  
The dynamic nature of access control is present in the 
system because the access decision may vary according to 
contextual information evaluated by the metrics. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
To validate our proposal and measure some performance 
characteristics we implemented the key parts of the 
federation system and the whole access control system. 
The implementation used the Python programming 
language, the zeromq library to handle message passing, 
MySQL for persistence, the ndg-xacml library for XACML 
evaluations and the web.py framework for the web services. 
The infrastructure over which the federation was 
deployed was composed of two OpenNebula clouds running 
on a laptop with a 2,53GHz Core i5 processor and 4GB of 
RAM. All of the experiments were repeated 50 times to 
obtain the averages and all of the times shown here refer 
only to the execution of the access control decision function, 
ignoring message passing between the clouds. Table I shows 
four different cases of access request. Case A represents 10 
requests handled by local XACML only; case B represents a 
risk decision that involves 10 risk quantification rules 
performed locally; case C uses 5 local rules and 5 external 
(web service) rules; and case D represents a risk policy with 
10 external risk quantification rules.    
TABLE I.  
 COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT ACCESS REQUEST CASES 
 
min. (ms)  
max. (ms) 
average (ms) 
A 
1.057 
9.372 
1.46 
B 
1.824 
15.564 
4.574 
C 
1556.182 
2813.56 
1726.71 
D 
3247.563 
10350.5 
4220.6 
 
 
Figure 5. Performance with a varying number of external metrics 
 
It is possible to see that the use of local risk 
quantification 
rules 
has 
no 
significant 
impact 
on 
performance, while the use of web services does affect 
performance, as expected, because of the HTTP invocations 
that must be performed for each metric. 
Fig. 5 shows the growth in time spent reaching an access 
decision as we increase the number of metrics which call 
web services in a risk policy file. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a risk-based dynamic access 
control system to enable cloud federations without the need, 
but allowing the possibility, of identity federations. By 
eliminating the need for identity federations our proposal 
eases the use of cloud federations, since it doesn't depend on 
the establishment of  agreements and circles of trust, also 
enhancing scalability, by avoiding the formation of  “identity 
islands” [5]. 
The main contributions of this paper are the definition of 
a risk-based access control system for cloud federations and 
the proposed use of risk policies in the form of XML files to 
allow the use of different risk metrics and quantification 
methods that are not necessarily predefined. 
The proposal is flexible enough to handle the needs of a 
cloud federation and the performance evaluations indicate 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

that it is scalable and that the risk estimation process is not a 
big hindrance in the process, especially if the quantification 
is performed locally. 
In comparison to the related work we first have to clarify 
that we have not implemented a whole cloud federation 
system such as [6, 7, 8, 10], since it is a huge task and not 
our focus. We have, however, described and implemented a 
simple federation model that is sufficient for our access 
control research and we can highlight that our proposal is the 
only that uses risk-based access control. Also, we still allow 
the use of identity federations, but offer a choice of 
establishing the cloud federation without the need for 
Federated Identity Management.  
Compared to the works that deal with risk-based access 
control in cloud [14, 15], our approach has the advantage of 
allowing the resource owner to choose different risk 
quantification and aggregation engines through a risk policy 
definition file, also the cloud that hosts the resource can 
define a baseline risk policy, to ensure its minimum security 
requirements are met. 
As future work we foresee the possibility of enlarging 
the federation used in our experiments and deploying it to 
real use. Also, we want to explore further the use of the risk 
policies with different risk metrics and quantification 
methods. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing”,  
2011. Available at: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
145/SP800-145.pdf  [Retrieved : May, 2013] 
[2] E. Carlini, M. Coppola, P. Dazzi, L. Ricci, and G. Righetti, “Cloud 
Federations in Contrail”, Proc. Euro-Par 2011: Parallel Processing 
Workshops, 2012, pp. 159-168 
[3] B. Rochwerger et al., “The reservoir model and architecture for open 
federated cloud computing”,  IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 53, no. 4, July 
2009, pp. 535-545 
[4] T. Kurze, M. Klems, D. Bermbach, A. Lenk, S. Tai, and M. Kunze, 
“Cloud Federation”, The Second International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, September 2011, pp. 32-38 
[5] K. Lampropoulos and S. Denazis, “Identity management directions in 
future internet”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 12, 
December 2012, pp. 74-83 
[6] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “How to Enhance 
Cloud Architectures to Enable Cross-Federation”, Proc. 3rd IEEE 
International Conference on Cloud Computing, July 2010, pp.337-
345 
[7] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “Security and Cloud 
Computing: InterCloud Identity Management Infrastructure”, 19th 
IEEE WETICE, June 2010, pp. 263-265 
[8] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “Three-Phase Cross-
Cloud Federation Model: The Cloud SSO Authentication”, 2nd 
AFIN, July 2010, pp. 94-101 
[9] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “Federation 
Establishment Between CLEVER Clouds Through a SAML SSO 
Authentication Profile”, International Journal on Advances in Internet 
Technology, vol. 4, no. 12, 2011, pp.14-27 
[10] M. Coppola et al., “The Contrail approach to cloud federations”, 
Proc. ISGC'12 , 2012 
[11] D. Bernstein, E. Ludvigson, K. Sankar, S. Diamond, and M. Morrow, 
“Blueprint for the Intercloud - Protocols and Formats for Cloud 
Computing Interoperability”, Proc. 4th ICIW, May 2009, pp. 328 -
336 
[12] D. Bernstein and D. Vij, “Intercloud Directory and Exchange 
Protocol Detail Using XMPP and RDF”, Proc. 6th SERVICES, July 
2010, pp. 431-438 
[13] V. Suhendra, “A Survey on Access Control Deployment”, Proc. 
FGIT-SecTech, 2011, pp. 11-20 
[14] D. Fall, G. Blanc, T. Okuda, Y. Kadobayashi, and S. Yamaguchi, 
“Toward Quantified Risk-Adaptive Access Control for Multi-tenant 
Cloud Computing”, Proc. 6th JWIS, October 2011 
[15] P. Arias-Cabarcos, F. Almenárez-Mendoza, A. Marín-López, D. 
Díaz-Sánchez, and R. Sánchez-Guerrero, “A Metric-Based Approach 
to Assess Risk for “On Cloud”' Federated Identity Management”, 
Journal of Network and Systems Management, vol. 20, no. 4, 2012, 
pp. 513-533 
[16] P. Harsh, Y. Jegou, R. Cascella, and C. Morin, “Contrail virtual 
execution platform challenges in being part of a cloud federation”, 
Proc. 4th ServiceWave, 2011, pp.50-61 
[17] R. Buyya, R. Ranjan, and R. Calheiros, “InterCloud: Utility-Oriented 
Federation of Cloud Computing Environments for Scaling of 
Application Services”, Algorithms and Architectures for Parallel 
Processing, vol. 6081, Springer, 2010, pp.13-31 
[18] D. Catteddu and G. Hogben, “Cloud Computing: benefits, risks and 
recommendations for information security”, Technical Report. 
European Network and Information Security Agency, 2009 
[19] B. Farroha and D. Farroha, “Challenges of operationalizing  dynamic 
system access control: Transitioning from ABAC to RAdAC”, Proc. 
SysCon, March 2012, pp. 1-7 
[20] F. Salim, J. F. Reid, and E. Dawson, “Towards authorisation models 
for secure information sharing : a survey and research agenda.” The 
ISC International Journal of Information Security, vol. 2, 2010 
[21] B. McQuaide, “Identity and Access Management”, Information 
Systems Control Journal, vol. 4, ISACA, 2003 
[22] JASON Program Office, “Horizontal Integration: Broader Access 
Models for Realizing Information Dominance”, Technical Report. 
MITRE Corporation, December 2004 
[23] D. W. Britton and I. A. Brown, “A Security Risk Measurement for 
the RAdAC Model.”, Naval Postgradute School Thesis, 2007 
[24] Q. Wang and H. Jin, “Quantified risk-adaptive access control for 
patient privacy protection in health information systems”, Proc. 6th 
ASIACCS, 2011, pp. 406-410 
[25] Y. Li, H. Sun, Z. Chen, J. Ren, and H. Luo, “Using Trust and Risk in 
Access Control for Grid Environment”, Proc. SECTECH, 2008, pp. 
13-16 
[26] R. A. Shaikh, K. Adi, and L. Logrippo, “Dynamic risk-based decision 
methods for access control systems”, Computers & Security, Elsevier, 
vol. 31, no. 4, 2012, pp. 447-464 
[27] I. Molloy, P. Cheng, and P. Rohatgi, “Trading in risk: using markets 
to improve access control”, Proc. NSPW, 2008, pp. 107-125 
[28] D. N. Sriram, “Federated Identity Management in Intercloud”, Der 
Technischen Universität München Thesis, January 2013 
[29] R. Lepro, “Cardea: Dynamic Access Control in Distributed Systems”, 
Technical Report, NASA, November 2003 
[30] A. Ferreira et al., “How to Securely Break into RBAC: The BTG-
RBAC Model”,  Proc. ACSAC '09, 2009, pp. 23-31 
[31] L. Zhang, A. Brodsky, and S. Jajodia, “Toward information sharing: 
benefit and risk access control (BARAC)”, Proc. 7th IEEE POLICY, 
2006, pp. 9-53 
[32] H. Lee, I. Jeun, and H. Jung, “Criteria for evaluating the privacy 
protection 
level 
of 
identity 
management 
services”, 
Proc. 
SECURWARE, 2009, p. 155–160 
[33] J. Tigli, S. Lavirotte, G. Rey, V. Hourdin, and M. Riveill, “Context-
aware Authorization in Highly Dynamic Environments”, International 
Journal of Computer Science Issues, vol. 4, no. 1, 2009, pp. 24-35
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

