Adopting an ISMS based Model for better ITSM in Financial Institutions
Zidiegha Seiyaboh, Mohammed Bahja
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Bedfordshire
Luton, Bedfordshire, UK
Email: Zidiegha.seiyaboh@study.beds.ac.uk, Mohammed.bahja@beds.ac.uk
Abstract—In
recent
times,
the
day-to-day
business
operations
in
financial
institutions
have
shown
dependence on information systems and Information
Technology (IT). IT service management systems have
helped in managing the complexity of IT service delivery
for delivering financial institutions’ critical business. IT
service
management
systems
have
become
fully
integrated into IT organizational arrangements as a
micro
part
of
financial
institutions.
However,
the
emergence
and
ever-increasing
information
security
challenges have become a source of worry not only for
financial institutions, but all other organizations. Despite
this, limited attention has been given to the improvement
of IT service management. The purpose of this research-
in-progress
is
to
investigate
Information
Security
Management Systems (ISMS) in terms of their capability
of
improving
Information
Technology
Service
Management
(ITSM)
in
financial
institutions
using
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
27001 standards as a guideline.
Keywords-
Information
Security
Management
System;
Information Technology Service Management; ISO Standards; IT
services; Service Operation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information has been identified as a very important aspect
of information technology in recent years, such that most
organizations and businesses are now focusing on the
service-oriented economy rather than a goods-based one as
was always the case in the past [1]. The huge rise in threats
and
cybersecurity
breaches
across
industries
including
financial institutions has brought about a substantial financial
loss and failure of IT service availability. This has led to an
increased focus on information security in the sector [2]. One
of the effective ways of strengthening an organization’s
cybersecurity is the implementation and periodic auditing of
efficient Information Security Management System (ISMS).
[3] stated that ISMS is a management system that embodies
policies,
processes
and
procedures
that
consider
the
fundamentals of cybersecurity, which are confidentiality,
integrity and the availability of IT services and business
information [3].
Information Technology Service Management (ITSM) has
long been considered a key player for integrating business
and IT services. IT service availability and continuity
management are part of IT service delivery. Downtime and
service failures occur, because of poor IT service availability
management
systems,
which
can
adversely
affect
an
enterprise’s business prospects [4]. Given that the business
activities and IT services of an organization are greatly
dependent on information security, it is essential that an
ISMS ISO based model guided by international standards
and frameworks be adopted [5]. To ascertain clearly the
relationship between information security and IT service
availability, for this research, a detailed analysis of the ITIL
2011 for an ITSM framework, a systematic review of the
ISO/IEC 20000 – 1:2011 being a Service Management
System (SMS) standard [6] and an investigation into the top
ISMS standards, such as ISO 27001, CIS 20 and NIST SP
800-53 will be carried out.
The structure of the paper is in sections. In Section II, a
critical review of existing literature is done. In Section III,
the possible benefits of ITSM are highlighted. Section IV
explains the research methodology to be followed. In Section
V, the components of ITIL are discussed. Section VI
discusses some of the ISO 27001 controls and their relevance
to ITSM. We conclude in Section VII with the findings from
related research and an online survey.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW AND RELATED WORK
Recent research has shown that the finance sector has
completely
embraced
the
adoption
of
Information
Technology
for
the
enhancement
of
organizational
performance and efficiency [2] but has brought with it many
challenges to the sector [7]. Business continuity has been
noted to be one of the key business values often identified
with the banking industry [7]. Some of the valuable drivers
of financial banking, service availability and business
continuity are the integration of ITSM to the business
operations of these financial institutions. [2]. Thomas Peltier
described good security as protecting the assets of an
organization and at the same time meeting the objectives and
goals of the business [8].
There is a gap in the management and adoption of relevant
standards to improve the efficiency of ITSM. This research
proposes the adoption of an ISO driven ISMS based model
that will bring about a change in the management of IT
services and infrastructure.
ITSM is a key player in the process of integrating business
and IT services [9]. In a bid to increase the business gains of
financial organizations, material resources, human resources,
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

management policies and objectives are being connected
through the sharing of information [10]. This linkage has led
to the potential for more serious attacks on information and
the systems that are used for communicating and processing
it than previously [11]. The security and protection of these
valuable information assets is now one of the highest
priorities for many organizations in the finance sector [12].
Whilst there are some approaches and technologies that have
been developed to bring about information security, however
none of these can guarantee watertight security [13]. The
London Stock Exchange system failure that happened in
2008 is an example of the huge financial loss that can be
caused by insufficient protection in the use of IT due to the
conflicting interests of stakeholders [14]. Given the potential
for big losses, professionals in the industry have started
investigating IT related risks intensively [15].
While
IT
infrastructure
failure
is
classified
as
an
operational risk, it can also be identified as an availability
failure from the service delivery management perspective
[2]. If ITSM is to deliver its core objectives, an acceptable
level of security must be attained, and hence, the need for
robust ISMS standards being devised and followed, thereby
ensuring the best security practices [16].
ITSM is considered part of the service sciences focusing
on IT operations [17]. Specifically, it can be defined as a
combination of processes established to ensure quality IT
services, in accordance with levels pre-agreed with the
customers [18]. Manuel Mora et al (2015) hold that ITSM
centers on defining and delivering IT services that support
business’ goals whilst meeting customer needs [19]. It
involves a systematic approach to the management of IT
services, covering design, execution, operation, process and
review aimed at providing improvement on a continual basis.
Moreover, it focuses on the alignment of services and
functions rendered by IT within an establishment as much as
on the technical aspects of IT. Whilst cost effectiveness is
one of the main aspects of the IT services management, it
also concerns the whole lifecycle of all IT services [20].
There are various ITSM frameworks with the most
common
one
being
the
Information
Technology
Infrastructure Library ITIL, which is the basic standard for
most IT service providers [21]. ITIL has been deployed by
Hewlett-Packard (HP), IBM and in the Microsoft Operation
Framework (MOF) [22]. Microsoft’s Operation Framework
(MOF) also mirrors the provisions of ITIL standard
[23].
ITIL 2011 being the most recent update of version 3, was
published in May 2007. There are 26 sections, which are part
of the five lifecycle phases, these being: Service Strategy,
Service Design, Service Transition, Service Operation and
Continual Service Improvement. There is a great difference
between the current and previous versions. That is, the
previous version, Version 2 comprised a total of ten
processes in just two main domains, namely: Service Support
and Service Delivery [24] [25].
III.
EXPLORING THE IMPACT OF IT SERVICE MANAGEMENT
Jantti et al. highlighted how IT organizations globally
have begun to take their service management processes to a
higher
level
based
on
the
adoption
of
best
practice
frameworks, like (ITIL). However, many of these companies
have yet to demonstrate positive impact from the adoption of
such as ITIL as a framework for ITSM [26]. This has
stimulated
the current investigation that addresses the
questions:
Has
the
IT
service
management
process
experienced any improvement? What are the factors that
could be responsible for poor efficiency of ITSM?
The cardinal objective of this work is to capture the best
practices of adopting ISMS frameworks and to identify the
factors that will enhance the expected efficiency and
improvement of ITSM. Some studies have highlighted the
possible benefits of ITSM. For instance, Mauricio and Kolbe
identified six benefits from its implementation, internal
processes
improvement,
customer
satisfaction,
service
quality improvement, processes standardization, efficiency
increment, and improvement in return on investment (ROI)
[27].
Organizations
that
have
implemented
ITIL
in
organizational change projects, have ultimately improved the
quality
of
their
services
through
better
IT
service
management processes. In sum, modelling IT assets that
form the IT business process has been identified as the key to
IT service management improvement [28].
IV.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This exploratory research is a work in progress and is
being conducted following the Design Science Research
(DSR) methodology [29]. DSR is basically a methodology
that encourages the researcher to understand the various
aspects of the Information System (IS) being researched and
the subsequent creation of new knowledge in the form of a
theoretical model.
The steps involved in DSR are:

Awareness of the problem (This was done
through system literature review and conduction
of an online survey)

Suggestion (Adoption of an ISO based ISMS
model to improve the efficiency of ITSM)

Development
(Design
a
framework
for
the
implementation of ISO 27001 as an adopted
ISMS model)
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies


Evaluation (Evaluation to be done using expert
judgement)

Conclusion
In the light of this, there will be two primary iterations, the
first to understand the concepts of ITSM and ISMS. The
second iteration involves focusing on the designing of a
theoretical model [29]. The realization of the artefact of this
research
work
is
centered
on
precise
problems,
data
quantification and a data gathering technique in the form of
an online survey questionnaire sent to IT professionals in
different financial institutions. Questions 2 - 9 of which
inquire about the components of ITSM, while questions 10 -
32 the relevance of ISMS to its efficiency. Before the
creation of the theoretical model, in financial Institutions, it
is important that the components of ITSM and ISMS be
defined.
V.
COMPONENTS OF ITIL
As aforementioned, ITIL is one of the widely accepted
ITSM frameworks that describes the best practices for
managing IT services. It was developed in the early eighties
by the Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency
(CCTA) following a serious economic downturn, to reduce
cost and to manage IT service delivery better. CCTA merged
later with the Office of Government Commerce (OGC) and
since then, ITIL has been constantly reviewed and updated
by the OGC as a service management standard library
dealing with information technology (IT). The current
version is ITIL 2011, which aims at providing high quality
IT services that focus more on the customer and effective IT
governance
than
previously
[30].
Most
financial
organizations have adopted the ITIL framework, because it
provides a systematic way of managing their IT services
which can enhance customer satisfaction at a much-reduced
cost [31].
The life cycle stage of ITSM is the IT operation and
maintenance, which is referred to as the “service operation” in
ITIL. It functions basically to ensure the normal operation of
daily business activities and handles all events and incidents
that occur during the information system operations and
maintenance process. ITIL service operation consists of five
processes
namely
Incident
Management,
Problem
Management,
Event
Management,
Request
Fulfilment,
Access Management and four functions - Service Desk,
Technical Management, IT Operations Management, and
Application Management [32].
VI.
ISO 27001 CONTROLS
ISO 27001 is structured into two divisions, which are:
ISMS requirements and reference control objectives [33]. It
has 14 clauses and 35 domains which include 114 controls.
Some of these controls will be focused on in this project,
because they are detailed enough to form the basis for an
ISMS that will lead to improvement in the efficiency of
ITSM in financial Institutions.
Table 1 shows the ISO 27001 controls that will be
referenced for this research.
TABLE I.
SOME ISO CONTROLS AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO ITSM
S/N
Control
No.
Control
Statement
Relevance to ITSM
1
A.6.1.1
“All
information
security
responsibilities
shall be defined
and allocated”
IT Access
Management, IT
Technical
Management, IT
Event Management
2
A.6.1.2
“Conflicting
duties and areas
of responsibility
shall be
segregated to
reduce
opportunities
for unauthorized
or unintentional
modification or
misuse of the
organization’s
assets”
IT Access
Management, IT
Technical
Management, IT
Event Management
3
A.7.2.2
“All employees
of the
organization
and, where
relevant,
contractors shall
receive
appropriate
awareness
education and
training and
regular updates
in organizational
policies and
procedures, as
relevant for their
job function”
IT Access
Management, IT
Technical
Management, IT
Event Management,
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ISO 27001 is the most adopted ISMS standard that allows
freedom in implementation. All the controls are classified
into one of the following: Data, software, hardware, network
and people. The classification of the controls help in
evaluating the performance of the standard.
VII.
CONCLUSION
The findings from related research and a conducted online
survey have shown that financial organizations rely heavily
on IT systems to create value for customers and to maximize
IT service delivery. The management and adoption of
relevant standards and best practice frameworks in the sector
is a critical issue in the day to day management of IT services
but has received limited attention. For this research, the
adoption of an ISO driven ISMS based model that will bring
about a change in the management of IT services and
infrastructure is proposed. Further research and results from
the survey will allow for the development of a theoretical
model that it is anticipated will have a positive impact on the
efficiency and offerings of ITSM.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Gopinath and R. Vinod, "IT service management
automation and its impact to IT industry," in 2017
International Conference on Computational
Intelligence in Data Science(ICCIDS), India, 2017.
[2]
O. Shirley, Yang. Carol, S. HSU. Suprateek and S. L.
Allen, "Enabling Effective Operational Risk
Management in a Financial Institution: An Action
Research Study," Journal of Management Information
Systems, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 727 - 753, 1 July 2017.
[3]
P. Sanghyun and L. Kyungho, "Advanced Approach to
Information Security Management System Model for
Industrial Control System," The Scientific World
Journal, vol. 2014, no. 348305, pp. 1 - 13, 21 July
2014.
[4]
A. Sahid, M. Yassine and B. Mustapha, "An Agile
Framework for ITS Management in Organizations:,"
Morocco, 2017.
[5]
S. Abbass, H. Parvaneh and K. Hourieh, "A Practical
Implementation of ISMS," in 7th International
Conference on e-Commerce in Developing
Countries:with focus on e-Security, Iran, 2013.
[6]
IEEE, "Adoption of ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011,
Information technology—Service management," IEEE
Software & Systems Engineering Standards Committee,
p. 48, 3 June 2013.
[7]
R. Choudhary and B. Kunal, "Business Continuity
Planning: A Study of Frameworks, Standards and
Guidelines for Banks IT Services," vol. 5, no. 8, August
2016.
[8]
R. T. Peltier, Information Security Polices, Procedures
and Standards: Guidelines for Effective Information
Security Management, 2 ed., Florida: Auerbach
Publications, 2016.
[9]
M. Muhammed, "The Impact of Adopting IT Service
Management Processes," 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.diva-
portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1118287&d
swid=5844. [Accessed 16 April 2018].
[10] A. A. Simplice, "Improving Financial Access: Insights
from Information Sharing and Financial Sector
Development," Development Finance Agenda (DEFA),
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 14 - 16, 2017.
[11]
H. Chang, "Is ISMS for Financial Organizations
effective on their business?," Mathematical and
Computer Modelling, vol. 58, no. 1 - 2, pp. 79 - 84,
July 2013.
[12] W. Jingguo, M. Gupta and H. R. Rao, "Insider Threats
in a Financial Institution: Analysis of Attack-Proneness
of Information Systems Applications," MIS Quaterly,
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 91 - 112, 2015.
[13]
A. Zahoor, M. Soomro, S. Hussain and A. Javed,
"Information Security Management needs more holistic
approach: A literature review," International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 215 - 225,
2016.
[14] P. Gary, H. Ray and L. P. Shan, "Information Systems
Implementation Failure: Insights from Prism,"
International Journal of Information Management, vol.
28, no. 4, pp. 259 - 269, 2008.
[15]
A. Juhani and J. Kari, "Challenges of the
Comprehensive and Integrated Information Security
Management," China, 2017.
[16]
S. Heru, N. A. Mohammad and C. T. Yong,
"Information Security Management System Standards:
A Comparative Study of the Big Five," International
Journal of Electrical & Computer Sciences, vol. 11, no.
5, pp. 23 - 29, 2011.
[17]
L. A. Mary, "Introducing ITIL Best Practices for IT
Service Management," April 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nysforum.org/events/4_30_2015/Final.pdf.
[Accessed 16 April 2018].
[18]
P. Armanda, N. Pratama, N. R. Jefri, P. W. Aji and D.
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A. Tinton, "IT Service Management based on service
dorminant logic:," in 2017 3rd International
Conference on Science in Information Technology,
Indonesia, 2017.
[19]
M. Manuel, M. G. Jorge, O. Rory, R. Mahesh and G.
Ovsei, "An Extensive Review of IT Service Design in
Seven International ITSM Processes Frameworks: Part
II," International Journal of Information Technologies
and Systems Approach, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 69 - 90, 2015.
[20] R. Wijesinghe, S. Helana and M. Stuart, "Defining the
optimal level of business benefits within IS/IT projects:
Insights from benefit identification practices adopted in
an IT Service Management (ITSM) project," Australia,
2015.
[21]
S. Mcloughlin, H. Scheepers and R. Wijesinghe,
"Benefit Planning Management for ITSM: Evaluating
Benefit Realization Frameworks," New Zealand, 2014.
[22]
IBM, "An Integrated Process Model as a Foundation
for ITSM," 22 January 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bcs.org/upload/pdf/integrated-process-
model.pdf. [Accessed 17 April 2018].
[23]
P. David, H. Claire and L. Paul, Microsoft Operations
Framework 4.0, Norwich: Van Haren Publishing, 2008.
[24]
J. Roman, K. Lukáš, Ž. Roman and K. Alena,
"Differences between ITIL V2 and ITIL V3 with
respect to Service Transition and Service Operation,"
2015.
[25] L. Rick, "A Comparison of Best Practice Frameworks:
Silos to Lifecycle," Office of Government Commerce,
US, 2002.
[26] M. Jantti, T. Rout, L. Wen, S. Heikkinen and A. Cater-
Steel, "Exploring the Impact of IT Service Management
Process Improvement Initiatives: A case study
approach," Australia, 2013.
[27]
M. Marrone and M. K. Lutz, "Impact of IT Service
Management Frameworks on the IT Organization,"
Business Information Systems Engineering, vol. 3, no.
1, pp. 5 - 18, 2011.
[28]
M. Lepmets, C.-S. Aileen, G. Francis and R. Eric,
"Extending the IT Service Quality Measurement
Framework through a Systematic Literature Review,"
Journal of Service Science Research, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 7
- 47, 2012.
[29]
V. Vaishnavi, K. Bill and P. Stacie, "Design Science
Research in Information Systems," 20 December
2004/17. [Online]. Available:
http://www.desrist.org/design-research-in-information-
systems/. [Accessed 21 April 2018].
[30]
N. Ahmad, A. N. Tarek, F. Qutaifan and A. Alhilali,
"Technology adoption model and a road map to
successful implementation of ITIL," Journal of Ent.
Info. Management, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 553 - 576, 2013.
[31]
K. V. Jiten and J. F. Nicholas, "Approaches to IT
Service Management in improving IT Management in
the Banking Sector," Malaysia, 2016.
[32]
I. InnoTrain, "IT Service Management Methods and
Frameworks Systematization," 2010. [Online].
Available:
http://www.central2013.eu/fileadmin/user_upload/Dow
nloads/outputlib/Innotrain_Systematization_2011_04_0
5_FINAL.PDF. [Accessed 22 April 2018].
[33]
S. Bahareh and S. Iman, "Evaluating the effectiveness
of ISO 27001:2013 based on Annex A," in 2014 Ninth
International Conference on Availability, Reliability
and Security (ARES) (2014), Switzerland, 2014.
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

