General Model for Personal Data Sensitivity Determination 
 
Marián Magdolen 
Department of Security Management 
University of Žilina 
Žilina, Slovak Republic 
email: marian.magdolen@fbi.uniza.sk 
 
Tomáš Loveček 
Department of Security and Safety Research 
University of Žilina 
Žilina, Slovak Republic 
email: tomas.lovecek@fbi.uniza.sk 
Jozef Ristvej 
Department of Crisis Management 
University of Žilina 
Žilina, Slovak Republic 
email: jozef.ristvej@fbi.uniza.sk 
 
Martin Hromada 
Department of Security Engineering 
Tomas Bata University in Zlín 
Zlín, Czech Republic 
email: hromada@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
 
Abstract—This article is a presentation of a general model for 
personal data sensitivity determination, which is based on 
early PhD research on personal data protection. Protecting 
privacy and personal data is in current environment a more 
and more challenging task not only for government 
institutions, but for small and large businesses as well. With 
the information technology advancements more and more 
personal data are processed automatically each year. That is 
the reason why effective, adequate and economic security 
measures have to be adopted to protect privacy of data 
subjects. But applying security measures blindly without 
deeper knowledge about sensitivity of such personal data, will 
not address the expectations for both, processors, for cost and 
maintenance effectiveness and data subjects, for most secure 
and trustworthy security measures. To overcome this conflict 
of expectations, a model for personal data sensitivity was 
created as a tool to evaluate the sensitivity and assign 
appropriate security measures. 
Keywords - Personal data protection; security measures, data 
security; privacy. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Right to privacy is one of the fundamental human rights 
recognized by many international and national conventions, 
treaties, constitutions and laws. In current security 
environment and unstoppable information technology 
development, securing the privacy is one of the grand 
challenges of today’s democracies. General availability of 
information technology and cloud services, as well as 
widespread internet usage and increase of web-based 
transactions, use of social media, targeted advertisement, 
smart metering and others, create countless opportunities to 
collect, process, store, analyse and correlate massive 
quantities of personal data about individuals. To ensure 
adequate security of this data, processors are forced to 
ensure their safety by implementing various security 
measures. Some of the measures are stipulated in the 
national laws, but others are adopted or just recommended 
to implement from other sources of information data 
security documents (e.g., ISO 27 000). We can rarely find 
an applicable method on how to implement adequate 
security measures to personal data by taking into account 
sensitivity and categories of personal data, character of data 
subject and/or other information relevant for data protection. 
It is crucial to fully comprehend the interaction between the 
protection of privacy and the furtherance of security in order 
to attempt to set appropriate limits [1]. In Section 2 of this 
article the current process of application of security 
measures in Slovak Republic with pointing out some of 
most serious shortcomings of this system is described and 
later in Section 3 the assessment of the point of view of data 
subjects for sensitivity of their personal data and in Section 
4 and 5 the model for personal data sensitivity determination 
and its evaluation process is described.  
 
II. 
APPLICATION OF SECURITY MEASURES IN 
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC 
Like all European countries, Slovak Republic adopted a 
law on protection of personal data of individuals as well. 
Based on the European directive 95/46/EC on the protection 
of individuals with regards to the processing of personal 
data and on the free movement of such data (hereinafter 
referred to as “Directive”), our national legislation tries to 
issue instructions on how to process and secure personal 
data by processors to ensure the right balance between 
privacy and security. Although the European directive 
95/46/EC established an obligation for member states to 
ensure that “appropriate technical and organizational 
measures should be taken, both at the time of the design of 
the processing system and at the time of the processing 
itself, particularly in order to maintain security and thereby 
to prevent any unauthorized processing;…whereas these 
276
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

measures must ensure an appropriate level of security, 
taking into account the state of the art and the costs of their 
implementation in relation to the risk inherent in the 
processing and the nature of the data to be protected” [2], 
neither in the directive nor in the Slovak laws or bylaws 
there is any hint on how to implement these security 
measures or any explanation of how to determine the 
appropriateness of security measures to the protected data. 
In Slovakian act No.: 122/2013 Coll. on personal data 
protection, our legislators stated that: “the processor is 
responsible for securing personal data. Therefore, he shall 
undertake appropriate technical, organizational and personal 
measures that correspond to the means of data processing, 
taking 
into 
account 
technical 
resources 
employed, 
confidentiality and importance of processed personal 
data…” [3]. The extent of appropriate security measures 
corresponds to specific conditions of processing personal 
data in filling system, to security risks resulting from the 
category of processed personal data (e.g., if sensitive data 
are processed) and to means of processing of such data [4]. 
However, there is no relevant instruction for processors on 
the appropriateness of implemented security measures, on 
the kind of risk assessment method they shall apply and on 
how to assess confidentiality and importance of processed 
personal data. Processors can just assume if the taken 
security measures are appropriate and most of the 
processors apply the ISO standards on information security 
to fulfil the requirements. According to our knowledge, 
there is no other method that would address personal data 
protection and appropriate security measures assignment 
along with consideration on data subject sensitivity. 
 
III. 
DATA SUBJECT POINT OF VIEW 
Neither the EC directive nor the Slovak national 
legislation take into account the perspective of how the data 
subject feels about the security measures taken by 
processors. How to include data subjects into the process? 
The problem regarding personal view on data processing is 
mainly the possible change in opinions about sensitivity of 
personal data. People change, circumstances change, the 
position and situation of individuals change in time. 
Individual with no interest in special protection of his 
personal data can, in a few years, become a politician and, 
as a public officer, his interest to protect his privacy will 
increase. In that case, from his point of view, the 
implemented security measures might not be appropriate 
anymore and it is his prerogative to demand higher level of 
security. Of course, processors cannot treat each data 
subject individually when processing large amount of data 
about undefined number of individuals. But on the other 
hand, they should take into account sensitivity of personal 
data not only from their point of view but from point of 
view of data subjects as well. Assessing such sensitivity 
level is the very first step for implementation of appropriate 
security measures which will be not only in accordance with 
actual legislation but within the expectations of data 
subjects as well.  
IV. 
MODEL FOR PERSONAL DATA SENSITIVITY 
DETERMINATION 
Model for personal data sensitivity determination 
(hereinafter referred to as “model”) is a model developed 
with the aim to include sensitivity of processed data to the 
data protection, to include data subject specifics and with 
additional knowledge about processed data to appropriate 
assign security measures to each specific data filling system. 
Within the model, various facts are evaluated and as a 
result, the level of sensitivity of processed data is revealed. 
With the specified sensitivity level, we can then assign 
effective, appropriate and adequate security measures to 
protect personal data in filling system of processor.  
If we want to embrace sensitivity as the key factor for 
security measures implementation, we should use model for 
sensitivity determination in order to evaluate processed 
personal data. In order to do so, we should take into 
consideration a few facts and conditions that are relevant to 
this process. Legislation requires the processors to establish 
the conditions for data processing before the processing 
starts so the processors should evaluate the sensitivity 
beforehand. 
There are three major areas the variables to the model 
are taken from. The first set is taken from legislation and is 
obligatory for each processor to include and determine these 
facts when processing personal data. The second set of 
variables is based on the type of filling system on conditions 
and background that are applicable. The third set is based on 
the knowledge of data subjects and categories of processed 
data. As the processor shall determine the sensitivity 
beforehand, it is important to estimate the information 
carefully and during processing regularly challenge these 
values to not to underestimate the changes and security 
measures that have been taken. 
First of all first set consist of a few basic legal 
requirements, that each processor has to fulfil - to determine 
the nature and purpose of personal data filling system, 
processors shall define (1) purpose of processing, (2) 
legitimacy of processing (3) the planned length of time the 
data are to be stored. 
The purpose of processing shall be clearly defined and 
data collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purpose 
only. It is forbidden to process data otherwise that is 
incompatible with those purposes [5]. For data subject, 
clearly defined purpose of data processing is a first sign of 
trust when the personal data have been given. The extent of 
processed personal data (number of personal data collected) 
is evaluated and the legitimacy of processing is established 
according the defined purpose. 
Personal data may be processed only if the legitimacy of 
processing is within the Article 6 of Directive. “Personal 
data may be processed only if: (a) the data subject has 
unambiguously given his consent; or (b) processing is 
necessary for the performance of a contract to which the 
data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of 
data subject prior to entering into a contract; or (c) 
processing is necessary for compliance with a legal 
obligation to which the controller is subject; or (d) 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

processing is necessary in order to protect the vital interests 
of data subjects; or (e) processing is necessary for the 
performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in 
the exercise of official authority vested in the controller or 
in a third party to whom the data are disclosed; or (f) 
processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate 
interests pursued by the controller or by the third party or 
parties to whom the data are disclosed, except where such 
interests are overridden by the interests for fundamental 
rights and freedoms of data subject which require 
protection…” Slovak act No.: 122/2013 Coll. recognize two 
types of legitimate purposes for data processing – 
processing without consent of data subject and processing 
based on consent of data subject. Processor shall process 
data without consent of data subject if the purpose of 
processing, data subjects and the extent of processed data 
are specified in directly applicable EU law, binding 
international treaty, law about personal data protection or 
other particular law [6]. Besides these situations, data shall 
be processed without consent only in cases mentioned in the 
Directive, Article 6 and when it is necessary for purposes of 
journalism or the purposes of literary or artistic expression 
[7]. Processing data based on consent of data subject is 
applicable when the consent is freely given, informed and 
specific and signifies his agreement to personal data relating 
to him being processed [8]. 
The planned length of time the data is to be stored is 
relevant information to assess how long the data are 
vulnerable. Processors have to ensure that the personal data 
will be processed no longer than necessary to obtain the 
purpose of processing [9]. To this first set of information, 
we have to consider other facts that are subject to the 
specific settings of personal data filling systems and have 
relevance to sensitivity determination. 
 
The second set of variables can vary in time but, in the 
end, the influence on sensitivity is obvious. That includes 
information about (1) transfer of personal data to other 
countries; (2) means of processing of personal data; (3) list 
and nature of third persons or recipients that have access to 
the data.  
Cross-border transfer of personal data “may take place 
only if the third country in question ensures an adequate 
level of protection” [10] and “the personal data should be 
able to flow freely from one Member State to another, but 
the 
fundamental 
rights 
of 
individuals 
should 
be 
safeguarded”  [11] at all times. 
The means of personal data processing are up to 
processor, whether it is automatic or manual processing. 
Currently, when everything is online and is processed by 
information technology, manual processing can evoke more 
trustworthy and secure way of data processing. On the other 
hand, many security breaches are still caused not by 
overcoming the information technological security measures 
but caused by human error or betrayal. 
By processing large amount of data, rarely the 
processors are able to maintain and administer their filling 
systems alone. It often depends on purpose but information 
sharing is often necessary to fulfil the goal of processing 
and providing access to the data to third persons or other 
recipients is inevitable. Third party usually means “any 
natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other 
body other than the data subject, the controller, the 
processor and the person who, under the direct authority of 
the controller or the processor, are authorized to process the 
data” [12] and recipient means “natural or legal person, 
public authority, agency or any other body to whom data are 
disclosed, whether a third party or not” [13]. Recipients and 
third parties shall have legitimate reason why to gain access 
to the data and processors shall very carefully inquire why, 
when and to what extent to provide the data to such parties. 
Third set is based on the knowledge of data subjects and 
categories of processed data. This is a crucial part as this 
information is the most relevant to determine whether the 
processed data are being considered as sensitive from data 
subject point of view. Processors have to research and gain 
detailed knowledge about (1) scope of personal data and 
their category and (2) information about count, nature and 
character of data subjects.  
The directive and Slovak national law about personal 
data protection stipulate that processors can process only 
such personal data which scope and content correspond to 
the planned purpose of processing and are essential to 
achieve such purpose [14]. Except the proportionality of 
used data the requirement of using only correct, complete 
and if necessary up-to-date personal data is applicable and 
all other data shall be without delay repaired, completed or 
blocked and subsequently erased [15]. The category of 
personal data is determined by legislation for regular and 
special personal data but this division is, in our opinion, not 
sufficient, very subjective and does not reflect the real 
opinion of data subjects. Directive forbids to process special 
data except special circumstances defining special data as 
data which “reveal racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, 
religious or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, 
and the data concerning health or sex life” [16]. Slovak 
national law goes beyond this characteristic and as special 
category of personal data names - except types of data that 
are mentioned in Directive as well general identifier of 
citizens - information about psychical identity and 
competence, criminal records data, biometric data and 
image and video files containing any captures of individuals 
[17]. Extent of such personal data is wide enough to cause 
problems with processing such data and with assignment of 
appropriate security measures. For example, photo of 
individual is so commonly used in many filling systems that 
assignment of such type of personal data for special 
category, with strict security rules and permissions to 
process it, often causes difficulties for processors. Various 
individuals often have different opinions for special 
category of data, some of them value more their mobile 
number than their image/photo or are willing to share the 
medical data over the credit card number. It is therefore 
obvious that processors have to evaluate each type of 
personal data individually and estimate how sensitive such 
type of data will be for data subjects and accordingly threat 
(secure) such data. 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The last variable relevant for the model is information 
about count, nature and character of data subjects. Again, 
processors have to estimate this information beforehand but 
it is important to update this information regularly in order 
to assign appropriate level of security to the filling system. 
Count of data subjects is related to the possible impact of 
security breach, nature and character of data subjects is 
relevant to the seriousness of possible security breach.  
With all this facts we can estimate the sensitivity of 
personal data in order to implement such level of security 
for processor’s processing operations that will be adequate, 
legitimate and appropriate but will also take into account the 
estimated sensitivity of data subjects. 
 
V. 
EVALUATION OF SENSITIVITY 
To evaluate sensitivity of filling system processing 
personal data, we have to evaluate each factor included into 
the model. For each factor, one or more questions to be 
answered are integrated into the model and to each possible 
pre-set answer there is a certain number of points assigned. 
After answering all the questions the final value is showing 
the estimated sensitivity according to the scale. The 
maximum number of points that are possible to gain is 85. 
With this high score, it is obvious that processed data are 
extremely sensitive and in further operation the security 
measures have to be very exhaustive and other procedures to 
limit the vulnerability shall be implemented. The minimum 
number of points that the filling system is able to receive is 
18. In such case, most of the data are with low sensitivity 
and the security measures and vulnerability of the personal 
data is of low risk. Sensitivity is scaled into five distinctive 
levels of low, moderate, high, very high and extreme 
sensitivity.  
TABLE I.  SENSITIVITY EVALUATION SCALE 
Evaluation 
Points score 
Low sensitivity 
18 – 25 
Moderate sensitivity 
26 – 40 
High sensitivity 
41 – 55 
Very high sensitivity 
56 – 70 
Extreme sensitivity 
71 – 85 
 
According to the sensitivity level, we can assign 
appropriate security measures to each specific data filling 
system. This is the second part of model where - after 
thorough risk assessment - effective, appropriate and 
adequate security measures that are in correspondence with 
estimated sensitivity of the processed personal data in the 
filling system could be assigned. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
To evaluate sensitivity of filling system processing 
personal data, we have to address many aspects and steps of 
processing procedure. Sensitivity level together with later 
risk assessment allow the processors or data subjects to 
confirm the expectations for security measures to be taken 
in any given filling system. Processors are constantly 
searching for most economical but still sufficient system 
how to determine and apply security measures for their 
system and data subjects expect the best security for their 
personal data. After recent development in massive personal 
data breaches and mass surveillance affairs, applying 
adequate security measures will become more and more 
important to general public in order to ensure their privacy 
[18]. As the view on personal data sensitivity is changing 
with various conditions, in the future, there will be more 
often demand for interactive system that will be able to 
determine sensitivity level and further help to assign 
appropriate security measures which will satisfy both 
processors and data subjects. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the research project 
VI20152019049 "RESILIENCE 2015: Dynamic Resilience 
Evaluation 
of 
Interrelated 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Subsystems", supported by the Ministry of the Interior of 
the Czech Republic in the years 2015-2019. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Stalla-Bourdillon, J. Phillips, M. D. Ryan, “Privacy vs. 
Security”, Springer: London, 2014, ISBN 978-1-4471-6529-3, 
pp. 5 
[2] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Paragraph 46 
[3] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 19  
[4] Z. Válková, J. Dudáš, J. Palúš, “Zákon o ochrane osobných 
údajov. Komentár od autorov zákona”, Kaštieľ Mojmírovce, 
2013, ISBN 978-80-971476-4-8, pp.149 
[5] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Article 6, Section b) 
[6] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 10  
[7] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 10, Section 3, a) 
[8] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Article 2, Section h) 
[9] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 6, Section 2, g) 
[10] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Article 25 
[11] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Paragraph 3 
[12] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Article 2, Section f) 
[13] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Article 2, Section g) 
[14] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 6, Section 2, d) 
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[15] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 6, Section 2, f) 
[16] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regards to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, Article 8, Section 1 
[17] Law No.: 122/2013 Z.z. about protection of personal data, 
Paragraph 13 
[18] S. Stalla-Bourdillon, J. Phillips, M. D. Ryan, “Privacy vs. 
Security”, Springer: London, 2014, ISBN 978-1-4471-6529-3, 
pp. 93 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

