Current Issues in Cloud Computing Security and Management
Pedro Artur Figueiredo Vitti, Daniel Ricardo dos Santos,
Carlos Becker Westphall, Carla Merkle Westphall, Kleber Magno Maciel Vieira
Network and Management Laboratory - Department of Informatics and Statistics
Federal University of Santa Catarina - Florianopolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil
{pvitti, danielrs, westphal, carlamw, kleber}@inf.ufsc.br
Abstract—Cloud computing is becoming increasingly more pop-
ular and telecommunications companies perceive the cloud as
an alternative to their service deployment models, one that
brings them new possibilities. But to ensure the successful use of
this new model there are security and management challenges
that still need to be faced. There are numerous threats and
vulnerabilities that become more and more important as the use
of the cloud increases, as well as concerns with stored data and
its availability, conﬁdentiality and integrity. This situation creates
the need for monitoring tools and services, which provide a way
for administrators to deﬁne and evaluate security metrics for their
systems. In this paper, we propose a cloud computing security
monitoring tool based on our previous works on both security
and management for cloud computing.
Keywords–cloud computing; security management; monitoring;
security metrics
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is a new way to provide computational
resources over the Internet in a transparent and easy manner.
According to the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST), it is a model for enabling on-demand network
access to a shared pool of computational resources, comprised
of three service models and four deployment models [1].
These service models are: Software as a Service (SaaS),
in which the service provided to the user is in the form of
an application that runs on a cloud infrastructure; Platform
as a Service (PaaS), in which the user can deploy its own
applications in the provider’s infrastructure; and Infrastructure
as a Service (IaaS), in which the user has access to the
computational resources themselves, in the form of virtual
machines, storage, networks and others.
The deployment models are the private, community, public
and hybrid cloud, and refer to the location of the cloud
infrastructure, who has access to it and who is responsible
for its management. The most used models are the public
cloud, when the infrastructure is run by an organization and
provisioned to be used by the public; and the private cloud,
when an organization provisions its own infrastructure to be
used by their business units.
In an era where telecommunication providers face ever
greater competition and technology evolution, the basic fea-
tures of cloud computing such as virtualization, multi-tenancy
and ubiquitous access provide a viable solution to their service
provisioning problems.
Telecoms are now using their own private clouds, or
sometimes public clouds, to host their services and enjoy the
beneﬁts of this new model. With a multi-tenant cloud they can
support an increasing number of subscribers and maintain the
Quality of Experience of their services even when dealing with
high demand. The use of the cloud also helps these companies
transition from a product based business model to a service
based one.
The main advantages of cloud computing are the reduction
of IT costs and increased ﬂexibility, scalability and the pos-
sibility to pay only for the used resources. The users of the
cloud range from individuals to large government or commer-
cial organizations, and each one has their own concerns and
expectations about it.
Among these concerns, security and privacy are the biggest
ones [2]. This comes from the fact that the data that belongs to
users and organizations may no longer be under their absolute
control, being now stored in third party locations and subject
to their security policies, in the case of public clouds.
But even in private clouds, the most common case in
telecom companies, there are new security challenges, such
as providing access to an ever growing number of users while
maintaining efﬁcient and well monitored access control.
It becomes necessary to characterize what are the new risks
associated with the cloud and what other risks become more
critical. These risks must be evaluated and mitigated before
the transition to the cloud.
It is already possible to ﬁnd in the literature a lot of work
being done in the security aspects of Cloud Computing, de-
scribing its challenges and vulnerabilities and even proposing
some solutions [3].
In the rest of this paper, we provide some background in se-
curity concerns in cloud computing, brieﬂy describe a previous
implementation of a monitoring tool for the cloud, show how
security information can be summarized and treated under a
management perspective in an Service Level Agreement (SLA)
and then propose a system for monitoring security information
in the cloud.
In Section II, some works, related to security in cloud
computing environments, are cited. In Section III, currently
existing concerns in cloud computing security area are pre-
sented. In Section IV, an architecture for monitoring clouds is
described. In Sections V and VI, safety concerns with SLA,
and the deﬁnition of entities, components, metrics and, actions
of security monitoring cloud computing are shown. Section VII
shows the case study. In Section VIII, lessons learned from
this work are described. Finally, in Section IX, a conclusion
is presented and some future work proposals are made.
II.
RELATED WORK
Uriarte and Westphall [4] proposed a monitoring architec-
ture devised for private Cloud that focuses on providing data
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

analytics capabilities to a monitoring system and that considers
the knowledge requirements of autonomic systems. While, ar-
gue that in the development of an analytical monitoring system
for public Clouds, security, privacy and different policies need
to be considered, their proposal does not consider speciﬁc
security metrics and Sec-SLAS.
Fernades et al. [5] surveys the works on cloud security
issues. Their work addresses several key topics, namely vul-
nerabilities, threats, and attacks, and proposes a taxonomy for
their classiﬁcation. Their work, however, does not consider
metrics monitoring or any implementation details.
CSA [6] has identiﬁed the top nine cloud computing
threats. The report shows a consensus among industry experts,
focusing on threats speciﬁcally related to the distributed nature
of cloud computing environments. Despite identifying, describ-
ing and analyzing these threats, their work does not consider
the monitoring of security metrics related to the identiﬁed
threats.
Murat et al. [7] proposed a cloud network security monitor-
ing and response system, which is based on ﬂow measurements
and implements an algorithm that detects and responds to
network anomalies inside a cloud infrastructure. Their proposal
however does not take into account security metrics and Sec-
SLAs, instead it generates and monitors proﬁles of network
trafﬁc to detect for anomalies, hence it is limited in the scope
of security issues it can monitor.
III.
SECURITY CONCERNS IN CLOUD COMPUTING
A. Technologies
A lot of different technologies are necessary to create
and manage a cloud environment, according to the kind of
service that this cloud will provide. Cloud computing relies
heavily on virtualization and network infrastructure to support
its elasticity. Technologies such as Web Services, Service
Oriented Architecture (SOA), Representational State Transfer
(REST) and Application Programming Interfaces (API) are
employed to provide users with access to their cloud resources.
Each of these technologies presents some kind of known
vulnerability and possible new exploits in the cloud [8].
B. Challenges, Threats and Vulnerabilities
The usual three basic issues of security: availability, in-
tegrity and conﬁdentiality are still fundamental in the cloud
and remain a big challenge in this scenario. Each sector
has its main concerns when it comes to the cloud. Industry
services are mostly worried about availability, so that they
keep providing services even during peaks of access, while
academia may be more concerned with integrity and individual
users usually care about the conﬁdentiality of their data. But
every security aspect must be considered together to achieve
security as a whole in this scenario. Because of the multi-
tenant characteristic of cloud computing, one single vulnerable
service in a virtual machine may lead to the exploitation of
many services hosted in the same physical machine. Also,
virtualization has an inherent security threat that a user may
escape its conﬁned environment and gain access to the physical
machine resources or to other virtual machines. This requires
complex attacks, but is possible.
Web applications and web services have a long history of
security vulnerabilities, and if not well implemented they are
susceptible to a lot of easily deployed and very well-known
attacks such as SQL injection, Cross-Site Scripting (XSS),
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) and session hijacking.
Cryptography is the most important technology to provide
data security in the cloud, but problematic implementations
and weak proprietary algorithms have been known problems
for a long time and are still exploited.
Another important topic in cloud security is Identity and
Access Management, because now data owners and data
providers are not in the same trusted domain. New mecha-
nisms for authentication and authorization that consider cloud-
speciﬁc aspects are needed and are being actively researched
[9].
The main security management issues of a Cloud Service
Provider (CSP) are: availability management, access control
management, vulnerability management, patch and conﬁgu-
ration management, countermeasures, and cloud usage and
access monitoring [10].
To remain effective in this new paradigm, some security
tools have to be adapted, such as Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS), which are critical to monitor and prevent incidents in
the cloud. Because of its distributed nature, the cloud is an
easy target for an intruder trying to use its abundant resources
maliciously, and because of this nature, the IDS also has to be
distributed, to be able to monitor each node [11].
C. Attacks
While the cloud serves many legitimate users, it may also
host malicious users and services, such as spam networks,
botnets and malware distribution channels. Cloud providers
must be aware of those problems and implement the necessary
countermeasures.
Besides that, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks
can have a much broader impact on the cloud, since now many
services may be hosted in the same machine. When an attacker
focuses on one service it may affect many others that have no
relation with the main target. DDoS is a problem that is still
not very well handled. On the other hand, since the cloud
provides greater scalability and may allocate resources almost
instantaneously it becomes more resilient to denial of service,
but it comes with a cost to the users.
D. Data Security
The security and privacy of the data stored in the cloud
is, perhaps, the most important challenge in cloud security. To
maintain data security a provider must include, at least: an
encryption schema, an access control system, and a backup
plan [12].
However, data encryption can be a hindrance in the cloud
because of the current impossibility to efﬁciently process or
query over encrypted data [2]. There is active research in
these areas, with techniques such as Searchable Encryption
and Fully Homomorphic Encryption, but their applications
are still limited and they cannot yet be used in large scale
environments.
When moving to the cloud it is important that a prospective
customer knows to what risks its data are being exposed. Some
of the key points a user must consider in this migration are
[13]: The cloud administrators will have privileged access to
user data, and possibly bypass access controls; The provider
must comply to legal requirements, depending on the kind of
data the user intends to store; The location of the user’s data
may now be unknown to them; How the data of one user are
kept separate from others; The provider must have a capacity
to restore a system and recover its data through backup and
replication; The provider must formally ensure full support in
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

the case of an investigation over inappropriate activities; and
The data must be in a standardized format and be available to
the user even in the case the provider goes out of business.
E. Legal Compliance
Legal compliance is fundamental when dealing with cloud
computing. In the cloud world, it is possible that data cross
many jurisdiction borders and have to be treated in compliance
to many different laws and regulations. This is one of the
reasons why security plays such an important role in cloud
adoption and development, especially for the CSPs.
To achieve compliance both providers and users must be
held responsible for how data is collected, stored and trans-
mitted, especially sensitive data, such as Personally Identiﬁable
Information (PII).
Among the most important tools to ensure legal compliance
are external audits and security certiﬁcations.
F. Telecommunications
The deployment and provisioning of telecommunication
services becomes easier in the cloud, and it empowers telecom
providers with greater scalability and ﬂexibility. Those advan-
tages, however, come with the cost of new security challenges.
Security plays such a vital role in telecommunications that
many telecommunication networks are built from the ground-
up with security requirements in mind. This, however, is not
true for many Internet protocols. When transitioning to the
cloud, telecom providers must be aware that their services are
being deployed in a different scenario, one that has to be well
understood before this transition is considered.
Availability, for instance, is critical to the telecom business
and if services are being deployed in a public cloud without
a proper SLA, server downtime will cause a lot of trouble.
Conﬁdentiality is also fundamental, since telecoms collect and
store a lot of data from their clients, from personal data to
information about their communications.
IV.
CLOUD MONITORING
The provisioning of cloud services represents a challenge
to service monitoring. It requires complex procedures to be
well accomplished, which leads to the development of new
management tools. Our team has previously proposed and
implemented an open-source cloud monitoring architecture and
tool called the Private Cloud Monitoring System (PCMONS)
[14].
The architecture of the system is divided in three layers
(see Figure 1):
•
Infrastructure - Consists of basic facilities, services
and installations and available software, such as oper-
ating systems and hypervisors;
•
Integration - Responsible for abstracting the infras-
tructure details for the view layer; and
•
View - The interface through which information is
analyzed.
The main components of the architecture are (see Figure
1):
•
Node information gatherer: Gathers local information
on a node;
•
VM monitor - Injects scripts into the virtual machine
(VM) that send data to the monitoring system;
•
Conﬁguration Generator - Generates the conﬁguration
ﬁles for the tools in the view layer;
•
Monitoring tool server - Receives data form different
resources and take actions such as storing it;
•
Database - Stores data needed by the Conﬁguration
Generator and the Monitoring Data Integrator.
V.
SECURITY CONCERNS IN SLA
Security is not only a matter of preventing attacks and
protecting data, it also has to be considered in a management
perspective. Providers must have ways to ensure their clients
that their data is safe and must do so by monitoring and
enhancing security metrics.
A SLA formally deﬁnes the level of service a provider
must guarantee. SLAs are a fundamental part of network
management, and are also applied in cloud computing. They
are deﬁned in terms of metrics that must be monitored to
ensure that the desired levels of service are reached.
SLAs may also be used in the deﬁnition, monitoring and
evaluation of security metrics, in the form of Security SLAs,
or Sec-SLAs [15]. In this case, the SLA considers security
service levels.
To accomplish this, the ﬁrst step is to deﬁne a set of
security metrics, which in itself is not easy. Though there is not
a deﬁnitive set of security metrics that is considered relevant in
every case, researchers tend to use or adapt concepts gathered
from international standards such as ISO 27002. Some issues
that are usually considered are cryptography, packet ﬁltering,
redundancy, availability, and backup.
VI.
CLOUD SECURITY MONITORING
Security monitoring is inherently hard, because the agent-
manager approach normally used in the monitoring of other
kinds of SLA, does not ﬁt easily to every security characteristic
[15].
Cloud computing has been evolving for many years and so,
only now we are able to have a broader view of what exactly
it is and hence what are its security requirements, based on
recent deﬁnitions and publications.
With this new perspective it is now possible to deﬁne good
security metrics that can be used to provide a clear view of
the level of security being employed in a CSP and its virtual
machines.
We now propose an extension to the PCMONS architecture
and tool to enable security monitoring for cloud computing. We
also present the security metrics which we consider adequate
to be monitored in a cloud infrastructure and which provide a
good picture of security as a whole in this environment.
The tool uses data and logs gathered from security software
available in the monitored systems, such as IDSs, anti-malware
software, ﬁle system integrity veriﬁcation software, backup
software and web application ﬁrewalls, and presents these data
to the cloud administrators.
Besides providing to administrators reliable metrics and
information about the security of their systems, this monitoring
architecture can also be used in the auditing and outsourcing
of security services.
The main components of the proposal can be seen in Figure
1 and are described below.
A. Entities
The entities involved in the deﬁnition, conﬁguration and
administration of the security SLAs and metrics are:
•
Cloud users - The users of the cloud infrastructure.
They negotiate the SLAs with the CSP and expect
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 1. Three Layers Monitoring Architecture
them to be accomplished;
•
Cloud administrators - The administrators of the CSP.
Their role is to monitor the cloud infrastructure; and
•
Security applications - The applications which pro-
duce the security information that will be gathered.
The two ﬁrst entities were a part of the previous PCMONS,
while the third one was inserted in our extension.
B. Components
Since PCMONS is modular and extensible, the components
used in the new architecture are the same already available, but
with extensions that allow the monitoring of security metrics.
The extensions are new scripts to gather the security
data from the many sources needed and an extension to the
visualization tool to show this data.
C. Metrics
As mentioned in Section IV, the deﬁnition of security
metrics is not an easy task, and it becomes even harder in
the cloud.
Here, we present the basic metrics we intended to monitor.
These metrics were chosen because we consider they cover a
great part of what was considered critical in a cloud provider,
based on the survey presented in Section II.
We divided the set of metrics into subsets related to each
security aspect that will be treated. There are four subsets of
metrics. The ﬁrst three are related to each individual virtual
machine. Data Security Metrics, Access Control Metrics and
Server Security Metrics are shown in Table I, Table II, and
Table III, respectively.
D. Actions
We decided to introduce a new module to take actions
based on the monitored metrics and possible violations to the
Sec-SLA. As an example, if a virtual machine has had a huge
number of failed access attempts in the last hours we may want
to lock any further access to it and communicate the possible
issue to the administrator of that machine. Also, if malware
was detected on a machine we may want to shut it down
to prevent it from infecting other VMs in the same physical
machine. These actions will be predeﬁned scripts available to
cloud administrators and may be enabled or disabled by them
at any time.
VII.
CASE STUDY
We have implemented the metrics presented in Tables I-
III and gathered the data generated in a case study. The
implementation of the data gathering scripts was done in
Python and the data shown in the Nagios interface.
Our infrastructure consisted of two physical servers, one
hosting the OpenNebula cloud platform and another hosting
the virtual machine instances.
Several virtual machines running the Ubuntu operating
system and the security software needed to provide the security
metrics were instantiated. The following software were used to
gather the security information: dm-crypt (encryption), rsync
(backup), tripwire (ﬁlesystem integrity), ssh (remote access),
clamAV (anti-malware), tiger (vulnerability assessment) and
uptime (availability).
The VMs were automatically attacked by brute force login
attempts and malware being downloaded and executed, as well
as access attempts to ports blocked by the ﬁrewall. During
the tests there were also simulations of regular usage, encom-
passing valid accesses and simple user tasks performed on the
machines, such as creating and deleting ﬁles. The malware
scans, vulnerability scans, integrity checks and backups were
performed as scheduled tasks on the operating system using
latest versions of Linux Malware Detect [16], OpenVAS [17],
AFICK [18] and, Amanda [19] respectively. We did not stress
the environment to test for scalability issues because it had
already been done with the previous versions of PCMONS.
Figure 2 shows an example of an early snapshot of the
monitoring environment. It represents how the metrics are
shown in Nagios and it is possible to see the vision that a
network administrator has of a single machine. The metrics
HTTP CONNECTIONS, LOAD, PING, RAM and SSH are
from the previous version of PCMONS and are not strictly
related to security, but they are show combined.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE I. DATA SECURITY METRICS
Metric
Description
Encrypted Data?
Indicates whether the data stored in the VM is encrypted
Encryption Algorithm
The algorithm used in the encryption/decryption process
Last backup
The date and time when the last backup was performed
Last integrity check
The date and time when the last ﬁle system integrity check was
performed
TABLE II. ACCESS CONTROL METRICS
Metric
Description
Valid Accesses
The number of valid access attempts in the last 24 hours
Failed access attempts
The number of failed access attempts in the last 24 hours
Password change interval
The frequency with which users must change passwords in the VM’s
operating system
TABLE III. SERVER SECURITY METRICS
Metric
Description
Malware
Number of malware detected in the last anti-malware scan
Last malware scan
The date and time of the last malware scan in the VM
Vulnerabilities
Number of vulnerabilities found in the last scan
Last vulnerability scan
The date and time of the last vulnerability scan in the VM
Availability
Percentage of the time in which the VM is online
It is important to notice that the accuracy of the obtained
information depends on the security software being monitored.
Our solution aggregates these data to present it in a way that
is more clear and easy to monitor. The tool helps network
and security administrator perceive violations to Sec-SLAs and
actively respond to threats.
In this case study, considering the automatic attacks pre-
viously described, the most violated metrics were the failed
access attempts and the anti-malware events, as well as avail-
ability, because of malware that would cause denial of service.
Since we obtained a high number of violations in an
environment that was supposed to be under constant attack, it
suggests that the chosen metrics are good indicators of overall
security for the virtual machines.
VIII.
KEY LESSONS LEARNED
A. Background
Monitoring and managing security aspects remains a chal-
lenge that has to be faced to enable the full potential of the
cloud and only now, with a recent agreed upon deﬁnition of
exactly what is cloud computing, this can be achieved. The
major piece of technology used to provide security in the cloud
is cryptography.
Data leakage and data loss are possibly the greatest con-
cerns of cloud users. If the CSP acts unfaithfully the users may
not even become aware of incidents that compromise their data.
There must be ways to verify data integrity, so that users are
certain their data were not corrupted. Backup and recovery are
also fundamental tools to ensure the availability of customer
data.
The greatest challenge to security monitoring in a cloud
environment is the fact that the cloud provides services on
demand, creating a highly dynamic and ﬂexible system to
which the metrics have to be adapted.
SLAs are fundamental to provide customers with the
needed guarantees that the service they are hiring will be
adequately provided, their machines will be secure and their
data will be securely stored, transmitted and processed.
Security metrics and a more quantitative approach to secu-
rity, in both the deﬁnition of requirements and their monitoring,
remain an important open research topic.
There are other important security metrics that are related
to the security processes of the CSP, such as employee training,
physical security and contingency plans. These were not taken
into account in this work because they cannot be automatically
gathered and monitored.
B. Design and Implementation
The design of a software project and related architectural
decisions may consume a great time before the implementation
is even started. Building an extension over a previous archi-
tecture, as was our case, may greatly reduce this time.
Nevertheless, many important decisions have to be made
to achieve a ﬁnal functioning software. The major decisions in
this case were related to the security metrics and the software
used to provide the necessary security data.
As already stated in this paper, deﬁning and quantifying
security is no easy task, therefore it was the most time
consuming aspect of the project. Trying to come up with a
simple set of metrics that represent the state of security of a
whole cloud not only seems, but deﬁnitely is a daunting task.
Something that became clear with this implementation is
that no single set of metrics can embrace every security need,
and so to deﬁne the metrics we based our approach on the
common security issues described in the literature, as well as
issues that are consistently cited as the most critical by industry
users. It is also important to note that the deﬁnition and
monitoring of metrics must be ﬂexible enough to accommodate
different potential uses of the software.
After deﬁning what is going to be measured it is necessary
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 2. Nagios simpliﬁed interface of the monitored cloud services
to focus on how to do it. The idea of analyzing logs to obtain
security data is classical in information security and it seemed
like a natural approach to our challenge.
To read, parse and present the data we chose to use the
Python programming language because it already formed the
base of PCMONS and it ﬁts very well these kinds of tasks.
An important aspect of the proposed solution is its mod-
ularity. Because of this feature we were able to introduce
the new metrics and adapt it to our needs without changing
anything that was already done in terms of basic monitoring.
We believe the same can be achieved anytime it becomes
necessary to adapt the software to new particular monitoring
needs.
Modularity and extensibility are necessary approaches
when you deal with such dynamic and highly scalable en-
vironments, because you have to be certain that you will be
able to adjust the software to your future needs, which may
be very different from current ones. The most challenging
metrics in terms of implementation were those that gathered
data from non-standard security software, such as tripwire,
because we had to understand the data they generated to
interface them with PCMONS. The analysis of our results
shows that PCMONS was able to comply with our deﬁned
set of metrics, since their implementation relied on established
security software, and that the deﬁnition and implementation
of new metrics may be done in the future without the need for
a great architectural redesign.
C. Testing Environment
Setting up a reliable testing environment was also ex-
tremely important to the success of the project. Setting up
a private cloud is often advertised as being simple and
convenient, but that is not always true when we have to
deal with speciﬁcities of architectures, operating systems and
hypervisors.
Our private cloud has been evolving for some years and
through the realization of other projects we were able to gather
experience on deploying, managing and monitoring it, which
allowed us to choose tools we already knew would work well
together.
Since the whole cloud infrastructure is built upon a piece of
software, it is important to know that it is stable, reliable, well
documented and provides available support. Our choice for the
OpenNebula platform came from previous experience with it
and its widespread use by many big players in the industry,
such as Telefonica, Akamai and IBM.
An important feature of this extension of PCMONS is
that it can run over Eucalyptus, OpenNebula and OpenStack,
monitoring virtual machines in every platform. The support for
different cloud platforms reﬂects the evolution of cloud tools
and a greater effort being made in terms of standardization,
interoperability and portability, all of which are big issues in
cloud computing.
The use of scripting languages in the development process,
such as Python and Bash Script allowed us to deﬁne the
metrics, implement and test them on the ﬂy on the testing en-
vironment, without needing to stop services, compile software,
test it, compile it again and so on. This approach required less
intensive use of the testing environment during development
and accelerated the whole process.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper described a few of our previous works in the
ﬁeld of Cloud Computing and how to bring them all together
in order to develop a cloud security monitoring architecture.
The use of cloud computing is a great option for telecom-
munications companies that want to reduce OPEX and CAPEX
costs and still improve their service provisioning. Security,
nevertheless, must be accurately planned and monitored to
ensure that the transition to the cloud runs smoothly.
The paper described the design and implementation of a
cloud security monitoring tool, and how it can gather data
from many security sources inside VMs and the network in
which the physical machines are to give administrators a clear
view of the security of their systems and allow Cloud Service
Providers to give users guarantees about the security of their
machines and data.
Currently, there are not many solutions to cloud security
monitoring, and this paper shows it is possible to build such
a system based on previous work.
As future work, we can point to the deﬁnition and imple-
mentation of new metrics and a better integration with existing
Security SLAs, planning to include a new module to treat
possible actions to be taken in response to metric violations,
such as locking a virtual machine or shutting it down.
Also, it would be important to study the integration of the
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

security monitoring model with other active research ﬁelds in
cloud security, such as Identity and Access Management and
Intrusion Detection Systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Salvatore Loreto, Saverio Niccolini
and Vijay Gurbani for their prior review and for their help in
improving the paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Mell and T. Grance, The nist deﬁnition of cloud computing.
[Online].
Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
145/SP800-145.pdf (2011) [retrieved: Sept, 2014]
[2]
K. Ren, C. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Security challenges for the public
cloud,” Internet Computing, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 1, jan.-feb. 2012, pp. 69
–73.
[3]
F. Shaikh and S. Haider, “Security threats in cloud computing,” in Inter-
net Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST), 2011 International
Conference for, 2011, pp. 214–219.
[4]
R. B. Uriarte and C. B. Westphall, “Panoptes: A monitoring architecture
and framework for supporting autonomic clouds,” in Network Opera-
tions and Management Symposium (NOMS), 2014 IEEE. IEEE, 2014,
pp. 1–5.
[5]
D. Fernandes, L. Soares, J. Gomes, M. Freire, and P. Incio,
“Security issues in cloud environments: a survey,” International
Journal of Information Security, vol. 13, no. 2, 2014, pp. 113–
170. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10207-013-0208-7
[retrieved: Sept, 2014]
[6]
T. T. W. Group et al., “The notorious nine: cloud computing top threats
in 2013,” Cloud Security Alliance, 2013.
[7]
M. Mukhtarov, N. Miloslavskaya, and A. Tolstoy, “Cloud network
security monitoring and response system,” vol. 8, no. Special Issue on
Cloud Computing and Services. sai: itssa.0008.2012.020 ITSSA, 2012,
pp. 71–83.
[8]
B. Grobauer, T. Walloschek, and E. Stocker, “Understanding cloud
computing vulnerabilities,” Security Privacy, IEEE, vol. 9, no. 2, march-
april 2011, pp. 50 –57.
[9]
X. Tan and B. Ai, “The issues of cloud computing security in high-speed
railway,” in Electronic and Mechanical Engineering and Information
Technology (EMEIT), 2011 International Conference on, vol. 8, 2011,
pp. 4358–4363.
[10]
F. Sabahi, “Cloud computing security threats and responses,” in Com-
munication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011 IEEE 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on, 2011, pp. 245–249.
[11]
K. Vieira, A. Schulter, C. Westphall, and C. Westphall, “Intrusion
detection for grid and cloud computing,” IT Professional, vol. 12, no. 4,
2010, pp. 38–43.
[12]
L. Kaufman, “Data security in the world of cloud computing,” Security
Privacy, IEEE, vol. 7, no. 4, 2009, pp. 61–64.
[13]
S. Chaves, C. Westphall, C. Westphall, and G. Geronimo, “Customer
security concerns in cloud computing,” in ICN 2011, The Tenth Inter-
national Conference on Networks, 2011, pp. 7–11.
[14]
S. De Chaves, R. Uriarte, and C. Westphall, “Toward an architecture for
monitoring private clouds,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 49,
no. 12, 2011, pp. 130–137.
[15]
S. de Chaves, C. Westphall, and F. Lamin, “Sla perspective in security
management for cloud computing,” in Networking and Services (ICNS),
2010 Sixth International Conference on, 2010, pp. 212–217.
[16]
R. M. Ryan MacDonald, Linux malware detect. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rfxn.com/projects/linux-malware-detect/ (2014) [retrieved:
Sept, 2014]
[17]
R. Deraison, Open vulnerability assessment system. [Online]. Available:
http://http://www.openvas.org/ (2014) [retrieved: Sept, 2014]
[18]
E.
Gerbier,
Another
ﬁle
integrity
checker.
[Online].
Available:
http://aﬁck.sourceforge.net/ (2014) [retrieved: Sept, 2014]
[19]
J. da Silva, Advanced maryland automatic network disk archiver.
[Online]. Available: http://http://www.amanda.org/ (2014) [retrieved:
Sept, 2014]
[20]
D. dos Santos, C. Merkle Westphall, and C. Becker Westphall, “A
dynamic risk-based access control architecture for cloud computing,”
in Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), 2014
IEEE, May 2014, pp. 1–9.
[21]
P. Silva, C. Westphall, C. Westphall, M. Mattos, and D. Santos, “An
architecture for risk analysis in cloud,” in ICNS 2014, The Tenth
International Conference on Networking and Services, 2014, pp. 29–33.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

