Virtual Sessions for Forensic Analysis of Video
Conferencing Systems: A Novel Methodology
Jaykumar Soni, Tom Neubert, Benjamin Dietrich, Claus Vielhauer
Department of Informatics & Media
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences
Brandenburg, Germany
{jaykumar.soni, tom.neubert, benjamin.dietrich, claus.vielhauer}@th-brandenburg.de
Abstract—During the last years online meetings and conse-
quently Video Conferencing Systems (VCS) have become more
and more popular to reduce travel time and costs. Because of
the dramatically increased usage of VCS, it has become more
important to analyze and evaluate their security and privacy
due to the huge amount of privacy related multimedia data
processed by VCS. Thus, in this paper, we present a novel privacy
preserving methodology to generate virtual video conferencing
sessions with reproducible data to enable a comparable and
reliable analysis of these systems in future work.
Index Terms—Privacy, Video Conferencing Systems, Media
Security, Forensic Analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
In the modern world, Video Conferencing Systems (VCS)
have become an essential tool for remote communication.
These systems enable individuals and teams to collaborate
and hold meetings from a distance, reducing travel costs and
energy consumption. However, as the use of VCS continues
to grow, there is an increasing need to evaluate their security,
privacy, data economy and sustainability aspects. In particular,
there have been reported several security and privacy issues
with regard to the use of VCS (e.g. [1] and [2]) which raises
concerns in the ﬁeld of multimedia security. Inherently, there
are privacy issues with all VCS, as facial videos and speech
audios are involved, which are considered as biometric data
requiring special protection. Furthermore, by analysis of the
activity timelines of participants, behavioral patterns such as
absence from the conference, movements, chatting behavior
can be derived. These facts suggest that security analysis,
especially with regard to privacy, is an important requirement
within the ﬁeld of multimedia security.
Due to the closed-source nature of most commercial VCS,
security and privacy analysis approaches are somewhat limited
to binary code analysis or behavioral analysis. e.g. by analyz-
ing network trafﬁc during live VC-sessions. Although VCS
communication nowadays is almost 100% endpoint encrypted,
but network trafﬁc analysis can still reveal meta information
about information ﬂows, including their volumes, temporary
behavior, server endpoints, streams, locations and more. In
addition to deriving privacy related ﬁndings such as server
operators and locations, there is also the potential to infer
aspects of data economy, sustainability and reliability by these
multimedia data. The network trafﬁc analysis approach of VCS
also brings along privacy issues in itself, as it requires real
persons to actually use the VCS under investigation, exposing
their aforementioned sensitive traits to potentially untrusted
VCS service providers.
A. Research Gap
These previously mentioned aspects leads to the need of
a new approach to conceptually generate virtual video con-
ferencing (VC-) sessions by injecting media data into VC
clients to create reproducible virtual sessions for a compa-
rable analysis of different VCS under the same data. Current
concepts for the analysis of VCS (for example [1]) did not
provide an environment with automated, simulated and virtual
network trafﬁc (video, audio, and text) to evaluate the systems.
We assume that for a systematically forensic analysis and
comparison of multiple VCS a novel concept is needed which
provides simulated, stable and scripted network trafﬁc data
based on virtual VC-sessions without privacy concerns.
B. Contribution
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach for the analysis
of VCS using publicly available videos and pre-programmed
scripts to simulate other VCS related activities like chatting,
screen sharing and so on to generate network trafﬁc. This
approach allows the forensic analysis of encrypted data with-
out the need for decryption and enables the evaluation of
VCS without compromising user privacy. The use of virtual
data instead of real biometric data protects the privacy of
individuals and allows researchers to test and improve their
algorithms and systems in a controlled and ethical manner
and with the possibility of reproduction. The approach can
provide a large and diverse dataset for studying the behavior
of Video Conferencing Systems, enabling a more comprehen-
sive understanding of these systems in real-world scenarios.
Furthermore, the use of virtual data can lead to more accurate
and reliable results compared to using noisy and unpredictable
biometric data. Our methodology for generation of virtual VC-
sessions to analyze VCS involves ﬁve steps:
1) Deﬁnition of user activities,
2) Data requirements and collection of data,
3) Automation of virtual VC-session,
4) Capture network data from virtual VC-session and
5) Forensic Analysis.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Fig. 1. Pipeline of our novel methodology
While our approach is still in its initial stages, we believe
that it has the potential to offer a novel framework for the
forensic analysis of VCS in future work.
C. Structure
The work is structured as follows: In Section II, a selected
State-of-the-Art of VCS analysis is presented without the
claim to completeness. In Section III the novel methodology
is introduced. Section IV concludes the paper with a summary,
early results and future work.
II. SELECTED STATE-OF-THE-ART
Forensic analysis of Video Conferencing Systems (VCS)
has gained attention due to the increased use of these systems
during the last years to save health, energy, costs and time.
With the widespread relocation of the workplace to a private
environment, security- and privacy-related aspects of Video
Conferencing Systems have become more important.
Early works primarily addressed Microsoft’s Skype™ software
as widely used VCS during the last decade. Relevant papers
address the following topics:
• Physical memory analysis to reconstruct user activities
[3],
• Identiﬁcation of Skype™ packets in network trafﬁc [4],
• NAND and RAM analysis of Skype™ using an emulator
[5] and
• Forensic analysis of Skype™
behavior on hard drive
image on Windows 10™ [6].
The authors of [7] have investigated the Cisco WebEx
VCS™ application in 2021. A forensic analysis of memory,
hard disk, and a recording of network trafﬁc was performed.
In [1] Altschaffel et al. presented an approach of a forensic
examination process based on heuristics and meta data analysis
of VCS-related multimedia network streams. Based on the
general deﬁnition of seven multimedia data streams (audio,
video, screen-sharing, sharing of video, text, ﬁle-transfer and
other spatial streams) 20 events could be identiﬁed that re-
vealed sensitive user or activity related information.
III. METHODOLOGY TO GENERATE VIRTUAL SESSIONS
FOR ANALYSIS OF VCS
Our methodology for generating virtual video conferencing
(VC-) sessions to analyze different Video Conference Systems
(VCS) consists of ﬁve basic steps (S1 - S5, see Fig. 1). In the
initial step S1 the user activities for the virtual VC-sessions
are deﬁned (see Section III-A). In the second step S2 the
video and audio data without privacy concerns is gathered.
The requirements for this data are described detailed in Section
III-B. During the third step S3 the automation of a virtual VC-
session based on a screenplay (from S1) is implemented (see
Section III-C). In S4 the network trafﬁc produced by the virtual
VC-session is recorded and post-processed (Section III-D).
The last step S5 features the potential analysis of the VCS
with the recorded virtual VC-session (Section III-E).
A. Deﬁnition of User Activities (S1)
In the ﬁrst step of the methodology for analyzing VCS,
we deﬁne user activities An (in this work, n denotes an
index number for each individual activity An, event En or
user Un) to trigger VCS relevant events En (based on [1])
in order to ensure a consistent and reproducible evaluation
process. This includes creating a screenplay, which speciﬁes
different activities An that users would carry out during the
VC-session. An are based on the functionalities present in the
particular VCS that shall be analyzed in S5 with the intention
of identifying speciﬁc events En of VCS. The screenplay
includes details such as the number of users Un who will
participate in the session and what activities An they will
perform, for example: join and leave the session, start sharing
their virtual camera and audio and so on. By deﬁning activities
An in advance, we can control user behavior and ensure
consistency across different simulations, allowing for more
accurate comparison of different VCS. This step is critical
for eliminating variations that could potentially inﬂuence an
evaluation or a comparison of different VCS and enables a
more reliable analysis (in S5). The output result of this step
is a screenplay that details the activities An for users Un in
the virtual VC-session.
B. Data Requirements and Collection of Data (S2)
After deﬁning the activities An for users Un in S1, the next
step S2 is to collect the media data required for the analysis
of various VCS. Our primary goal in this step is to collect
video and audio data without privacy concerns. To ensure this,
we collect our data from publicly available sources such as
news video platforms, which typically obtain consent from the
individuals being recorded before making the footage available
for public viewing. The collected data reﬂects the types of
content and communication styles commonly encountered in
real-world video conferencing scenarios. This helps us to
create more accurate and relevant virtual VC-sessions. Before
the collected data is used for analysis, it should be pre-
processed to comply with deﬁned requirements and standards.
This may involve tasks such as formatting the data in a speciﬁc
way (e.g. converting video to a particular ﬁle format or resizing
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

of video media to a deﬁned resolution to simulate a web cam),
removing any irrelevant or extraneous information such as in-
image text, or applying various ﬁlters or transformations to the
data. The output result of this step is the collection of publicly
available video and audio data for use in the subsequent steps.
C. Automation of Virtual VC-Session (S3)
Step S3 of our methodology is the automation of the VC-
session. Therefore a simulation script is implemented that
takes different media like audio, video and text data as input
and carries out activities An for users Un as deﬁned in S1 in a
chronological order without the need for manual intervention.
As a result this step reduces the workload of manually
carrying out activities An on different clients and allows a
reproducible data recording. What programming language is
used for scripting the activities An of users Un from S1 with
the collected data from S2 should be decided by individual
preferences (we used Python 3.10).
D. Capture Network Data from Virtual Session (S4)
In Step S4, network trafﬁc data is captured from VCS of
deﬁned user activities An from S1 with collected multimedia
data from S2, automated with the simulation script from S3.
For capturing network trafﬁc data, we utilize a Switch SW
that mirrors the trafﬁc of all Ethernet connected systems (from
users Un) to a Data Collector DC (see Fig. 2). Thus, DC
captures the network data. It is noteworthy that in our work we
can only gather network trafﬁc data for the client-side, since
we usually do not have access to the server-side (VCS-SV)
for most commercial VCS. This approach guarantees that the
data we collect accurately reﬂects real-world VCS scenarios.
When the data is captured, it has to be post-processed to
ensure that it contains only relevant data for the subsequent
and use case speciﬁc forensic analysis in S5 (e.g. ﬁltering out
network trafﬁc communication based on the IP addresses of
client and server along with ﬁltering only a single protocol for
analysis like TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) or UDP
(User Data Protocol). Thus, S4 provides a post-processed
dataset of selected network trafﬁc of a virtual session for a
speciﬁc VCS scenario, with controlled and consistent user
behavior.
Fig. 2. Setup to capture network data of virtual VC-session S4
E. Forensic Analysis (S5)
The ﬁnal step S5 of the methodology involves the forensic
analysis of the data provided from S4. The analysis can
focus on various use case speciﬁc aspects, such as privacy,
reliability, user activity tracking, sustainability and more. The
speciﬁc aspects chosen for analysis will depend on the goals
and objectives of a potential study. To perform the forensic
analysis, various statistical computational techniques such as
machine or deep learning based approaches can be taken into
consideration. For an initial validation of the concept, we have
carried out an exemplary user activity tracking for S5 (see
Section IV-B).
IV. CONCLUSION
A. Summary
In this paper we introduce a novel methodology for the
generation of virtual session for VCS to provide a forensic
analysis of VC-sessions with reliable, comparable and repro-
ducible data. The methodology involves four steps to create
data for virtual session. In the ﬁfth step of the methodology
a forensic analysis is performed which can focus on various
aspects such as privacy, reliability, sustainability, user activity
tracking and so on.
B. Early Results and Future Work
For the initial proof-of-concept validation of the new
methodology presented in this paper, we perform a ﬁrst user
activity analysis based on visualization of multimedia streams.
During this initial exemplary analysis (step S5), we identiﬁed
user activities based on events from [1] like webcam on/off,
muted/unmuted and screen sharing on an exemplary VCS.
Thus, we can expect that our concept can provide reliable
and reproducible virtual VC-session, which can be used for
the analysis of VCS.
We will use the methodology to provide further virtual VC-
session for a machine learning based analysis of multiple VC-
Systems with the intention of user activity tracking.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Altschaffel, J. Hielscher, S. Kiltz, and J. Dittmann, “Meta and media
data stream forensics in the encrypted domain of video conferences,”
in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Workshop on Information Hiding and
Multimedia Security, 2021, pp. 23–33.
[2] MITRE-CVE-Program, “CVE-2022-36927,” Available from MITRE,
CVE-ID
CVE-CVE-2022-36927,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2022-36927
[3] M. Simon and J. Slay, “Recovery of skype application activity data
from physical memory,” in 2010 International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 283–288.
[4] A. Azab, P. Watters, and R. Layton, “Characterising network trafﬁc for
skype forensics,” in 2012 Third cybercrime and trustworthy computing
workshop.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 19–27.
[5] M. I. Al-Saleh and Y. A. Forihat, “Skype forensics in android devices,”
International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 78, no. 7, 2013.
[6] A. Majeed and S. Saleem, “Forensic analysis of social media apps in
windows 10,” NUST Journal of Engineering Sciences, vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
37–45, 2017.
[7] Z. Khalid, F. Iqbal, F. Kamoun, M. Hussain, and L. A. Khan, “Forensic
analysis of the cisco webex application,” in 2021 5th Cyber Security in
Networking Conference (CSNet).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 90–97.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

