Reducing the Attack Surface for Private Data 
 
 
George O. M. Yee 
Computer Research Lab, Aptusinnova Inc., Ottawa, Canada 
Dept. of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada 
e-mail: george@aptusinnova.com, gmyee@sce.carleton.ca 
 
 
 
Abstract—Breaches of private data have been occurring at an 
alarming rate, to the embarrassment and expense of companies 
that hold the data. It would appear that in each breach, the 
attack surface for the data has been sufficiently large to attract 
attackers. Reducing this attack surface is a way to lessen the 
likelihood of breaches. This paper presents methods for 
reducing the attack surface of private data held in the online 
computer systems of  organizations. The methods are applied to 
a software system’s  architecture early in the design process, as 
an approach for designing-in security. This work defines the 
attack surface for the data, and then uses this definition to 
obtain a formula for calculating the attack surface. The 
definition further leads to identifying methods that can be used 
to reduce the attack surface. Reducing the attack surface may 
not prevent breaches, but it will make them less likely to occur.  
Keywords-privacy; private data; breaches; attack surface 
identification; attack surface reduction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Breaches of private data held by companies and other 
types of organizations have been occurring at an alarming rate. 
Consider the following sampling of recent breaches [1]: 
• 
August 21 – September 5, 2018: British Airways, 
380,000 
customers 
affected; 
card 
payment 
information stolen; the airline’s website and app were 
hacked. 
• 
January 1, 2016 – December 22, 2017: Orbitz, 
880,000 
customers 
affected; 
payment 
card 
information and personal data (billing addresses, 
phone numbers, emails) stolen; the company’s 
website was hacked. 
• 
May 1, 2015 – July 4, 2018: SingHealth, 1.5 million 
users affected; names and addresses in the Singapore 
government’s health database, and some histories of 
dispensed medicine were stolen; also, the prime 
minister of Singapore was specifically targeted; 
hackers orchestrated a deliberate, well-planned 
attack. 
• 
August 20, 2018: T-Mobile, about 2 million users 
affected; a group of hackers accessed T-Mobile 
servers through an application programming interface 
and stole encrypted passwords and personal data, 
including account numbers, billing information, and 
email addresses. 
Apparently, the attack surface for the data that was breached, 
or the number of ways that the data could be accessed and 
stolen, was sufficiently large and attractive to the attackers. 
Given the rate of recent data breaches, it is clear that more 
needs to be done to reduce the probability of a data breach 
occurring. The objective of this work is to derive methods for 
reducing the attack surface of private data held in online (i.e., 
connected to the Internet) computer systems of organizations. 
The methods are obtained from consideration of the definition 
of the attack surface, which in turn is based on how an attack 
happens. This definition also leads to a straightforward 
formula for calculating the size of the attack surface, which 
can be used to verify that use of the methods does indeed 
reduce the attack surface. The methods focus on reducing the 
attack surface by altering the system architecture, rather than 
the deployment of add-on security appliances, such as 
firewalls and intrusion detection systems. The methods are 
meant to be applied at the early stages of design within a 
software development cycle, as part of the Design for Security 
toolset. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II explains 
private data, attacks, attack surface, and how to calculate the 
size of the attack surface. Section III derives methods for 
reducing the attack surface based on its definition. Section IV 
illustrates the methods using an application example. Section 
V describes related work, and Section VI presents conclusions 
and future work. 
II. 
PRIVATE DATA, ATTACKS, AND ATTACK SURFACE 
A. Private Data, Attacks, and Attack Surface 
Private Data (PD), also known as personal data, is data 
about an individual, can identify that individual, and is owned 
by that individual [2]. For example, an individual’s driver 
license number, passport number, or credit card number can 
each be used to identify the individual and are therefore 
considered as private data. The individual’s privacy then 
refers to his/her ability to control the collection (what personal 
data and collected by which party), purpose of collection, 
retention, and disclosure of that data, as stated in the 
individual’s privacy preferences [2]. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

DEFINITION 1: An attack is any action carried out against 
an organization’s computer system that, if successful, results 
in the system being compromised.  
This work focuses on attacks that compromise the PD held 
in the online systems of organizations. The attacker who 
launches an attack may be internal (inside attacker) or external 
(outside attacker) to the organization. This work applies to 
both types of attackers. An internal attacker usually has easier 
access to the targets of his/her attack and he/she may hide 
his/her attacks in the guise of normal duty.  
Salter et al. [3] give an interesting insight into what 
enables a successful attack: “Any successful attack has three 
steps: One, diagnose the system to identify some attack. Two, 
gain the necessary access. And three, execute the attack. To 
protect a system, only one of these three steps needs to be 
blocked.” Thus, an attack surface must contain a target that 
the attacker deems worthy of attack (suit his/her purpose for 
the attack) and that target must be accessible to the attacker. 
For this work, the target that is potentially worthy of attack is 
the PD that is accessible to attackers. In a computer system, 
this PD is either moving (travelling from one location to 
another), at rest (stored), or being used (by some process). 
This leads to the following definition of attack surface: 
DEFINITION 2: The attack surface for private data 
contained in an online computer system is the set of all 
locations in the system that contain attacker accessible PD in 
the clear, where the PD is moving, at rest, or being processed. 
Figure 1 shows an example attack surface.        
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Definition 2, “attacker accessible PD” means that the 
attacker is able to exfiltrate the PD using some agent of 
attack, such as malware against stored PD and PD being 
processed, or a man-in-the-middle attack against a link 
containing moving PD.  
An alternative definition of attack surface for PD 
contained in a computer system is the set of ways the attacker 
has to exfiltrate the PD. However, given the complexity of 
computer systems and the fact that the tools available to the 
attacker to use in his/her attacks are unknown to us, it is next 
to impossible to determine this set.  On the other hand, 
locations that contain attacker accessible PD are easier to 
identify.  Since an exfiltration must be from a location that 
contains PD, the set of such exfiltrations depends on the set 
of such locations. The larger the set of locations, the larger 
the set of exfiltrations. The smaller the set of locations, the 
smaller the set of exfiltrations. Therefore, Definition 2 in a 
sense includes this alternative definition, but in addition, is 
more easily applied. 
As mentioned above, in the first step of a successful 
attack, the attacker diagnoses the system to identify the attack 
[3].  A smaller attack surface will make this step more 
difficult for the attacker. Therefore, a smaller attack surface 
corresponds to higher security, which is why we wish to 
reduce the attack surface. Definition 2 also gives rise to this 
conclusion: a smaller attack surface means a smaller number 
of locations that contain PD, which in turn means fewer 
opportunities for exfiltration of the PD, or in other words, 
higher security.  
Definition 2 is consistent with the intuitive understanding 
of an attack surface, which is “the set of ways in which an 
adversary can enter the system and potentially cause damage” 
[4]. Each “way” corresponds to a location in Definition 2 that 
in turn corresponds to methods for exfiltrating PD from the 
location.  
B. Calculating the Size of the Attack Surface 
It would be useful to have a numerical value for the size 
of the attack surface, since then we could a) compare attack 
surfaces at different stages of development to see if the 
system’s security is getting better or worse, b) compare attack 
surfaces of different systems when choosing a system for 
purchase, and c) easily see if actions taken to reduce the attack 
surface have indeed reduced it.  
As mentioned above, private data held in a computer 
system can be in the following three states: moving, at rest, or 
being processed. These states correspond respectively, within 
a computer system, to PD that is moving along a link, PD that 
is stored in a data store, and PD that is being processed. Thus, 
the locations in Definition 2 refer to links, datastores, and 
processes that contain attacker accessible PD. Definition 2 
then leads naturally to the following formula for calculating 
the size of the attack surface for private data.  
Let N be the size of the attack surface for PD. Let m, n, and 
k be the number of links, data stores, and processes, 
respectively, that contain attacker accessible PD in the clear. 
Then 
 
𝑁 = 𝑚 + 𝑛 + 𝑘 
 
Equation (1) says that the size N of the attack surface is 
found by adding up the number of attacker accessible 
locations in the system that contain PD, namely: the number 
m of links, the number n of data stores, and the number k of 
processes, all of which contain attacker accessible PD. This 
equation follows directly from Definition 2, by simply 
replacing “attack surface” with “size of the attack surface” and 
(1) 
Figure 1. Example attack surface consisting of the set of all 6 attacker 
accessible locations in the system that contain PD in the clear.  
Internet 
Computer 
System 
 
Legend: 
PD data store 
Process using PD 
Link with PD flow 
Attacker 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

“set” with “size of the set” in that definition. Applying this 
equation to Figure 1 gives an attack surface of size N = m + n 
+ k = 2 + 2 + 2 = 6.  
III. 
REDUCING THE ATTACK SURFACE 
A. Methods for Redusing the Attack Surface 
Equation (1) implies that the attack surface will decrease 
if and only if any or all of the quantities m, n, or k decrease. 
Therefore, the attack surface may be reduced by the following 
methods, where each method decreases m, n, or k: 
 
a) Make a PD location useless to the attacker. 
b) Combine two or more PD locations into a single PD 
location.  
c) Deny the attacker access to a PD location.  
d) Remove a PD location from the system. 
 
The following explains these methods in greater detail 
and describes how they may be carried out. 
a) Make a PD Location Useless to the Attacker 
As mentioned above, in the first step of a successful attack, 
the attacker diagnoses the system to identify an attack, or in 
our case, the PD target for the attack. In this diagnosis, it is 
reasonable to assume that the attacker will ignore any target 
that he/she finds useless for his/her purposes. Such targets 
may be removed from the attack surface. Some ways to make 
a PD target useless to an attacker are: 
• 
Obfuscate (e.g., encrypt) the PD at the location. The 
attacker will not want to exfiltrate PD that cannot be 
read. The computer system will need to able to de-
obfuscate the data securely for its own purposes. 
• 
Anonymize the PD at the location. Again, the attacker 
will not want PD that cannot be linked to individuals, 
since it is this linking that adds value to the data, e.g., 
for advertising purposes. The computer system will 
need to be able to de-anonymize the data securely for 
its own purposes. 
To illustrate, obfuscating one data store and one process in 
Figure 1 results in Figure 2, where the obfuscated data store 
and the obfuscated process have been removed from the attack 
surface. It can be seen that the attack surface in Figure 2 is 
reduced (size 4) relative to the attack surface of Figure 1 (size 
6).  
b) Combine Two or More PD Locations into a Single PD 
Location 
This method will decrease the number of PD locations 
and reduce the size of the attack surface per (1). Additional 
data links may need to be implemented in the system’s design 
to carry PD that was previously carried by links to/from the 
locations that were combined. In addition, changes to the 
software logic may be needed for data stores or processes that 
were combined to accomplish reading or storing the data in 
the combined location (for combined data stores), or new 
processing of data in the combined location. (for combined 
processes). To illustrate, combining two data stores into one 
data store and combining two processes into one process in 
Figure 1 also results in the reduced attack surface shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Deny the Attacker Access to a  PD Location 
It may be possible to have some PD locations offline, thus 
denying the attacker access to these locations. For example, 
this may be possible for certain self-contained processing, 
such as analytics, that can be done using PD that is offline. In 
this case, all data stores, processes, and data links involved 
solely in such offline processing may be removed from the 
attack surface of the system to which these locations originally 
belonged, and re-constituted into an offline system. It may be 
necessary to update the offline PD data stores periodically 
using data from the system that is online. This update will 
need to be done in a secure fashion, perhaps by transferring 
the data manually using disks, after making sure that no 
malware can infect the offline system via this transfer. 
Although the destination locations are offline, it may still be 
possible for transferred malware to exfiltrate the offline data, 
e.g., hiding the data in the disks that are used for transfer and 
then transmitting the data once the disks are on the online part 
of the system. 
d) Remove a PD Location from the System 
Another way to reduce the attack surface is to remove a 
PD location from the system by deciding that the PD in the 
location is no longer required. For example, a company that 
stores the credit card information of its customers for their 
convenience may decide to stop storing this information, and 
instead, ask the customer for their credit card information 
every time the customer goes through checkout. This is in 
general a good decision, to avoid storing PD that may get 
compromised, at the cost of a little inconvenience. In this case, 
the associated credit card PD datastore would no longer be 
needed, and would be removed from the attack surface. 
Another example is the removal of a process that periodically 
sends customers the status of their order. The process uses PD 
consisting of the customer’s name and email address to send 
the status. Suppose that this process is no longer necessary 
because the customer can now use a new Web interface to 
Internet 
Computer 
System 
 
Attacker 
Figure 2. Resulting reduced attack surface of size 4 after obfuscating or 
combining locations in Figure 1.   
Legend: 
PD data store 
Process using PD 
Link with PD flow 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

check order status. Removal of this process from the system 
removes it from the attack surface. Interestingly, removal of a 
PD location can also result in removing other PD locations 
that are connected to the location that is removed. For 
example, the removal of a PD data store or a process that uses 
PD can result in also removing connected PD locations, such 
as the links that carry PD, or a PD data store that the removed 
process was exclusively using. Thus, removing a PD location 
not only removes that location from the attack surface but can 
also lead to removing other PD locations further reducing the 
attack surface. 
B. Applying the Methods 
Since the above methods operate on attacker accessible 
PD locations, it is recommended that they be applied in the 
second phase of two phases, where the attacker accessible PD 
locations are identified in the first phase. These phases are 
carried out on an architectural representation of the online 
system, such as a Data Flow Diagram (DFD) [5] (see the 
application example in Section IV). The phases are as follows. 
• 
Phase 1: Identify PD locations by tracing the flow of 
private data in the online computer system, looking for 
where PD enters the system, where PD flows (links), 
where it is stored (data stores), and where it is used 
(processes). Identifying the PD locations by tracing the 
flow of PD in the system implies that there are paths to 
the PD that an attacker can use to exfiltrate the PD. We 
therefore conclude that all PD locations found in this 
manner in an online system are attacker accessible PD 
locations. Given the ingenuity of attackers (the 
exfiltration could even be aided by an insider of the 
organization that owns the computer system, through 
social engineering), this conclusion is valid.  
• 
Phase 2: Apply the above methods to the attacker 
accessible PD locations found in Phase 1, where possible, 
while considering the potential negative effects on the 
following aspects of the system: 
— 
Performance 
— 
Reliability and dependability 
— 
Ease of maintenance 
— 
Implementation cost 
For example, encryption or anonymization incurs extra 
overhead, combining data stores may introduce a 
performance bottleneck since the newly combined data 
store will now need to additionally support data accesses 
that were originally shared among the data stores that 
were combined. Combining PD locations in general may 
reduce modularity and lead to extra effort needed to 
maintain the system. A general guiding rule is to look for 
opportunities to apply the methods where the potential 
negative effects mentioned above are minimal. It may be 
more efficient to consider method a) last, since the other 
methods can add/delete links that are candidates for 
method a).  
Carrying out the above phases clearly requires knowledge 
of the computer system in terms of identifying the PD 
locations. Some basic knowledge of security would also be 
advantageous. These skills should be found within the 
software development team responsible for developing the 
system, perhaps with a little security training if needed. 
IV. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLE 
This section illustrates how to apply the methods for 
reducing the attack surface for private data using an example 
computer system for an online seller of merchandise (e.g., 
Amazon.com). Suppose this system is at the beginning stages 
of development and that the development team has produced 
a DFD showing how both private and non-private data will 
flow, be stored, and used in the system. This DFD is shown in 
Figure 3.  
The system in Figure 3 allows the customer to enter his/her 
“name”, “address”, “email”, “item selected” for purchase, and  
“credit card info” for payment. These comprise the PD for this 
example. Five processes cooperate to provide the 
functionality for the system. One datastore stores the 
customers’ private data; another datastore contains inventory 
data, i.e., what items are in stock. The system is an online 
system since it is for an online seller. The PD locations will be 
found by tracing the flow of PD in the system (described 
below). Thus, all PD locations in the system are attacker 
accessible PD locations, as noted above in the description of 
Phase 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applying Phase 1 in Section III B, we trace the flow of 
private data from the point where the data enters the system at 
Customer 
name, address, 
email, item selected, 
credit card info 
1. 
Receive and 
store data 
name, address, 
email, item selected, 
credit card info 
Customer datastore 
3. 
Send 
shipping 
status 
shipping 
status 
credit card 
info 
name, address, 
email, item 
selected 
email, shipping 
status 
4. 
Charge credit 
card 
 
payment 
status 
2. 
Check 
inventory & 
ship 
name, 
address 
inventory 
update 
inventory 
data 
5. 
Print 
shipping 
label 
Inventory datastore 
Figure 3. DFD for online seller system, showing how data 
flows, are stored, and used.  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

process 1. From there, the PD passes through process 1 and is 
stored in the customer datastore. After this datastore, the PD 
is split up with the “credit card info” going to process 4 to be 
used, and the “name”, “address”, “email”, and “item selected” 
going to process 2, where the “item selected” datum is used, 
and “name” and “address” are passed to process 5 to print the 
shipping label, whereas “email” is passed to process 3 to send 
the customer the shipping status. Thus, we can identify the PD 
locations as links, datastores, and processes through which the 
PD passes, is stored, and used. These attacker accessible PD 
locations are shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
ATTACKER ACCESSIBLE PD LOCATIONS IN FIGURE 3 
 
Links 
Datastores 
Processes 
1 
link into process 1  
customer datastore 
process 1 
2 
link out of process 1 
 
process 2 
3 
link from customer 
datastore to process 2 
 
process 3 
4 
link from customer 
datastore to process 4 
 
process 4 
5 
link into process 5 
 
process 5 
6 
link into process 3 
 
 
 
Table I shows that there are 6 attacker accessible PD link 
locations, 1 attacker accessible PD datastore, and 5 attacker 
accessible PD processes. For Figure 3, prior to the application 
of the above methods, (1) gives the size N of the attack surface 
for private data as N = m + n + k = 6 + 1 + 5 = 12. 
Applying Phase 2 in Section III B, we first use the above 
methods on the attacker accessible locations in Table I, as 
follows: 
• 
Using method b), combine process 3 with process 2; 
this was seen to have negligible impact on 
performance and an acceptable reduction in 
modularity. 
• 
Using method b), combine process 5 with process 2; 
this was also seen to have negligible impact on 
performance and an acceptable reduction in 
modularity. 
• 
Using method d), remove the customer datastore 
from the system; it was decided that storing customer 
PD was not needed (customer purchase history can 
be stored securely on the customer’s device by the 
seller’s app and later retrieved by the seller’s 
website). 
These changes result in the DFD shown in Figure 4. Table II 
gives the attacker accessible PD locations corresponding to 
Figure 4. 
Table II shows that there are 3 attacker accessible PD link 
locations and 3 attacker accessible PD processes. For Figure 
4, (1) gives the size N of the attack surface for private data as 
N = m + n + k = 3 + 0 + 3 = 6. Thus, the application of methods 
b) and d) have reduced the attack surface from 12 to 6. 
We can further reduce the attack surface as follows: 
• 
Using method a), obfuscate (encrypt) the links in 
Table II; the impact on performance due to the extra 
over head is deemed acceptable. 
• 
Using method a), obfuscate (encrypt) the PD in the 
processes shown in Table II; here, the impact on 
performance and the cost involved for extra code to 
handle 
encryption/decryption 
were 
considered 
unacceptable, and  this reduction step was not done. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
ATTACKER ACCESSIBLE PD LOCATIONS IN FIGURE 4 
 
Links 
Datastores 
Processes 
1 
link into process 1  
 
process 1 
2 
link from process 1 to 
process 2 
 
process 2 
3 
link from process 1 to 
process 4 
 
process 4 
Table III shows the remaining attacker accessible PD 
locations after applying method a) to the links in Table II. The 
new attack surface is of size N = m + n + k = 0 + 0 + 3 = 3. 
The application of the methods in Section III has improved the 
security of private data in the system by reducing the size of 
the attack surface from 12 to 3. 
Comparing Figure 4 to Figure 3, reducing the attack 
surface requires the following architectural changes to the 
system: a) reducing the number of processes from 5 to 3 by 
eliminating processes 3 and 5, b) changing the functionality of 
processes 1 and 2, and c) eliminating the customer database. 
As noted above, the implications of these changes were 
accepted by the development team. 
TABLE III.  
REMAINING ATTACKER ACCESSIBLE PD LOCATIONS IN 
FIGURE 4 AFTER OBFUSCATING THE LINKS IN TABLE II 
 
Links 
Datastores 
Processes 
1 
 
 
process 1 
2 
 
 
process 2 
3 
 
 
process 4 
Customer 
name, address, 
email, item selected, 
credit card info 
1. 
Receive and 
forward data 
shipping 
status 
credit card 
info 
name, address, 
email, item 
selected 
2. 
Check inventory, 
print shipping label, 
ship, & send 
shipping status 
4. 
Charge credit 
card 
 
inventory 
update 
inventory 
data 
Inventory datastore 
Figure 4. DFD for online seller system after combining 
processes and removing the customer data store. 
payment 
status 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The size of the attack surface obtained by applying the 
above methods depends on which methods were applied and 
the order in which they were applied. In particular, it may 
depend on the available opportunities for applying method b). 
For example, by using only method a) (obfuscation) on the 
locations in Table I and assuming that it is not advisable to 
apply method a) to the processes due to unacceptable impacts 
on performance and costs, we obtain an attack surface of size 
5 (for the remaining 5 processes since the obfuscated links and 
datastore would have been removed from the attack surface), 
which is larger than the attack surface of size 3 obtained above 
by opportunistically first applying method b). This is the 
rationale for the comment made in the description of Phase 2 
above, that it may be more efficient to consider applying 
method a) last.  
V. 
RELATED WORK 
Most closely related to this work is this author’s previous 
work on reducing the attack surface [6]. However, this 
previous work differs from the current work in at least the 
following ways: a) the previous work deals with sensitive data 
(including private data) whereas the current work focuses on 
private data, b) the previous work proposes a graphical model 
with which to identify the attack surface whereas the current 
work does not require any such model, c) the previous work 
reduces the attack surface by requiring the developer to learn 
and modify the graphical model whereas the current work has 
no such requirement. 
Some of the following related works deal with attack 
surface identification and reduction at the code or binary 
levels, whereas this work deals with it at the architectural 
level. A few of these works reduce the attack surface by 
removing unnecessary code or features similar to the removal 
of PD locations in this work. A. Kurmus et al. [7] look at 
reducing the attack surface of commodity OS kernels by 
identifying code that is not used and removing it or 
preventing it from executing. T. Kroes et al. [8] investigate 
reducing the attack surface through dynamic binary lifting, 
removal of unnecessary features, and recompilation. R. Ando 
[9] presents work on attack surface reduction through call 
graph enumeration in which attackable call graphs are 
removed. S. N. Bukhari et al. [10] propose reducing the attack 
surface corresponding to cross-site scripting by employing 
secure coding practices. G.V. Neville-Neil [11] writes that 
“the best way to reduce the attack surface of a piece of 
software is to remove any unnecessary code”. M. Sherman 
[12] looks at attack surface identification only and 
investigates attack surfaces for mobile devices. This author 
claims that mobile devices exhibit attack surfaces in 
capabilities, such as communication, computation, and 
sensors, that are generally not considered in current secure 
coding recommendations. 
Some works propose to increase security through attack 
surface expansion rather than attack surface reduction. For 
cloud services, T. Al-Salah et al. [13] propose three attack 
surface expansion approaches that use decoy virtual 
machines co-existing with the real virtual machines in the 
same physical host. They claim that simulation shows that 
adding the decoy virtual machines can significantly reduce 
the attackers’ success rate. For enterprise networks, K. Sun 
and S. Jajodia [14] propose a new mechanism that expands 
the attack surface, so that attackers have difficulty in 
identifying the real attack surface from the much larger 
expanded attack surface. Note that these works do not 
contradict reducing the attack surface to improve security, 
since the real attack surface is not expanded. The attack 
surface only appears to be expanded due to the addition of 
decoys.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This work has presented methods for reducing the attack 
surface for private data held within an online computer 
system. The methods are intended to be applied at the 
architectural level early in the development cycle prior to 
coding, as part of the Design for Security toolset.  
Applying the methods does not require developers to 
learn a new model or a new coding language. Apart from the 
methods themselves, which are straightforward, a minimal 
level of security knowledge is needed, in order to understand 
the concept of attack surface, the purpose of the methods, and 
how they work. Knowledge of the computer system is the 
major requirement, but developers already have this 
knowledge. 
Although 
the 
methods 
themselves 
are 
straightforward, applying them can be challenging in terms 
of their impact on performance, ease of maintenance, and so 
on, as mentioned above. 
Future work includes refining the methods from 
developer feedback, obtained perhaps through workshops 
and trials. Other future work consists of investigating new 
methods for reducing the attack surface and looking at tools 
that could indicate a method’s impact on such aspects as 
performance, 
reliability, 
ease 
of 
maintenance, 
and 
implementation costs. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Business Insider, “The 21 Scariest Data Breaches of 2018,” 
[retrieved: Sept., 2019] https://www.businessinsider.com/data-
hacks-breaches-biggest-of-2018-2018-12 
[2] G. Yee, “Visualization and Prioritization of Privacy Risks in 
Software Systems,” International Journal on Advances in 
Security, issn 1942-2636, vol. 10, no. 1&2, pp. 14-25, 2017, 
[retrieved: Sept., 2019] http://www.iariajournals.org/security/  
[3] C. Salter, O. Sami Saydjari, B. Schneier, and J. Wallner, 
“Towards a Secure System Engineering Methodology,” 
Proceedings of New Security Paradigms Workshop, Sept. 
1998, pp. 2-10. 
[4] P. K. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, “An Attack Surface Metric,” 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 
371-386, May/June, 2011. 
[5] T. DeMarco, Structured Analysis and System Specification, 
Prentice Hall, May, 1979. 
[6] G. Yee, “Modeling and Reducing the Attack Surface in 
Software Systems,” Proceedings, 11th Workshop on 
Modelling in Software Engineering (MiSE’2019), May 2019, 
pp. 55-62. 
[7] A. Kurmus, A. Sorniotti, and R. Kapitza, “Attack Surface 
Reduction for Commodity OS Kernels: Trimmed Garden 
Plants May Attract Less Bugs,” Proceedings of the Fourth 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

European Workshop on System Security (EUROSEC ’11), 
April 2011, article no. 6 (no page number available). 
[8] T. Kroes et al., “BinRec: Attack Surface Reduction Through 
Dynamic Binary Recovery,” Proceedings of the 2018 
Workshop on Forming an Ecosystem Around Software 
Transformation (FEAST ’18), October 2018, pp. 8-13. 
[9] R. Ando, “Automated Reduction of Attack Surface Using Call 
Graph Enumeration,” Proceedings of the 2018 2nd 
International Conference on Management Engineering, 
Software Engineering and Service Sciences (ICMSS 2018), 
January 2018, pp. 118-121. 
[10] S. N. Bukhari, M. A. Dar, and U. Iqbal, “Reducing Attack 
Surface Corresponding to Type 1 Cross-Site Scripting Attacks 
Using Secure Development Life Cycle Practices,” Proceedings 
of the 4th International Conference on Advances in Electrical, 
Electronics, Information, Communication and Bio-Informatics 
(AEEICB-18), February 2018, pp. 1-4. 
[11] G. V. Neville-Neil, “Reducing the Attack Surface,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 61, issue 2, pp. 27-28, 
February 2018. 
[12] M. Sherman, “Attack Surfaces for Mobile Devices,” 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Software 
Development Lifecycle for Mobile (DeMobile 2014), 
November 2014, pp. 5-8. 
[13] T. Al-Salah, L. Hong, and S. Shetty, “Attack Surface 
Expansion Using Decoys to Protect Virtualized Infrastructure,” 
Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on 
Edge Computing (EDGE), June 2017, pp. 216-219. 
[14] K. Sun and S. Jajodia, “Protecting Enterprise Networks 
through Attack Surface Expansion,” Proceedings of the 2014 
Workshop on Cyber Security Analytics, Intelligence and 
Automation (SafeConfig ’14), November 2014, pp. 29-32.
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

