Measurement of Electromagnetic Interference of Electronic Devices 
 
Hana Urbancokova, Jan Valouch, Stanislav Kovar, Milan Adamek 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
e-mail: {urbancokova, valouch, skovar, adamek}@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
Abstract — Measuring levels of electromagnetic interference, 
which are emitted by electronic devices, must be carried out in 
specialized laboratories that are equipped with an anechoic or 
semi-anechoic chamber. Electromagnetic interference of 
electronic devices is measured in these chambers at a distance 
of several meters; therefore, this interference is included in the 
far-field of electronic devices. Another possibility of measuring 
of electromagnetic interference is the measurement in a 
Gigahertz Transversal Electromagnetic (GTEM) cell. Unlike 
the chambers, the GTEM cells measure electromagnetic 
interference in the near-field of devices. Since the chambers 
are often fully booked, manufacturers of electronic devices can 
not test products in every phase of their development. The 
measurement of electromagnetic interference of electronic 
devices in the GTEM cell might be a possible alternative 
measure for manufacturers. 
Keywords- Electromagnetic compatibility; Electromagnetic 
interference; Intrusion and hold-up alarm systems; Electronic 
device; Level of interference signals. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the level of electromagnetic interference 
(EMI), which is normally found in our surroundings, can be 
a serious problem for the operation of electronic devices. The 
level of EMI is sometimes so high that it can cause 
malfunction or damage, and even the destruction of 
electronic devices. Because every electronic equipment, 
system or device is not only a receiver of electromagnetic 
interference, but it is also the source of interference, the 
problem with EMI is growing [1]. 
We face the question of problems of electromagnetic 
interference from the very development of electronic 
devices. One of the aims of the manufacturers is to bring to 
the market a product, which has a high resistance to 
electromagnetic interference.  Also, this product should not 
produce electromagnetic radiation that could disrupt the 
functionality 
of 
other 
electronic 
equipment 
in 
its 
surroundings during its current operations. For this reason, 
manufacturers must test their products in laboratories of 
electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) [2] [3]. 
Specialized generators that can produce various types of 
electromagnetic interference are used for most of the tests for 
electromagnetic susceptibility of electronic devices. These 
generators are quite expensive but their cost is negligible in 
contrast to the construction of the anechoic or semi-anechoic 
chamber. For example, the Haefely AXOS5 Compact 
Immunity Tester costs € 19,000 and constructing and 
equipping the semi-anechoic chamber may require the 
investment of € 450,000 and more. Therefore, some 
manufacturers have invested money in the purchase of such 
generators and they carry out themselves the most basic tests 
of electromagnetic susceptibility of devices at the time of 
development. Subsequently, when the finished product is 
tested in an accredited EMC laboratory, the manufacturer 
can be sure that the product meets the criteria in international 
technical standards for electromagnetic susceptibility for 
selected 
types 
of 
electromagnetic 
interference. 
For 
manufacturers, the problem is testing of electromagnetic 
radiation of their products when they want to find out the 
level of electromagnetic interference emitted by a new 
product during its development. The anechoic or semi-
anechoic chambers are used for this type of tests in the EMC 
laboratories, however, these chambers are often fully 
occupied due to their small number and the repeated tests for 
testing of electromagnetic interference of device is expensive 
for manufacturers. 
All electrical and electronic devices must be designed in 
accordance with the standards for EMC. In the field of 
electromagnetic interference, the components of intrusion 
and hold-up alarm systems (I&HAS) are tested in 
accordance with the international standard CSN EN 55022 
ed.3. 
This 
technical 
standard 
determines 
uniform 
requirements for the high-frequency interference level of the 
information technology equipment, defines limits on the 
levels of the EMI and the methods of measurement [4] [5]. 
The aim of this paper is to publish the measured levels of 
electromagnetic interference radiated by the basic set of 
intrusion and hold-up alarm system in the semi-anechoic 
chamber and GTEM cell. The basic difference in the 
measured levels of EMI is based on the type of the measured 
electromagnetic interference. Electromagnetic interference, 
which is located in the far-field of an electronic device, is 
recorded in 
the 
semi-anechoic 
chamber 
while the 
interference in a near-field is recorded in the GTEM cell. In a 
further research, these data will be used for analysis, which 
answers the question whether the GTEM cell can be an 
adequate substitute for a semi-anechoic chamber for the 
measurements of EMI of electronic devices. 
In Section II, the (semi)anechoic chamber is described 
and Section III focuses on the basic characteristics of the 
GTEM cell. In Section IV, we describe the set of I&HAS on 
which the level of electromagnetic interference was 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

measured in the semi-anechoic chamber and the GTEM cell; 
in addition, this section discussed the measuring instruments 
used. In Section V, the results of the measurements are 
shown. 
II. 
(SEMI) ANECHOIC CHAMBER 
An ideal space for testing and measuring of EMC 
parameters of electronic equipment is an absorption 
chamber.  This chamber is electromagnetically impermeable 
(electromagnetic shielding) through the outer structure of a 
well-conductive metal material. In our case, the semi-
anechoic chamber was built from the panels that were of 
galvanized sheet steel with a thickness of 2.0 mm. 
The interior of the chamber is covered with an 
electromagnetically absorbent material which significantly 
reduces the internal reflections in a broad frequency. This 
absorbent material can be made of a ferrite or a carbon with a 
styrofoam. The absorption chamber exists in two versions 
both as the anechoic chamber or semi-anechoic chamber. 
The anechoic chamber has covered with an absorbent 
material, not only interior walls and ceiling but also the 
entire floor. As such, the anechoic chamber simulates 
unlimited open area. In practice, we often encounter a semi-
anechoic chamber (shown in Figure 1), which has covered 
with an absorbent material only the ceiling and walls and 
simulates the open area with reflections from the ground 
plane.  
The absorbent material can be placed on the floor in the 
semi-anechoic chamber if it is required under the technical 
standards or requirements of the manufacturer of the 
equipment under test (EUT). 
 
Figure 1.  Semi-anechoic chamber 
The absorbent material converts the energy of the 
incident wave into heat using the magnetic or dielectric 
losses. Due to the price, dielectric materials are preferred, 
such as the different toughened foam materials of 
polystyrene, polypropylene or polyurethane that contain 
electro-conductive or graphite fillers. Most frequently, these 
materials have the shape of a pyramid or cone, but we can 
also encounter the absorber surface area. The main 
disadvantage is that a quality anechoic chamber is 
technologically and financially very demanding [5] [6] [7]. 
III. 
GTEM CELL 
The GTEM cell (shown in Figure 2) is a specially 
constructed shielded space which allows the measurement of 
EMC parameters of small electronic devices. The GTEM cell 
enclosure is made of conductive material and has the shape 
of a pyramid. The rear internal space is covered with the 
absorbent material, the side walls are left bare to act as a 
waveguide. The antenna or field probe is placed in front of 
the cell and the EUT is placed in the space between the 
absorber and the antenna or field probe (transducer) [8].  
 
Figure 2.  GTEM cell 
The GTEM cells can be of different sizes depending on 
the septum height from 0.25 m to 2.0 m.  The GTEM cell is 
considerably smaller and its price is much lower in contrast 
to the anechoic or semi-anechoic chamber [9]. 
IV. 
SET OF I&HAS AND MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 
This basic set of intrusion and hold-up alarm system 
belongs to the product lines of Oasis and includes the 
following components: 
 
Control panel JA 82-K 
 
Accumulator 12V, 2.4Ah 
 
Mains power module 
 
Keypad JA-81E 
 
Passive infrared  detector JS-20 
 
Siren SA-913TM 
The control panel was powered from the mains supply 
240V/50Hz and the control panel with accumulator and 
mains power module were closed in the plastic box. The 
electromagnetic radiation of this set was tested in the semi-
anechoic chamber and GTEM cell in the EMC laboratory at 
the Tomas Bata University in Zlin in the Czech Republic. 
The used semi-anechoic chamber was from the 
manufacturer Frankonia and was equipped with a BiLog 
antenna CBL 6112, which is the broadband biologarithmic-
periodic antenna which operates with a range from 30 MHz 
to 2 GHz. The polarization of this antenna can be varied 
(horizontal or vertical polarization) and the height of the 
antenna is adjustable from 0.8 m to 4.0 m above the ground 
plane.  
The BiLog antenna was connected to the EMI test 
receiver ESU8 with a range of 20 Hz to 8 GHz by using the 
switching and control units OSP130 and OSP150. The whole 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

set was controlled by a computer with EMC Software 
EMC32 for simplifying control of the antenna, the setting of 
limits and higher quality display of measured data. 
The used GTEM cell 250 from the manufacturer 
Frankonia had a maximum septum height of 250 mm and 
was suitable for the measurement of electromagnetic 
radiation of small electronic devices. The measuring probe 
EFS-10 was located inside the cell and it was connected to 
the test receiver ESPI  (Rohde & Schwarz), which had an 
operating frequency from 9 kHz to 7 GHz. 
V. 
THE RESULTS OF SELECTED MEASUREMENTS 
The equipment under test was the basic set of I&HAS. 
We measured the levels of electromagnetic interference of 
this set in the semi-anechoic chamber and GTEM cell. The 
set of I&HAS was measured in the mode where the whole 
set was in the ON state (state of guarding) or when the alarm 
was induced.  
The selected measurements from the semi-anechoic 
chamber and GTEM cell are shown in Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6.  
In the figures, the x-axis shows the frequency from 30 MHz 
to 1 GHz and the y-axis shows the measured level of 
electromagnetic interference. The levels of electromagnetic 
interference are stated in the specific unit dBµV/m. The red 
line, which is in the figures from the semi-anechoic chamber, 
shows the maximum level of electromagnetic interference, 
which the EUT can generate at the respective frequencies. 
This maximum level is defined by the standard CSN EN 
55022 ed. 3. If the measured interference of the EUT exceeds 
this red line, it means that the device generates the 
interference which endangers functionality of electronic 
devices in its surrounding area and this EUT can not have the 
Certificate of the EMC tests. 
Two coloured lines are shown in the figures from the 
semi-anechoic chamber. This is because each measurement 
was carried out in both polarities of the antenna. The antenna 
height was 250 cm above the ground plane. From our 
previous series of measurements, we determined that this 
was the ideal antenna height for the measurement of this 
EUT. The highest levels of electromagnetic interference 
emitted by the EUT were recorded at this height.  
Figure 3 shows the electromagnetic interference 
generated by the EUT in the ON state. This EMI was 
recorded in both polarities of the receiving antenna. As 
apparent from the figure, the biggest differences in the levels 
of the electromagnetic interference of the EUT, when the 
polarity of the antenna was changed, have been recorded in 
the frequency range from 40 MHz to 80 MHz and then from 
120 MHz to 220 MHz. 
Figure 4 shows the set of intrusion and hold-up alarm 
system in the state of alarm. We also carried out two 
measurements for both polarities of the receiving antenna. 
With the antenna in the horizontal position (green line), a 
clearly recorded electromagnetic interference generated by 
the siren can be observed, which announced the alarm by the 
sound signal in the frequency range from 180 MHz to 280 
MHz. 
 
Figure 3.  Semi-anechoic chamber - the EMI of the EUT in the ON state – 
the antenna in the horizontal (blue line) and vertical (green line) 
polarization 
 
Figure 4.  Semi-anechoic chamber - the EMI of the EUT in the state of 
alarm – the antenna in the horizontal (green line) and vertical (violet line) 
polarization 
In the GTEM cell, we carried out same measurements as 
in the semi-anechoic chamber. In Figure 5 and Figure 6, the 
limit of 40 dBµV/m has been highlighted in red for better 
orientation and comparability of measurement data. The x-
axis shows the frequency from 30 MHz to 1 GHz and the y-
axis shows the measured level of electromagnetic 
interference in the unit dBµV/m.  
Figure 5 shows the set of I&HAS in the ON state. As in 
the semi-anechoic chamber, the significant electromagnetic 
interference of EUT has been measured in the GTEM cell in 
the frequency range from 100 MHz to 200 MHz.  
 
Figure 5.  GTEM cell - the EMI of the EUT in the ON state 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The difference between the measured data can be 
observed especially in the frequency range from 30 MHz to 
50 MHz and from 200 MHz to 1GHz. These differences can 
be attributed to the fact that a certain low electromagnetic 
interference stably occurs in the semi-anechoic chamber and 
it overlapped interference which was emitted by the EUT. It 
is also necessary 
to 
take 
into 
consideration that 
electromagnetic interference measured in the near-field 
should have a higher level than electromagnetic interference 
measured in the far-field of the EUT. 
Figure 6 shows set of I&HAS in the state of alarm.  
 
Figure 6.  GTEM cell - the EMI of the EUT in the state of alarm 
The level of interference of the EUT in a state of alarm 
recorded in the GTEM cell at a frequency of 150 MHz 
exceeded the limit of 40 dBµV/m, which is determined by 
the standard CSN EN 55022 ed. 3. Due to the fact that 
interference in the near-field is higher than in the far-field 
and this limit is proposed for measurements in the far field, 
this result was to be expected.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The measured levels of electromagnetic interference 
radiated by the set of components of intrusion and hold-up 
alarm system in the ON state or state of alarm indicate that 
the measurements from the semi-anechoic chamber and 
GTEM cell are partially similar. The similarity in measured 
levels EMI of far-field and near-field the EUT indicates that 
there is the possibility of using GTEM cells as an adequate 
substitute for a semi-anechoic chamber in design time of 
electronic devices and it could be of great significance for 
manufacturers of these devices. 
In all cases, electromagnetic interference of the EUT 
reached the highest level at a frequency of approximately 
150 MHz. However, since the GTEM cell records 
electromagnetic interference in the near-field of the device 
and semi-anechoic chamber records the interference in the 
far-field of the device, the levels of EMI in the GTEM cell 
are noticeably higher. When the EUT was in the ON state, 
the level of EMI is closer to the border of 40 dBµV/m in the 
GTEM cell than in the semi-anechoic chamber. In the case of 
measurements when the set of I&HAS was in the state of 
alarm, the border of 40 dBµV/m was even exceeded in 
GTEM cell. However, exceeding of this limit was not very 
pronounced. 
In future research, we will examine and analyze the 
measured data and we will carry out other measurements on 
other types of electronic devices. If it is established that the 
measured levels of EMI in the GTEM cell are stably higher 
than in the semi-anechoic chamber, the GTEM cell can be an 
adequate substitute for a semi-anechoic chamber intended to 
the pre-certification measurements of EMI of small 
electronic 
devices, 
however, 
with 
the 
necessary 
modifications of the maximum level of electromagnetic 
interference which is defined in the standard CSN EN 55022 
ed. 3. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth 
and Sports of the Czech Republic within the National Sustainability 
Programme project No. LO1303 (MSMT-7778/2014) and also by 
the European Regional Development Fund under the project 
CEBIA-Tech No. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089 and also by the Internal 
Grant Agency of Tomas Bata University under the project No. 
IGA/CebiaTech/2016/005 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Urbancokova, J. Valouch, and M. Adamek, “Testing of an 
Intrusion 
and 
Hold-up 
Systems 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Susceptibility - EFT/B, ” International Journal of Circuits, 
Systems and Signal Processing, volume 9, USA, Oregon:  
North Atlantic University Union, 2015, pp. 40-46, ISSN: 
1998-4464. 
[2] E. Vaculik and P. Vaculikova, Electromagnetic compatibility 
of electrotechnical systems: A practical guide to technology 
limitations HF electromagnetic interference, 1st ed, Grada 
Publishing, Prague, 1998, p. 487, ISBN 80-716-9568-8. (in 
Czech) 
[3] J. Valouch, “Electromagnetic Compatibility of Alarm 
Systems - Legislative and Technical Requirements,” Security 
Magazin, Issue No 106, 2/2012, Prague: Security Media, 
2012, pp. 32-36, ISSN 1210- 8273. 
[4] CSN EN 55022 ed. 3. Information technology equipment - 
Characteristics of high-frequency disturbance - Limits and 
methods of measurement, Prague: Czech office for standards, 
metrology and testing, 2011. (in Czech) 
[5] J. Valouch, “Technical requirements for Electromagnetic 
Compatibility of Alarm Systems,” International Journal of 
Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing, volume 9. USA, 
Oregon:  North Atlantic University Union, 2015, pp. 186 – 
191, ISSN: 1998-4464.  
[6] J. Svacina, Electromagnetic compatibility: principles and 
notes, Issue No. 1, Brno: University of Technology, 2001, p. 
156, ISBN 8021418737. (in Czech) 
[7] T. Rybak and M. Steffka, Automotive electromagnetic 
compatibility (EMC), Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
2004, ISBN: 1-4020-7713-0. 
[8] F. A. Po'ad, M. Zarar, M. Jenu, C. Christopoulos, and D.W.P. 
Thomas, “Estimation of Electric and Magnetic Shielding 
Effectiveness of a Metallic Enclosure with Apertures,” 
International RF and Microwave Conference, IEEE, 2006, pp. 
291-295, DOI: 10.1109/RFM.2006.331088, ISBN 0-7803-
9744-4. 
[9] D. Li, Y. Yuan, and M. Xie, “Generating field strength 
measurement standard in GTEM cell by using transfer 
standard,” International Conference on Microwave and 
Millimeter Wave Technology, IEEE, 2010, pp. 2033-2036, 
DOI: 10.1109/ICMMT.2010.5525186, ISBN 978-1-4244-
5705-2 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

