Surveying the Incorporation of IoT Devices into Cybersecurity Risk Management
Frameworks
Aaron J. Pendleton
Graduate Cyber Operations
Air Force Institute of Technology
Dayton, United States
email: Aaron.Pendleton@aﬁt.edu
Richard Dill
Assistant Professor
Dept of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Air Force Institute of Technology
Dayton, United States
email: Richard.Dill@aﬁt.edu
Dillon Pettit
Graduate Cyber Operations
Air Force Institute of Technology
Dayton, United States
email: Dillon.Pettit@aﬁt.edu
Abstract—This paper reviews the state of the art for incorpo-
rating Mobile Devices, Industrial Control Systems, and Internet
of Things systems into present risk analysis framework models.
Internet of Things devices present unique risks to a network due
to their highly connective and physically interactive nature. This
physical inﬂuence can be leveraged to access peripherals beyond
the immediate scope of the network, or to gain unauthorized
access to systems which would not otherwise be accessible. A 2017
Government Accountability Ofﬁce report on the current state of
Internet of Things device security noted a lack of dedicated policy
and guidance within the United States government cybersecurity
risk assessment construct and similar private sector equivalents.
Surveyed in this paper are 28 original frameworks designed to
be implemented in enterprise networks. In this research the
comparison of frameworks is analyzed to assess each system’s
ability to provide risk analysis for Internet of Things devices.
The research categories are level of implementation, quantitative
or qualitative scoring matrix, and support for future develop-
ment. This survey demonstrates there are few risk management
frameworks currently available which attempt to incorporate
both cyber-physical systems and enterprise architecture in a large
scale network.
Keywords— IoT; RMF; cybersecurity; risk; ICS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Industrial Control Systems (ICS) and Internet of Things
(IoT) devices have inﬁltrated most networks that would tra-
ditionally be classiﬁed as enterprise networks. Their unprece-
dented rise in popularity has made it challenging for compa-
nies to assess and mitigate the additional risk.
IoT devices present unique risks to a network due to their
highly connective and often cyber-physical nature. This phys-
ical inﬂuence can be leveraged to gain unauthorized access to
systems which would not otherwise be accessible.
The United States (U.S.) Government Accountability Ofﬁce
(GAO), an independent and nonpartisan U.S. Congressional
watchdog organization, provides objective and reliable infor-
mation to the government regarding work and spending prac-
tices. GAO focuses on identifying problems and proposes so-
lutions [32]. In July 2017, GAO released a report titled Internet
of Things: Enhanced Assessments and Guidance Are Needed to
Address Security Risks in DOD in order to highlight shortcom-
ings in most current operational risk assessment frameworks to
include those implemented by the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD). The report includes security concerns with Mobile
Devices, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA),
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), and Remote Terminal
Units (RTU) in the U.S. DOD [32].
GAO noted a lack of dedicated policy and guidance within
the U.S. government cybersecurity risk assessment construct
and similar private sector equivalents. In the report, GAO
deﬁnes IoT devices as any personal wearable ﬁtness device,
portable electronic device, smartphone, or infrastructure device
related to industrial control systems [32].
Present DOD Instructional Guidance does not address IoT
devices sufﬁciently [32]. Furthermore, no single DOD entity
is responsible for the security of IoT systems, and the primary
guidance on IoT security is the strategic directive to establish
an operations security program. This paper furthers the re-
search done by GAO in order to expand the scope of analysis
beyond the U.S. DOD and into the greater ﬁeld of published
cyber risk solutions.
A risk analysis methodology must account for more than
just traditional enterprise network components in order to mit-
igate the risks presented by an unregulated or loosely deﬁned
set of devices on an otherwise secure network. The purpose of
this survey is to analyze the pace of development and compare
the strengths and weaknesses of each analyzed framework
with regard to IoT and ICS devices. 27 original cyber risk
assessment and management models will be compared based
on their method of risk scoring, level of implementation, and
future development plans. These metrics will be used to gauge
the effectiveness of a framework when accounting for devices
which may not be consistently part of the secure baseline,
or may not be commonly patched and secured. The ability
of a risk analysis model to incorporate these common, but
otherwise difﬁcult to attribute systems will be compared in
order to determine the state of the art. Frameworks published
from as early as 2002 were identiﬁed and assessed for their
ability to adapt to IoT devices. This paper analyzes the extent
that network risk analysis and management frameworks have
adapted to this evolving threat terrain. Section II outlines the
risk framework models and their attributes, Section III presents
the methods used to analyze and evaluate the frameworks
in order to make appropriate comparisons, and Section IV
provides an assessment of the current state of the art in order to
then make recommendations for future research. We conclude
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

this work in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Risk Management Framework (RMF)
The primary risk assessment and management framework
used by the U.S. Military and DOD to conduct mission
assurance is the cybersecurity Risk Management Framework
(RMF) developed by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). NIST RMF is a 6 step qualitative analysis
method for assessing risk. It establishes a secure baseline
through identifying controls that are to be updated as changes
are detected [1]. Common NIST RMF implementation policy
requires end users to disable the impertinent network compo-
nents of most IoT devices, but this can encourage subversion
of the RMF process for personal and government devices by
dis-associating some capabilities from the network and the
secure baseline. This presents heightened risk levels that are
left unaccounted for in the overall assessment [32]. Qualitative
frameworks such as RMF rely on scanning tools and strict
Information Assurance (IA) policy to prevent unauthorized
activity. These security measures can be subverted by IoT
devices because they often have limited up-time, minimal
support, a notable lack of associated scanning tools, and a
smaller footprint for vulnerability testing [32]. Note: The NIST
Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) and RMF are different, and
CSF is directed at a higher level of protection speciﬁc to
Critical Infrastructure (CI) not analyzed in this paper.
B. Control Objectives for Information and related Technology
(COBIT) 5
COBIT 5 is the latest COBIT version analyzed. It was
developed by the Information Systems Audit and Control As-
sociation (ISACA) and is a qualitative framework designed to
provide top-down security of a business sized network. It relies
on control objectives to build out the security requirements,
and the level of security is assessed by maturity models.
COBIT follows a purpose built model which is intended to
allow for only necessary systems to be on the network in order
to minimize risk [2] [34] . COBIT 2019 has been announced
and is expected to address IoT more directly [22].
C. ISO27K Series
Published the International Organization for Standardiza-
tion (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), the ISO/IEC 27000 series is a large framework of
best practices. It provides a security control based qualitative
framework with signiﬁcant modularity for varying levels of
implementation similar to the NIST RMF and COBIT. The
strength of this model is its inherent ability to scale to the
needs of the network, but allows for weaknesses where the
framework is not fully implemented. It is currently in extensive
use [3] [19].
D. Information Security Maturity Model (ISMM) (2011)
The ISMM model was created by analyzing eight existing
models: NIST, Information Security Management Maturity
Model (ISM3), Generic Security Maturity Model (GSMM),
Gartner’s Information Security Awarness Maturity Model
(GISMM), SUNY’s Information Security Initiatives (ISI), IBM
Security Framework, Citigroup’s Information Security Evalu-
ation Maturity Model (ISEM), and Information Security Man-
agement System (ISMS) Maturity Capability Model. ISMM
assesses the security requirements of an organization and
then assigns a maturity level that will provide the correct
balance of security and accessibility. They propose a method
of quantifying risk at a very abstracted level, but the model
itself is primarily a qualitative system to initiate compulsory
levels of security [21].
E. Information Security Maturity Model (ISMM) (2017)
This ISMM model was also created following a com-
parison of several current implementations of risk modeling
frameworks to include NIST RMF, COBIT, and ISO 27001.
ISMM attempts to directly map each capability provided by
current models to determine the most mature framework.
The ﬁndings discovered weaknesses in all frameworks, and
a single composite framework was introduced as a solution
which provides all capabilities of currently implementations
in one system. The framework is still at a theoretical stage
of implementation, but has the potential to create a more
complete qualitative solution [1].
F. Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability
Evaluation (OCTAVE)
1) OCTAVE (original): OCTAVE is a self directed risk
management solution for large enterprises. It relies on the
network staff’s knowledge of critical systems and components
to create a secure baseline. The weakness of this system is it
is outdated (2003) and reliant on having an expert team with
signiﬁcant resources. There have not been signiﬁcant updates
to OCTAVE following the release of OCTAVE-Allegro and it
could now be considered a legacy framework [4].
2) OCTAVE-S: OCTAVE-S is designed as a smaller scale
implementation of OCTAVE, but suffers from several similar
pitfalls. A manually created baseline that is updated as
changes are observed cannot be easily adapted. OCTAVE-S
provides additional structure for a less experienced team,
but at the expense of signiﬁcant system constraints as the
implementation matures [4].
3) OCTAVE-Allegro: Allegro attempts to make risk man-
agement system more approachable than the original models.
The complexity level of OCTAVE Allegro is lowered and the
system is shifted to a more information-centric container based
approach. Allegro is one of the ﬁrst qualitative systems to
incorporate an abstracted level of quantitative analysis using
the containers as network elements. Due to the still largely
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

qualitative nature of Allegro, it can have issues with implemen-
tation consistency. This can be especially challenging when
accounting for IoT devices [10].
G. Holistic Cyber Security Implementation Framework (HCS-
IF)
Atoum introduces HCS-IF in an attempt to create a more
complete approach to risk management that avoids the frag-
mented stovepipe nature that developed over several iterations
of abstracted quantiﬁcation in many risk management frame-
works. The HCS-IF has not yet been tested, but has potential
value to be assessed in future studies [6].
H. IoT/M2M
Cisco introduces the IoT/M2M framework in order to
address the rising challenge of securing networks saturated
with relatively insecure IoT devices. The downside to this
otherwise very effective model is the cost and difﬁculty in
building a network from essentially the ground up as opposed
to introducing new security measures to an existing network.
It is a qualitative zero trust approach to security that attempts
to limit the access of IoT devices in order to prevent them
from being leveraged to inﬂuence otherwise secure devices.
Live network evaluation has not yet been published [14].
I. Mobius
Mobius creates a quantiﬁable model which allows for risk
calculations to be made using custom designed proﬁles for
each device. The weakness is in the scaling and implemen-
tation relative to more modern tools. It requires extensive
expertise to properly employ, and additional development to
account for IoT devices [12].
J. Online Services Security Framework (OSSF)
The OSSF framework is designed to manage risk in an
enterprise network offering online services. It provides the
structure to create a secure baseline for both the provider and
the consumer, but inherently must be conﬁgured by the end
user. It accounts for broadly connected devices like IoT well,
but it is limited in its application until it can be expanded to
more diverse networks [24].
K. The CORAS Method
The CORAS approach is an 8 step model-based solution
which allows a great deal of ﬂexibility in implementation. A
risk evaluation matrix is populated using CORAS that provides
both high and low level analysis, but at the cost of signiﬁcant
labor as the baseline is constantly redeﬁned when IoT devices
are introduced [23].
L. Threat Agent Risk Assessment (TARA) (2009)
TARA was created by Intel and uses a calculation matrix to
predict which agents pose the highest risk to the network. The
output is then cross-referenced with known vulnerabilities and
controls to mitigate risk. A meaningful published application
of the TARA system has not been identiﬁed during this survey
[26].
M. Threat Assessment & Remediation Analysis (TARA)(2011)
The MITRE Corporation created the TARA system to secure
speciﬁc networks known to be of interest to potential actors.
TARA uses a scoring model to identify probability of attack
and potential attack vectors. It is difﬁcult to scale, but can
provide very sophisticated assessments if the cybersecurity
budget is sufﬁciently large [35].
N. CCTA Risk Analysis and Management Method (CRAMM)
CRAMM is a framework designed by the United King-
dom (UK) Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency
(CCTA). It is a relatively outdated method of providing quali-
tative analysis across multiple asset groups and requires them
to be built out on a per-network basis. This makes the modular
construction useful, but at the cost of signiﬁcant overhead to
implement. It has been implemented in many countries, but
has not been updated since CRAMM 5 in 2003 [36].
O. Cyber Assessment Framework (CAF) 2.0
Created by the UK National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC),
the CAF is a model based risk assessment system similar to
NIST RMF which provides extensibility across many devices
and network types including SCADA [33]. The framework
is very new without published academic assessment, but has
been adopted at an international level with a particular focus
on SCADA and business IT systems [31].
P. Cyber Risk Scoring and Mitigation (CRISM)
CRISM uses Bayesian graphs to build an end-to-end au-
tomated capability which can provide security scores and
prioritized mitigation plans. A high level of automation is
achieved which makes implementation much simpler for small
teams. Additional testing and development has the potential to
create a powerful tool [29].
Q. Network Security Risk Model (NSRM)
NSRM relies on establishing a secure baseline and com-
paring risk levels after the introduction of each new device.
This method is relatively outdated and labor intensive, but
can provide good results if it is effectively implemented. It is
targeted at Process Control Networks (PCN) which have less
variance, and is not suitable for a large enterprise network
[18].
R. Cyber Physical Systems Security (CPSS)
DiMase identiﬁed the need for a Cyber-Physical System
(CPS) centric risk framework to account for the rise in CPS
devices across enterprise networks. It relies on a heuristics
based approach rather than a secure baseline to provide an
initial level of security, and over time creates an operational
baseline. Extensive future development is required before
ﬁelding on a large network [13].
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

S. Harmonized Threat & Risk Assessment (HTRA)
Published by the Canadian Government, HTRA provides
a risk management framework which expounds rapid ad-
justments to account for quickly evolving threat terrain, but
still implements a traditional secure baseline structure. HTRA
suffers from the same pitfalls of most large frameworks in that
the size of the network often determines how effectively the
model is implemented [17].
T. System-Fault Risk (SFR)
The qualitative framework created by Ye accounts for sev-
eral layers of interconnection by creating multiple attack origin
classiﬁcation models. It is modular and capable of extension
into nearly any device that operates on a network, but at
extreme cost. It is not primarily intended to be used as a full
enterprise solution [37].
U. Hierarchical Model Based Risk Assessment
Baiardi introduces a framework based on security depen-
dency hypergraphs which have the capability to identify attack
paths which an analyst may miss in a qualitative assessment.
Tools for basic implementation were developed but not widely
tested in a live network [7].
V. Patel & Ziveri Model
The model is a quantitative system which depends on pre-
determined types of attacks and devices. Additional research
would be required in order to account for anything outside of
the current scope of the model. It is presently designed for
implementation in SCADA networks, and does not account
well for IoT or any attack that is not within the matrix [25].
W. IBM Security Framework
The IBM security blueprint stovepipes security into domains
which are broken down further into distinct objectives and
services. Each sub-domain is then to be implemented accord-
ing to industry best practices [8]. An update in 2014 showed
successful results in several live networks [9].
X. Information Security Risk Analysis Method (ISRAM)
ISRAM is an attempt to bridge the gap between the over-
whelming challenge of implementing a quantitative model on
a complex network and the inconsistencies of a qualitative
model. While sound in theory, the product still suffers from
the extensibility issues faces by quantitative models [20].
Y. Amin Cyber-Physical Security (CPS) Model
Amin attempts to create a quantitative framework to address
the risks presented by cyber-phsyical systems on a network,
but struggles to account for all components simultaneously in
a large composite model [5].
Z. Cybernomics
Cybernomics is an attempt to incorporate cyber risk man-
agement and economic modeling to build a quantiﬁable frame-
work which can be scaled to a larger enterprise network. It
provides a more network centric portfolio, and in turn may be
capable of providing sound IoT accountability. Live network
testing is anticipated in a future publication [28].
III. METHODOLOGY
Four primary elements common to each framework are
evaluated. This establishes a basic standard used to make
comparisons, and highlights several key differences between
otherwise similar methods. These attributes are mapped and
graded to determine the level of efﬁcacy provided. It is
challenging to conduct a full pairwise comparison between
any two models due to their inability to target IoT devices
at all. Nearly all models surveyed neglected to take special
measures towards securing IoT devices versus other enterprise
components. This led to a largely qualitative analysis of the
merits of each model, with models that have a particularly
outstanding system being highlighted in Section IV.
A. Quantitative vs. Qualitative
Each framework surveyed was classiﬁed as either primarily
qualitative, or quantitative. The constraints of the quantitative
model are similar to the strengths of a qualitative model,
and vice versa. Quantitative models often provide unparalleled
modeling at the expense of scalability. In order to classify a
framework as quantitative, it needed to exhibit device based
calculations. Any framework which used only abstractions for
a quantitative analysis was relegated to the qualitative category.
B. Level of Implementation
Models are assigned an implementation score of high, low,
or N/A in order to account for the broad range of real-world
testing frameworks have received. A framework with hundreds
of implementations and years of feedback will have more data
points to evaluate than a network which is conceptual or in
its ﬁrst live network test. Many surveyed frameworks that are
recently published have not yet been employed in a signiﬁcant
capacity on a live network.
C. Age and Support Level
Risk assessment frameworks which no longer have a robust
implementation or supporting entity may no longer be viable.
It is important to consider that legacy models may no longer
provide adequate security.
D. Overall Rating
The current standard for a risk assessment framework is
a qualitative model which relies on robust security policy
and patching processes alongside vulnerability scanning and
security controls. These methods are suitable for securing a
traditional enterprise network, but fall short when IoT devices
are introduced. Any framework that meets, but does not have
the potential to exceed this baseline is rated “Yellow”. Yellow
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

rated models are relatively good assessments of cyber risk,
but do not manage IoT devices well. Any framework which
is unable to achieve the same level of network protection
as the current generation of frameworks are rated “Red”.
Models which have made a meaningful step towards properly
accounting for IoT devices within enterprise networks will
be rated “Green”. The rating of green does not mean that
they have fully accounted for IoT devices, but that it is an
advancement over most currently implemented models.
IV. ANALYSIS OF RISK ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORKS
TABLE 1. RISK FRAMEWORK COMPARISON
Framework Analysis
Reviewed Framework
Rating
Implementation
Year
*Amin CPS Model [5]
Red
N/A
2013
†CAF [33]
Yellow
High
2018
†COBIT 5 [3] [34]
Yellow
High
2012
†CORAS [30]
Red
Low
2003
†CPSS [13]
Red
N/A
2015
*CRAMM [36]
Red
Low
2003
*CRISM [29]
Green
N/A
2018
*Cybernomics [28]
Green
N/A
2017
†HCS-IF [6]
Green
N/A
2014
†*Hierarchical Model [7]
Red
N/A
2009
†HTRA [17]
Yellow
High
2007
†IBM Framework [8]
Yellow
Low
2010
†IoT/M2M [14]
Green
N/A
2016
†ISO27K [3] [19]
Yellow
High
2005
*ISRAM [20]
Red
N/A
2005
†ISSM [1]
Green
N/A
2017
†ISSM [21]
Yellow
Low
2011
*Mobius [12]
Red
N/A
2002
†NIST [27]
Yellow
High
2015
*NSRM [18]
Red
N/A
2009
†OCTAVE [4]
Red
Low
2003
†OCTAVE-S [4]
Red
Low
2003
†OCTAVE-Allegro [10]
Red
Low
2007
†OSSF [24]
Green
N/A
2017
*Patel & Ziveri Model [25]
Red
N/A
2010
†SFR [37]
Red
N/A
2005
†*TARA (Intel) [26]
Yellow
Low
2009
†*TARA (MITRE) [35]
Yellow
Low
2011
†Indicates Qualitative *Indicates Quantitative
A. Common Framework Pitfalls
No surveyed model rated “green” for IoT advancement has
been implemented in a live network. Similarly, all models
rated “high” for implementation scored “yellow” in IoT ad-
vancement. This overwhelmingly indicates that the state of
the art has not yet accounted for IoT properly, and no single
framework can be recommended as an immediate solution
to the IoT problem. The current model of a qualitative risk
assessment may no longer be viable as IoT devices continue to
become more critically integrated into networks. Each qualita-
tive model surveyed attempts to use only existing resources to
secure the IoT threat vector. In order to continue using existing
risk models, it is necessary to either invest in new architecture
to account for the largely unknown vulnerabilities presented
by current off the shelf IoT systems, or incorporate only IoT
systems which have been subjected to a much higher degree
of security analysis. The current model of minimal support
and small device marketshare footprint is unlikely to result in
a solution to the IoT problem.
B. IoT Advancements
It is imperative that security development be proactive due
to the increasingly vital role that IoT devices have in enterprise
networks. Among the most promising proposed models is
the zero trust approach in the IoT/M2M framework. Rather
than attempt to impose enterprise security methods on IoT
devices, it attempts to section them off as much as possible
into other network segments. This is not a full solution, but
it may prove more effective than current implementations.
The frameworks that have the ability to accurately model
risks to ICS and IoT systems primarily have implemented a
quantitative risk assessment approach, but no solution has been
able to provide cost-effective coverage to a larger network.
The primary weakness to this solution is some devices will
eventually have to have a trusted relationship, and this will lead
to inevitable vulnerabilities. This method is at best a technique
to shrink the attack surface of a network, and does not fully
mitigate the risk of IoT devices.
C. Proposed Solutions
Two courses of action for securing IoT devices based on
the analysis of the 28 frameworks surveyed are:
1) Short Term: Use network segmentation and a zero trust
model: IoT devices cannot be considered trusted or secure by
a risk analysis model until a more robust vulnerability assess-
ment process can be developed. Designing network architec-
ture to create the smallest foothold possible for compromised
IoT devices may be an effective short term solution. Potential
examples of this would be creating an IoT device Virtual
Local Area Network (VLAN), De-Militarized Zone (DMZ),
or using bastions as IoT interface servers. Similarly, isolating
IoT devices from domain credentials and trust settings is also
vital to ensuring that a vulnerable IoT device does minimized
damage if exploited.
2) Long Term: Increase viability of quantiﬁable risk as-
sessment frameworks with Machine Learning: Quantitative
frameworks have demonstrated the highest level of potential
risk analysis, but are not capable of modeling large networks in
their present state. The next iteration of quantitative framework
must solve this problem in order for them to become viable.
This could be accomplished by using machine learning to
implement their risk algorithm, and to develop the individ-
ual device proﬁles. This direction would require substantial
resources to establish, but potentially yield lower operating
costs. The threat proﬁle and logical/physical location of a
device would be inputted, and the risk proﬁle of the network
could be automatically adjusted to compensate for the addition.
This system would also allow for very accurate projections of
security level in proposed architecture developments, as well
as software migrations and patching.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The breakdown of ﬁndings shows signiﬁcant shortcomings
in all state of the art risk assessment frameworks. No de-
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

velopmental model was identiﬁed that could be considered
deployment ready with capabilities clearly exceeding those of
the current generation of qualitative system. Several proposed
frameworks with the ability to incorporate both cyber-physical
systems and enterprise architecture in a large scale network
were reviewed, but none have been tested in a live environ-
ment. At this time, there is still a signiﬁcant need for research
on methods to incorporate IoT devices into enterprise net-
works without losing either accessibility or security. The scale
and diversity of IoT has been insurmountable for qualitative
models, but future research developing Proposed Solution 1).
may yield signiﬁcant advancements. A signiﬁcant change in
funding or ease of implementation will be necessary in order
to drastically alter the current risk assessment terrain away
from qualitative models. Minimal published research on the
application of machine learning to cyber risk assessment was
identiﬁed, but this avenue of research outlined in Proposed
Solution 2). is one of the primary methods of making the
quantitative model viable again.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are those of
the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or
position of the Air Force, the Department of Defense, or the
U.S. Government.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Almuhammadi and M. Alsaleh, ”Information Security Maturity Model
for NIST Cyber Security Framework.” Computer Science & Information
Technology 51 2017.
[2] M. Ahlmeyer and A. M. Chircu, ”Securing the Internet of Things: A
review.” Issues in Information Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, 2016.
[3] W. Al-Ahmad and B. Mohammad, ”Can a Single Security Framework
Address Information Security Risks Adequately.” International Journal
of Digital Information and Wireless Communications, vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
222-230, 2012.
[4] C. Alberts, A. Dorofee, and J. Stevens, ”Introduction to the OCTAVE
Approach.” Carnegie-Mellon Univ. Software Engineering Inst, 2003.
[5] S. Amin, G. A. Schwartz, and A. Hussain, ”In Quest of Benchmarking
Security Risks to Cyber-Physical Systems.” IEEE Network, vol. 27, no.
1, pp. 19-24, 2013.
[6] I. Atoum, A. Otoom, and A. A. Ali, ”A Holistic Cyber Security Imple-
mentation framework.” Information Management & Computer Security,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 251-264, 2014.
[7] F. Baiardi, C. Telmon, and D. Sgandurra, Hierarchical, Model-Based
Risk Management of Critical Infrastructures, Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, vol. 94, no. 9, pp. 1403-1415, 2009.
[8] A. Buecker, M. Borrett, C. Lorenz, and C. Powers, ”Introducing the IBM
security Framework and IBM Security Blueprint to Realize Business-
Driven Security.” IBM Redpaper 4528, no. 1, pp. 1-96, 2010.
[9] A. Buecker, S. Arunkumar, B. Blackshaw, M. Borrett, P. Brittenham,
J. Flegr, and J. Jacobs, ”Using the IBM Security Framework and IBM
Security Blueprint to Realize Business-Driven Security.” IBM Redbooks,
2014.
[10] R. Caralli, J. Stevens, L. Young, and W. R. Wilson, ”Introducing
Octave Allegro: Improving the Information Security Risk Assessment
Process. No. CMU/SEI-2007-TR-012. Carnegie-Mellon Univ. Pittsburgh
PA Software Engineering Inst, 2007.
[11] J. Cebula and L. R. Young, ”A Taxonomy of Operational Cyber Security
Risks.” Carnegie-Mellon Univ. Pittsburgh PA Software Engineering Inst,
No. CMU/SEI-2010-TN-028, 2010.
[12] D. D. Deavours, G. Clark, T. Courtney, and D. Daly, ”The Mobius
framework and its Implementation.” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 956-969, 2002.
[13] D. DiMase, Z. A. Collier, K. Heffner, and I. Linkov, ”Systems En-
gineering Framework for Cyber Physical Security and Resilience.”
Environment Systems and Decisions, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 291-300, 2015.
[14] J. Frahim, ”Cisco: Securing the Internet of Things: A Proposed Frame-
work.” 2016.
[15] C. Fruhwirth and T. Mannisto. ”Improving CVSS-Based Vulnerability
Prioritization and Response with Context Information.” Proceedings of
the 2009 3rd international Symposium on Empirical Software Engineer-
ing and Measurement, IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
[16] G. Giannopoulos, R. Filippini, and M. Schimmer, ”Risk Assessment
Methodologies for Critical Infrastructure Protection. Part I: A state of
the art.” JRC Technical Notes, 2012
[17] Government of Canada, ”Harmonized Threat and Risk Assessment
Methodology” Ottawa, 2007. Accessed Sep. 11, 2019
[18] M. H. Henry and Y. Y. Haimes. ”A Comprehensive Network Security
Risk Model for Process Control Networks.” Risk Analysis: An Interna-
tional Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 223-248, 2009.
[19] T. Humphreys, ”State-of-the-Art Information Security Management Sys-
tems with ISO/IEC 27001: 2005.” ISO Management Systems, vol. 6, no.
1, 2006.
[20] B. Karabacak and I. Sogukpinar, ”ISRAM: Information Security Risk
Analysis Method.” Computers & Security, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 147-159,
2005.
[21] G. Karokola, S. Kowalski, and L. Yngstrm, ”Towards An Information
Security Maturity Model for Secure e-Government Services: A Stake-
holders View.” In HAISA, pp. 58-73, 2011.
[22] J. Lainhart, ”Introducing COBIT 2019: The Motivation for the Update?”
ISACA Webinar Blog Post, 2018. Accessed Sep. 9, 2019.
[23] M. S. Lund, B. Solhaug, and K. Stlen. ”A Guided Tour of the CORAS
Method. In Model-Driven Risk Analysis” Springer, Berlin, pp. 23-43,
2011.
[24] J. Meszaros and A. Buchalcevova. ”Introducing OSSF: A Framework
for Online Service Cybersecurity Risk Management.” Computers &
Security, vol. 65, pp. 300-313, 2017.
[25] S. Patel and J. Zaveri. ”A Risk-Assessment Model for Cyber Attacks on
Information Systems.” Journal of Computers, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 352-359,
2010.
[26] M. Rosenquist, Prioritizing Information Security Risks with Threat
Agent Risk Assessment Intel, 2009.
[27] R. Ross, ”Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to
Federal Information Systems” NIST, SP 800-37, Revision 1, 2010.
[28] K. Ruan, ”Introducing Cybernomics: A Unifying Economic Framework
for Measuring Cyber Risk.” Computers & Security, vol. 65, pp. 77-89,
2017.
[29] S. Shetty, M. McShane, L. Zhang, and J.P. Kesan, ”Reducing Informa-
tional Disadvantages to Improve Cyber Risk Management.” The Geneva
Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, vol. 43, no. 2, pp.
224-238, 2018.
[30] K. Stolen, F. den Braber, T. Dimitrakos, and R. Fredriksen, ”Model-
Based Risk Assessment: The CORAS Approach.” iTrust Workshop,
2002.
[31] T. Kevin. ”Introducing the Cyber Assessment Framework v2.0” NSCS
Blog Post, 2018. Accessed Sep. 9, 2019.
[32] U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁce INTERNET OF THINGS: En-
hanced Assessments and Guidance Are Needed to Address Security
Risks in DOD Publication No. GAO-17-668, 2017.
[33] U.K. National Cyber Security Centre ”Cyber Assessment Framework”
Accessed sep. 9, 2019.
[34] K. V. Wal, J. Lainhart, and P. Tessin, ”A COBIT 5 overview.” ISACA
Webinar Program, 2012.
[35] J. Wynn, J. Whitmore, G. Upton, L. Spriggs, and D. McKinnon, ”Threat
assessment & Remediation Analysis (TARA): Methodology” MITRE
CORP BEDFORD MA, ver. 1.0, No. MTR110176, 2011.
[36] Z. Yazar, ”A Qualitative Risk Analysis & Management Tool: CRAMM.”
SANS InfoSec Reading Room, White Paper 11, 2002.
[37] N. Ye, C. Newman, and T. Farley. ”A System-Fault-Risk Framework for
Cyber Attack Classiﬁcation.” Information Knowledge Systems Manage-
ment, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 135-151, 2005.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

