Analyzing the Impact of Security Protocols on Wireless LAN with Multimedia 
Applications 
 
Thaier Hayajneh, Samer Khasawneh, Bassam Jamil, Awni Itradat
Department of Computer Engineering 
Hashemite University 
Zarqa, Jordan 
{Thaier, Samerkh, Bassam, Itradat}@hu.edu.jo
 
Abstract—The availability and reasonable cost of broadband 
Internet made it an attractive and favorable option to billions 
of users worldwide.  Being a fast service also encourages its 
users to use multimedia applications. The performance of such 
applications in wireless LAN may be highly affected by 
security protocols. This paper examines the effect of different 
security protocols on the performance of wireless LAN with 
multimedia applications. Experiments were performed on a 
wireless test-bed and the results were analyzed for throughput, 
delay and jitter for four security settings: disabled security, 
WEP, WPA1, and WAP2. The experiments were performed 
under two different scenarios and using multimedia traffic 
streams. The results revealed a significant degradation in 
performance when security protocols were enabled in wireless 
LAN. Specifically, delay and jitter, were significantly 
increased, both of which are key metrics for multimedia 
applications. The increase is clearer when a larger number of 
hosts exist in the network. We finally propose an outline for a 
solution to obtain strong security in wireless LAN without 
significant performance degradation. The solution proposes 
that the security processing at the hosts be conducted by the 
powerful host processor rather than by the radio card 
processor. As for the wireless access point, adding ASIC or 
FPGA processor is suggested for performing the heavy 
security processing. 
Keywords-WLAN; 
WEP; 
WPA1; 
WPA2; 
delay; 
jitter; 
multimedia traffic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the last decade, wireless local area networks (WLAN) 
technology has become more convenient and thus has spread 
extensively worldwide. The security of this technology, 
however, is a constant concern to all its users, especially 
those who use it for online banking, social networking, and 
monetary transfer. In that regard, determining the 
relationship between the strength of the used security 
protocol and the performance of WLAN is of utmost 
importance. This relationship becomes even more important 
in applications that require high QoS to operate properly 
such as video conferencing and live video streaming.   
Researchers have extensively investigated the impact of 
security protocols on the performance of WLAN. The 
majority focused on the network’s throughput while less 
attention was given to delay. The results were conflicting on 
the impact of security on the performance of WLAN, with 
several [1, 2, 3, 6, 7] discussing its tangible negative impact 
and few concluding its negligible impact on performance of 
WLAN [5]. 
The main security protocols in WLAN are wired 
equivalent privacy (WEP) [8], WiFi protected access 
(WPA1) [10], and WiFi protected access II (WPA2) [10]. 
WEP is the simplest and uses computationally light cipher. 
However, it has been shown to be insecure and should no 
longer be used. WPA1 is stronger than WEP; but, has few 
security vulnerabilities and was replaced by WPA2 [11]. 
WPA2 is known to be secure since it relies on strong cipher 
as AES. Hence, applying WPA2 is expected to be heavy and 
requires considerable processing leading to increased delay. 
Further details will be discussed on each protocol in Section 
3. 
In this paper, we will examine the impact of security 
protocols on the performance of WLAN through conducting 
experiments over a test-bed. The performance of the network 
was examined under four conditions: disabled security, 
WEP, WPA1, and WPA2.  Given the contemporary trend of 
using multimedia applications among current Internet users, 
a special attention was given in this paper to the impact of 
security protocols on the performance of WLAN in such 
applications. Since the multimedia applications are most 
sensitive to delay and jitter, these two performance metrics 
were the focus in this paper. 
Moreover, we have proposed a new solution that will 
allow us to use a strong security protocol in WLAN while 
significantly 
minimizing 
the 
degradation 
in 
WLAN 
performance. The solution proposes that the security 
processing be conducted by the powerful host processors 
instead of the radio card processors. As for the wireless access 
point, adding ASIC or FPGA processor is suggested for 
performing heavy security processing. The need for such a 
proposition arose from the fact that disabled security WLAN 
by far outperforms other security settings in all performance 
aspects. Our work is different from pervious studies in 
considering different security protocols including WPA2 and 
different multimedia traffic (video streaming traffic); focusing 
on delay and jitter; and finally proposing a novel solution to 
achieve strong security without performance degradation.   
The consequent parts of this paper are organized as 
follows: Section 2 overviews previous related work. Section 
3 provides a brief description of the security protocols and 
their 
pitfalls 
in 
WLAN. 
Methodology 
and 
the 
hardware/software used in the experiments are discussed in 
Section 4, and results are described in Section 5. Section 6 
illustrates the proposed solution, and the derived conclusion 
and future work are summarized in Section 7. 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II. 
RELATED WORK 
The impact of security protocols on WLAN performance 
has been studied in the literature from different perspectives. 
The majority of the researchers considered the impact on 
throughput and only few considered delay and jitter. Most of 
the networks were tested with file transfer traffic.  
Barka and Boulmalf [1] studied the impact of security 
protocols on the throughput of WLAN. They considered 
both TCP and UDP traffic under two scenarios. Only the 
impact of WEP and WPA1 was considered but not WPA2. 
The study concluded that adding security will cause a 
decrease in the average network throughput and increase in 
the percentage of dropped packets for both TCP and UDP 
traffic. The authors assume fixed traffic intensity with fixed 
packet delay. Moreover, Barka and Boulmalf found that 
WPA1 will have the largest impact on the network 
performance due to the bigger key sizes and longer 
processing time.  
Kolahi et al. [2] evaluated the impact of different security 
protocols on network throughput and round trip time (RTT) 
for both TCP and UDP traffic. They also considered 
different operating systems (Windows server 2003, XP and 
Vista). Similar to Barka and Boulmalf [1], the authors did 
not consider WAP2. The results showed that using security 
protocols reduces the throughput and increases RTT. The 
increase in RTT is more noticeable when larger encryption 
keys are used.   
Several experiments have been carried out to explore the 
impact of security protocols on the performance of voice and 
data traffic in WLAN [3]. The performance metrics that were 
tested are: throughput, delay, and jitter. However, delay and 
jitter were only tested for WEP protocol with 64-bit key size; 
such a protocol is not secure and could be broken in few 
seconds [4]. Boulmalf et al. [3] showed that no noticeable 
throughput degradation is incurred through adding security 
protocols. However, considerable increase in packets delay 
and jitter was noticed especially for voice traffic. 
Gin and Hunt [5] evaluated the impact of 802.11i 
security on network throughput performance. Several 
experimental scenarios were carried out in which the traffic 
volume and the number of traffic initiators (users) are 
changed. In their first set of experiments, where only two 
users 
coexisted 
in 
the 
network, 
minor 
throughput 
degradation is incurred even if the security level is 
maximized. In their second set of the experiments, where 
multiple users are transmitting through the network 
concurrently, slight throughput degradation resulted when 
adding security even with larger key length. With their 
results, Gin and Hunt [5] disagreed with many research 
papers that confirmed throughput deterioration when 
implementing increasing security. 
In Begh and Mir work [6], IPTraffic was used to generate 
different rates of TCP and UDP traffic to quantify the impact 
of adding security on network throughput, transmission 
delay and packet loss. The results are obtained using five 
different security setups: no security, WEP-64, WEP-128, 
WPA-TKIP and WPA-AES. For 1 Mbps and 5 Mbps traffic 
rates, the results showed no major degradation in network 
throughput (except for WPA-AES), no significant increase in 
transmission time, and almost negligible packet loss ratio. 
However, when the traffic rate is increased to 12 Mbps, 
noticeable detraction in performance metrics was noticed. 
Begh and Mir [6] only performed their experiments with a 
single wireless station and they did not consider WPA2. 
Furthermore, they did not consider the end-to-end delay, but 
instead considered the transmission time which may not 
reflect the impact of using security protocols in WLAN.  
In Baghaei and Hunt study [7] the impact of WEP 
protocol with various settings and key sizes on the 
performance of WLAN was analyzed. They used a network 
with three wireless clients and a wired server. Baghaei and 
Hunt [7] concluded that the stronger the security mechanism 
implemented the poorer the performance, although the 
degradation is certainly not linear. Moreover, they found that 
the response time is increased with stronger security 
mechanism and also when the network is congested.  
As discussed in this section, none of the previous work 
has studied the impact of WPA1 and WPA2 on multimedia 
applications where delay and jitter are the key metrics that 
must be carefully tested. Furthermore, none of the previous 
work proposed a solution for the performance degradation 
that is caused by using strong security protocol as WPA2.  
Therefore, in this paper a special attention will be given to 
the impact of security protocols on the performance of 
WLAN in multimedia applications. Moreover, we will 
propose a new solution that will allow using a strong security 
protocol in WLAN while significantly minimizing the 
degradation in WLAN performance. 
III. 
WLAN SECURITY PROTOCOLS 
Similar to all wireless technologies, security in WLAN is 
considered one of its main weaknesses. The wireless 
medium is shared among the users and open access for any 
malicious attacker.    
In this section, we provide a brief description of the most 
commonly used security protocols in WLAN.  
A. Wired Equivalent Privacy  
WEP protocol is the first security protocol for WLAN 
[8]. It was designed as a part of the original 802.11 standard. 
Its intended purpose was to provide security to WLAN 
equivalent to the security existing in the wired network.  
WEP uses RC4 stream cipher for confidentiality and CRC-
32 for integrity. In this paper, we used 128-bit WEP protocol 
with 104-bit key and 24-bit initialization vector. WEP is 
known to be insecure since 2001. Tews and Beck [4] 
surveyed the most common successful attacks against WEP. 
Although WEP is widely used, it is agreed now that WEP 
with all its variations and modifications is considered 
insecure and should not be used.  With the available tools 
such as Aircrack [9] one can break WEP security within 
minutes.  
B. WiFi Protected Access  
WPA1 [10] was designed to overcome the limitations 
and insecurity of WEP protocol. WPA1 implements most of 
the IEEE 802.11i standard. It uses Temporal Key Integrity 
Protocol (TKIP) [10] that uses a per-packet key. Hence, 
unlike WEP, a new 128-bit key is dynamically generated for 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

each packet. Consequently, this prevents most of the type of 
attacks that compromised WEP.  WPA1 replaced the 
insecure CRC used in WEP with a stronger message 
integrity check. Despite the fact that WPA1 addressed most 
of the problems that exists in WEP, it continues to show 
some limitations such as relying on stream cipher and 
cryptographically weak integrity (Michael algorithm).  In 
Moen et al. [11] researchers discovered weaknesses in the 
temporal key hash of WPA1. Tews and Beck [4] presented 
the details of a potential attack to break WPA1. 
C. WiFi Protected Access II 
WPA2 [10] also referred to as IEEE 802.11i replaces 
WPA1 and implements the mandatory elements of IEEE 
802.11i standard. It uses a new AES-based encryption mode 
CCMP that is highly secure. This resolved the security issue 
with TKIP in WPA. WPA2 provides Robust Security 
Network including two new protocols, the 4-way Handshake 
and the Group Key Handshake. Junaid et al. [12] and Khan 
et al. [13] showed that the initial counter value used in the 
CCMP can be predicted and that WPA2 is subject to 
dictionary attacks.  
He and Mitchell [14] concluded that in CCMP, 
management frames and control frames are neither encrypted 
nor authenticated by the Link Layer encryption algorithm, 
and hence, being vulnerable to many threats discussed in 
their paper. In addition, they expected CCMP to have some 
impacts on performance because it requires some hardware 
upgrades. 
IV. 
METHEDOLOGY AND HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, we describe the test bed used to conduct 
the experiment and the software tools used to collect and 
analyze the results. We also present the experimental 
scenarios conducted for studying the impact of security 
protocols on several network performance metrics such as 
throughput, delay, and jitter. Clock synchronization as well 
as a brief description for the performance metrics, especially 
the end-to-end delay, will be discussed in this section. 
Finally, traffic streams used in this experiment will be 
illustrated.   
A. Test Bed Description 
Two different network setup scenarios were used in this 
experiment. In the first scenarios, we only used two wireless 
host (laptops) and one access point as shown in Figure1.  
 
Figure 1. First Scenario 
 
The specification of the devices is as follows: 
1) Linksys E2000 Cisco Advanced Wireless-N Router 
with the following specifications: 
• Supports up to 11 channels. 
• Supports 802.11n, 802.11a, 802.11g, 802.11b, 802.3, 
802.3u, 802.3ab Standards 
• Security features : WEP, WPA, WPA2 
• Security key bits: up to 128-bit encryption 
2) Acer notebooks with the following specifications: 
• Model: Acer Intel core i5, 2.24 GHz processor.  
• NIC model: Realtek RTL Gigabit Family.  
• Operating system: Ubuntu 11.04 
The nodes were adjacent (2-3 meters) and other WiFi 
networks in the area were eliminated to avoid extraneous 
interference. All the experiments were performed in the 
same location and within a short period of time. Hence, the 
impact of multi-fading or coexistence of other WLANs will 
be the same for all the security protocols and scenarios.  
The second scenario is shown in Figure 2 where four 
laptops existed in the network. All laptops were transmitting 
at the same time but communication was monitored between 
two nodes only. The other nodes were added to cause greater 
interference and congestion in comparison to the first 
scenario.  This is expected to cause more processing, 
queuing, and backoff delay (possibly caused by collisions).  
In both scenarios, the streaming bit rate was about 500 kbps. 
Moreover, beside the video streaming, a large file was 
transferred between the sender and the receiver.   
 
 
Figure 2. Second Scenario 
 
B. Clock Synchronization 
Accurate synchronization for the Laptops’ clocks is 
crucial to avoid erroneous results on delay and jitter, such as 
a smaller packet arrival time compared to the packet sending 
time which may lead to unexplained negative delay. Several 
techniques can be used to ensure accurate synchronization. 
One technique is the manual adjustment of the devices’ 
clocks based on a certain reference time. However, this 
method is prone to human error and therefore may be 
inaccurate and leading to wrong delay.  
Another technique is issuing “net command” between the 
networked devices. The command guarantees instantaneous 
and accurate adjustment. However, shortly afterwards, the 
devices usually skew from the initial adjustment. 
A third technique and the one applied in this experiment 
is the AtomTime Pro software [15], which frequently 
connects to global servers to adjust the time of the devices 
used in the experiment. As for the communication with the 
time server, an out-of-band connection was used to 
guarantee no interference with our traffic.   
C. Software 
Wireshark TM packet analyzer was used to capture and 
analyze network packets.  In order to extract the required 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

data from the large output files, we used AWK scripting 
language. This tool is used to extract certain packets 
information being read from Wireshark output files.  
Some scripts were written using C# program for packets’ 
matching. Throughput, delay, and jitter were calculated 
using the list of matched packets obtained from output files.  
D. Performance Metrics 
1) End-to-End Delay  
Delay is one of the most important metrics for multimedia 
applications. Unlike file transfer, multimedia applications 
could tolerate packet loss but not a high delay. Delay can be 
classified into four main types or causes:   
a) Transmission delay: 
 This is the time needed to transmit all the bits of a 
packet.  It is measured by dividing the frame size in bits by 
the wireless link transmission speed in bits per second. In 
our case, this time is expected to be in the order of tens of 
milliseconds.  
b) Queuing delay:  
This is the time when the packet waits its turn to be 
transmitted in the queue of a router or host. This delay could 
be neglected if only few hosts are transmitting in a lightly 
loaded network. We expect this delay to take place only with 
the second scenario.  
c) Propagation delay: 
This is the time needed for one bit to travel from the 
sending to the receiving host. This delay is measured by 
dividing the distance between the sender and the receiver by 
the signal speed (usually equals the speed of light). Usually, 
this time is small and could be neglected.   
d) Processing delay:  
This is the time taken to process the packets by the router 
and hosts. This time is expected to be more significant if 
security is enabled in the wireless router given that 
encryption and authentication verification require significant 
processing and may cause longer delay.  
2) Packet Jitter 
The packet jitter measures the variation in the end-to-end 
delay from packet to packet. Multimedia application could 
tolerate some delay but large jitter could cause a greater 
damage to the consistency of their operation.    
3) Throughput  
Throughput is the average number of bits that is sent over 
the network per second. Usually, it is the most significant 
metric if the main purpose of the network is to transfer large 
files.  
E. Traffic Streams 
In our scenarios, we used video steaming traffic between 
wireless hosts.  Multimedia traffic uses real-time streaming 
protocol (RTSP) to control the transmission of a media 
stream. It also relies on real-time protocol (RTP), which runs 
on the top of UDP or possibly TCP [16]. These multimedia 
protocols add sequencing and timestamp information to the 
transferred packets. Hence, their operationability will be 
significantly affected by the packets delay and jitter.   
Moreover, a heavily-loaded network will have more collision 
and backoff time incurring longer delays.  
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, results from both scenarios are discussed 
in terms of delay, jitter, and throughput. For statistical 
validation, all the experiments were repeated 10 times and 
the averages were considered in our results.  
A. Delay 
Figure 3 shows the total average end-to-end round trip 
delay in milliseconds for the packets transmitted between 
two wireless hosts for WEP, WPA1 and WAP2 security 
protocols. Since our goal was to study the impact of security 
protocols on the delay, then change in delay is what matters 
not the value of the delay itself. Hence, we neutralized the 
results by subtracting the delay with disabled security from 
the other three cases. 
 
Figure 3. Delay 
  
Figure 3 shows that for both scenarios, delay is increased 
when security protocols are enabled in WLANs. As 
expected, WPA2 which is the most complicated security 
protocol for using the strong AES encryption, showed the 
highest delay. On the other hand, WEP protocol, which is the 
lightest protocol for relying on the simple RC4 stream 
cipher, showed the lowest delay.  
For all the security protocols, scenario two has higher 
delay than scenario one. This is due to the fact that the 
network traffic in scenario two is much larger than that in 
scenario one. Larger traffic leads to a larger number of 
collisions, which in turn results in longer backoff times and 
longer delay.  
Figure 3 also shows that the difference between the delay 
of WPA1 and WAP2 with scenario two is larger than that 
with scenario one. This indicates that the processing delay is 
not the only reason that causes the delay with WPA2. It can 
also be caused by the overhead in WAP2 protocol handshake 
messages.  
B. Jitter 
Figure 4 shows the packet jitter in milliseconds  for the 
packets transmitted between two wireless hosts for WEP, 
WPA1 and WAP2 security protocols. Since our goal was to 
study the impact of security protocols on the jitter rather than 
value of the jitter per se, we neutralized the results by 
subtracting the jitter with disabled security from the other 
three cases.  
Figure 4 shows that for both scenarios, the jitter is 
increased when security protocols are enabled in WLANs. 
As expected, WPA2 showed the highest jitter and WEP 
showed the lowest.  
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Similar to Figure 3, for all security protocols, scenario two 
has higher jitter than scenario one. The same justification 
also applies here. 
 
 
Figure 4. Jitter 
 
 Figure 4 also shows that the difference between the jitter 
of WPA1 and WAP2 with scenario two is even larger 
compared to scenario one, and for the same reasons that 
caused the delay to be higher. 
C. Throughput 
 
Figure 5. Throughput 
 
Figure 5 shows the throughput in Mbps for the two 
wireless network scenarios with the four cases: disabled 
security, WEP, WAP1, and WPA2. The figure shows that 
WEP has no impact on the throughput. This observation may 
be explained by the fact that WEP is light and does not cause 
large overhead. Even for WPA1 and WPA2 protocols, the 
throughput was slightly affected which may be due to the 
fact that the multimedia traffic was not heavy on the 
network. The throughput in the second scenario was higher 
than the first scenario because of the additional file transfer.  
VI. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
In this section, we propose an outline for a new approach 
to achieve security in WLAN while reducing the impact on 
the network performance. The proposed outline is based on 
the fact that disabling security in WLAN results in higher 
throughput and significantly lower delay and jitter. This fact 
was also agreed upon in other research papers [1, 2, 6, 7].  
Potorac and Balan [17] studied the impact of security 
overheads on 802.11 WLAN throughput. They provided 
theoretical analysis about the impact of the three security 
protocols on system’s performance. Their findings indicated 
that theoretically, the impact of WEP, WPA1, and WPA2 
security overheads is insignificant for large packets. They 
concluded that the processing devices and computing 
resources that are available at the level of the radio station 
need more processing power for encryption. Thus, 
according to Potorac and Balan [17] it is possible to observe 
smaller throughput or larger delay given that the 
communication processor cannot encrypt or decrypt the data 
flow at the necessary speed. Lars [18] presented 
measurements that match the theoretical results presented 
by Potorac and Balan [17]. Based on our results and the 
findings we discussed for Potorac and Balan [17] and Lars 
[18], we propose a solution to overcome the performance 
degradation caused by using strong security protocols in 
WLANs. The actual implementation, deep analysis, and 
performance evaluation of this solution is beyond the scope 
of this paper and is left for future extension of this work.  
The idea of the proposed solution is to move all the 
security to the end systems and use WLAN with disabled 
security. Using open access (disabled security) WLAN will 
give us the following advantages: 
• 
Higher throughput, also shown in [1, 2, 6,  7]. 
• 
Lower delay or response time, also shown in [2,  3,  
6]. 
• 
Less percentage of dropped packets, also shown in 
[1]. 
Authentication and encryption will be applied to the 
data prior to its delivery to the low processor performance 
wireless card.  
At the hosts, the encryption and all other security 
services, such as authentication and key exchange, will be 
done before the data is passed to the radio card by the 
device (possibly laptop) processor. These processors are 
usually powerful and will process the encryption in much 
less time compared to the radio card processer. The delay 
and jitter are both expected to be significantly small and 
possibly negligible.  
At the access point, the increasing complexity of 
security protocols signifies the need to improve the 
performance of network processing hardware for real-time 
cryptographic processing. The cryptographic algorithm 
throughput and delay can be significantly improved by 
implementing the algorithm in specialized processors using 
ASIC solution or FPGA implementation. While ASIC 
designs are superior in performance, FPGA implementation 
has the advantages of low cost, reprogramability and short 
time to market. Numerous ASIC and FPGA designs have 
been proposed in the literature such as those in Wang et al. 
[19] and Chang et al. [20]. Wang et al. [19] presented an 
ASIC implementation with on-the-fly key expansion and 
reconfigurable core architecture. The design provides a 
throughput of up to 3.75 Gb/s at 102 MHz. Chang et al. [20] 
discussed an FPGA implementation of 32-bit AES 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

algorithm. The design has a low area of 156 slices and a 
throughput of 876 Mbps.  
In terms of hardware implementation of the algorithm, 
our preliminary analysis indicates that the synthesized HDL 
design would result in a gate count of 50K gates. An ASIC 
implementation using 90-nm technology will have an area 
of 1mm2 and a power dissipation of 150 mW with a 
throughput of about 40 Gbps. An FPGA implementation, on 
the other hand, would require about 10K slices with a 
throughput of about 15 Gbps. 
Figure 6 illustrates the proposed solution. The laptops 
will use the Fast Security Add-on (FSA), which will be an 
add-on software to the wireless card driver. FSA will be 
responsible for all the security algorithms and will be 
processed by the powerful fast laptop processor (could be 
dual core, i3, i5, or i7). On the other hand, at the access 
point the ASIC/FPGA processor will be responsible for all 
the processing that maybe required by the security 
protocols.  
 
Figure 6. Proposed Solution 
 
The proposed solution is considered successful only if it 
causes a negative impact on the performance that is less 
than the impact caused by WPA2. As for the impact on the 
throughput, Potorac and Balan [17] analytically proved that 
the overhead in WPA1 and WPA2 are 20 and 16 bytes per 
packet, respectively. Thus, it is less likely that the proposed 
solution will have any impact on the throughput. In our 
future work, we are planning to implement and test the FSA 
tool on several laptops platforms to analyze its impact on 
the delay and jitter. The specialized processors using ASIC 
solution or FPGA implementation will also be tested for 
delay and jitter. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper examined the effect of several security 
protocols on the performance of a WLAN with multimedia 
applications. Throughput, delay, and jitter for four security 
settings: disabled security, WEP, WPA1, and WAP2 were 
analyzed. The results showed a significant degradation in 
performance occurring when enabling security protocols in a 
WLAN. Specifically, delay and jitter, which are key metrics 
for such applications, were significantly increased. The 
increase was more noticeable when more wireless hosts exist 
in the network. Therefore, we proposed a solution outline to 
achieve strong security in WLAN without noticeable 
performance degradation. The solution proposes that the 
security processing be conducted by the powerful host 
processors rather than by the radio card processors. As for 
the wireless access point, adding ASIC or FPGA processor is 
suggested for performing heavy security processing. Our 
study has shown that in theory, the proposed solution is 
effective. However, future empirical research is needed to 
practically prove its effectiveness.  
Moreover, in order to better comprehend the possible 
impact of the increase in delay and jitter with WPA2 one 
should consider objective and subjective video quality 
metrics. However, theses quality metrics and the details and 
prototype of the proposed solution are left for future 
research.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Barka and M. Boulmalf, “On The Impact of Security on 
The performance of WLANS,” Journal of Communications 
(JCM), Vol. 2, pp. 10-17, June 2007.  
[2] S. Kolahi, S. Narayan, Y. Sunarto, D. Nguyen, and P. Mani, 
"The Impact of Wireless LAN Security on Performance of 
Different Windows Operating Systems," in Proceedings of 
the 
IEEE 
Symposium 
of 
Computers 
and 
Communications(ISCC), pp. 260-264, July 2008. 
[3] M. Boulmalf, E. Barka, and A. Lakas, “Analysis of the effect 
of security on data and voice traffic in WLAN,” ACM journal 
of Computer Communications, vol. 30, pp. 2468-2477, 2007. 
[4] E. Tews and M. Beck, "Practical attacks against WEP and 
WPA," In Proceedings of the second ACM conference on 
Wireless network security (WiSec '09), pp.  79-86, 2009. 
[5] A. Gin and R. Hunt, “Performance Analysis of evolving 
Wireless IEEE 802.11 Security Architectures,” Proceedings 
of the 8th International Conference on Mobile Technology, 
Applications, and Systems, Vol 2, pp. 101-106, 2008. 
[6] G.R. Begh and A.H. Mir, "Quantification of the Effect of 
Security on Performance in Wireless LANs," Proceeding of 
the 3rd  International Conference on Emerging Security 
Information, Systems and Technologies (SECURWARE '09), 
pp. 57-62, June 2009. 
[7] N. Baghaei and R. Hunt, "Security Performance of Loaded 
IEEE 802.11b Wireless Networks," Journal of Computer 
Communications, vol. 27, pp. 1746-1756, 2004. 
[8] LAN MAN Standards Committee of the IEEE Computer 
Society, Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and 
Physical Layer (PHY) Specification, IEEE Std 802.11-1999 
edition, IEEE, New York, 1999. 
[9] <http://www.aircrack-ng.org> 27.7.2012 
[10] ANSI/IEEE standard 802.11i., “Amendment 6 Wireless LAN 
Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (phy) 
Specifications”, Draft 3. (2003).  
[11] V. Moen, H. Raddum, and K. Hole, "Weaknesses  in  the 
temporal  key hash of WPA,"  In Proceeding of ACM Mobile 
Computing and Communications Review (SIGMOBILE 04) , 
pp. 76-83, 2004. 
[12] M. Junaid, Muid Mufti, and M.Umar Ilyas, "Vulnerabilities of 
IEEE 802.11i Wireless LAN CCMP Protocol," Journal of 
Transactions on Engineering, Computing and Technology, 
vol. 11, pp. 228-233, February 2006.  
[13] M. Khan, A. Cheema, and A. Hasan, "Improved Nonce 
Construction Scheme for AES CCMP to Evade Initial 
Counter 
Prediction," 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
9th 
ACIS 
International Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial 
Intelligence, 
Networking, 
and 
Parallel/Distributed 
Computing, pp. 307-311, 2008. 
[14] C. He and J. Mitchell, "Security Analysis and Improvements 
for IEEE 802.11i," Proceeding of NDSS, 2005. 
[15] < http://www.atomtime.com/> 27.7.2012 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[16] J. Kurose and K. Ross, Computer Networking: A Top-Down 
Approach (5th Edition), Addison-Wesle, 2010. 
[17] A. Potorac and D. Balan, "The Impact of Security Overheads 
on 802.11 WLAN Throughput," Journal of Computer Science 
and Control Systems, vol. 2, pp. 47-52,  2009. 
[18] McCarter Harold Lars, “Analyzing Wireless LAN Security 
Overhead”, research report at Virginia Tech University, 
available at http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/ available/etd-
04202006-080941/unrestricted,  2006. 
[19] M. Wang, C. Su, C. Horng, C. Wu, and C. Huang, "Single- 
and Multi-core Configurable AES Architectures for Flexible 
Security," in IEEE Transactions on  Very Large Scale 
Integration (VLSI) Systems,  vol. 18 , pp. 541-552, 2010. 
[20] C. Chang, C. Huang, K. Chang, Y. Chen, and C. Hsieh, "High 
throughput 32-bit AES implementation in FPGA,"  in 
Proceeding of IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and 
Systems, 2008. 
 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

