User Authentication Method with Mobile Phone as
Secure Token
Ryu Watanabe and Yutaka Miyake
KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc.
Ohara 2-1-15 Fujimino Saitama, Japan
Email: ryu@kddilabs.jp and miyake@kddilabs.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a user authentication
method with mobile phone. In our proposal, a mobile phone
with a Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card is used as
security token for user authentication on WEB services. This
authentication method named SIM-based authentication provides
a secure authentication because of robustness of the SIM card.
However, currently, the use of SIM-based authentication is limited
to mobile phone. The terminals without a SIM card cannot use
this style. In addition, only the mobile operator can use this
method because the shared key hidden in the card is not open
to service providers. In order to overcome this limitation, we
realize pairing between mobile phone and terminals, which do
not have SIM cards and the SIM-based authentication method
can be applied to the terminals. In addition, the single sign on
(SSO) technique is also applied in order to provide SIM-based
authentication for service providers.
Keywords—authentication; SIM; identity management.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, Internet services have become more attractive
and many users frequently use the services. The services are
varied, and online shopping or auction sites are common.
User authentication function is important for services that
require payments. Many Internet sites still use ID/password
(PW) pairs for this purpose. However, malicious attack tech-
niques have recently improved [1][2][11][12], and thus the
number of incidents has increased. In order to cope with this
problem, some sites apply multifactor authentication methods
[3], such as biometrics or One Time Password (OTP). The
use of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) also provides secure
authentication. Some Internet banking sites require the random
number table for executing money transfer. These methods are
practical for malicious attacks. However, such methods usually
require dedicated devices or items, for instance, sensors for
ﬁngerprints, a one time password generator or random number
table. Therefore, more convenient user authentication method
is required for Internet service use. On the other hand, in
the case of a mobile phone, another authentication method
exists. So, a mobile phone uses a subscriber identity module
(SIM) for the connection to the base station. (The Universal
Integrated Circuit Card (UICC) is the different name of the
SIM card. In this paper, we use the word SIM for the card.)
The SIM card is removal and can be transferred between
different mobile phones. By using SIM cards, mobile carriers
can identify users. Using SIM card for user authentication
has some good features. The SIM card is one of the tamper
resistant modules and it is difﬁcult to duplicate. In addition,
users do not have to memorize some secret information such
as password. However, currently, use of this authentication
method is limited to the connection to the base station for mo-
bile phones or device authentication on Wi-Fi communication.
Moreover, only the mobile carrier can apply this authentication
method because the secret information inside SIM cards is
not open to service providers. Therefore, when the SIM-based
authentication method can be used for user authentication of
WEB service use, a more secure user authentication method
is brought to both users and service providers. In addition, as
described previously, this method requires a SIM card. Other
terminals, such as a tablet or notebook PC, do not have SIM
cards. In this case, if the mobile phone with a SIM card
cooperates with mobile terminals without SIM cards, then
secure authentication can be utilized on all mobile terminals.
In order to cope with these two problems, the authors we
proposed the SIM-based authentication method for mobile
terminals without SIM cards. We also implemented a proto-
system based on the proposal. The authorswe conﬁrmed the
functions in an Internet environment. In order to provide the
SIM-based authentication for Internet service providers, the
single sign on (SSO) technique is used. In addition, for secure
usage, pairing between mobile phone with mobile terminal
without SIM is conﬁrmed at application level. After this
section, we denote related work in section II. In section III, IV
and V, we explain our proposal, the implementation based on
our proposal, and discussion, respectively. In section VI, the
conclusion is drawn.
II.
RELATED WORK
A. Authentication method
User authentication methods for Web services are cate-
gorized into three basic factors: the knowledge base factor,
ownership factor, and inherence factor. The ﬁrst factor uses
something the user knows (e.g., password or Personal Identi-
ﬁcation Number (PIN)). The second factor uses something the
user has (e.g., secure token, software toke, cell phone) [5]. The
third factor uses something the user is or does (e.g., ﬁngerprint,
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence, face) [4]. Because of
security problems, the authentication methods that use the last
two factors or combination of multiple factors have gradually
become widespread.
1) SIM-based authentication: The SIM-based authentica-
tion method is one of the authentication methods with the
ownership factor. Firstly, this method is used for only the
connection between a base station and mobile phone. Then,
the method is extended to identify user terminal on Wi-Fi
connection as EAP-SIM or EAP-AKA. EAP means extensible
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

authentication protocol and AKA means authentication and key
agreement [6], which are standardized in 3GPP [7] and IETF.
EAP protocols are used on user device authentication on Wi-
Fi connection establishment. In SIM-based authentication, by
checking the response managed with the secret key, the mobile
carrier authenticates the user terminal. So, the secret is shared
with the authentication server of the mobile carrier.
Currently, the theses authentication methods are limited
and not used for user authentication for Web services. For
this purpose, another SIM-based authentication method was
proposed, which is called Generic Bootstrapping Architecture
(GBA). Basic idea is same. It also uses a dedicated shared
secret key installed inside the SIM card. The design is based
on the AKA. In the GBA method, the user, who wants to use a
Web service (called the Network Application Function (NAF)),
is authenticated by the Bootstrapping Server Function (BSF),
then the BSF issues a dedicated temporary identiﬁer and
key pair for the services, and then authentication is executed
between the user terminal and the service. The lifetime of the
key is limited. Therefore, when it is expired, the user has to
restart the sequence. The GBA is standardized; however, it
does not use current Internet services because the browser
function for the GBA method from the Web browser is not
prepared. In addition, not all SIM cards can use the GBA
function. Some function is also required for the SIM cards. The
Application programmable interface (API) for this purpose is
under standardization.
Therefore, in our proposed scheme, we customized the
mobile phone and test type card to use the SIM-based au-
thentication function based on the EAP-AKA’ authentication
protocol, which is derivation of EAP-AKA.
B. Identity Management Technique
The identity management (IdM) technique is used for
control of user information. Originally, it was invented for
control of user account management on an intranet. Then, the
target area of the IdM technique expanded to the Internet. One
of the main functions of the IdM technique is SSO, which
realizes centralized authentication. A user account control
server named identity provider (IDP) authenticates the user
then transmits the result to the service server named service
provider (SP). The SP provides the user a service depending
on the results. Figure II-B shows the concept of SSO. In order
to prevent linking, which is a privacy problem, pseudonyms
are used for user identiﬁcation between servers. Therefore, if
service servers conspire with each other, the user identiﬁer on
both servers cannot be known. For realizing the IdM technique,
some speciﬁcations and implementations are released from
standardization organization. OpenID [9] and SAML [8] are
representative of them.
1) OpenID: The OpenID mechanism is a decentralized
authentication scheme for the SSO mechanism. OpenID users
identify themselves with a URI and XRI. In the OpenID
scheme, the identity provider and service provider are referred
to as the OpenID provider (OP) and relying party (RP),
respectively. The latest version of OpenID is OpenID connect.
The OpenID technique is also used on the Internet service
site. The combination of SIM-based authentication method and
OpenID has been proposed [10]. In this identity management
Authentication 
request
User
Identity 
provider
(IDP)
Service 
provider
(SP)
• IDP and SPs are collaborated .
• IDP authenticates user sends SPs 
its results.
• SPs provide user services .
Service 
provider
(SP)
Pseudonym 
Pseudonym 
Figure 1.
Concept of SSO
system, users and service provider are provided secure and
convenient authentication.
2) SAML:
SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language)
is an XML-based open standard data format produced by OA-
SIS for exchanging authentication and authorization data be-
tween an identity provider and a service provider. Based on the
SAML, some Web Brower single sign on proﬁles are deﬁned
such as liberty identity web services framework.
III.
OUR PROPOSAL
A. Requirement
The concept of our proposal is described. A user wants to
use some Web service on a mobile terminal, such as tablet
or note PC, which do not hold a SIM card inside. It is
supposed that such terminals have a wireless local area network
(LAN) connection to the Internet. Usually, the service provider
authenticates the user by using ID/PW pair. Instead of using
the ID/PW pair, in our proposal, mobile phone is used as
key device for user authentication. So, the system requires a
mobile phone by the user. Under this concept, the SIM-based
authentication can be used for any kind of terminals.
However, there are some problems. First, the mobile
terminal and mobile phone have to contact each other by
some method. Second, service providers cannot use SIM-based
authentication directly. In addition, some security mechanism
is required between the paired terminal and phone in order to
avoid malicious use from another user.
The requirement for the system is summarized below.
1)
Connection between mobile terminal and mobile
phone
2)
Delegated authentication scheme
3)
Safety mechanism for avoiding malicious use
B. System Concept
Based on the requirements described above, we designed
the prototype. For the ﬁrst requirement, some connection
methods can be used. In order to communicate with each other,
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

a bidirectional connection is required and a unidirectional
one is not appropriate. Therefore, we decided to use Wi-
Fi and Bluetooth connections. In addition, we assume this
connection is already established. So, the establishment of
the communication method between the mobile terminal and
mobile phone is out of the scope of this paper.
For the second requirement, we applied the identity man-
agement mechanism. So, the SSO mechanism is used. The
mobile carrier, who knows the shared secret, behaves as the
IDP. And the service providers unite with the mobile carrier
and delegate user authentication to it. So, using tThe identity
management technique is used better for security reasons to
avoid privacy problems such as linkability.
For the third requirement, we applied mutual authentication
on the applications for a SIM based-authentication. Currently,
the browser API is not prepared for mobile phones. In addition,
for our proposal, the mobile terminals without SIM cards
and mobile phones have to communicate on the application
level. Therefore, we implemented mobile applications for both
terminals and phones. These applications also have to associate
with each other before executing the SIM-based authentication.
C. Malicious attacks
Here, we denote malicious attacks, which we suppose.
The aim of the malicious users is spooﬁng. They want to be
authenticated as legitimate user. However, they do not have
legitimate SIM or cannot duplicate the SIM because of the SIM
resiliency. In addition, the SIM-based authentication method
has a protection against eavesdropping. It uses a challenge and
response (CHAP) type authentication and manages its lifetime.
Therefore, if a response is eavesdropping, it cannot be used
different session. In addition, the SIM-based authentication
applies mutual authentication in the message exchange. So,
user can notice that the server is faked, even though the attacker
prepares a fake server and induce to it by phishing mail.
However, if the attacker can replace the application for
our proposal, they can achieve man-in-the-middle type attack
because the attacker can put modiﬁed messages both user ter-
minal and server via the contaminated application. In order to
cope with this problem, in our proposal, the applications share
the secrete information. By using this information, the appli-
cations both mobile phone and mobile terminal conﬁrm their
legitimacy. Therefore, it is required that the secret is pre-shared
among all the application and implemented securely. For this
purpose, obfuscated codes can be used. However, in current
version, this countermeasure against reverse-engineering is not
supported and we will apply the feature in next version.
The totalwhole concept of the proposal is shown in Figures
2 and 3. Figure 2 shows the preparation before our proposed
scheme and Figure 3 shows the communication among servers,
user terminal and user mobile phone, respectively. So, in
our proposal, the SIM-based authentication scheme and SSO
technique are utilized.
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION
A. System Speciﬁcation
Based on the proposal, we implemented the proto-system.
The system speciﬁcation is summarized on Table I.
• Connection establishment
(Wi-Fi or Bluetooth )
• Application installation
in Advance
Application
Application
Wi-Fi / Bluetooth
Figure 2.
System preparation for our proposal
Federation
Authentication 
request
Service use
Identity 
provider
(IDP)
Service 
provider
(SP)
Authentication 
result
Mobile
device
Mobile
phone
Pairing
Figure 3.
Concept of our proposal
As a mobile phone, we used the Android OS smartphone
Nexus One because the kernel of the phone is open and can
be modiﬁed. For the OpenID platform (IDP and SP servers),
the Linux base OS (CentOS) and open module (php OpenID)
are used. In addition, Windows OS tablet is used for the user
mobile terminal. In our proposal, the EAP-AKA’ method is
used as SIM based authentication method. As mentioned previ-
ously, not all the SIM card is hold the GBA function, so, in our
implementation, we selected EAP-AKA based authentication
method. Usually, the mobile phone OSs including Android OS
do not provide access to SIM card. Therefore, we modiﬁed the
OS for this purpose. So, the use of the proto-type is limited
currently.
In order to limit restrict the mobile terminals, which can
contact to the mobile terminal, before the executing SIM-based
authentication, named EAP-AKA’, the pairing between appli-
cations on user mobile terminal and user mobile phone has to
be conﬁrmed. The steps for the pairing are summarized below.
Before this step, the installation of dedicated applications for
both user terminal and phone in advance.
1)
At ﬁrst, user operates the application on mobile phone
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Table I.
SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS
Mobile Phone
Terminal
Nexus One
OS
Android (Customized)
Mobile terminal without SIM
Windows tablet
Toshiba WT301
OS
Windows 7
OpenID platform
Server OS
CentOS
OpenID module
php-openid
Application
Module
java
and change the mode to active in order to accept the
request from user terminal. Only the active mode,
the application listens to the request from mobile
phone. (At this time, the wireless connection between
mobile phone and mobile terminal is supposed to be
constructed.)
2)
Then user sends request from the mobile terminal to
the mobile phone.
3)
The mobile phone, which catches the request, exe-
cutes mutual authentication using the secret hidden
in the application.
4)
If the application on the mutual authentication is
successfully achieved on them, then the mobile phone
shows accept code (four-six digit number) on the
display.
5)
User inputs the number to the application on mobile
terminal. Then the pairing process is ﬁnished.
This process is similar to the paring method of Bluetooth.
The purpose is same. Once the pairing is constructed, the user
terminal can send authentication request to the mobile phone.
The ﬂow sequence of our proposed scheme is described
below. Before this authentication ﬂow, ID association between
an IDP and SP has been completed successfully in advance.
The ﬁgure 4 shows the whole sequence.
1)
A user accesses an SP from the browser on the mobile
terminal without a SIM card or UIM.
2)
The SP redirects the request to IDP.
3)
The IDP generates the session ID for the user au-
thentication and sends it to the browser on the user’s
mobile terminal.
4)
The browser launches the application on the mobile
terminal and passes the session ID to the application.
5)
The application on the mobile terminal searches the
mobile phone, which is on standby near the mobile
terminals.
6)
Connection is conﬁrmed between applications.
7)
The application sends an authentication request to
the authentication application on the mobile phone,
which is found in the previous step.
8)
The SIM-based authentication method (EAP-AKA’)
is executed between the mobile phone and the IDP.
9)
The IDP redirects the user authentication result to the
SP.
10)
The SP generates the session ID for service provi-
sioning.
11)
The SP provides the Web service to the user.
The time for the authentication was measured on the proto-
type. The process time on authetication server is less than 1
second without network delay in ten times average.
V.
DISCUSSION
For the pairing between applications on both mobile phone
and mobile terminals, the secrete parameter number, which is
decided by user is required. If the number parameter is securely
protected by user, no one can know it except the legitimate
user. Therefore, malicious user cannot execute pairing behind
legitimate user’s back. In addition, the applications mutually
authenticate each other before pairing by using securely em-
bedded secret parameter . When an application cannot validate
the other application, the request is denied. So even though
a malicious user remakes the application, the modiﬁcation is
detected.
Whole communication between the terminals and the mo-
bile phone IDP and SP are protected by using Secure Socket
Layer (SSL) connection, therefore, secrets that is exchanged
between them cannot be eavesdropped. Even though, the
parameters are stolen by some method parameters included the
response has life time and managed with the communication
session. So it cannot be reused.
Our proposed system applies the SSO technique for user
authentication on SP. Therefore, unwanted information about
user is not sent to SP. The important parameter such as tele-
phone number i is not revealed to service providers.So, the
IMSI that is one of the important parameter is also kept inside
IDP.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a SIM-based authentication
method for mobile terminals. By using a mobile phone with
SIM card as an authentication token, the secure user authen-
tication is realized on mobile terminals without SIM card
for WEB service use. The authorswe believe that by using
our proposal, more ﬂexible and useful user authentication is
brought to both users and service providers.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Vorobiev and J. Han, “Security Attack Ontology for Web Services,”
Semantics, Knowledge and Grid, 2006. SKG ’06. Second International
Conference on, 2006, pp. 42-47.
[2]
T. S. Chen; F. G. Jeng, and Y. C. Liu, “Hacking Tricks Toward Security
on Network Environments,” Parallel and Distributed Computing, Ap-
plications and Technologies, 2006. PDCAT ’06. Seventh International
Conference on, 2006, pp. 442-447.
[3]
S. R. Basavala, M. Kumar, and, A. Agarrwal, “Authentication: An
overview, its types and integration with web and mobile applications,”
Parallel Distributed and Grid Computing (PDGC), 2012 2nd IEEE
International Conference on, 2012 pp. 398-401.
[4]
S. Asha and C. Chellappan, “Authentication of e-learners using mul-
timodal biometric technology,” Biometrics and Security Technologies,
2008. ISBAST 2008. International Symposium on, 2008, pp. 1-6.
[5]
H.K. Lu and A. Ali, “Communication Security between a Computer
and a Hardware Token,” Systems, 2008. ICONS 08. Third International
Conference on 2008, pp. 220-225.
[6]
J. Arkko, H. Haverinen, “Extensible Authentication Protocol Method
for 3rd Generation Authentication and Key Agreement (EAP-AKA),”
RFC 4187, IETF.
[7]
3GPP,
⟨http://www.3gpp.org/⟩ 07.07.2013
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Mobile
phone
Mobile Device
Wi-Fi / Bluetooth
connection
(1) access request
(2) redirect to IDP
(4) send session ID
launch appl.
send session ID
(7) authentication
request
(9) redirect to SP
service provisioning
Session ID
(authentication)
generation
connection confirmation
Between applications
EAP-AKA’ authentication
Message(IMSI, session ID, challenge, response)
Session ID
(service)
generation
Application
Application
Browser
Identity
Provider
(IDP)
Service
Provider
(SP)
(3)
(5)
(6)
(8)
(10)
(11)
Figure 4.
Sequence of our proposed method
[8]
OASIS SAML V2.0,
⟨http://www.oasis-open.org/specs/index.php#samlv2.0⟩ 07.07.2013.
[9]
OpenID, ⟨http://openid.net/⟩ 07.07.2013
[10]
A. S. Ahmed and P. Laud, “Formal Security Analysis of OpenID with
GBA Protocol,” MobiSec, volume 94 of Lecture Notes of the Institute
for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering, Springer, 2011, pp. 113-124.
[11]
H. M. Sun, Y. H. Chen, and Y. H. Lin, “oPass: A User Authentication
Protocol Resistant to Password Stealing and Password Reuse Attacks”,
Information Forensics and Security, IEEE Transactions on, Vol. 7, 2012,
pp. 651-663.
[12]
C. Xu and Y. Yang, “Password guessing attack on a key exchange
protocol based on ECDLP”, Progress in Informatics and Computing
(PIC), IEEE International Conference on, Vol. 1, 2010, pp. 449-452.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

