Identifying and Managing Risks in Interconnected Utility Networks 
The HyRiM Risk Management Process 
 
Stefan Schauer, Sandra König, Martin Latzenhofer 
Center for Digital Safety & Security 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH 
Vienna, Austria 
Email: {stefan.schauer, sandra.koenig, 
martin.latzenhofer}@ait.ac.at 
Stefan Rass 
Institute of Applied Informatics, System Security Group 
Alpen-Adria Universität Klagenfurt 
Klagenfurt, Austria 
Email: stefan.rass@aau.at
 
 
Abstract— Critical infrastructures and especially their utility 
networks play a crucial role in the societal and individual day-
to-day life. Thus, the estimation of potential threats and 
security issues as well as a proper assessment of the respective 
risks is a core duty of utility providers. Despite the fact that 
utility 
providers 
operate 
several 
networks 
(e.g., 
communication, control and utility networks), most of today’s 
risk management tools only focus on one of these networks. In 
this article, we will give an overview of a novel risk 
management process specifically designed for estimating 
threats and assessing risks in highly interconnected networks. 
Based on the international standard for risk management, ISO 
31000, our risk management process integrates various 
methodologies and tools supporting the different steps of the 
process from risk identification to risk treatment. At the heart 
of this process, a novel game-theoretic framework for risk 
minimization and risk treatment is applied that is able to deal 
with uncertainty by using distribution-valued payoffs. This 
approach is specifically designed to take information generated 
by various tools into account and model the complex interplay 
between the heterogeneous networks, systems and operators 
within a utility provider. It operates on qualitative and semi-
quantitative information as well as empirical data, including 
expert opinions.  
Keywords-risk management; interconnected utility networks; 
game theory; ISO 31000 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Utility networks are critical infrastructures consisting of 
physical and cyber-based systems. The organizations 
operating these networks are providing essential services for 
society, e.g., the electric power production and distribution, 
water and gas supply as well as telecommunication services. 
A failure within a critical infrastructure has huge societal 
impact, as shown for example in [1] [2].  
These infrastructures are heavily relying on Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) as well as 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems 
for providing their services. As it has been shown in recent 
events [3] [4], ICT and SCADA systems are potential targets 
of cyber-security threats and may have vulnerabilities that 
attackers could exploit. Therefore, protecting and assuring 
availability and security is of the utmost importance for 
normal societal and business continuity. 
In this context, risk management is a core duty in critical 
infrastructures. Current risk management frameworks [5]–[8] 
are mostly a matter of best practices, often focusing on one 
specific topic (e.g., the ICT area, SCADA systems or the 
physical utility layer). In particular, the aforementioned 
network-centric structure within utility providers relies on a 
high integration and a heavy interrelation between the 
different networks (cf. Figure 1). Hence, an incident in one 
network might affect not only the network itself but might 
also have cascading effects on several other networks as 
well. Standard risk management frameworks are often not 
designed to identify and assess these cascading effects, thus 
leaving them underestimated or even undetected.  
In this article, we present a novel risk management 
process, which is specifically tailored to work on highly 
interconnected networks and take the aforementioned 
cascading effects into account. With this process, we go 
beyond the classical approaches in risk management and use 
a game-theoretic framework to identify an optimal set of risk 
mitigation measures. Therefore, we extend the well-known 
risk management process given in the international standard 
ISO 31000 by special tools. These tools support risk 
managers obtaining a holistic view of their organization, an 
in-depth identification of potential threats and a thorough 
analysis of the propagation of incidents together with their 
respective impacts. By integrating the collected semi-
quantitative data into probability distributions or histograms, 
the presented process accounts for the intrinsic randomness 
given in this field of application. This utilization of 
distribution-valued payoffs represents also an extension to 
standard game-theoretic frameworks. 
In the following Section II, we will give a short overview 
on the research already done in this field. Section III then 
describes the HyRiM Project in which the HyRiM Risk 
Management Process has been developed, in further detail. 
The ISO 31000 standard, which represents the basis for the 
HyRiM Risk Management Process, is sketched in Section 
IV. The core contribution of this work, the detailed 
description of the HyRiM Risk Management Process, is 
provided in Section V; the respective subsections describe 
each sub-step of the process. Section VI concludes the work. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 1. Interconnected networks operated by a utility provider 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the past decade, risk and security management have 
become core parts of any company’s day-to-day business. 
This is caused by the increasing number of attacks on cyber 
systems over the last years, where in particular critical 
infrastructures have moved in the center of attacker’s 
attention. General standards for risk management (e.g., the 
ISO 31000 [5], ISO/IEC 27005 [6] or the NIST SP800-30 
[7]) and security management (e.g., the ISO/IEC 27001 [9] 
or NIST SP800-37 [10]) as well as common business 
frameworks (e.g., COBIT 5.0 for Risk [8] or Octave [11]) 
provide a good approach to prepare organizations against the 
current threat landscape. Nevertheless, these standards and 
frameworks are quite generic and need a lot of tailoring to 
meet the specific requirements of critical infrastructures. 
Moreover, they represent best practice approaches with little 
or no mathematical basis for the assessment of risks.  
For critical infrastructures, there are more specialized 
guidelines available, e.g. the NIST SP800-82r2 [12] or the 
ISA/IEC 62443 family of standards [13], covering the field 
of industrial control systems. Although these frameworks 
focus more on cyber-physical systems and thus intend to 
close the gap between those two worlds, they leave other 
aspects like organizational and human factors aside. Hence, 
they take some (more technical) parts of the critical 
infrastructure’s network architecture into consideration but 
don’t provide a holistic view on the whole organization as 
such. The HyRiM Project [14] described in the following 
section provides a more comprehensive view of these 
organizations and thus further improves the overall risk 
management. 
III. 
THE HYRIM PROJECT 
In the course of the FP7 project HyRiM (“Hybrid Risk 
Management for Utility Networks”) [14], we are focusing on 
these sensitive interconnection points between different 
networks operated by a utility provider. The main goal is to 
define a novel risk management approach for identifying, 
assessing and categorizing security risks and their cascading 
effects in interconnected utility infrastructure networks. In 
more detail, we are concentrating on three major networks 
operated by utility providers, i.e., (cf. also Figure 1) 
• 
the 
utility’s 
physical 
network 
infrastructure, 
consisting of, e.g., gas pipes, water pipes or power 
lines; 
• 
the utility’s control network including SCADA 
systems used to access and maintain specific nodes 
in the utility network; 
• 
the ICT network, collecting data from the SCADA 
network and containing the organization’s business 
logic.  
Additionally, we also include the human factor and the 
social interrelations (i.e., the social network) between 
employees, wherever possible. In other words, we choose a 
holistic or “hybrid” view on these networks, strongly 
emphasizing on the interrelations between them. Hence, we 
refer to our approach as “Hybrid Risk Management” and to 
the respective risk measures as “Hybrid Risk Metrics”.  
The risk measures developed in HyRiM are focusing on a 
qualitative approach to avoid the illusion of “hard facts” 
based on subjective numerical risk estimates provided by 
humans. Nevertheless, simulation tools based on well-
defined mathematical frameworks like percolation and co-
simulation are provided, which support the qualitative 
analysis with quantitative results.  
Hence, our risk management process unifies the 
advantages of quantitative assessment with the ease and 
efficiency of a qualitative analysis and supports a qualitative 
assessment 
with 
a 
sound 
quantitative 
mathematical 
underpinning. The aim is to provide utility network operators 
with a risk management framework supporting qualitative 
risk assessment based on numerical (quantitative) techniques. 
In this way, the HyRiM project takes an explicit step towards 
considering security in the given context of utility networks 
based on a sound and well-understood mathematical 
foundation, ultimately supporting utility network operators 
with a specially tailored solution for the application at hand. 
IV. 
THE ISO 31000 STANDARD 
The international standard for risk management, ISO 
31000 [5] describes the principles and guidelines for the 
implementation of risk management in organizations. It is 
based not only on the operational risk management process, 
but also on general organizational factors and their respective 
underlying structure. Therefore, the standard describes, to a 
large extent, a strategic risk management framework, which 
is constantly seeking to develop and improve the operational 
risk management process in the context of the defined 
principles.  
A distinct characteristic of the ISO 31000 is the two-tier 
structure with a risk management framework on the one 
hand, and the operative risk management process on the 
other hand (cf. Figure 2). These two life cycles are linked by 
the framework’s activity “implementing risk management”. 
The risk management framework represents the top down 
approach, ensures the consistent embedding of risk 
management in the organization based on a quality 
management perspective. It follows an iterative and 
continuous improvement approach, i.e., the plan-do-check-
act (PDCA) cycle. Furthermore, the operative risk 
management process supports the bottom-up approach, 
which puts the concrete risks in an organizational context, 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 2. Risk management framework (left) and risk management process (right) according to ISO 31000 [5] 
assesses and treats them. During the whole risk management 
process, two guiding sub-processes ensure communication 
and consultation as well as monitoring and review. The first 
one interacts with the stakeholders, the latter enables 
performance measure. 
In order to support the PDCA-driven risk management 
framework, a strong and sustainable commitment of the 
organization’s top management is required. Only with such a 
top-level commitment, a risk management policy is 
supported, objectives and strategies can be coordinated 
within the organization, indicators can be defined and legal 
and regulatory requirements can be met. Furthermore, this 
commitment also ensures that the necessary resources and 
responsibilities are allocated at all levels of the organization, 
the benefits are communicated to all stakeholders, and the 
framework for dealing with risks continues to be adequate. 
The implementation of the risk management process 
describes the application of the risk management policy to 
the organizational processes including their schedule. 
Therefore, the following five generic steps are defined, 
which divide the operational risk management process into 
specific actions: Establishing the Context, Risk Identification, 
Risk Analysis, Risk Evaluation and Risk Treatment. In short, 
framework conditions for risk management in relation to the 
organization are specified in the beginning, followed by the 
identification of the potential threats together with their 
respective likelihood of occurrence and consequences. The 
resulting list of risks is assessed according to the predefined 
context of the organization and ranked according to its 
importance. This makes it possible to directly identify a 
procedure for risk management. 
V. 
THE HYRIM RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
A. General Setting 
The HyRiM Risk Management Process we are presenting 
here 
is 
tailored 
to 
organizations 
operating 
highly 
interconnected networks at different levels, such as utility 
providers or critical infrastructure operators. Therefore, the 
HyRiM process is compliant with the general ISO 31000 
process for risk management [5] shortly introduced in the 
previous section and thus can also be integrated into existing 
risk management processes already established in the 
aforementioned organizations.  
In detail, the operative risk management process of the 
ISO 31000 framework (cf. Figure 2) is adopted and each step 
of the process is supported with the tools developed in the 
HyRiM project. These tools cover different social and 
technical analysis techniques and simulation methodologies 
that facilitate the risk process. The relevant HyRiM tools 
have been identified and mapped onto the risk management 
process as shown in Figure 3. Since the ISO 31000 is a 
generic process and is often used as a template in other ISO 
standards itself (like in the ISO 27005 [6], the ISO 28001 
[15] or others), the HyRiM process described here can also 
be integrated into these standards. This makes it possible to 
apply the HyRiM process to multiple fields of application. 
The general framework applied in HyRiM to model the 
interplay between different networks is game theory. Game 
theory not only provides a solid mathematical foundation but 
can also be applied without a precise model of the 
adversary’s intentions and goals. Therefore, a zero-sum game 
and a minimax approach [16] can be used, where the gain of 
one player is balanced with the loss of the other. This can be 
used to obtain a worst-case risk estimation. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 3. HyRiM Risk Management Process 
The game-theoretic framework we developed in HyRiM 
[12] [13] also allows modeling the intrinsic randomness and 
uncertainty encountered in real-life scenarios. This is realized 
using distribution-valued payoffs for the game [19], as 
opposed to the standard modeling where security needs to be 
quantified in numeric terms; a task that is typically difficult 
and reasonable figures measuring security are hard to obtain. 
These payoffs are coming from both the percolation and the 
co-simulation, since those are stochastic processes and the 
results are described as distributions.  
The output of the game-theoretic framework is threefold 
and includes the maximum possible damage that can be 
caused by an adversary, an optimal attack strategy resulting 
in that damage and an optimal security strategy for the 
defender. The optimal defense strategy is, in general, a 
mixture of several defensive (i.e., mitigation) activities. 
These activities, if implemented correctly, provide a provable 
optimal defense against the adversary’s worst case attack 
strategy. The implementation can be simplified and 
guaranteed, for example, by the use of a job scheduling tool. 
B. Establishing the Context 
The HyRiM risk management process starts by defining 
the objectives which should be achieved and attempting to 
understand the external and internal factors that may 
influence the goal. This summarizes a description of the 
external and internal environment of the organization as well 
as detailed requirements for the risk management process 
itself. 
The first step takes the information about SCADA and 
ICT communication networks (e.g., network architecture 
diagram), components of the utility network (e.g., 
architecture of the physical utility network layer), industrial 
control functions and information assets as input. Further, 
information about the social and organizational aspects as 
well as other necessary documentation that is relevant for the 
overall risk management context is also required. Whereas 
the technical aspects are often more or less documented 
within the organization, for analyzing the social aspects, we 
suggest using firsthand and more qualitative analysis 
techniques, like interviews or ethnography. This allows 
identifying the gap between the way policies and security 
measures are planned and should be implemented within the 
organization and how the organizational structure works in 
real life. In the HyRiM project, we applied such studies to 
obtain a holistic and in-depth view on the relevant 
infrastructures of the end user partners. 
The main output of this step is a specification of the 
different networks (ICT, SCADA, social, etc.), their 
interdependencies among each other and a definition of the 
basic criteria for the risk management process as well as its 
scope, boundaries, and responsible parties.  
C. Risk Identification 
Risk identification involves the application of systematic 
techniques to understand a range of scenarios describing 
what could happen, how and why. Therefore, the 
infrastructure within the scope of the risk management 
process needs to be defined, including technical assets, 
organizational roles and individual personnel as well as their 
interdependencies. Based on that, potential vulnerabilities 
and threats can be identified. 
As an input, this step requires a detailed specification of 
the organization’s infrastructure relevant for the risk 
assessment process. This information is obtained from the 
previous step “Establishing the Context”. The main objective 
of this step is to get an overview on the relevant aspects for a 
risk assessment. Therefore, firstly a list of assets has to be 
created, describing the subset of the organization’s overall 
infrastructure under evaluation. Secondly, a list of asset-
related threats needs to be extracted from the general set of 
potential threats in the organization’s field of application. 
Further, specific vulnerabilities (not only from the technical 
area, but also from a general point of view) for these assets 
need to be gathered. 
To avoid missing potential threats or vulnerabilities, a 
structured approach for risk identification has to be applied. 
Hence, a Threat Awareness Architecture [20], which is based 
on Organizational, Technology and Individual (OTI) 
viewpoints, was developed in the HyRiM project. This 
architecture comprises a three-stage process, including 
Situation 
Recognition, 
Situation 
Comprehension 
and 
Situation Projection. In this process, the OTI viewpoints 
serve as a basis and include not only the technical aspects but 
also cover policies and processes within an organization as 
well as how individual people behave under particular 
conditions. Thus, this architecture provides a holistic view on 
an organization’s threat landscape and also specifies and 
collects structured information on threats and vulnerabilities. 
This information can be gathered and also shared with open 
source threat and vulnerability repositories to achieve a 
continuous exchange with other utility providers.  
This step produces several outputs, including a structured 
representation (e.g., a network graph) of relevant assets and 
their interrelations, a list of open vulnerabilities and potential 
threats related to these assets. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

D. Risk Analysis 
Risk analysis deals with developing an understanding of 
each risk, its consequences and the likelihood of these 
consequences. In general, the level of risk is determined by 
taking into account the present state of the system, existing 
controls and their level of effectiveness. Whereas in a 
classical risk analysis approach both the consequences and 
the likelihood of an incident are aggregated into a single 
value, in the HyRiM process, both are described by 
distributions or histograms including all the relevant 
information coming from different sources. Hence, the more 
information is available to build up these distributions, the 
higher the quality of the results. Nevertheless, since most of 
the time only scarce information about potential threats and 
vulnerabilities is available within an organization, the 
HyRiM process is designed to work also with such limited 
information. 
This step takes the list of potential threats and the list of 
the organization’s assets together with their vulnerabilities as 
an input (resulting from the previous step “Risk 
Identification”). Based on this list, specific threat scenarios 
tailored to the organization’s infrastructure are defined. 
These threat scenarios are evaluated according to their 
likelihood and consequences.  
In general, there is a plethora of different methodologies 
for estimating the likelihood and consequences of a specific 
threat scenario. They range from simple questionnaires 
collecting expert opinions up to complex mathematical 
models. Especially in the context of utility networks, 
estimating the potential consequences of a threat often is 
quite complex due to the interconnected nature of the 
networks and the related cascading effects. Hence, for the 
HyRiM Risk Management Process, we suggest four specific 
simulation-based approaches, which are well-suited for 
utility networks: Percolation Theory, Co-Simulation, Agent-
based Modelling and Physical Surveillance Simulation. 
In particular, when looking at the different networks 
operated by a utility provider (cf. Figure 1) percolation 
theory [21]–[23] as well as co-simulation [24]–[26] can be 
used to describe the cascading effects spreading over the 
different networks. More precisely, percolation theory is 
particularly helpful when only high-level or sparse (e.g., 
qualitative) information is available [23]. In this case, the 
nodes and edges in the network graph from the previous step 
can be distinguished according to several characteristics. 
Based on these different types, a specific probability of 
failure is assigned to each type and the propagation of an 
error is modeled according to these probabilities. This model 
allows computing the probability that an error affects a 
significant number of components, i.e., it causes an epidemic 
or even pandemic, as well as how many nodes are indeed 
affected in this case.  
If 
more 
details 
on 
the 
infrastructure 
and 
the 
communication between certain systems are known, a co-
simulation approach can provide more accurate information 
about the spreading of a failure among these networks [26]. 
In this context, the overall network is represented in different 
tools, each responsible for simulating a part of the complex 
system. Then, the co-simulation framework models and 
manages the communication between these tools, e.g., by 
exchanging variables, data and status information. In this 
way, the separated simulations of the complex system are 
synchronized and the effects of an incident propagating over 
several systems in the different networks can be analyzed.  
In case of threats against the physical infrastructure of a 
utility provider, e.g., the buildings, machinery, warehouses, 
tank depots, etc., a simulation framework for physical 
surveillance is more applicable. In this context, game theory 
is often used as a mathematical approach to model an 
intruder’s behavior and to find optimal strategies to defend 
against specific scenarios [27]–[29]. A similar framework 
has been developed in the HyRiM project [14]. It takes the 
layout of the utility provider’s premises, including the 
buildings and pathways connecting them and allows 
simulating the movements of an adversary entering the 
premises. In more detail, the adversary’s capabilities, 
potential entry points and targets can be modeled. 
Additionally, the security measures (cameras, identity 
badges, etc.) together with the routes and routines of the 
security guards within the premises can be represented in the 
simulation. In this way, the framework allows reproducing 
and analyzing different attack scenarios together with the 
respective defensive actions. Using this framework, not only 
the potential physical damage caused by one or more 
intruders but also soft factors (like the effect of increased 
surveillance on the employees) can be estimated.   
Complementary to these methodologies, agent-based 
modelling is much more focused on the societal impact of 
specific actions taken by an organization. Since utility 
providers are, in general, critical infrastructures, incidents 
happening within utility providers as well as the respective 
security actions can directly affect societal structures in a 
certain region. As shown in the HyRiM project, an agent-
based model can be used to simulate such social response 
and provide an overview on the potential implications on 
society [30].  
Taking the results of one or several of the simulation 
methodologies mentioned above, this step provides two 
unsorted lists as output, containing the consequences and 
likelihoods for each identified threat scenario. As already 
mentioned, the consequences as well as the likelihoods are 
represented as histograms to prevent the loss of important 
information. 
E. Risk Evaluation 
Risk evaluation involves making a decision about the 
level or priority of each risk by applying the criteria 
developed when the context was established (c.f. Section 
V.B above). In classical approaches, a cost benefit analysis 
can be used to determine whether specific treatment is 
worthwhile for each of the selected risks. In contrast, the 
game-theoretic model applied in the HyRiM process allows 
an optimization according to several tangible and intangible 
goals (i.e., not only costs but also soft factors like employee 
satisfaction or social response). Nevertheless, the result needs 
to be visualized in a well-known representation, i.e., a risk 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 4. Illustration of the resulting risk matrix based on  
the two ordered lists for the consequences and likelihoods. 
matrix, to provide a high recognition value for top level 
management.  
This step requires the compilation of the empirical 
histograms or distributions (or, more general, the probability 
mass 
functions) 
representing 
the 
likelihood 
and 
consequences of each of the threats as evaluated in the 
previous step “Risk Analysis”. The input is created from data 
obtained from the aforementioned simulation approaches, 
i.e., percolation, co-simulation, agent-based modelling and 
physical surveillance simulation. 
A general approach for risk evaluation is to compute the 
risk as the product “consequence × likelihood” and to order 
the results according to their magnitude. Due to the fact that 
we are dealing with histograms or distributions instead of 
single values, forming this product is not possible and the 
ordering becomes non-trivial. Hence, we need another way 
of ordering the consequences and likelihoods for each threat 
scenario. One solution for this is given by the stochastic ≼-
ordering, which has been introduced in [17] [18], and allows 
comparing two distributions (cf. [17] [18] for technical 
explanation of ≼-ordering). By applying this ordering to the 
unsorted lists of the threat scenarios’ consequences and 
likelihoods, is it possible to identify the risks with the most 
severe consequences and the highest likelihood. Unlike 
rankings based on values (only), this form of evaluation uses 
all available information, rather than relying on a lossy 
aggregation thereof (such as the product of likelihood and 
damage, which corresponds to condensing a distribution into 
its first moment only).  
The main output of this step is a two-dimensional risk 
matrix including all risks according to their respective 
likelihood and consequences (cf. Figure 4). Based on this 
matrix, a priority list of all risks can be compiled. 
F. Risk Treatment 
Risk treatment is the process in which existing controls 
are improved and new controls are implemented. In classical 
risk management approaches, the aim is to apply these new 
or improved controls to reduce either the likelihood of a 
specific threat to occur or the magnitude of the 
consequences. The decision about which controls to 
implement is often a subjective one, carried out by the risk 
manager. In the HyRiM Risk Management Process, the goal 
is to identify the optimal set of controls to reduce the 
maximum damage that can be caused by an attacker to a 
minimum. In this context, the optimality of the resulting 
controls is given due to the game-theoretic algorithms 
developed in the course of the project [17]–[19].  
This step takes the list of risks resulting from the Risk 
Evaluation as input. The main goal is to identify an optimal 
treatment plan for risks with the highest priority. Therefore, 
the list of controls which can be implemented to counter a 
specific risk is evaluated according to their effect on the 
consequences. The game-theoretic approach applied here 
allows not only to identify the optimal choice of controls for 
a specific risk but also to cluster several risks with similar 
controls to identify the set of controls, which are most 
effective against all of the clustered risk. Additionally, the 
game-theoretic algorithm is capable of optimizing over 
different security goals, e.g., also taking the costs for 
implementing the controls into account. 
To compute the optimal mitigation action, it has to be 
evaluated, how much a specific defense strategy affects a 
certain attack strategy. This is done by rerunning the 
consequence analysis for the organization’s asset structure 
assuming that the specific defense strategy has been 
implemented. Therefore, the simulation approaches from 
Section V.D can be used again. The evaluation has to be 
done for all combinations of attack and defense strategies. 
The resulting table of the evaluated consequences (i.e., the 
payoff matrix) is then fed into the game-theoretic algorithm 
(cf. [18] for details on the computation of the game). 
The output of this step is threefold: the first result is an 
optimal security strategy for the defender, pointing at the best 
choice of defense strategies. Those strategies can be pure 
(i.e., indicating one specific strategy) or mixed (i.e., several 
strategies 
have 
to 
be 
implemented 
with 
specific 
probabilities). The second output is an optimal attack 
strategy for the attacker identifying the neuralgic assets 
within the organization, and the third is the maximum 
damage that can be caused by an adversary. This information 
is then fed into a job scheduling tool, resulting in a well-
defined sequence of mitigation activities implementing the 
optimal defense strategy. 
G. Communication and Consultation 
Concurrent to the five main steps of the risk management 
process (as described above), the Communication and 
Consultation step is performed. Therein, the main and partial 
results of the process are communicated to the respective 
stakeholders (as identified during the Establishing the 
Context step). This is a core part of the overall process due to 
the fact that the stakeholders, in particular the top level 
management, need to be kept well-informed about the results 
from the process. It is important to maintain awareness for 
the risk management activities, since their continued support 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 5. Example of a payoff matrix consisting of distributions 
(taken from [23]) 
for the risk management process is crucial for the overall risk 
management framework (cf. also Section IV about the ISO 
31000). 
H. Monitoring and Review 
Besides the Communication and Consultation, a second 
step running in parallel to the five main steps of risk 
management is Monitoring and Review. This step represents 
a constant feedback loop, using the main and partial results 
from each step and evaluating their effectiveness. Although 
the outputs of the game-theoretic model are optimal (which 
can be proven mathematically), but any risk guarantee is only 
valid provided that the input data is accurate and the threat 
lists are exhaustive. Here comes another advantage of using 
payoff distribution models over normal numbers (as in 
competing approaches) into play: we can even account for 
rare and unexpected events, since the utilized distributions 
are based on input data, but by taking the tails of these 
distributions into account, we can capture extreme outcomes 
that have not been observed so far (e.g., zero-day exploits). 
In more detail, the inputs are based on the general 
organizational structure (cf. Section V.B), the list of potential 
threats and vulnerabilities (cf. Section V.C) as well as the 
estimation of the consequences and likelihood for each threat 
scenario (cf. Section V.D). If these inputs are not 
comprehensive enough or erroneous, the output of the risk 
treatment plan will also be incomplete. Hence, the correct 
implementation of the mitigation actions needs to be 
validated and their consequences on the organization needs 
to be compared to the effect estimated during the risk 
assessment process. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented a novel approach towards risk 
management for utility networks, the HyRiM Risk 
Management Process. This approach has been developed in 
the HyRiM project and extends the international risk 
management standard ISO 31000 by tools specifically 
designed to address the particular requirements of utility 
providers. As a main advantage over standard risk 
management processes like the ISO 31000, ISO/IEC27005, 
COBIT 5 for Risk or others, the presented risk management 
process accounts for the “hybrid” nature of utility networks, 
i.e., the strong and complex interrelations between the 
different networks operated by utility providers. To achieve 
that, several simulation techniques can be integrated into the 
process, for example, depending on the quality of the 
underlying information, to improve the analysis of the 
dynamics stemming from these interrelations and their 
resulting cascading effects. By including techniques from the 
field of social and human studies, not only technical but also 
individual, organizational and social impact of threats can be 
evaluated.  
Further, the HyRiM Risk Management Process relies on a 
sound mathematical basis, building on game-theoretic 
concepts and algorithms, to improve mitigation actions to 
their optimum. This game-theoretic framework allows the 
estimation of the worst-case damage and the identification of 
the corresponding optimal mitigation strategy for a given set 
of potential threats. Hence, the HyRiM Risk Management 
Process has a clear advantage over standard frameworks, 
since those often rely on best practice approaches, lacking a 
general mathematical basis. Moreover, the notions of worst 
case damage and optimal defense strategy are well defined 
according to the game-theoretical framework. 
In the course of the HyRiM project, the process’ 
practicality and applicability have been evaluated in real-life 
use case scenarios. These scenarios include malware 
propagation in a power provider’s cyber-physical network, 
an APT attack on a water provider’s control room and a 
physical intrusion into an oil and gas refinery. The detailed 
scenarios will be described in [31]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the European Commission’s 
Project No. 608090, HyRiM (Hybrid Risk Management for 
Utility Networks) under the 7th Framework Programme 
(FP7-SEC-2013-1). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Fletcher, “Electric power interruptions curtail California 
oil and gas production,” Oil Gas J., 2001. 
[2] 
M. Schmidthaler and J. Reichl, “Economic Valuation of 
Electricity Supply Security: Ad-hoc Cost Assessment Tool 
for Power Outages,” ELECTRA, no. 276, pp. 10–15. 
[3] 
E-ISAC, “Analysis of the Cyber Attack on the Ukrainian 
Power Grid,” Washington, USA, 2016. 
[4] 
J. Condliffe, “Ukraine’s Power Grid Gets Hacked Again, a 
Worrying Sign for Infrastructure Attacks,” 22-Dec-2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603262/ukraines-
power-grid-gets-hacked-again-a-worrying-sign-for-
infrastructure-attacks/. [Accessed: 26-Jul-2017]. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[5] 
International Standardization Organization, ISO 31000: Risk 
Management – Principles and Guidelines. Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2009. 
[6] 
International Standardization Organization, ISO/IEC 27005: 
Information technology - Security techniques - Information 
security risk management. Geneva, Switzerland, 2011. 
[7] 
G. Stoneburner, A. Goguen, and A. Feringa, NIST SP800-30 
Risk Management Guide for Information Technology 
Systems. Gaithersburg, USA, 2002. 
[8] 
ISACA, COBIT 5 for Risk. Rolling Meadows, USA, 2013. 
[9] 
International Standardization Organization, ISO/IEC 27001: 
Information technology - Security techniques - Information 
security management systems - Requirements. Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2013. 
[10] 
NIST, NIST SP800-37 Rev. 1 Guide for Applying the Risk 
Management Framework to Federal Information Systems: a 
Security Life Cycle Approach. Gaithersburg, USA, 2010. 
[11] 
C. Richard A., S. James F., Y. Lisa R., and W. William R., 
“Introducing OCTAVE Allegro: Improving the Information 
Security Risk Assessment Process,” Software Engineering 
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA, 
Technical Report CMU/SEI-2007-TR-012, 2007. 
[12] 
K. Stouffer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and A. 
Hahn, NIST SP800-82 Rev. 2 Guide to Industrial Control 
Systems (ICS) Security. Gaithersburg, USA, 2015. 
[13] 
International Society of Automation, “ISA/IEC 62443 
Series of Standards on Industrial Automation and Control 
Systems 
(IACS) 
Security.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://isa99.isa.org/ISA99%20Wiki/Home.aspx. [Accessed: 
26-Jul-2017]. 
[14] 
“HyRiM | Hybrid Risk Management for Utility Providers.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.hyrim.net//. [Accessed: 
26-Jul-2017]. 
[15] 
International Standardization Organization, ISO 28001: 
Security management systems for the supply chain - Best 
practices 
for 
implementing 
supply 
chain 
security, 
assessments and plans - Requirements and guidance. 
Geneva, Switzerland, 2007. 
[16] 
M. Maschler, E. Solan, and S. Zamir, Game Theory. 
Cambridge University Press, 2013. 
[17] 
S. Rass, S. König, and S. Schauer, “Deliverable 1.2 - Report 
on Definition and Categorisation of Hybrid Risk Metrics,” 
Vienna, Austria, HyRiM Deliverable, 2015. 
[18] 
S. Rass, “On Game-Theoretic Risk Management (Part One) 
– Towards a Theory of Games with Payoffs that are 
Probability-Distributions,” ArXiv E-Prints, Jun. 2015. 
[19] 
S. Rass, S. König, and S. Schauer, “Uncertainty in Games: 
Using Probability-Distributions as Payoffs,” in Decision 
and Game Theory for Security, London, UK: Springer, 
2015, pp. 346–357. 
[20] 
A. Gouglidis, B. Green, J. Busby, M. Rouncefield, D. 
Hutchison, and S. Schauer, “Threat Awareness for Critical 
Infrastructures Resilience,” in Resilient Networks Design 
and Modeling (RNDM), 2016 8th International Workshop 
on Resilient Networks Design and Modeling, Halmstad, 
Sweden, 2016, pp. 196–202. 
[21] 
G. R. Grimmett, Percolation Theory. Heidelberg, Germany: 
Springer, 1989. 
[22] 
S. König, S. Rass, and S. Schauer, “A Stochastic 
Framework for Prediction of Malware Spreading in 
Heterogeneous Networks,” in Secure IT Systems. 21st 
Nordic 
Conference, 
NordSec 
2016, 
Oulu, 
Finland, 
November 2-4, 2016. Proceedings, B. Brumley and J. 
Röning, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2016, pp. 67–81. 
 [23] S. König, S. Rass, S. Schauer, and A. Beck, “Risk 
Propagation Analysis and Visualization using Percolation 
Theory,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 
694–701, 2016. 
[24] 
M. Faschang, F. Kupzog, R. Mosshammer, and A. Einfalt, 
“Rapid control prototyping platform for networked smart 
grid systems,” in Proceedings IECON 2013 - 39th Annual 
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 
Vienna, Austria, 2013, pp. 8172–8176. 
[25] 
M. Faschang, “Loose Coupling Architecture for Co-
Simulation 
of 
Heterogeneous 
Components,” 
Vienna 
University of Technology, Vienna, Austria, 2015. 
[26] 
M. Findrik, P. Smith, J. H. Kazmi, M. Faschang, and F. 
Kupzog, “Towards secure and resilient networked power 
distribution grids: Process and tool adoption,” in Smart Grid 
Communications 
(SmartGridComm), 
2016 
IEEE 
International Conference on, Sidney, Australia, 2016, pp. 
435–440. 
[27] 
M. Aigner and M. Fromme, “A game of cops and robbers,” 
Discrete Appl. Math., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 1984. 
[28] 
S. Bhattacharya, T. Başar, and M. Falcone, “Surveillance 
for Security as a Pursuit-Evasion Game,” in Decision and 
Game Theory for Security, vol. 8840, R. Poovendran and W. 
Saad, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014, 
pp. 370–379. 
[29] 
G. Hahn and G. MacGillivray, “A note on k-cop, l-robber 
games on graphs,” Discrete Math., vol. 306, no. 19–20, pp. 
2492–2497, 2006. 
[30] 
J. Busby, A. Gouglidis, S. Rass, and S. König, “Modelling 
security risk in critical utilities: the system at risk as a three 
player game and agent society,” in Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics (SMC), 2016 IEEE International Conference 
on, Budapest, Hungary, 2016, pp. 1758–1763. 
[31] 
S. Rass and S. Schauer, Game Theory for Security and Risk 
Management: From Theory to Practice. Boston, USA: 
Birkhäuser, to appear. 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

