Security and Safety Requirements for Soft Targets in Czech Republic
Lucia Duricova, Martin Hromada, Jan Mrazek
Faculty of Applied Informatics
Tomas Bata University in Zlin
Zlin, Czech Republic
e-mail: {duricova, hromada, jmrazek}@fai.utb.cz
Abstract— This article describes theoretical and management
requirements for organizations in the safety and security
sector. The aim of this article is to define the primary law
framework and to propose evaluation attributes which can
help to implement an effective management system in this
sector. The article also proposes and describes the solution for
system application of security requirements by understanding
the soft targets threats. The proposal consists of technical
requirements,
law
requirements
and
management
requirements, as well. The system solution is different for each
organization and object; however, the main structure is the
same.
Keywords- Management system; Safety requirements; Soft
targets; System solution.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Soft targets are objects that do not have special security
and safety measures in place. Soft targets are specified
objects with a large number of visitors in one place at the
same
time,
and
special
security
measures
are
not
implemented at those locations. One of the main causes of
danger is uncontrolled visitors moving in soft targets. People
who visit soft targets are a source of risk. Examples of soft
targets include: cinemas and theatres, shopping centers,
schools, universities and so on [5].
In the Czech Republic, the first security and safety layer
is defined by legal measures. In the proposal of the solution,
the first security and safety layer is divided into four
sections.
Figure 1.
Sectoral breakdown of law requirements.
These four sections are identified in the following
paragraphs.
•
People and animals – this section is about life
and health protection. First is human life, then
animal life [4].
•
Surrounding and environment – this section is
about requirements for safety and security in the
surrounding. It is divided in different sections:
environment,
work
places,
public
places,
crowded places and others [1].
•
Material things and machines – this section is
about using machines and working with things,
and
about
requirements
for
use
and
development. Development of things, buildings,
machines, as well as product requirements are
included in specific requirements [1] [4].
•
Information – this section is about classification,
use, transfer and about removing information as
well [10].
Law requirements and technical information are defined
in the first security and
safety layer. The technical
information is present in the technical standards and
European regulations. Currently, our society has a lot of
approaches to security and safety solutions with some
differences. These differences
were identified
in risk
assessment in the decision making process and terminology.
In this research, serious certification standards from special
sectors are used, but the work could be exploited for support
in other sectors; for example: evaluation of fire risk, more
risk analysis, definition of workplaces and machines and
others.
After its implementation, software experts could make
effective decisions, consequences could be smaller and
experts could know the real current status of an object; for
example, a building fire. Experts work with software to see
the building division, machines and economical risk,
calculation of statics and others. As the result, experts could
use knowledges from other experts to make a decision. This
is the main advantage of this solution.
A.
Typology of Objects
•
Commercial objects – An owner uses legal measures
and also technical requirements. Companies identify
stakeholder requirements and then they are translated
into internal directives. These objects have special
operating rules. The commercial objects are divided
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

into two zones: first, the industrial zone and second,
the public zone (shops).
•
State objects – The state objects are divided into
private zone and public zone. Special state objects
could be identified with special conditions for use and
work with special information and other processes.
The
commercial
objects
can
be
managed
by
International
Standardization
Organization
(ISO).
ISO
standards
are
international
standards
that
define
the
organization degree in terms of quality, security, processes
and other categories. These degrees are identified by the
number of the ISO standard. For example, ISO OHSAS
18001
defines
Occupational
health
and
safety
in
organizations. Every organization that has this certification,
has to fulfill the requirements defined in that standard [8].
The
reason
for
ISO
certification
is
business
opportunities. Commercial organizations want to achieve
better product quality and increase economical profit.
The protective security role of the Security department
in any organization is that it is the protector or guardian in
charge of company’s property, product or merchandise,
assets,
equipment,
reputation,
and
employees.
This
responsibility is not limited to the company’s assets and
employees. It extends to nonemployees as well, regardless
of whether they are guests, patrons, customers, or any other
visitor on company property [8].
Soft targets are different because of different business
aims. A shopping centre does not invest financial resources
to implement ISO standards because the customers do not
care about ISO standards; however, they care what
shopping centres are selling or what the price is. The same
is true for theatres, museums and cinemas. These objects do
not integrate ISO standards to processes. This research
paper proposes an integration to achieve better security and
safety in these specific objects.
Legal measures are applied in soft targets. Legal
measures consist of Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)
requirements
and
Fire
protection
(FP)
requirements.
Secondly, camera systems for monitoring the current
situation are present in soft targets. Lastly, technical
systems for monitoring closed buildings are present in soft
targets.
The
above
conclusions
are
the
results
of
examination of objects and consultation with the object
management.
Our behaviour is the first important aspect in an object.
Every visitor must know rules and obligations. This process
is in relation with technology and processes that were
identified in the object. It is the reason why we must know
how the object works. We can identify attributes and
processes that are linked with security and safety risks.
Every requirement is defined in other sectors (commercial
business organization). This research wants to integrate
current requirements into one system and its implementation
into a software solution. The software solution for soft
targets could help experts define reactions to incidents. Our
research concentrates on system integration that has been
applied into soft targets. The system integration effectively
protects soft targets from danger. The software solution
contributes to the right decision making and could lead to an
improvement of the current situation in soft targets.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. The
elementary requirements for commercial buildings and legal
measures for occupational health and safety are defined in
Section 2. In Section 3, the elementary requirements for the
fire protection sector are defined. In Section 4, the proposal
of management and software solution and the primary
principles of fuzzy logic are identified. The elementary
principles for the software solution are identified in Section
5.
II.
LAW FRAMEWORK
In the Czech Republic, the safety framework is defined in
legislative documentation in Occupational Health and Safety
and Fire Protection. In businesses and companies, rules are
set in place for everyday work. The framework consists of
technical
requirements
that
are
defined
by
technical
standards.
The input to documentation and rules are management
standards
in
commercial
objects.
These
management
standards evaluate companies in the world and grant the
quality label. This group (commercial objects) should be
divided into the following subgroups:
•
Production companies
•
Non-production
companies
=
Trading
companies
In this paper, the primary lines of defense for specific
security and safety options in soft targets are identified. A
soft target is an object or place that has borders without
special security and safety preventative actions. This is the
reason why they are easy targets for our society.
Many
people have performed uncontrolled actions in an open space
or a building. Security or safety incident should occur in this
situation, it could be very quick and people could be very
threatened.
A.
Occupational Health and Safety
The legislative framework defines obligations of the
employer. The labor code defines employer responsibilities
to employees and also defines the system. This part of the
paper defines the primary principles which have to be
fulfilled.
•
If two or more employees are present in some
workplace employers must inform each other about
risks and measures.
•
The responsibility of the employer is to ensure
occupational health and safety for every person in the
workplace (the employee must be informed about it in
writing ).
•
Risk prevention includes measures that minimize risk
to an acceptable level
•
Acceptable risk is defined by the law, by calculation or
by expert review.
•
Expert review is based on experiences and knowledges.
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

•
Every risk must be evaluated, defined, minimized or
eliminated.
•
Preference is given to collective protection before
individual protection.
•
Every person that will work at the workplace must be
informed about security and safety rules.
•
Every employee has to be trained when starting at a
workplace, and when changing working process due to
new procedure and or introduced technology.
•
The employer has to keep a record and evidence of
every accident that happened at the workplace in an
accident book.
•
Employer has to keep evidence documentation for
every accident that has been incapacity more as 3
calendar days or in case that injured employee died
after accident.
•
Minimum for controlling process of OHS is defined
once a year [2].
This primary rules could be used to define the system
security solution that could be more effective in objects. In
working processes, employers have to fulfill more rules, but
the only important and useful rules that could be used for
every person in the object, are defined in this paper.
•
The Czech law defines employees and employers, but
in §12 applicable law is understood every person, who
must keep this rules (self-employed persons, family of
employees,
sponsors
of
building).
More
law
documents apply to construction activities.
In the Czech Republic, special law requirements are
defined in legislative documents that have to be kept for
working with machines, technical components or other
pieces of equipment.
Technical rules for OHS:
•
Definition
of
handling
places
for
working
with
facilities.
•
Definition of technological processes and working
procedure according to the producer.
•
Definition of installation and removal of protective
cover.
•
Definition of using operating components without
risk’s zones on facilities.
•
Definition for using actuating devices.
•
If a machine or other equipment is not specified by
special law, it has to be verified once a year [3].
According to the government regulation no. 361/2007 the
collection
of
Czech
Republic
laws
specifying
the
temperature for working areas and places is defined. These
are divided into three groups:
•
Category A - working place with high level of quality.
•
Category B - working place with middle level of
quality.
•
Category C - other places. This definition is known as
work classes.
In this paper, two groups are defined and thse are class I.
and class IIa. Class I. defines working activities with
minimum movement, and it includes administration work
activity, control activity, work with computer and so on
(Class IIa.) [4].
B.
Occupational Health and Safety Management System
This standard covers OHS management that provides
organizations with the elements of an effective OHS
management system that can be integrated with other
management requirements and help organizations to achieve
OHS and economic objectives. This standard specifies
requirement for an OHS management system to enable an
organization to develop and implement a policy and
objectives which take into account legal requirements and
information about OHS risks. This standard is intended to
apply to all types and sizes of organizations. The overall
aim of this standard is to support and promote good
practices, in balance with socio-economic needs [9].
For this research, we have chosen the following terms
and definitions from this standard:
•
Acceptable risk – risk which has been reduced to a
level that can be tolerated by the organization having
regard to its legal obligations and its own policy.
•
Continual
improvement
–
recurring
processes
of
enhancing the management system (for this policy, it is
OHS, although our research could be applied to other
groups, too) in order to achieve overall improved
performance (in specified group) consistent with the
organization policy.
•
OHS – Occupational health and safety – conditions and
factors that affect or could affect the health and safety
of employees or other workers, visitors or any other
person in the workplace.
•
Corrective action – action to eliminate the cause of a
detected nonconformity or other undesirable situation.
Corrective action is taken to prevent recurrence,
whereas
preventive
action
is
taken
to
prevent
occurrence.
•
Preventive action – action to eliminate the cause of a
potential nonconformity or other undesirable potential
situation.
•
Nonconformity – non-fulfilment of a requirement [9].
For this research, the process of continual improvement
will take place in all areas of activity simultaneously. These
rules could be implemented into the system security and
safety solution, because this standard is generally accepted in
the world and organizations. This standard subscribes to the
following approach to reduce the risk:
•
Elimination.
•
Substitution.
•
Engineer controls.
•
Signage, warnings and/or administrative controls.
•
Personal protective equipment [9].
This framework could be implemented as a management
system for solving the risk in the proposed solution. It could
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

be implemented in other kinds of organizations and objects.
It is the main reason for implementation. The level of
security and safety in a situation in the case of soft targets
depends on the correct setting of measures.
III.
FIRE PROTECTION
In every building, fire protection is defined by the law
requirements. In a new object, it is first present in the
building documentation. Three groups are identified in the
process of construction management:
•
Project construction documentation.
•
Expression of relevant state administration – the
statement of firefighter rescue in which is
technical administration fire protection.
•
The dealing with construction permits.
If the building is in operation, it means that the building
uses
legal
measures
and
adheres
to
fire
protection
requirements (according to purpose of the object). The
purpose of the object is analyzed by fire load which is
defined in the fire safety design of the building by a
chartered
engineer.
In
the
Czech
Republic,
a
fire
compartment is defined as bordered unit which should stop
spreading of fire to other building units. The zones are
bordered by fire barriers; the fire resistance is determined by
fire risk, respectively according to the expected duration of
the fire. The building structure, which is not divided into fire
compartments, is considered as one fire compartment. The
building object has to be divided into fire compartments in
the case when it exceeds the size of the fire compartment
determined by calculation according to CSN 730802 (Fire
protection of buildings – non-industrial buildings).
If the object is in operation, the manager has to ensure
fire protection by qualified staff. In the Czech Republic, this
needs to be done by a professional with qualifications in fire
protection. In these processes, a qualified person has to
define
operation
rules
that
are
based
on
technical
administration fire protection, laws requirements and risks in
the object. Fire safety equipment, rules of using, and revision
interval have to be defined
in these processes. Fire
management is about proposing effective protection in the
object by plans and activities; however, it also involves the
training
and
implementation
processes and plans into
working
process.
This
is
the
connection
between
management
of
an
object
and
management
of
an
organization.
IV.
THE PROPOSAL OF SAFETY AND SECURITY
MANAGEMENT AND SOFTWARE
The current findings were described in the previous
section. The main reason is that these findings were
confirmed with research and practical use. Fire protection is
the main field which we can use to define our new
approach. The soft targets were classified in international
standards for building. Building requirements in standards
are justified. The problems are identified in implication.
Experts use the standards as a minimum requirement and
therefore they do not integrate them into the system.
The activities that are done in the object have some
similar characteristics:
•
The emphasis is on preventive actions.
•
The four phases could be implemented: Plan, Do,
Control, Act. These phrases are common with more
sectors.
•
Documentation must be implemented to processes and
internal politics must involve required measures applied
in practice.
•
In the object, technical components are used and these
components must be analyzed by a qualified person.
•
Crisis situation training improves efficient immediate
response.
The safety and security management should be effective
in objects and organizations. The managers must understand
processes that are in the organization and after that, they
could see more types of risks. This process where input
studying of ties between more as one group of security or
safety risks.
As can be seen in Figure 1, there are defending primary
groups of security and safety objects. Managers implement
protective measures to processes to ensure better security and
safety situations in the object. The application of these
measures is similar with other measures that are described in
international standards and state laws.
People are the main reason security and safety measures
are implemented into process or activity. In the analytical
part, the ties between people and other attributes are
analyzed. Ties are depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
The linkagess beetween four groups of objects.
In these four categories, two procedures that must be
identified are proposed. The first procedure is the definition
of characteristic and classification. The classification defines
attributes which are similar and different. The second
procedure is the definition of practice and processes and it
has to be followed. The security and safety attributes have to
be defined for this security and safety analysis. It means that
every process, which could be connected with people and
these other four groups of objects, has to be reconsidered
according to
security and safety attributes. After the
definition of the main cause and other causes, the process has
to be edited and reintroduced to operation. This solution has
analytical part number 1, analytical part number 2 and the
last predicting part number 3.
The first part is the study of objective situation and the
past actions. The proposed analytical part has the following
next steps:
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

•
The analysis of the current state of the object –
familiarity with processes in organization.
•
The definition of the risks.
•
The definition of the main cause and other causes.
•
An assessment of the impact of other processes for risk.
•
The proposal of permanent corrective action and
immediately corrective actions.
The
second
part
will
be
designed
for
immediate
management in the object. It means that it will be supported
with immediately actions, but in real time. This part will be
in a continuous process. This part will be similar to the first
one; however, inputs will be extended of technical values
from technical components. There is a connection with
integrated technical measures.
The third predicting part will predict situations and
conditions that could happen when operators or managers
change attributes, e.g. introducing new machine to object
(requirements for using, safety, fire protection, high level of
security and others). Each of these solutions shall have a
technical and a management part.
V.
SOFTWARE SOLUTION
The disadvantage of this solution is that, for managers
and owners to implement this system solution, they must
know a lot of specific knowledge and also have experience.
This could be solved by one software and systematical
solution.
This is the main factor which influences the software
solution; therefore, the authors propose fuzzy logic as a tool
for realizing software support. Fuzzy logic is based on more
options for a solution and supports more experts for solving.
It minimizes requirements for managers and operators
because managers will be supported by the system. This
solution could reduce the incidence of human errors.
Figure 3.
The proposal of software solution.
The proposal integrates management principles and
software support into one solution. The proposal of software
solution is presented in Figure 3. Fuzzy logic studies a whole
range of values in the interval between 0 and 1. The classical
logic studies two states. These states can be true (1) or false
(0). The expert knowledges and experiences can be coded by
fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic works with fuzzy statements. These
fuzzy statements represent degrees of support for the rule.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a software solution for soft
targets. The main advantage of our proposal is in the system
approach that manages security and safety situations inside
an organization. System integration could increase the
effectiveness of more security and safety processes, as well
as of manager processes. In the presentation of our safety
and security solution, we considered different groups of
attributes.
The utilization of fuzzy logic is the subject of further
research. The proposal takes into account the realization of a
software tool that would replace the need for a large number
of experts in individual objects by fuzzy logic.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of
Tomas Bata University in Zlin under the project No.
IGA/FAI/2016/012.
REFERENCES
[1]
Act no. 133/1985 Coll. about fire ptorection, Czech Republic.
[2]
Act no. 262/2006 Coll. Labour Code, Czech Republic.
[3]
Act no. 309/2006 Coll. Act o further terms of safety and
health at work, Czech Republic.
[4]
Government Regulation no. 361/2007 Coll. establish the
conditions of health protection at work, Czech Republic.
[5]
L. Duricova Prochazkova and M. Hromada. The Proposal of
the Soft Targets Security. Advences in Intelligent Systems
and Computing, Automation Control Theory Perspectives in
Intelligent Systems. Proceedings of the 5th Computer Science
On-line Conference 2016 (CSOC2016), Vol3, Springer, pp.:
337-345. ISSN 2194-5357, ISBN 978-3-319-33387-8, DOI
10.1007/978-3-319-33389-2.
[6]
L. Fennely and M. Perry, “ The Handbook for School Safety
and Security,” 1st ed., Elsevier, 2014, ISBN: 978-0-12-
800568-2.
[7]
L. Prochazkova and M. Hromada, “ The Proposal System fot
the Safety Assesment of Soft Targets with Focus on School
Facilities,” Proceeding of 3rd CER Comparative: SCIEMCEE
Publishing, Vol. II, pp.: 30-34, ISBN: 978-0-9928772-6-2.
[8]
Ch.
Sennewald
and
C.
Baillie,
“Effective
Security
Management,” 6th ed.,Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2016, ISBN: 978-
0-12-802774-5.
[9]
ISO
31000:2009,
Risk
management
–
Principles
and
guidelines.
[10] ISO/IEC
27001:2013,
Information
Technology-
Security
Techniques- Information Security Management Systems –
Requirements.
[11] British Standard BS OHSAS 18001/2007, Occupational
Health and Safety Management Systems- Requirements.
[12] ISO 9000:2005, Quality Management Systems- Fundamentals
and Vocabulary.
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

