Assessing Security Protection for Sensitive Data 
 
George O.M. Yee 
Aptusinnova Inc. and Carleton University 
Ottawa, Canada 
email: george@aptusinnova.com, gmyee@sce.carleton.ca 
 
 
 
Abstract—The growth of the Internet has unfortunately been 
accompanied by an increasing number of attacks against an 
organization’s computing infrastructure, leading to the theft of 
sensitive data. In response to such incursions, the organization 
installs security measures (e.g., intrusion detection system) for 
protecting its sensitive data. However, this installation is often 
done haphazardly, without any objective guidance regarding 
how many vulnerabilities must be secured in order to achieve a 
targeted level of protection that would be deemed acceptable. 
This work derives estimates of the levels of protection based on 
the number of vulnerabilities to attack that have been secured. 
The paper then shows how an organization can calculate these 
estimates, and use them to adjust the number of security 
measures installed, until a certain target level of protection is 
achieved subject to certain constraints. An application example 
is included. 
 
Keywords-assessment; security; protection; sensitive data; 
vulnerability. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent 
attacks 
against 
computing 
infrastructure, 
resulting in the theft of sensitive data, have grabbed the 
headlines, and have devastated the victim organizations.  
The losses have not only been financial (e.g., theft of credit 
card information), but more importantly the damage to the 
organization’s reputation. Consider the following data 
breaches that happened in 2016 [1]: 
• 
February, 2016, University of Central Florida: Data 
breach affected approximately 63,000 current and 
former students, faculty, and staff, with the theft of 
information including social security numbers, first and 
last names, and student/employee ID numbers. 
• 
February, 2016, U.S. Department of Justice: Hackers 
released data on 10,000 Department of Homeland 
Security employees one day, and the next day released 
data on 20,000 FBI employees. Stolen information 
included names, titles, phone numbers, and email 
addresses. 
• 
March, 2016, Premier Healthcare: Theft of a laptop 
containing sensitive data pertaining to more than 
200,000 patients, including names, dates of birth, and 
possibly 
social 
security 
numbers 
or 
financial 
information. 
• 
March, 2016, Verizon Enterprise Solutions: Hackers 
stole information for about 1.5 million customers; the 
information was found for sale in an underground 
cybercrime forum by cyber security journalist Brain 
Krebs. 
• 
September, 2016, Yahoo!: The company announced 
that a hacker had stolen information from 500 million 
accounts in 2014. The hacker, believed to be working 
for a foreign government, stole email addresses, 
passwords, full user names, dates of birth, telephone 
numbers, and in some cases, security questions and 
answers. 
This is only a sampling, as there were many more breaches 
in 2016, and in fact, no year can be said to have been 
breach-free. 
To protect themselves from attacks, such as the ones 
described 
above, 
organizations 
determine 
their 
vulnerabilities to attack, and then secure the vulnerabilities 
with security measures. Common measures include 
firewalls, 
intrusion 
detection 
systems, 
two-factor 
authentication, encryption, and training for employees on 
identifying and resisting social engineering. However, 
today’s organizations install security measures without any 
way of calculating the overall level of protection that will 
result. They proceed based on recommendations from 
consultants or in reaction to attacks that have been observed. 
And in many cases, they are forced to stop this deployment 
once their security budget runs out. It would be far better if 
an organization can follow a top-down approach, by setting 
a target level of protection and then install security measures 
to achieve the target. The target would be set according to 
the expected threat situation, the nature of the business, the 
sensitivity of information kept, and an estimated financial 
budget. Before this can be done, it would be useful to have 
quantitative estimates of the level of protection based on the 
number of vulnerabilities secured. This work derives such 
estimates and shows how to apply them to not only set a 
protection target, but also how security measures can be 
installed to achieve the target. 
The objectives of this work are i) derive estimates of the 
resultant protection level obtained by an organization 
through the installation of security measures to secure 
vulnerabilities, ii) show how these estimates can be 
calculated, iii) show how the estimates can be applied in a 
top-down and objective quantified approach to secure an 
organization, and finally iv) illustrate ii) and iii) using an 
example.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
discusses the nature of sensitive data and derives the 
estimates. Section III explains how the estimates are 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

calculated and applied in a top-down quantified approach to 
secure an organization. Section IV presents an application 
example. Section V discusses related work. Finally, Section 
VI gives conclusions and future research. 
II. ESTIMATING SECURITY PROTECTION LEVELS 
Before deriving estimates of security protection levels, it 
is useful to examine the nature of sensitive data. 
A. Sensitive Data  
We all have some sense of what is meant by sensitive 
data: first and foremost it is data that must be safeguarded 
from falling into the wrong hands, the consequence of 
which would be damaging to an individual or an 
organization. For an individual, sensitive data usually means 
private information. The nature of private information will 
not be explored here but the reader is encouraged to consult 
[2]. For an organization, sensitive data may encompass 
private 
information, 
but 
may 
additionally 
include 
information that may compromise the competitiveness of a 
company if divulged, such as trade secrets or proprietary 
algorithms and secret formulas. For this work, sensitive data 
is defined as follows: 
DEFINITION 1: Sensitive data is information that must be 
protected from unauthorized access in order to safeguard the 
privacy of an individual or the operational well being of an 
organization. 
This work considers losses arising from sensitive data or 
sensitive information being in the possession of unintended 
malicious parties or entities. This covers theft and any 
unintended exposure of sensitive information such as 
accidental leakage or posting. Per Definition 1, “sensitive 
data” and “sensitive information” are used interchangeably 
in this work. Some researchers make a distinction between 
these terms but the popular usage calls for no distinction. 
A.   Attacks on Organizations 
Attacks carried out against sensitive information 
residing with organizations may be categorized as “outside 
attacks” and “inside attacks”. We define these as follows. 
DEFINITION 2: An attack is any action carried out against 
sensitive information held by an organization that, if 
successful, results in that information being in the hands of 
the attacker. An outside attack (Ao) is an attack that is 
carried out by an outsider of the organization (i.e., the 
attacker is not associated with the organization in a way that 
gives her special access privileges to sensitive data, e.g., a 
regular member of the public). An inside attack (Ai) is an 
attack that is carried out by an insider of the organization 
(i.e., someone who has special access privileges to sensitive 
data by virtue of her association with the organization, e.g., 
employee).  
DEFINITION 3: A vulnerability of an organization is any 
weakness in the organization’s infrastructure, platform, or 
business processes that can be targeted by an attack. A 
secured-vulnerability was originally a vulnerability that has 
had protective security measures put in place so that it is no 
longer a vulnerability. For example, a vulnerability is 
private information stored in the clear. This becomes a 
secured vulnerability if the private information is encrypted. 
Outside attacks target a range of security vulnerabilities, 
from software systems that can be breached to access the 
sensitive information to simple theft of laptops and other 
devices used to store sensitive information. An example of 
an outside attack is the use of a Trojan horse planted inside 
the organization’s computer system to steal sensitive 
information.  
Inside attacks arise from the attacker making use of her 
privileged position (e.g., as an employee) to cause a loss of 
sensitive data. In this case, the attack is often difficult to 
detect, since it would appear as part of the normal duties of 
the insider attacker. An example of an inside attack is where 
a disgruntled employee secretly posts the organization’s 
sensitive information on the Internet to try to harm the 
organization. An inside attack can also be unintentional 
(e.g., an employee casually providing client names for a 
survey). 
Both outside and inside attacks target the organization’s 
vulnerabilities. Vulnerabilities that invite outside attacks 
include the use of badly provisioned firewalls, the failure to 
encrypt data, and simple carelessness (e.g., leaving a laptop 
containing sensitive information in a car). Vulnerabilities 
that attract inside attacks include a) poor business processes 
that lack mechanisms to track which data is used where, 
used for what purpose, and accessed by whom, b) poor 
working conditions that give rise to employees feeling 
unfairly treated by management which can lead to 
employees seeking revenge, and c) poor education and 
enforcement of company policies regarding the proper care 
and handling of sensitive information (e.g., the above survey 
example). 
We have so far used the expressions “level of 
protection” and “protection level” informally relying on 
their everyday meaning. We now formalize this meaning in 
terms of vulnerabilities, introducing the idea of “security 
protection level”. 
DEFINITION 4: An organization’s security protection level 
(SPL) is the degree of security protection from attacks that 
results 
from 
the 
organization 
having 
secured 
q 
vulnerabilities, leaving p vulnerabilities unsecured, where 
the organization has a total of p+q vulnerabilities. Each pair 
of values (p, q) corresponds to a different SPL. 
B. Deriving the Estimates 
Intuitively, for the same organization, SPL A is more 
capable of protecting from sensitive information loss than 
SPL B if A is composed of more secured vulnerabilities 
than B, where all vulnerabilities have roughly the same level 
of loss risk. This is the idea behind the derivation below.  
We seek the capability C of an organization’s SPL to 
protect sensitive data. Suppose that an organization’s SPL 
has p vulnerabilities and q secured-vulnerabilities, where no 
distinction is made between outside and inside attacks. The 
number of original vulnerabilities before any vulnerabilities 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

were secured is p+q. Let P(e) represent the probability of 
event e. For convenience, “data” is understood to be 
“sensitive data”.  We have 
C = P(no data losses) = 1-P(data losses)             (1) 
Since a data loss is the result of a successful attack on a 
vulnerability,  
P(data losses)≈ p/(p+q)                       (2) 
where we have applied the additive rule for the union of 
probabilities of attacks on the p vulnerabilities, assuming 
that 2 or more attacks do not occur simultaneously. This is a 
fair assumption confirmed by experience. Substituting (2) 
into (1) and adjusting for a possible zero denominator gives 
C ≈ 1-[p/(p+q)] = q/(p+q)    if  p+q > 0             (3) 
  = 1               if  p+q = 0             (4) 
Since C is a probability, its value is between 0 and 1, 
attaining 0 if the organization has no secured vulnerabilities 
(q=0, (3)) and 1 if either all of its vulnerabilities are secured 
(p=0, (3)) or if the organization has no vulnerabilities 
(p+q=0, 
(4)). 
Since 
an 
organization 
having 
no 
vulnerabilities is highly improbable, (4) is unlikely to apply.  
The above derivation can be done within each of the 
categories of outside attacks and inside attacks (we did not 
distinguish between outside and inside attacks above). Let 
Co, Ci represent the capabilities of an organization’s SPL to 
protect sensitive information from outside attacks and inside 
attacks, respectively. Let po, pi represent the number of 
vulnerabilities to outside attacks and inside attacks, 
respectively. Let qo, qi represent the number of secured 
vulnerabilities to outside attacks and inside attacks, 
respectively. Then, repeating the above derivation for 
outside attacks and inside attacks gives 
             Co ≈  qo/(po+qo)      if  po+qo > 0                           (5) 
               ≈  1                     if  po+qo = 0                           (6) 
             Ci ≈  qi/(pi+qi)         if  pi+qi > 0                            (7) 
               ≈  1                      if  pi+qi = 0                            (8) 
As above, Co (Ci)  have values between 0 and 1, attaining 
0 if the organization has no secured vulnerabilities to 
outside (inside) attacks ((5) and (7)) and 1 if either all of the 
vulnerabilities are secured ((5) and (7)) or if the 
organization has no vulnerabilities ((6) and (8)). Since an 
organization having no vulnerabilities to outside and inside 
attacks is highly improbable, (6) and (8) are unlikely to 
apply. 
The estimates of data protection capability are now 
assigned as follows for a given SPL. Let E be an estimate of 
data protection capability, where no distinction is made 
between outside and inside attacks. Let Eo be an estimate of 
data protection capability against outside attacks. Let Ei be 
an estimate of data protection capability against inside 
attacks. Then for the SPL,             
              E  = q/(p+q)            if  p+q > 0                            (9) 
                   = 1                      if  p+q = 0                          (10) 
Eo = qo/(po+qo)       if  po+qo > 0                         (11) 
                  = 1                     if  po+qo = 0                         (12) 
            Ei  = qi/(pi+qi)        if  pi+qi > 0                          (13) 
               =  1                    if  pi+qi = 0                          (14) 
E has the advantage of providing a single number for ease of 
comparison between different SPLs within an organization. 
A threshold T for E may be pre-determined such that for E 
above T, the security measures installed by the organization 
to secure vulnerabilities against both outside and inside 
attacks (corresponding to a SPL) are deemed adequate. For 
a given SPL, Eo and Ei have the advantage of focusing in 
separately on where an organization stands in terms of its 
security measures against outside and inside attacks. 
Thresholds To and Ti may be pre-determined for Eo and Ei 
respectively, such that for both estimates above their 
respective thresholds, the corresponding installed security 
measures against outside and inside attacks are deemed 
adequate. If this is the case, we call the corresponding SPL 
an adequate SPL. In practice, Eo and Ei may be expressed as 
percentages that define a region in a 100 x 100 plane in 
which an organization’s capability to protect data is 
adequate (acceptable), as represented by the shaded region 
in Figure 1. Each point in this shaded region corresponds to 
an adequate SPL. An organization  strives to have the “best”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adequate SPL (one which has highest number of security 
measures possible against both outside and inside attacks) as 
allowed by its financial budget for adding security measures 
(see Section III). 
 
III. APPLYING THE ESTIMATES TO OBTAIN A SPL  
This section shows how an organization may use the 
estimates to establish a “best” adequate SDL as permitted by 
its financial budget.  The description below separates 
outside attacks from inside attacks since organizations 
would need to account for them separately.  
A. Determining the Vulnerabilities 
For outside attacks, we recommend a threat analysis of 
security vulnerabilities in the organization’s systems that 
could allow outside attacks to occur. The threat analysis can 
be carried out by a project team consisting of a security 
analyst, a privacy analyst, and a project leader acting as a 
facilitator. In addition to having expertise on privacy and 
security, the analysts must also be very familiar with the 
organization’s systems. Threat analysis or threat modeling is 
a method for systematically assessing and documenting the 
security risks associated with a system (Salter et al. [3]). 
0  10  20  30  40 50  60 70 80 90 100 
100 
  90 
  80 
  70 
  60 
  50 
  40 
  30 
  20 
  10 
    0 
Eo (%) 
Ei (%) 
To 
Ti 
Figure 1.  Sufficiency of Security Measures Against Outside 
Attacks (Ao) and Inside Attacks (Ai) 
Insufficient 
measures for Ai 
Insuffi-
cient 
measures 
for Ao 
Insufficient 
measures for 
Ao and Ai 
Sufficient 
measures for Ao 
and Ai 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Threat modeling involves understanding the adversary’s 
goals in attacking the system based on the system’s assets of 
interest. It is predicated on that fact that an adversary cannot 
attack a system without a way of supplying it with data or 
otherwise accessing it. In addition, an adversary will only 
attack a system if it has some assets of interest. The method 
of threat analysis given in [3] or any other method of threat 
analysis will yield No = po + qo, which is the total number of 
vulnerabilities to outside attacks. We will not take up room 
to provide further details on threat analysis here.  
For inside attacks, we recommend that the above project 
team carry out a special insider threat analysis, to identify 
vulnerabilities to inside attacks and identify measures to 
secure these vulnerabilities. The team would accomplish 
this by brainstorming answers to the questions in Table 1, or 
other 
questions 
from 
experience, 
identifying 
the 
vulnerabilities and measures to secure the vulnerabilities in 
the process. In Table 1, questions 1 to 6 address 
motivational or environmental vulnerabilities, which may 
also be “secured” by applying mitigating measures. 
Questions 7 and 8 address security vulnerabilities. In 
identifying vulnerabilities to inside attack, the project team 
may weigh the vulnerabilities in terms of how likely they 
are to lead to attacks, and eliminate the unlikely ones. The 
weighing process may consider such factors as risk to the 
attacker that she could be caught as well as her motivation 
for the attack. The value of Ni = pi + qi would be determined 
at the end of this process. 
B. Determining the Thresholds To and Ti 
The values of To and Ti should be determined by the 
same threat analysis team mentioned above. The values 
would depend on the following: 
• 
The potential value of the sensitive data – the more 
valuable the data is to a thief, a malicious entity, or a 
competitor, the higher the thresholds should be. 
• 
The damages to the organization that would result, if 
the sensitive data were compromised – of course, the 
higher the damages, the higher the thresholds. 
• 
The current and likely future attack climate – consider 
the volume of attacks and the nature of the victims, say 
over the last 6 months; if the organization’s sector or 
industry has sustained a large number of recent attacks, 
then these thresholds need to be higher. 
• 
Consider also potential attacks by nation states as a 
result of the political climate; attacks by individual 
hacktivist groups such as Anonymous or WikiLeaks 
may also warrant attention.  
In general, an organization would like to be as secure as 
possible and establish a “best” adequate SPL. Therefore, 
values above 80% would not be uncommon. However, 
whatever the thresholds, the organization must find them 
acceptable after considering the above factors.  It must also 
be  kept  in mind  that the higher  the  thresholds,  the higher  
 
TABLE 1. QUESTIONNAIRE TO IDENTIFY VULNERABILITIES TO 
INSIDE ATTACK 
 
Question 
Rationale 
1. 
Is the sensitive information 
of high value to outside 
agencies or a competitor? 
The higher the value, the 
more an inside attacker 
will be tempted to steal 
and sell the information. 
2. 
Does the organization have 
an employee assistance 
program that includes 
counselling and help with 
financial difficulties? 
Such a program may 
eliminate some financial 
motivation for an inside 
attack. 
3. 
Does the organization have 
an ombudsman or other 
impartial agent to assist 
employees with their 
grievances? 
Such an impartial agent 
may eliminate or reduce 
the motivation to seek 
revenge by committing 
an inside attack. 
4. 
Does the organization have a 
history of perceived 
injustices to employees? 
If the answer is ‘yes’, 
employees may be 
motivated by revenge to 
commit an inside attack. 
5. 
Does the organization 
conduct a stringent back-
ground and reliability check 
on a candidate for employ-
ment prior to hiring the 
candidate? 
While a background and 
reliability check is not 
guaranteed to weed out 
potential inside attackers, 
it should eliminate those 
with criminal pasts.  
6. 
Does the organization 
require candidates for 
employment to disclose any 
potential conflicts of interest 
they may have with respect 
to their new employment 
and any outside interests 
prior to hire? Does the 
organization require ongoing 
disclosure of conflicts of 
interest after hire? 
Eliminating conflicts of 
interest should reduce 
related motivations for 
malicious inside attacks. 
For example, an inside 
attacker may secretly 
compromise private 
information in favour of 
an outside interest, 
believing that the com-
promise is undetected. 
7. 
What are some possible 
ways for an insider to gain 
access to sensitive informa-
tion she should not be 
accessing? How to secure? 
This question will 
identify security 
weaknesses. 
8.  What are some possible 
ways for an insider to trans-
mit sensitive information 
outside the organization 
undetected? How to secure? 
This question will 
identify additional 
security weaknesses. 
 
will be the financial costs of implementing the security 
measures. 
C. Applying the Estimates for a “Best” Adequate SPL 
We now have values for the following: No = po + qo, Ni 
= pi + qi (Section IIIA), and To, Ti (Section IIIB). Rewriting 
(11) and (13) and using the ceiling function to avoid 
fractional numbers of secured vulnerabilities gives: 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

qo = ⎡NoEo⎤               where  To ≤ Eo  ≤  1               (15) 
      qi = ⎡NiEi⎤                          where  Ti ≤ Ei  ≤  1               (16) 
Equations (15) and (16) give all possible values of qo and qi 
such that the associated Eo and Ei (with po = No - qo and pi = 
Ni – qi) fall within the shaded region of Figure 1. In other 
words, these equations give all possible values of qo and qi 
for adequate SPLs. The ceiling function biases the security 
level 
upward 
by 
taking 
the 
number 
of 
secured 
vulnerabilities to the next higher integer where applicable, 
which should be fine since more security should be better 
than less security. The quantities qo = ⎡NoTo⎤ and qi = ⎡NiTi⎤ 
from (15) and (16), termed respectively the threshold qo and 
the threshold qi, will be useful below. 
To obtain a “best” adequate SPL from among the 
adequate SPLs generated by (15) and (16), the organization 
applies the constraint that the total cost of implementing the 
(qo + qi) security measures from (15) and (16) must be less 
than or equal to the financial budget for security measures. 
The organization separately prioritizes its outside attack and 
inside attack vulnerabilities, and then selects them for 
securing in order of high priority to low priority, until both 
the financial budget is exhausted and the number of secured 
vulnerabilities are at least as great as the threshold qo and 
the threshold qi. In this way, the organization determines the 
qo and qi, as well as the po and pi (which are just No - qo and 
Ni – qi respectively) that define its “best” adequate SPL. 
This procedure may be precisely described as follows. Let 
u1, u2, … uNo and v1, v2, … vNi be the organization’s 
prioritized outside attack and inside attack vulnerabilities, 
respectively, such that u1 has higher (or equal) priority than 
u2, u2 has higher (or equal) priority than u3, and so on. 
Similarly, v1 has higher (or equal) priority than v2, v2 has 
higher (or equal) priority than v3, and so on. Let Bo and Bi 
represent the budgets for securing against outside and inside 
attacks, respectively. Let Co and Ci be the costs of securing 
the vulnerabilities to outside and inside attacks respectively. 
Let k be a counter variable. Then the pseudo code shown in 
Figure 2 describes the procedure for obtaining a “best” 
adequate SPL. Running this pseudo code will produce the 
following: a) qo and qi, defining the “best” adequate SPL, or 
b) one or two “insufficient budget” messages, in which case 
the organization has to increase the corresponding budgets 
and re-run the procedure. Only result a) would be 
acceptable. 
Prioritizing the vulnerabilities may be based on four 
aspects of an attack, namely “risk”, “access”, “cost”, and the 
resulting damages from the attack, where “risk” is risk to the 
safety of the attacker, “access” is the ease with which the 
attacker can access the system under attack, “cost” is the 
monetary cost to the attacker to mount the attack, and 
resulting damages is self evident. A full explanation of this 
prioritization procedure is given in Yee [2].  
IV. APPLICATION EXAMPLE 
Alice Inc., an online seller of goods (e.g., Amazon.com),  
has an  objective to secure  its vulnerabilities to  outside and  
inside attacks and to establish a “best” adequate SPL using 
the  approach in  this work.  The company  hired a  security 
Figure 2. Procedure for obtaining a “best” adequate SPL. 
consulting firm to perform threat analyses of its systems, 
resulting in a report of vulnerabilities found that could be 
targeted by outside and inside attackers. The report also 
provides values for the number of vulnerabilities as No = 10 
and Ni = 8, and includes prioritizations of outside and inside 
vulnerabilities. For each type of vulnerability (i.e., outside 
or inside) the prioritizations identified which vulnerability 
required securing first, which one second, and so on, in 
declining order of urgency. Based on the consultant’s 
recommendations, as well as its own internal deliberations, 
Alice Inc. assigned the following values: 
To = 0.80, Ti = 0.90, Bo = $100,000, Bi = $150,000 
Therefore 
           threshold qo = ⎡NoTo⎤ = ⎡10 x 0.80⎤ = 8 
           threshold qi = ⎡NiTi⎤   = ⎡8 x 0.85⎤ = 7 
meaning that at least 8 vulnerabilities to outside attacks and 
7 vulnerabilities to inside attacks must be secured in order to 
have a “best” adequate SPL. Table 2 identifies the costs of 
securing the prioritized vulnerabilities where vulnerability 1 
is the  most urgent, vulnerability 2 is next urgent,  and so on.  
TABLE 2. COSTS OF SECURING OUTSIDE AND INSIDE 
VULNERABILITIES 
uk 
Cost of 
Securing 
vk 
Cost of 
Securing 
1 
$20,000 
1 
$40,000 
2 
$15,000 
2 
$40,000 
3 
$10,000 
3 
$30,000 
4 
$10,000 
4 
$20,000 
5 
$8,000 
5 
$10,000 
6 
$7,000 
6 
$5,000 
7 
$5,000 
7 
$5,000 
8 
$5,000 
8 
$5,000 
9 
$3,000 
 
 
10 
$2,000 
 
 
 
As in Section III, outside and inside vulnerabilities are 
denoted as uk and vk respectively. Running the pseudo code 
in Figure 2 yields Co = $85,000 at qo = 10 and Ci = 
Begin; 
     Co = 0; Ci = 0; k = 0; 
     While k ≤ No and Co ≤ Bo; 
          k = k + 1; 
          Co = Co + cost of securing uk; 
     EndWhile; 
     If (k ≥ threshold qo) qo = k; 
     Else Print “qo unavailable -insufficient budget”; 
     k = 0; 
    While k ≤ Ni and Ci ≤ Bi; 
         k = k + 1; 
         Ci = Ci + cost of securing vk; 
    EndWhile; 
    If (k ≥ threshold qi) qi = k; 
    Else Print “qi unavailable – insufficient budget”; 
End; 
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

$150,000 at qi = 7. The budget for securing outside 
vulnerabilities was more than enough to secure all outside 
vulnerabilities. 
The 
budget 
for 
securing 
inside 
vulnerabilities was only enough to secure 7 inside 
vulnerabilities. Given the existing budgets, Alice Inc.’s 
“best” adequate SPL is realized with qo = 10, po = 0 and qi 
= 7, pi = 1. Any additional security measure against inside 
attacks would require an increase in the budget. 
V. RELATED WORK 
Related work found in the literature includes risk and 
threat analysis applied to various domains as well as 
research on vulnerabilities.  No other work was found that is 
similar to this work. 
In terms of risk analysis, Jing et al. [4] present an 
approach that uses machine learning to continuously and 
automatically assess privacy risks incurred by users of 
mobile applications. Aditya et al. [5] catalog privacy threats 
introduced by new, sophisticated mobile devices and 
applications. Their work emphasizes how these new threats 
are fundamentally different and inherently more dangerous 
than prior systems, and present a new protocol for secure 
communications between mobile devices. 
In terms of threat analysis, Schaad and Borozdin [6] 
present an approach for automated threat analysis of 
software architecture diagrams. Their work shows that 
automated threat analysis is feasible. Shi et al. [7] describe a 
hybrid static-dynamic approach for mobile security threat 
analysis, where the dynamic part executes the program in a 
limited way by following the critical path identified in the 
static part. Sanzgiri and Dasgupta [8] summarize and 
classify insider threat detection techniques based on the 
detection strategies used. Sokolowski and Banks [9] 
describe the implementation of an agent-based simulation 
model designed to capture insider threat behavior, given a 
set of assumptions governing agent behavior that pre-
disposes an agent to becoming a threat. 
With regard to vulnerabilities, Gawron et al. [10] 
investigate the detection of vulnerabilities in computer 
systems and computer networks. They use a logical 
representation of preconditions and postconditions of 
vulnerabilities, with the aim of providing security advisories 
and enhanced diagnostics for the system. Spanos et al. [11] 
look at ways to improve the open standard to score and rank 
vulnerabilities, known as the Common Vulnerability 
Scoring System (CVSS). They propose a new vulnerability 
scoring system called the Weighted Impact Vulnerability 
Scoring System (WIVSS) that incorporates the different 
impact of vulnerability characteristics. In addition, the 
MITRE Corporation maintains the Common Vulnerability 
and Exposures (CVE) list of vulnerabilities and exposures 
[12], standardized to facilitate information sharing. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
Organizations need to protect their sensitive data from 
outside and inside attacks against their computer systems 
that store the data. This protection is achieved by adding 
security measures to secure vulnerabilities to attack. 
However, organizations have been implementing security 
measures without any way of setting security protection 
level targets, or knowing how an added security measure 
contributes to the protection target. Organizations also did 
not have a way of selecting which security measures to 
implement in order to stay within the financial budget. This 
work proposes a quantitative approach to estimate, set, and 
achieve safe security protection levels in terms of securing 
outside and inside vulnerabilities. In addition, the work 
proposes a procedure for selecting which security measures 
to implement in order to achieve targeted protection levels 
within the allowable financial budget. 
Future 
research 
includes 
investigating 
other 
formulations of security protection levels, such as 
incorporating the effectiveness of security measures, as well 
as improving the methods for threat analysis and 
prioritization. In addition, it would be interesting to explore 
how this work complements existing work in the 
standardization community. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Identity Force, “The Biggest Data Breaches in 2016,” 
retrieved: 
 
July, 
2017, 
https://www.identityforce.com/blog/2016-data-breaches 
[2] G. Yee, “Visualization and Prioritization of Privacy Risks in 
Software Systems,” International Journal on Advances in 
Security, issn 1942-2636, vol. 10, no. 1&2, pp. 14-25, 2017, 
http://www.iariajournals.org/security/  
[3] C. Salter, O. Saydjari, B. Schneier, and J. Wallner, “Towards 
a Secure System Engineering Methodology,” Proc. New 
Security Paradigms Workshop, pp. 2-10, 1998. 
[4] Y. Jing, G.-J. Ahn, Z. Zhao, and H. Hu, “RiskMon: 
Continuous and Automated Risk Assessment of Mobile 
Applications,” Proc. 4th ACM Conference on Data and 
Application Security and Privacy (CODASPY '14), pp. 99-
110, 2014. 
[5] P. Aditya, B. Bhattacharjee, P. Druschel, V. Erdélyi, and M. 
Lentz, “Brave New World: Privacy Risks for Mobile Users,” 
Proc. ACM MobiCom Workshop on Security and Privacy in 
Mobile Environments (SPME '14), pp. 7-12, 2014. 
[6] A. Schaad and M. Borozdin, “TAM2: Automated Threat 
Analysis,” Proc. 27th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing (SAC ’12), pp. 1103-1108, 2012. 
[7] Y. Shi, W. You, K. Qian, P. Bhattacharya, and Y. Qian, “A 
Hybrid Analysis for Mobile Security Threat Detection,” Proc. 
IEEE Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics & Mobile 
Communication Conference (UEMCON), pp. 1-7, 2016. 
[8] A. Sanzgiri and D. Dasgupta, “Classification of Insider Threat 
Detection Techniques,” Proc. 11th Annual Cyber and 
Information Security Research Conference (CISRC '16), 
article no. 25, pp. 1-4, 2016. 
[9] J. Sokolowski and C. Banks, “An Agent-Based Approach to 
Modeling Insider Threat,” Proc. Symposium on Agent-
Directed Simulation (ADS '15), pp. 36-41, 2015. 
[10] M. Gawron, A. Amirkhanyan, F. Cheng, and C. Meinel, 
“Automatic 
Vulnerability 
Detection 
for 
Weakness 
Visualization and Advisory Creation,” Proc. 8th International 
Conference on Security of Information and Networks (SIN 
’15), pp. 229-236, 2015. 
[11] G. Spanos, A. Sioziou, and L. Angelis, “WIVSS: A New 
Methodology 
for 
Scoring 
Information 
System 
Vulnerabilities,” Proc. 17th Panhellenic Conference on 
Informatics, pp. 83-90, 2013. 
[12] MITRE, “Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures”, retrieved: 
July, 2017, https://cve.mitre.org/ 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

