Addressing Complex Problem Situations in Critical Infrastructures using Soft Systems
Analysis: The CS-AWARE Approach
Thomas Schaberreiter∗, Chris Wills†, Gerald Quirchmayr∗ and Juha Röning‡
∗Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna (Vienna, Austria)
e-mail: thomas.schaberreiter@univie.ac.at
e-mail: gerald.quirchmayr@univie.ac.at
†CARIS Research Ltd. (Fowey, United Kingdom)
e-mail: ccwills@carisresearch.co.uk
‡Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering
University of Oulu (Oulu, Finland)
e-mail: juha.roning@oulu.fi
Abstract—In a world in which large-scale cyber attacks are the
norm rather than the exception, the need for cybersecurity gains
in importance every day. Current cybersecurity solutions are
often not taking the holistic approach that would be required
to provide comprehensive security to their users (for example,
strategic/critical infrastructure, large organizations, small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) or public institutions). A new
way of thinking about cybersecurity is required: Cooperation
and collaboration among individual actors as a way to improve
the security situation for society and economy as a whole is a
promising approach. In the European Union, the legal framework
that is currently developing (like the network and information
security (NIS) directive), recognizes the need for cooperation and
collaboration among individual actors to improve cybersecurity.
Information sharing is one of the key elements of the NIS
directive. In this paper, we present a system and dependency
analysis based on soft systems thinking that is able to capture
the relations between assets and its internal and external de-
pendencies in the complex systems of organizations like critical
infrastructures or other organizations that base their operations
on complex systems and interactions. The analysis is done in a
socio-technological manner; the human aspect of the systems is
considered as important as the technical or organizational aspects.
As a use case, we present CS-AWARE, a European H2020 project
which relies on the presented system and dependency analysis
method as a core concept for providing a cybersecurity solution
that is in line with the cooperative and collaborative efforts of
the NIS directive.
Keywords–Cybersecurity; Critical Infrastructures; System Anal-
ysis; Soft Systems Methodology; Socio-technological Analysis; Cy-
ber Situational Awareness; Information Sharing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity is one of today’s most challenging societal
security problems, affecting both individuals and organisations,
such as strategic/critical infrastructures, large commercial en-
terprises, SMEs, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or
governmental institutions. Deliberate or accidental threats and
attacks threaten digitally administered data and digitally han-
dled processes. Sensitive data leaks can ruin the reputation
of companies and individuals, and the interruption of digital
processes that organisations rely upon in their daily work ﬂow
can cause severe economic disadvantages. Reaching beyond
the technology-focused boundaries of classical information
technology (IT) security, cybersecurity strongly interrelates
with organisational and behavioural aspects of IT operations,
and the need to comply with the current and actively devel-
oping legal and regulatory framework for cybersecurity. For
example, the European Union (EU) recently passed the NIS
directive that obliges member states to get in line with the EU
cybersecurity efforts. Most EU member states and the EU itself
have a cybersecurity strategy in place which will eventually
lead to the introduction of laws and regulations that fulﬁl
cybersecurity requirements. One of the main aspects of the
NIS directive, as well as the European cybersecurity strate-
gies is cooperation and collaboration among relevant actors
in cybersecurity. Enabling technologies for coordination and
cooperation efforts are situational awareness and information
sharing. Situational awareness in this context is a runtime
mechanism to gather cybersecurity relevant data from an IT
infrastructure and visualise the current situation for a user
or operator. Information sharing refers to the ability to share
this information with cybersecurity information sharing com-
munities, like the NIS relevant authorities. In the long term,
information sharing will improve cybersecurity sustainably and
beneﬁt society and economy as a whole.
One of the major aspects of information sharing to facilitate
collaboration and cooperation, is a proper understanding of
the cybersecurity relevant aspects within an organization’s
systems. This is a complex and often neglected task that will,
as we argue in this paper, greatly improve the cybersecurity
of organizations in the context of cybersecurity situational
awareness and cooperative/collaborative strategies towards cy-
bersecurity. We propose a system and dependency analysis
methodology to analyse the environment and: (a) Identify
the assets and dependencies within the system and how to
monitor them; (b) capture not only technological aspects,
but the socio-technical relations within the organisation; (c)
identify external information sources that could either be
provided by ofﬁcial and cybersecurity speciﬁc sources (for
example, legal/regulatory framework, standardisation, cyber-
security information sharing communities), or more general
publicly available information relating to cybersecurity (for
example, social networks or twitter); (d) provide the results
in a form that can be utilized by support tools. We base our
work around established and well proven methods related to
systems thinking, the soft systems methodology (SSM) and
PROTOS-MATINE/GraphingWiki.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses
background and related work, Section III details our system
and dependency analysis approach. In Section IV, an applica-
tion example in the context of CS-AWARE, a European H2020
project which uses the presented system and dependency
analysis as a core part of its cybersecurity solution, is given.
Section V discusses the approach in a wider context and
Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
In December 2015, The European Parliament, the Euro-
pean Council and the European Commission agreed on the
European NIS directive as the ﬁrst EU wide legislation on
cybersecurity [1]. The directive lays down the obligations of
member states concerning NIS. Most notably for this work,
it requires the implementation of proper national mechanisms
for incident prevention and response, in addition to information
sharing and cooperation mechanisms. The NIS directive is the
main action stemming from the EU cybersecurity strategy [2],
which emphasises the need for a decentralized prevention
and response to cyber incidents and attacks. By now, most
EU countries have put a national cybersecurity strategy in
place [3] that is in line with many actions proposed by the
NIS directive. Coordination and information sharing are key
elements of the strategy, with the requirement for national NIS
authorities, national law enforcement and defence authorities
to interact with each other, as well as their EU counterparts.
International cooperation and coordination is envisioned at the
EU level. On the standardisation front, the ISO/IEC 27000 [4]
standard is the ﬁrst in a series of standards on information
security management that have provided organisations with
a best practice framework for assessing security risks and
implementing security controls as countermeasures. Similarly,
the privacy focused ISO/IEC 29100 [5] standard provides
a framework to help organisations to manage and protect
personally identiﬁable information. In 2011 the European
standardisation organisations CEN, CENELEC and ETSI have
formed the cybersecurity coordination group (CSCG), which
was converted to the focus group on cybersecurity in 2016 [6],
in order to undertake the strategic evaluation of IT security,
cybersecurity and NIS standardisation.
A systems analysis methodology that will be used in this
work is the Soft Systems Methodology developed by Peter
Checkland [7][8]. The key thought behind the soft systems
methodology is that it is hard to completely analyse and
describe a complex system, especially if human interaction
plays a key role. The SSM represents an analysis methodology
that aims to achieve an holistic understanding of the system
while at the same time only focusing on the actual problems
at hand. Soft Systems Methodology has been used in an
extraordinarily wide variety of problem domains as diverse as
knowledge management in the building industry [9], to evaluat-
ing government policy to promote technological innovation in
the electricity sector [10]. In the case of the building industry
example, the tacit knowledge held by staff involved in the
tendering process was made explicit by the application of SSM.
In the case of the electricity supply industry, SSM was used
understand how better to to promote and foster technological
innovation in the sector.
The PROTOS-MATINE methodology [11] is another ap-
proach that relates to systems thinking. While the SSM fo-
cuses on understanding complex systems and processes by
interviewing its users, PROTOS-MATINE takes the standpoint
that a truly holistic view on complex situations can only be
achieved if as many relevant information sources as possible
(e.g., technical, organisational, human on all organizational
levels as well as external and publicly available information),
are combined to create a complete picture and eliminate
discrepancies between information from different sources. The
key to PROTOS-MATINE is that collected information from
different sources is set in context to each other and graphically
processed and visualized to make it simple for domain experts
to identify discrepancies in information coming from different
sources. For this purpose, GraphingWiki [12], a graphical
extension to the MoinMoin Wiki, was developed to visualize
dependencies between semantic data collected in Wiki pages in
the context of PROTOS-MATINE. The methodology was used
in many case studies, for example for highlighting vulnerabil-
ities in anti-virus software [13] and for a socio-technological
analysis of a VoIP (voice over IP) provider [14]. In [15], the
methodology was extended for analysing complex systems in
the critical infrastructure context, where the analysis goal is
to achieve a dependency graph of critical infrastructure assets,
dependencies between the assets and measures to observe those
assets (base measurements).
III.
SOFT SYSTEMS ANALYSIS IN THE CONTEXT OF
CYBERSECURITY FOR COMPLEX SYSTEMS
The system and dependency analysis proposed in this
paper is seen as the basis for the automatic incident detec-
tion and cybersecurity situational awareness efforts of future
cybersecurity initiatives, as discussed in the related work. The
objective is to identify in the speciﬁc organizational context
what needs cybersecurity protection and what are the main
threats it needs protection from. More speciﬁcally, this means
that the challenge for system and dependency analysis is to
identify the assets within an organisation and their internal and
external dependencies in order to be able to protect them from
cybersecurity threats. Observable information sources that can
be used to determine the on-line state of those assets need to
be identiﬁed to allow for monitoring and detecting abnormal
behaviour, thus describing the security state. Furthermore, the
goal of the system and dependency analysis is to identify
external information sources that can provide information to
help detect and classify security threats correctly. Those in-
formation sources can be dedicated cybersecurity information
providers like, for example, computer emergency response
teams (CERTs) or other threat and vulnerability databases,
or they can be publicly available information sources via,
for example, platforms like Twitter, Facebook or Google+.
The usage of open source intelligence (OSINT) has been
proved to be valuable before in other contexts like disaster
management. Sail Labs Media Mining System is an example
of a system which makes use of freely available information. It
aims to allow accurate situational analysis of crisis locations by
analysing different relevant data feeds. It gathers information
from multiple sources including television, radio and various
Internet sources and uses data mining techniques to extract
information about the content [16].
Since technology is only one factor in cybersecurity, the
system and dependency analysis is designed to capture and
monitor the socio-technical nature of an IT infrastructure, tak-
ing into account the human, organisational and technological
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

factors, as well as other legal/regulatory and business related
factors that may contribute to the cybersecurity in a speciﬁc
context. As can be seen in Figure 1, systems thinking is a way
of looking at some part of the world, by choosing to regard it
as a system, using a framework of perspectives to understand
its complexity and undertake some process of change. The key
concepts are holism - looking at things as a whole and not as
isolated components and systemic - treating things as systems,
using systems ideas and adopting a systems perspective.
Figure 1. Systems thinking - The systems approach
Two concepts of systems thinking are hard systems think-
ing and soft systems thinking. Hard systems design is based
on systems analysis and systems engineering. It assumes that
the world is comprised of systems that we can describe and
that these systems can be understood through rational analysis.
It is based on the assumption that it is possible to identify
a “technically optimal” engineering solution for any system
and that we can then write software to create the “solution”.
Hard systems design assumes that there is a clear consensus
as to the nature of the problem that is to be solved. It is
unable to depict, understand or make provisions for “soft”
variables such as people, culture, politics or aesthetics. It
is based on the assumption that it is possible to identify a
“technically optimal” engineering solution for any system. It
assumes that those commissioning the system have the ability
and power to implement the system. While hard systems
design is highly appropriate for domains involving engineering
systems structures that require little input from people, the
complex systems and interactions in critical infrastructures or
other organizations - especially with cybersecurity in mind -
usually do not allow this type of analysis. Hard systems design
is inappropriate and unsuitable for analysing human activity
systems that require constant interaction with, and intervention
from people. Such systems are complicated, fuzzy, messy and
ill deﬁned and are typiﬁed by unclear situations, differing
viewpoints and unclear objectives, containing politics, emotion
and social drama. This is the type of system domain for which
a SSM design approach is highly appropriate and to which it
should be applied. That is not to say that the SSM approach
cannot or should not be used in the design of engineering
systems and structures, indeed one of the authors has used
this approach very successfully in many complex and diverse
problem domains. For example, SSM has been used by one
of the authors in the design of naval command and control
systems for the British Navy and in the design of system
architectures for automated fare collection in very large light
railway and mass transit operations.
Figure 2. Soft systems design
An overview of the stages of SSM is set out in Figure 2.
The SSM methodology has 7 steps: (1) Enter the problem
situation; (2) Express the problem situation; (3) Formulate root
deﬁnitions of systems behaviour; (4) Build conceptual models
of systems in root deﬁnitions; (5) Compare models with real-
world situations; (6) Deﬁne possible and feasible changes;
(7) Take action to improve the problem situation. A detailed
description of the approach is beyond the scope of this paper,
however, reader may wish to refer to Checkland’s work [7][8].
In this work, we will focus on the earlier steps of the SSM
that deal with the system analysis and problem deﬁnition
(speciﬁcally, steps 1-4). One key element of this phase is that
systems stakeholders (users, managers, administrators, etc.) are
engaged in workshops to deﬁne the problems they are facing,
since those who are using systems on a daily basis are the
ones that have the most information about it. Since this is
not explicit knowledge, but tacit knowledge, it is important to
create an environment that facilitates information sharing. The
SSM utilizes rich pictures for this purpose, and depicting the
problem in a rich picture is a key stage early in the process.
Rich pictures are a representation of the problem domain.
They utilize “cartoon-style” techniques to portray a complex
situation and concentrate on:
•
Structure - Key individuals, organisations etc.
•
Process - What could be or is happening?
•
Climate - Pressures, attitudes, cultures, threats etc.
An example of a Rick Picture depicting a malfunctioning
airline passenger check-in system appears in Figure 3, outlin-
ing different viewpoints in case the system goes off-line.
Rich pictures are a tool for understanding where we are
and are a mix of drawings, pictures, symbols and text. They
represent a particular situation or issue and they are depicted
from viewpoint(s) of the person or people who drew them.
They can both record and evoke insight into a situation. Rich
pictures are pictorial ’summaries’ of a situation, embracing
both the physical, conceptual and emotional aspects of a
problem situation. They can depict complicated situations or
issues, and relevant systems are identiﬁed from the rich picture.
These systems are described in Root Deﬁnitions, which are
then used in conjunction with the rich pictures to develop
Conceptual Models. These are formed from the actions stated
or implied in the Root Deﬁnition(s). Of course, each rich
picture may be interpreted from quite differing ‘world view
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 3. Rich picture of an airline check-in system
points’. A Conceptual Model is like an activity sequence
diagram, but is aimed at representing a conceptual system as
deﬁned by the logic of the Root Deﬁnition and not just a set
of activities.
The role of PROTOS-MATINE and GraphingWiki in this
proposed analysis method is to complement the information
gathering effort in the user workshops with information from
other sources, and provide a solid base for discussion in
those workshops through visualization. The main additional
sources are expected to be legal requirements and regulatory
efforts like the NIS directive; cybersecurity relevant stan-
dardization like the ISO/IEC 27000 family of standards and
information about relevant and current risks and threats via
ofﬁcial sources like CERTs, or more dynamic information
sources like social media. Where relevant, the information
received via rich pictures from the workshop participants can
easily be complemented by more detailed information available
such as, for example, technical manuals, business continuity
plans or disaster recovery plans. One of the capabilities of
GraphingWiki is to instantly link gathered information to
other relevant information and thus allowing to update the
graphical representation of the analysed system as soon as new
information arrives. We hope to utilize this feature in the user
workshops to create more dynamic discussions and give even
more incentive to the participants to create a system model
that is as close to reality as possible.
The expected result of the proposed system and dependency
analysis will be a dependency graph containing an organiza-
tions security relevant or critical assets and the dependencies
among them. Furthermore, observable measurements that are
able to determine the security state of those assets are identiﬁed
and associated to them. Though GraphingWiki this dependency
graph is in digital form and can be further utilized as the
basis for advanced cybersecurity situational awareness and
monitoring services. One example of such a service will be
given in the next section.
IV.
THE CS-AWARE APPROACH
CS-AWARE is a European H2020 project that was funded
by the European Union under the project number 740723. The
aim of the project is to improve the cybersecurity situation
in local public administrations (LPAs). While the project is
focused on LPAs, the ideas and methods developed in this
project are applicable to any organizations that rely on complex
systems, interactions and procedures (like strategic/critical
infrastructures, large organizations or SMEs).
Figure 4. CS-AWARE overall concept
As can be seen in Figure 4, the main building blocks of the
CS-AWARE solution are the system and dependency analysis,
data collection and data analysis to achieve the project’s goals
of cybersecurity situational awareness, cybersecurity informa-
tion exchange and system self-healing. The proposed solution
aims at improving automated situational awareness in small-
to medium-sized IT infrastructures, however it is expected that
the same principals would also apply to large organizations or
critical infrastructures. The system and dependency analysis
presented in the previous section is an integral part of two
project phases. Besides the actual system and dependency
analysis, which will be conducted according to the method-
ology presented in Section III (Steps 1-4 of the SSM as well
as PROTOS-MATINE/GraphingWiki related aspects), it will
provide the main input for the self-healing component, based
on steps 5-7 of the SSM.
The core idea of the CS-AWARE project is to automate the
cybersecurity effort of organizations as much as possible, and
provide an on-line situational awareness tool that aims to base
its recommendations on a holistic view of an organization’s
IT systems and dependencies, but also on the cybersecurity
situation in general (for example by observing the risk and
threat landscape). The end users of the CS-AWARE solution
are expected to be the people responsible for cybersecurity
in an organization, such as the chief security ofﬁcer (CSO),
or system administrators. CS-AWARE is a decision support
system that will allow its users to detect cybersecurity inci-
dents quickly and identify the affected systems, since the key
assets and security relevant dependencies have been identi-
ﬁed during system and dependency analysis. Countermeasures
can be initiated by the people responsible for cybersecurity
in a timely manner. Besides manual countermeasures, CS-
AWARE includes a self-healing component that is closely tied
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

to the system and dependency analysis. The later steps of
the SSM (especially steps 5-7) are concerned with deﬁning
solutions to the problems identiﬁed during analysis. In CS-
AWARE one focus point will be to identify and develop
possible countermeasures to cybersecurity threats and deﬁne
policies and procedures that can be invoked if such a threat
materializes. Those policies and procedures will be utilized
by the self-healing component and can be conﬁgured to be
invoked automatically if a threat materializes. This will allow
the system, depending on the scenario, to prevent or mitigate
the damage and/or recover from the incident.
The intelligent and fully automated part of the CS-AWARE
project are the data collection and storage and the analysis
and decision making components. Based on the system and
dependency analysis results, the base measurements from
internal and external sources are observed and when rele-
vant data points are collected, pre-processed and stored. The
data analysis component is capable of detecting suspicious
behaviour like threat and attack patterns in the data sets it
receives and will classify and rank them accordingly, as an
input to the decision support in the situational awareness and
visualization component. The accuracy of the decision making
component will depend on the cooperation and collaboration
efforts and the quality of data that is provided by information
sharing authorities. It is envisaged that threat detection can
achieve highly accurate unsupervised results once cybersecu-
rity information exchange is an established concept and can
provide accurate information relating to cybersecurity threats
and attack patterns.
The cybersecurity situational awareness and visualization
component is the user interface to the CS-AWARE solution. It
will visualize the security relevant aspects of an organizations
socio-technological systems, based on the dependency graph
received during system and dependency analysis. State changes
triggered by the decision making component will cause a
visualization of the affected components and its dependencies.
Possible countermeasures will be suggested and self-healing
procedures can be conﬁgured and invoked, where relevant.
The cybersecurity information exchange is the connection
point to the cybersecurity information sharing authorities, for
example NIS competent authorities like national or EU CERTs.
While cybersecurity information sharing is currently still in its
infancy, it is seen as one of the major building blocks to a
safer cyberspace in future. The CS-AWARE solution will on
the one hand, beneﬁt from the information provided by those
authorities and on the other hand, provide information about
newly detected and unmatched incidents (like threat or attack
patterns). It is assumed that with more and more tools that
provide capabilities for organizations to participate in security
related information sharing, the beneﬁt of sharing information
for the common good will become evident and encourage
organizations to engage in cybersecurity related information
sharing. Cybersecurity information exchange would in that
case become one of the most important information sources
for cybersecurity awareness and threat detection.
In order to deal with the expected language barriers and
usability concerns in the context of European local public
administrations, the main focus of the CS-AWARE project,
multi-lingual semantics support will be part of this project’s
solution. Where relevant, security related information coming
from within the end user organizations, or information from
external information sources, will be automatically translated
to beneﬁt from the information of different cultural contexts.
The project includes two pilot scenarios in the LPA con-
text: the municipalities of Larissa (Greece) and Rome (Italy).
This set-up will allow us to develop tailored system and
dependency analysis procedures for the LPA context. The
project will commence with workshops in both municipalities.
A representative cross section of the LPA’s staffs will be
formed in each LPA and will use SSM in a workshop setting,
where the LPA’s staff, facilitated by the project team can help
create a detailed understanding of the problem domain and the
system dependency analysis, together with security experts,
legal experts and CERT representatives.
V.
DISCUSSION
In the past years, we have seen a rapid growth in connec-
tivity in all organizational contexts. For example, in critical
infrastructures or the industry (Industrial IoT, Industry 4.0), the
advances in the Internet of things allows devices in all levels
of the organizational structure to be connected to the Internet
- something that was not possible before. In administrations,
more and more privacy related information about citizens
is handled digitally, with interfaces to many different tools,
accessed by many different devices and device classes. This
trend makes the complex task of ensuring cybersecurity for
those organizations even more complex, and the trend is
continuing.
One major aspect of this situation is that each complex
system is different. Not only are the systems of different
industries/governmental institutions not comparable, but even
the systems of different organizations within the same industry
or government may have fundamentally different set-ups and
needs related to cybersecurity. When looking for technological
solutions to improve cybersecurity in this situation, there
is no one-size-ﬁts all solution that can be purchased and
installed to provide out of the box protection. Especially when
looking for solutions that enable cybersecurity collaboration
and cooperation, some sort of abstraction layer is required
to connect the individual systems of an organization with a
common understanding about the security requirements and
cybersecurity protection strategies. To achieve this abstraction
level we see no way around an individual and methodical
analysis of the complex environment in which an organization
is operating, in order to determine which assets require protec-
tion and how they relate to the risk and threat landscape and
protection strategies as laid out, for example, by NIS relevant
authorities like national and EU CERTs. Tool support can
build upon the abstraction layer introduced by this methodical
analysis.
Some of the authors have very signiﬁcant, broad and prac-
tical experience of systems thinking and the application and
use of the Soft Systems Methodology to real-world problem
domains. This experience has been acquired in a wide range of
industrial and commercial and non-commercial settings, with
widely differing organisational structures and technical, social
and cultural constraints. The power of the method is that it
captures and enables the expression of the tacit knowledge of
the "actors" in the problem domain - the people who work
with and within the system or systems under investigation.
It is the expression and application of this tacit knowledge
to the analysis and design process, that distinguishes the
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

method from other analytical tools. The approach that was
presented in this paper is ideally suited for situations where
complex environments need to be analysed but a complete
and optimal analysis is not feasible. Soft systems analysis
is excellent for quickly and ﬂexibly deﬁning problems and
any associated relevant factors for speciﬁc situations, such as
providing cybersecurity and all the socio-technological aspects
that relate to the cybersecurity of a complex system. Especially
in the dynamic cybersecurity context, where situations (e.g.,
threat and risk landscape) change rapidly, it is necessary to
complement the problem deﬁnitions that are mainly gathered
in user workshops, with more dynamic and highly topical
information from other sources. We think that we have found
an ideal solution with GraphingWiki, which was speciﬁcally
designed to collect and graphically present related information
from different sources.
We are highly conﬁdent that the proposed analysis method-
ology will fulﬁl the analysis requirements of complex organiza-
tional systems in the context of cybersecurity, and to build the
basis and required abstraction level for cybersecurity tools that
build on it. In CS-AWARE we see the system analysis as the
enabling factor for a highly automated cybersecurity solution.
Built on a common understanding of the cybersecurity re-
quirements, CS-AWARE will shift cybersecurity from a purely
organizational problem to a cooperative and collaborative
problem. At the same time, solutions to speciﬁc threats that
are developed on the collaborative level (for example, through
NIS competent authorities), can be more easily integrated on
the organizational level based on the analysis results.
We will be using the pilot use cases in CS-AWARE to
validate our approach in the LPA context, in combination
with the technological capabilities of the CS-AWARE solution.
Besides providing analysis for the case studies which are part
of the project, we will develop procedures and policies for the
system and dependency analysis tailored to the LPA context.
The goal is to develop a quasi-standard in order to ensure
that comparable results can be achieved, while at the same
time, reducing the level of expertise required to conduct such
an analysis. Once we have more relevant results within the
project, we expect to do the same outside the LPA context. We
expect that application areas like critical infrastructures, large
organizations or SMEs can beneﬁt in the same way from a soft
systems based analysis in the context of cybersecurity, and we
intend to tailor and apply the presented analysis methodology
to those contexts.
VI.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
In this paper, we have presented a system and dependency
analysis methodology for complex systems based on soft
systems thinking within the context of cybersecurity. The
target for the analysis are organizations that rely on complex
systems and procedures for their operation, like critical in-
frastructures, large organizations/SMEs or public institutions.
The analysis methodology is focused on providing a holistic
socio-technological view of the analysed system, based on the
combination and visualization of different relevant information
sources. Since one of the greatest sources of information about
a system is coming from its users, workshops where users from
all organizational levels and with different backgrounds work
together to deﬁne the problem situation are a central aspect of
this methodology. We have argued that each organizational set-
up is different which makes generalized cybersecurity solutions
difﬁcult. We have shown that the presented system and depen-
dency analysis methodology can be seen as an abstraction layer
that allows to apply generalized cybersecurity solutions on top
of it. As an example, we have presented the EU H2020 project
CS-AWARE that utilizes the presented system and dependency
methodology as a central part of its cybersecurity solution. The
goal of CS-AWARE is to develop an automated cybersecurity
situational awareness and decision support solution relying on
cooperative and collaborative approaches, as laid out by the
NIS directive.
As a next step, we will validate the presented analysis
method in the context of LPAs, within the CS-AWARE piloting
efforts in the municipalities of Larissa (Greece) and Rome
(Italy). Besides providing the case dependent analysis required
for the CS-AWARE solution, we intend to develop quasi-
standardized policies and procedures for the LPA context to
ensure repeatable and comparable analysis results for future
cases. In a next step we intend to apply the methodology
to cases outside the LPA context like, for example, critical
infrastructures.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the EU H2020 project CS-
AWARE ("A cybersecurity situational awareness and infor-
mation sharing solution for local public administrations based
on advanced big data analysis", project number 740723) and
the Austrian national KIRAS project CERBERUS ("Cross
Sectoral Risk Management for Object Protection of Critical
Infrastructures", project number 854766) for supporting this
work. The Biomimetics and Intelligent Systems Group (BISG)
would like to acknowledge the support of Infotech Oulu.
REFERENCES
[1]
European Commission, “Proposal for a directive of the european
parliament and of the council concerning measures to ensure a high
common level of network and information security across the union,”
COM(2013) 48 ﬁnal, 2013.
[2]
European Commission and High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, “Cybersecurity strategy of the
european union: An open, safe and secure cyberspace,” JOIN(2013) 1
ﬁnal, 2013.
[3]
ENISA,
“National
cyber
security
strategies
in
the
world.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/
national-cyber-security-strategies/ncss-map (Accessed 8/2017).
[4]
ISO/IEC 27000:2016, “Information technology — security techniques
— information security management systems — overview and vocab-
ulary,” ISO/IEC, Standard, 2016.
[5]
ISO/IEC 29100:2011, “Information technology — security techniques
— privacy framework,” ISO/IEC, Standard, 2011.
[6]
CEN,
CENELEC
and
ETSI,
“Focus
Group
on
Cybersecurity
(CSCG).”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.cencenelec.eu/standards/
sectors/defencesecurityprivacy/security/pages/cybersecurity.aspx
(Ac-
cessed 8/2017).
[7]
P. B. Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice.
John Wiley &
Sons Ltd. 1981, 1998.
[8]
P. B. Checkland and J. Scholes, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice.
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 1991.
[9]
T. Maqsood, A. D. Finegan, and D. H. T. Walker, “Five case studies
applying soft systems methodology to knowledge management,” in 7th
Annual Conference on Systems Engineering Research, 2009, p. 18.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[10]
C. H. Antunes, L. Dias, G. Dantas, J. Mathias, and L. Zamboni,
“An application of soft systems methodology in the evaluation of
policies and incentive actions to promote technological innovations in
the electricity sector,” Energy Procedia, vol. 106, pp. 258 – 278, 2016.
[11]
J. Eronen and M. Laakso, “A case for protocol dependency,” in First
IEEE International Workshop on Critical Infrastructure Protection
(IWCIP’05), Nov 2005, p. 9.
[12]
J. Eronen and J. Röning, “Graphingwiki – a semantic wiki extension
for visualising and inferring protocol dependency,” in First Workshop
on Semantic Wikis – From Wiki To Semantics, 2006.
[13]
J. Eronen et al., “Software vulnerability vs. critical infrastructure – a
case study of antivirus software,” International Journal on Advances in
Security, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 72–89, 2009.
[14]
P. Pietikainen, K. Karjalainen, J. Roning, and J. Eronen, “Socio-
technical security assessment of a voip system,” in 2010 Fourth In-
ternational Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and
Technologies, July 2010, pp. 141–147.
[15]
T. Schaberreiter, K. Kittilä, K. Halunen, J. Röning, and D. Khadraoui,
Risk Assessment in Critical Infrastructure Security Modelling Based on
Dependency Analysis.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013, pp. 213–217.
[16]
G. Backfried et al., “Open source intelligence in disaster management,”
in 2012 European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference,
Aug 2012, pp. 254–258.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

