Authentication of Czech Banknotes using Raman Microscopy 
 
Hana Vaskova, Pavel Valasek 
Department of Electronics and Measurements  
Faculty of Applied Informatics, Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
vaskova@fai.utb.cz, p_valasek@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
Abstract—At the present time, all modern banknotes contain 
security features to prevent their counterfeiting. Some of these 
features include special paper and inks with a specific 
composition as well as tints that are hard to reproduce by 
commercial copiers and printers. Current availability of digital 
technologies makes it much easier to produce higher quality 
counterfeits than in the past. This paper is focused on 
systematical experimental examination of paper and inks used 
on Czech banknotes to obtain characteristic Raman spectra 
that serve for the authenticity assessment. Raman spectroscopy 
is a powerful method for material identification and meets 
requirements of the forensic examination. This method has  
the potential to recognize various substances, even their 
structural modification. On the basis of Raman spectra, it is 
possible to determine whether the questioned banknote is 
genuine or a forgery, even though the specific composition of 
inks is a manufacturing secret. Raman spectral data of the 
investigated Czech banknotes were used for creation  
of a spectral library for the purpose of further verification of 
questionable banknotes.    
Keywords-authenticity; Czech banknotes; Raman sepctra; 
inks; spectral library. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Banknotes are used worldwide as universal mean of 
payment. Also, the desire of self-enrichment is a sentiment 
found all over the world. The desire to become rich is 
sometimes accompanied by illegal activities, including 
forgery of money. Creating and using counterfeit money is 
one of the oldest crimes in history. Current popularization 
and availability of digital technology shifts the level of 
counterfeits at a higher level and it is much easier to produce 
counterfeit money than it was in the past.  
To prevent counterfeiting banknotes, all the modern 
banknotes contain different amounts of more or less 
successfully falsifiable security features. Many of them are 
recognizable to the naked eye as safety watermarks, key 
register line or hidden diagram. Some can be verified using 
ultraviolet (UV) light or chemical reaction of a special pen 
with the banknote paper, but some require more advanced 
analytical tools where a naked eye is not sufficient as  
a detector. Understandably, it is much more difficult and 
demanding to falsify these kinds of advanced security 
features. 
In this paper, the term “banknote” refers to currency bills 
i.e. money, but could also be used in a broader sense, to 
include different valuable documents, cheques, travel tickets, 
stamps, vouchers, shares, etc.   
Raman spectroscopy/Raman microscopy is an innovative 
analytical tool that has become a valuable part of laboratories 
all over the world lately [1]. This potential method allows an 
insight into the structure of materials on a molecular level 
and enables evaluation of their composition based on the 
characteristic molecular vibrations caused by incident 
monochromatic light. Raman spectroscopy is a powerful tool 
for 
material 
identification. 
Applications 
of 
Raman 
spectroscopy comprise increasing number of scientific and 
technical fields in recent years. We mention some examples 
in the following fields: material sciences [2], nanotechnology 
[3], chemistry [4], pharmaceutical industry [5], food 
technology [6], biology [4], medicine [7], arts and cultural 
heritage [8], as well as forensic analysis [9] and security 
[10].  
Raman spectroscopy is an effective tool for rapid 
identification [9].  The key importance for the identification 
is a highly specific chemical “fingerprint” in form of Raman 
spectrum for every individual chemical element or its 
modification. Raman spectra reflect vibrations of bonding in 
the structure after laser irradiation and are unique.  
Essentially, it is analogical to the human fingerprints. The 
method fulfils the requirements for forensic examination. It 
is also non-destructive, non-invasive and applicable to  
a wide range of substances. Specifically, for the application 
presented in this paper it means, that researched banknotes 
may be after analyzing, if genuine, return back into 
circulation.  
Apart from the common methods used for counterfeits 
detection suggestions for other innovative approaches to 
banknotes control and confirmation of their authenticity have 
been proposed in the recent years. L.S. Eberlin et. al. [11] 
use ambient mass spectrometry for chemical analysis of 
banknotes to obtain characteristic chemical profiles for 
genuine banknotes and for counterfeits. This method meets 
requirements of non-destructive, instantaneous, reproducible 
measurements. G. S. Spagnolo et. al. [12] use a new 
approach to verify banknotes originality based on the idea of 
hylemetry, a methodology conceptually similar to biometry 
applied to non-living matter. Specifically, the random 
distribution pattern of the metallic security fibres set into the 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

paper pulp is dealt in the paper. C. Nastoulis et. al. [13] 
propose a new method useful for banking systems around the 
world for the different banknote recognition using 
probabilistic neural network. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The scope 
of the research is outlined in Section 2. In Section 3, the 
Czech banknotes are introduced together with some statistics 
of counterfeits since 2008 and brief overview of the methods 
used for counterfeits detection. Section 4 describes the 
fundamental principle and features of Raman microscopy, 
the studied method applied to detect counterfeit banknote. 
The results of Raman analyses are then discussed in Section 
5. The conclusion and future work is presented in Section 6. 
II. 
SCOPE OF THE RESEARCH 
The possibility of the authenticity assessments of Czech 
banknotes has been investigated using fundamental features 
and advantages of Raman microscopy. Both genuine Czech 
banknotes and their counterfeits were studied on the basis of 
the material composition characteristic for their manufacture. 
Analysis of the used materials can be conducted in order to 
confirm counterfeit currency. For the purpose of relatively 
rapid evaluation of spectral data of examined banknotes the 
database of Raman spectra of paper and inks used on Czech 
banknotes was created.  
III. 
CZECH BANKNOTES 
There are six banknotes currently in circulation in the 
Czech Republic, valid since 1993 when Czechoslovakia was 
separated into two individual countries.  
 
Figure 1. Overview of the valid Czech banknotes. 
The nominal value of these banknotes are 100 Czech 
koruna / crown (CZK), 200 CZK, 500 CZK, 1000 CZK, 
2000 CZK and 5000 CZK, all the banknotes are displayed 
in Figure 1. In addition, there used to be two other valid 
banknotes, in the value of 20 CZK and 50 CZK, which were 
withdrawn from circulation in 2008 and 2011, respectively, 
and were replaced by coins only. The author of all Czech 
banknotes is Oldrich Kulhanek (1940 - 2013), Czech 
painter, graphic and stage designer, illustrator and 
pedagogue.  
Czech banknotes and coins are very safe in comparison 
with other international currency. The development and 
application of protective elements on Czech banknotes are 
some world leaders. The 1000 CZK banknote with 
innovative security features was awarded the title Banknote 
of the Year in 2008 [14] by The International Association of 
Currency Affairs. This was an acknowledgment of the 
quality of Czech banknotes as being among the highest in 
the world, not only in terms of artwork but also in the 
technical level of protective elements applied. This was the 
third award of the Czech currency since 1993. 
A. Statistics of Counterfeits 
The occurrence of counterfeits of Czech Banknotes has 
been decreasing since 2008 according to the Czech National 
Bank (CNB) and as seen in the graph in Figure 2. 
Nevertheless, 2,383 banknotes in the cash value 2,355 
million CZK were captured in 2015. The most often faked 
in recent years are 1000 CZK (57.2 % in 2015) and 500 
CZK (17.89 % in 2015) banknotes [15].  
Absolutely predominant (96.6 % in 2015) forgery 
technique for the Czech currency in a long term is inkjet 
print. Colour copying was used for 3.3 % of fakes revealed 
last year. On the other hand, the most often forgery 
technique used on Euro banknotes captured in the Czech 
Republic in 2015 was offset print for 52.8 %, which is not 
almost used on CZK banknotes fakes (only 0.1 %), followed 
by inkjet print for 46.6 % of counterfeited Euro. The 
situation was similar with the US dollars, with 98.3% of 
counterfeits using offset print. 
On a five-grade scale of danger (1 very dangerous -  
5 primitive) the highest degree for CZK banknotes (89 %) is 
 
 
Figure 2. Occurrence of counterfeits of Czech Banknotes and EURO 
banknotes in the Czech Republic from 2008 to 2015 [8]. 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

4th degree (less successful), 5th degree (6 %) followed by 3rd 
(4 %). Even the number of counterfeit banknotes of 2nd 
degree (dangerous) decreased from 21.8 % for all Czech 
falsified banknotes in 2011 to 0.1 % in 2015 [15]. 
Counterfeits of Euro banknotes seized in the Czech 
Republic are much more likely (than Czech banknotes) to be 
ranked 2nd (6 %) and 3rd (51 %) degree of danger.  
Counterfeit US dollar banknotes seized in the Czech 
Republic mainly fall into the 3rd degree of danger category 
(98 %) [16]. The quality of CZK counterfeits compared to 
Euro and US dollar counterfeits underlines good technical 
quality of protective elements of Czech banknotes.  
B. Methods for counterfeits detection 
There are various methods and techniques known for 
testing authenticity of banknotes. Firstly, simple methods to 
verify visible elements are used, such as watermark lamps, 
intaglio print, microtext, UV luminescence or holograms. 
Secondly, more sophisticated methods are used, which 
require special equipment for verification, not only naked 
eye, and are usually based on the colour response of 
banknote’s features analysis. These methods include 
Magnetic Ink Scanners, isocheck, Fibre-Based Certificates 
of Authenticity or colour analyses.  
Generally, it is not possible to say which method is the 
best. Usually, a combination of more methods gives better 
results and confirmation. 
Generally the process of control of the authenticity of 
banknotes could be summed up into four steps: 
1. checking of the paper – unique feel of the paper 
2. checking of the print quality – sharp and clean lines 
3. checking security features on the banknote 
4. comparing with the banknotes of the same series 
IV. 
RAMAN MICROSCOPY 
Raman spectroscopy, as a modern spectroscopic method, 
has, in principle, the potential to answer a number of 
questions concerning chemical details of a molecular 
structure. This feature makes Raman spectroscopy suitable 
for material identification [1].  
The method is based on the Raman effect, an inelastic 
scattering of photons on molecules. The majority of incident 
photons is scattered elastically (Rayleigh scattering), only  
a very small part (approximately 1 of ten million photons) 
needful for origin of Raman spectra is scattered 
inelastically. This fact requires precise instrumentation to 
ensure conditions for accurate measurements. Analysis 
possibilities are extended when using the advantages of 
optical microscopy via a coupled microscope.        
Raman spectroscopy brings advantages over other 
techniques as non-destructiveness, no special requirements 
for sample preparation, rapidity, applicability to all states  
of matter and different forms, measurements through 
covering layers or contactless measurements.  The listed 
features make this analytical tool convenient, attractive and 
participating on the growth of its popularity and 
applicability worldwide.  
The greatest drawback of the method is occurring of 
luminescence which as much stronger quantum effect may 
overlap Raman spectra and mask spectral information. 
Another disadvantage is eventual degradation of a sensitive 
sample when using intense laser beam [17], [18].  
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL PART 
All types of Czech banknotes were analyzed by Raman 
microscopy. The procedure is demonstrated on 200 CZK 
banknote in this paper, however the same routine was 
applied on all banknotes. On each banknote, 23 points were 
picked, both on the face and the reverse side. The 
performance criterion consisted in a color layout and also in 
the distribution of different printing techniques used during 
the production of the banknotes and the application of 
protecting elements.  
The most important aspects of the banknotes analyses 
using Raman spectroscopy were the used inks and paper. To 
study the diversity of the results two types of banknotes 
imitation were created – by the inkjet printer and by color 
copier. These are the most often used methods in the Czech 
banknotes counterfeiting. 
A. Inks 
For obvious reasons, the specific composition of inks 
used on banknotes is not publically known. Using Raman 
microscopy does not suffer from an absence of this specific 
information although this manufacturing secrets. Original 
banknotes provide corresponding data which serves as the 
standard for comparison. Colours occurring on all banknotes 
together with the number of protective elements are listed in 
Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
INKS AND SECURITY FEATURES ON BANKNOTES 
Value 
[CZK] 
No. of 
measur
ed 
points 
Inks - colours 
No. of 
security 
features 
100 
23 
green, red, yellow, black 
6 
200 
23 
brown, orange, green, black 
6 
500 
23 
brown, yellow, red, ochre, green, 
black 
7 
1000 
23 
violet, ochre, pink, blue, black 
8 
2000 
23 
green, violet, yellow, pink, black 
8 
5000 
23 
blue, red, yellow, pink, black 
8 
 
B. Paper 
Banknotes are printed on special high quality paper. This 
paper is based on cotton, contains a mixture of chemical 
additives, also characteristic fibers (several mm long) and 
watermarks to prevent the imitation. More stringent 
requirements are laid on this paper in comparison with 
ordinary consumer paper made of wood fibers. Banknote 
paper must have greater strength and flexibility, must be 
resistant to bending, breaking and tearing. Czech banknotes 
are printed on natural colored paper. This means that the 
paper is not pure white, but has a very light ochre tint. 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

One of the easiest ways of fake’s recognition is its sound 
of wrinkling or friction (the acoustic safety feature). It is 
influenced by appropriate composition of the paper fibers. 
The paper banknotes sounds differently than writing paper,  
the sound is tougher. 
C. Measuring Device 
InVia Basis Raman microscope from Renishaw was 
used for recording all Raman spectra. Argon ion laser with 
the excitation wavelength 514 nm in visible area (VIS) and 
maximum output power of 20 mW and 785 nm near infrared 
(NIR) diode laser with maximum output power 300 mW 
were used as light sources. A Leica DM 2500 confocal 
microscope with the resolution up to 2 μm was coupled  
to the Raman spectrometer.  
All measurements were collected at magnification 20x 
or 50x, with 15 s exposure time, 10 accumulations. Powers 
 
 
Figure 3. Raman spectra of banknote and ordinary office paper. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Raman spectra of orange ink on genuine 200 CZK banknote  
and its two imitations. 
of lasers were from 0.1 % to 5 % of the output laser power. 
The samples were scanned in range 200 to 3200 cm-1 with  
2 cm-1 spectral resolution.  
D. Results 
Czech banknotes and their imitations were measured using 
both lasers (VIS and NIR). Some of the inks exhibited 
luminescence and their Raman spectra were poor quality or 
were not possible to acquire by laser from the visible region. 
Therefore, most of spectra were acquired by NIR laser. High 
level of luminescence was also present at imitations. This 
behavior is also a partial result indicating the presence of 
luminescent element which is missing in the spectra of 
original banknotes.  
The layout of the inks is typical to the used printing 
method hence microscope view can satisfactorily prove the 
forgery in many cases. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Raman spectra of green ink on genuine 200 CZK banknote  
and its two imitations. 
 
 
Figure 6. Raman spectra of green ink on genuine 200 CZK banknote  
and its two imitations. 
 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Spectrum of paper confirms the presence of viscose 
fibers recovered from cellulose that are similar in structure  
to fibers of cotton from which are divergent mainly by the 
presence of the peak at 650 cm-1 for C-S-C vibrations [19]. 
This peak is missing from the spectrum of ordinary paper.  
Raman spectra of banknote paper and ordinary office paper 
used for imitations are displayed in Figure 3.  
In some measured points not only a spectrum of an ink 
but also spectral response of the paper can be observed.  
In these cases the spectrum of paper of the banknote is for 
further processing of spectral data in spectral library 
subtracted from the measured Raman spectrum. 
The diversity in layout of characteristic peaks for 
different colours can be seen in Figure 4 to Figure 6. 
Noticeable differences in Raman spectra are recorded for 
genuine banknotes and reproductions as is shown  
in Figure 4 to Figure 6 for orange, green and brown ink  
on 200 CZK banknotes. Different layout of Raman peaks 
and 
their 
intensities 
clearly 
demonstrate 
various 
compositions of used inks. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on characteristic Raman spectra of banknote 
materials, paper and inks, the authenticity assessment of 
Czech banknotes was presented. Raman spectroscopy was 
used as an innovative tool for analyzing Czech banknotes in 
this sense. The features examined have characteristic Raman 
spectra and provide information about the authenticity of 
banknotes and point out any successful forgeries, which are 
not possible to distinguish with the naked eye. For the 
purpose of further verification of banknotes, the Raman 
spectral library of inks measured on all Czech banknotes 
using lasers from visible and near infrared region was 
created.  
A similar routine was applied on selected Euro banknotes 
and the results show universality of the use of Raman 
microscopy for the purpose of banknotes originality 
assessment.   
The future work within the research will be focused on 
measurement of Czech banknotes issued in all the years to 
have a complete reference data for the Raman spectral 
library. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, 
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic within the National 
Sustainability Program project No. LO1303 (MSMT-
7778/2014) and also by the European Regional Development 
Fund 
under 
the 
project 
CEBIA-Tech 
No. 
CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. S. Das, Y. K. Agraval, “Raman spectroscopy: Recent 
advancements, techniques and applications,” Vibrational 
Spectroscopy, vol. 57, is. 2, pp. 163-176, 2011. 
[2] W.H. Weber, and R. Merlin, Raman scattering in materials 
science. Springer Science & Business Media, 483 p. 2013. 
[3] A. C. Ferrari, and D. M. Basko, “Raman spectroscopy as a 
versatile tool for studying the properties of graphene,” Nature 
nanotechnology, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 235-246, 2013. 
[4] E. Smith, and G. Dent, Modern Raman spectroscopy: a 
practical approach. John Wiley & Sons, 2013. 
[5] Y. S. Li, and J. S. Church, “Raman spectroscopy in the 
analysis of food and pharmaceutical nanomaterials,” Journal 
of food and drug analysis, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 29-48, 2014. 
[6] H. Vaskova, and M. Buckova, “Thermal degradation of 
vegetable oils: spectroscopic measurement and analysis,” 
Procedia Engineering, vol. 100, pp. 630-635, 2015. 
[7] P. Matousek, and N. Stone, “Recent advances in the 
development of Raman spectroscopy for deep non‐invasive 
medical diagnosis, ” vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 7-19, 2013. 
[8] H. Gomes, P. Rosina, P. Holakooei, T. Solomon, and C. 
Vaccaro, “Identification of pigments used in rock art 
paintings in Gode Roriso-Ethiopia using micro-Raman 
spectroscopy,” Journal of Archaeological Science, vol. 40, no. 
11, pp. 4073-4082, 2013. 
[9] J. M. Chalmers, G. H. Howell, and M. D. Hargreaves, 
Infrared and Raman spectroscopy in forensic science. 1st pub. 
Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley, 618 p. 2012. 
[10] M. López-López, and C. García-Ruiz, “Infrared and Raman 
spectroscopy 
techniques 
applied 
to 
identification 
of 
explosives,” TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 54, 
pp. 36-44, 2014. 
[11] L. S. Eberlin et al., “Instantaneous chemical profiles of 
banknotes by ambient mass spektrometry,” Analyst, vol. 135, 
is. 10, pp. 2533 – 2539, 2010.  
[12] G. S. Spagnolo, L. Cozzella, and C. Simonetti, “Banknote 
security using a biometric-like technique: a hylemetric 
approach,” Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 21, 
pp. 1 – 8, 2010.  
[13] C. Nastoulis, A. Leros, and N. Bardis, “Banknote recognition 
based on probabilistic neural network models,” WSEAS 
Transactions on Systems, pp. 802-805, 2006. 
[14] Central Banking: Czech banknote wins prize.  [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.centralbanking.com/centralbanking/news/142509
7 /czech-banknote-wins-prize/ 2016.04.11 
[15] Ceska narodni banka: Padelky 2011. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.cnb.cz/ 2016.04.11 
[16] Ceska narodni banka: Padelky 2015. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.cnb.cz/ 2016.04.11 
[17] N. B. Colthup, H. D. Lawrence, and S. E. Wiberley, 
Introduction to infrared and Raman spectroscopy. 3rd ed. San 
Diego: Academic Press, 547 p. 1990. 
[18] H. Vaskova, “A powerful tool for material identification: 
Raman spectroscopy,” International Journal of Mathematical 
Models and Method in Applied Science, vol. 5, pp. 1205-
1212, 2011. 
[19] L. L. Cho, “Identification of textile fiber by Raman 
microspectroscopy,” Forensic Science Journal, vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp.55-62, 2007. 
 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

