Toward Engineering of Security of Information Systems: The Security Acts 
 
Wilson Goudalo  
ABE Research  
Advanced Business Engineering – ABE  
Paris, France 
wilson.goudalo@laposte.net   
 
 
Abstract: Business professionals and researchers have 
made considerable efforts and significant technical 
breakthroughs in information security in the last decades. 
Nevertheless, companies and organizations continue to 
incur losses associated with security issues. In order to 
remedy to this situation, we propose a new approach to 
information security engineering for companies and 
organizations. First, this approach is based on the 
standards and good practices of security, second, is 
inspired from the best practices and feedback of advances 
in the engineering of enterprise information systems 
security, and third, its design takes advantage of more 
than twelve years of experience in system architecture 
and information security for reknown banks and 
financial institutions. 
Our approach to engineering of information systems 
security aims at: 
- reducing losses relating to security issues in companies 
and organizations, operating on an enhanced and 
sustained information security; 
- improving the reliability of processes in companies and 
organizations, and assisting companies in legal and 
regulatory compliance efforts, operating on security 
indicators 
and 
checkpoints 
at 
various 
levels 
of 
management; 
- helping companies gain competitive advantages through 
their security management solutions, operating on a 
global security monitoring system with feedback. 
As further development of the basic principle of Security 
know-how Encapsulation into UML profiles [14], we have 
introduced the mapping global picture of the Process of 
Security engineering into the formalism of Business 
Processes. The purpose of this paper is to provide a clear 
methodology based on the elaboration of the key Security 
Acts of the process of information systems security 
engineering. The paper consists of three major parts: 
- Part One recalls the reasons why BPM has been chosen 
for our process of system information security. 
- Part Two develops the key security acts of the process of 
information systems security engineering. 
- Part Three shows some security metrics to illustrate the 
aims of our works. 
Keywords: security acts; security engineering; BPM; 
enterprise information system security.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Business professionals and researchers have made 
considerable 
efforts 
and 
significant 
technical 
breakthroughs in information security [1] - [7]. 
Nevertheless, companies and organizations continue to 
incur losses due to security issues [8] – [11]. Taking 
this unsatisfying situation into account, we have 
developed a new approach to information security 
engineering for companies and organizations. Our 
works aim 
at bringing a 
methodological 
and 
organizational approach to bond all the stakeholders of 
a company around the security issue. We use a 
federator 
approach 
based 
on 
Business 
Process 
Management and provide a real bridge between the 
enterprise top management level and the daily technical 
operations level. 
Nowadays, business is incorporated in technology. 
Business security depends on technology security on 
the one hand side and, on the other hand side, 
technology security improves business. To achieve an 
efficient enterprise security, we propose a joint-work 
of the different teams of a company: the management, 
business, functional and technical teams [12]. Our 
approach is reinforced by the McKinsey strategy [13]: 
“When business and IT executives jointly take an end-
to-end look at business processes, the resulting 
investments can have up to ten times the impact (to the 
business) of traditional IT cost reduction efforts”. 
In our recent articles, we showed the encapsulation 
of Security know-how into UML profiles [14] and 
introduced the global view on mapping the Process of 
security engineering into the formalism of Business 
Processes [15]. The purpose of this paper is to give 
detailed information on the key security acts of the 
process of information systems security engineering.  
II. BPM NOTIONS AND SECURITY CONCEPTS 
Business Process Management is activity undertaken 
by businesses to identify, evaluate, and improve 
business processes. A business process is a set of 
activities organized in a network and performed 
sequentially or in parallel that combine and implement 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

multiple resources, capabilities and skills to produce 
valuable result or output.  
The business process is the most import
a company [16]. It is the first step of an enterprise 
strategy, coming before the other business 
like the functional, the applicative and
technological views [17]. All enterprise architecture 
methodologies deal with this paradigm: the Praxeme 
approach [18] relates to the pragmatic and semantic 
aspects, the Togaf approach 
architecture (Architecture Development Methodology
and business scenario; the USI approach 
[21]) relates to the business view and the Zachman 
approach ([22], [23] and [24]) relates to the cells « 
Function/Scope» and « Function/Enterprise Model ».
All the other points of view (levels, layers, aspects) of 
the information system will gradually be developed 
from the process point of view ([
[27]) regardless to the methodology adopted by the 
company (Top-Down approach) in order to co
to a concrete implementation of the security measures
Our approach to security engineering 
security of information systems at 
life cycle, by working on four 
simultaneously in an attempt of an 
enhancement. These are the assets and related risks
the security solutions and monitoring indicators.
The security concept of assets 
company assets to protect and their value in terms of 
security. A company or organization
be described as the set of all its properties
which are necessary to reach its business 
could be information, services provided to clients or 
partners, transformation processes, know
skills inherent to the activity of the company and 
having value with respect to the stakes of the company. 
An IS asset is an IS component which supports one or 
many company assets; therefore the company assets 
security requires the security of the IS assets 
supporting them.  
The security concept of risks 
security needs of the company assets. Security needs 
are 
expressed 
through 
three 
basi
confidentiality, integrity and availability. Security risk 
depends on the exposure of company assets to risks, 
the probability of occurrence of 
event and the actual resulting damage 
different components of security risk are: the risk itself, 
the risk factor, the risk impact, threat and vulnerability.
The security solution defines the measures taken to 
protect company assets against risks
exposed. When elaborating a security solution, the 
decision about how an identified risk 
processed, would be to avoid, reduce, transfer or re
that risk. 
ltiple resources, capabilities and skills to produce a 
he business process is the most important asset of 
It is the first step of an enterprise 
strategy, coming before the other business functions 
and the technical or 
ll enterprise architecture 
logies deal with this paradigm: the Praxeme 
relates to the pragmatic and semantic 
 [19] to business 
Development Methodology) 
and business scenario; the USI approach ([20] and 
to the business view and the Zachman 
relates to the cells « 
» and « Function/Enterprise Model ». 
All the other points of view (levels, layers, aspects) of 
the information system will gradually be developed 
[25], [26], [18] and 
the methodology adopted by the 
Down approach) in order to come down 
concrete implementation of the security measures. 
engineering covers the 
information systems at each level of their 
working on four security concepts 
in an attempt of an on-going 
assets and related risks and 
security solutions and monitoring indicators. 
The security concept of assets describes the main 
company assets to protect and their value in terms of 
or organization asset would then 
properties having value 
business objectives. It 
could be information, services provided to clients or 
partners, transformation processes, know-how and 
e activity of the company and 
the stakes of the company. 
An IS asset is an IS component which supports one or 
many company assets; therefore the company assets 
security of the IS assets 
he security concept of risks is linked to the 
company assets. Security needs 
are 
expressed 
through 
three 
basic 
criteria: 
confidentiality, integrity and availability. Security risk 
company assets to risks, 
 a security-relevant 
damage to the assets. The 
different components of security risk are: the risk itself, 
the risk impact, threat and vulnerability. 
the measures taken to 
protect company assets against risks, to which they are 
exposed. When elaborating a security solution, the 
how an identified risk must be 
processed, would be to avoid, reduce, transfer or retain 
A solution in itself is a function of
hereafter: the security policy in 
quotation, the results of the 
risk, the nature of the solution and how the latter is 
designed, implemented, run and 
The security concept of monitoring indicators 
defined through security q
harmonized monitoring of security efficiency
is evaluated on the basis of 
functional requirements [28
whose meaning would be different 
stakeholder to the other (e.g. 
managers, designers, developers and operators)
refers to different concepts 
object. To define the security quality
concretely, we divided the 
kinds of conceptual quality model [15].
III. SECURITY ACTS OF INFORMATION 
Information systems security e
as a process that aims at providing
enterprise information systems in their eco
order to meet the company stakes
the new design of the global 
security engineering process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Process of ESIS 
The security acts of our security 
are: 
• 
(a) Identify the company assets
• 
(b) Define the security objectives to be met
• 
(c) Analyze the security risks
• 
(d) Decide strategy on security risks
• 
(e) Define the security requirements to cover the 
risks. 
• 
(f) Select, implement security solutions 
control tools. 
• 
(g) Manage security and its 
companies’ objectives. 
function of the factors listed 
: the security policy in force, the asset 
results of the analysis of the identified 
, the nature of the solution and how the latter is 
designed, implemented, run and managed. 
The security concept of monitoring indicators is 
quality, in order to reach 
security efficiency. Quality 
 all the functional and non-
8]. It is an abstract concept 
whose meaning would be different from one 
(e.g. clients, partners, users, 
managers, designers, developers and operators). It 
rs to different concepts depending on the qualified 
security quality requirements 
the main concept into some 
kinds of conceptual quality model [15].  
NFORMATION SYSTEMS 
ecurity engineering is defined 
providing global security to 
information systems in their eco-system, in 
y stakes. We present below 
global picture of the information 
process. 
Figure 1. Process of ESIS – the security acts 
security engineering process 
Identify the company assets. 
efine the security objectives to be met. 
the security risks. 
security risks. 
security requirements to cover the 
security solutions and verify 
anage security and its alignment to 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

After the security solutions have been
security risks may occur. The latter
security solutions obsolete or might be
security solutions already implemented
information systems security engineering 
iterative 
and 
cyclic 
to 
achieve
enhancement. This guarantees the efficient fulfillment 
of the primary goals of companies’ security 
time. For this purpose, we added a transversal 
act to insure the auto-adaptation of the process; this is 
called “Matching”. This security act 
its own; it goes together with the security
“Management of security and its alignment 
company objectives” (g). 
We split up each security act in
activities and present it according to the business sub
processes formalism. 
A. Identify the company assets  
"Identify assets of companies" is one of 
security acts of our process of information systems 
security engineering. In this security act, we include the 
following security activities: 
• 
List the major assets (such as hardware, 
software, human, documentary, physical
intangible). 
• 
Specify the use case contexts and the 
corresponding responsible person
who has deep knowledge of
and the consequences of compromise) for each 
asset. 
• 
Define the values held by those assets and their 
sensitivity to business enterprise, regulation and 
legislation 
Classify assets and define the
relation with given security criteria.
We illustrate below the security act “Identify the 
assets of company”, as a sub-process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Process of ESIS – the security activities as sub
 
We recall the characteristics of information system 
security defined by the three invariant criteria below.
e been defined, new 
e latter might render some 
might be ignored by the 
implemented. The process of 
engineering must be 
achieve 
an 
on-going 
guarantees the efficient fulfillment 
of companies’ security at any 
a transversal security 
adaptation of the process; this is 
act does not exist on 
its own; it goes together with the security act 
“Management of security and its alignment with the 
We split up each security act into a set of security 
activities and present it according to the business sub-
"Identify assets of companies" is one of the seven 
process of information systems 
his security act, we include the 
List the major assets (such as hardware, 
software, human, documentary, physical and 
use case contexts and the 
corresponding responsible person (the person 
knowledge of its use, its value, 
and the consequences of compromise) for each 
Define the values held by those assets and their 
sensitivity to business enterprise, regulation and 
Classify assets and define their quotation, in 
security criteria. 
We illustrate below the security act “Identify the 
process.  
the security activities as sub-processes 
We recall the characteristics of information system 
by the three invariant criteria below. 
• 
Confidentiality: Information should not be, 
made accessible, or disclosed to a user, to an 
entity or to a system process that is not allowed.
• 
Integrity: Information should not be amended, 
altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner.
• 
Availability: Access, by an authorized entity, 
authorized user or authorized process, to 
services provided by the system, must be 
always possible. Operations 
processing time illegally
reach such goal, must be detected and 
eliminated in time. 
Other properties of the information security, such as 
Proof, Traceability and Authenticity are derived from 
these three invariants criteria.
The security criteria characterize the constraints on 
the properties of business assets, describing their 
security needs. The stakes of companies may be human, 
financial, branding, regulatory 
We illustrate below the process of quotation 
results in secure assets classification.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Process of ESIS – the quotation of assets
 
B. Classify the company assets
It’s not possible to secure every asset
against every imaginable risk. 
assets on which we operate, in order to efficiently 
protect the intellectual property, protect confidential 
information from unauthorized use 
facilitate SLA (Service Level Agreements) and business 
continuity management. Security 
becomes necessary to provide and improve business 
activities. 
Security classification of assets meets both business 
and operational needs. It is based on 
the assets for companies in terms of business, brand
image, human resources, 
regular aspects. Actually, we dissociate 
classification of assets from 
threat and risk analysis. In our 
system security engineering
“security classification of assets” is an element of 
security act “Identify assets”. The results of the three 
 
Confidentiality: Information should not be, 
accessible, or disclosed to a user, to an 
entity or to a system process that is not allowed. 
Integrity: Information should not be amended, 
altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner. 
Availability: Access, by an authorized entity, 
authorized user or authorized process, to 
services provided by the system, must be 
always possible. Operations that occupy 
processing time illegally or that attempt to 
, must be detected and 
Other properties of the information security, such as 
Proof, Traceability and Authenticity are derived from 
these three invariants criteria. 
security criteria characterize the constraints on 
the properties of business assets, describing their 
security needs. The stakes of companies may be human, 
financial, branding, regulatory or legal. 
We illustrate below the process of quotation those 
classification. 
the quotation of assets 
Classify the company assets  
secure every asset of a company 
against every imaginable risk. Thus, we must classify 
assets on which we operate, in order to efficiently 
protect the intellectual property, protect confidential 
information from unauthorized use or disclosure and 
SLA (Service Level Agreements) and business 
curity classification of assets 
necessary to provide and improve business 
Security classification of assets meets both business 
is based on the real value of 
assets for companies in terms of business, brand 
 and financial, legal and 
. Actually, we dissociate the security 
from the activities related to 
threat and risk analysis. In our process of information 
security engineering, the security activity 
“security classification of assets” is an element of 
security act “Identify assets”. The results of the three 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

security acts “Identify assets” “Define the objectives of 
security” and “Analyze the risks” are used in the 
security act “Decide strategy on risks”.
We illustrate below the main steps of
activity “Secure classification of assets”, as a sub
process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Process of ESIS – the sub
classification of assets 
The security classification of assets 
• 
Operates on three main security criteria 
(Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability) and 
derived criteria;  
• 
Takes into account companies
strategic management);  
• 
Provides four sensitivity classes 
low sensitive, sensitive and top sensitive).
We descript the sub-process “classify as
company” in seven steps, and we elaborate the input 
and output of each step. 
Step-1: Identify asset in the Information System of 
company. For each asset defined in asset list (business 
asset or essential asset to support the business), we 
identify the related IS assets, according to conceptual 
model of company assets [15], and we specify (verify) 
the owner of each asset.  
Step-2: Define provisional level,
security criteria Define security needs for the related IS 
asset, in terms of confidentiality (a), integrity (b) and 
availability (c), according to the real (intrins
each asset.  
security acts “Identify assets” “Define the objectives of 
security” and “Analyze the risks” are used in the 
Decide strategy on risks”. 
We illustrate below the main steps of the security 
activity “Secure classification of assets”, as a sub-
the sub-processes of security 
The security classification of assets  
Operates on three main security criteria 
(Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability) and 
Takes into account companies stakes (from 
classes (non sensitive, 
low sensitive, sensitive and top sensitive). 
process “classify assets of 
company” in seven steps, and we elaborate the input 
1: Identify asset in the Information System of 
defined in asset list (business 
asset or essential asset to support the business), we 
identify the related IS assets, according to conceptual 
, and we specify (verify) 
2: Define provisional level, about need of 
security criteria Define security needs for the related IS 
asset, in terms of confidentiality (a), integrity (b) and 
, according to the real (intrinsic) value of 
Step-3: Verify the impact levels for stakes of 
company. Verify the impact levels for stakes of 
company, in terms of human, financial, brand image, 
business and legal, according to 
environment and mission of a company.
Step-4: Review provisional level, about need of 
security criteria. Review the appr
provisional need of security criteria (confidentiality, 
integrity and availability), 
impacts assessment on stakes of company.
Step-5: Adjust/Finalize level, about need of 
security criteria. Adjust/Fina
criteria (confidentiality, integrity and availability) to 
each asset in IS, according 
company, the real environmental context of the 
company, and the security policy in force in the 
company.  
Step-6: Assign security class to assets in IS
the resulting security classes to main assets in IS
determine the classification. 
Step-7: Assign security class to each business asset
Assign the resulting security class to main business 
assets according the classification determined in step
and document the classification in a language 
understandable by the business
We recall that security engineering is assumed 
through ongoing process, like Deming wheel [14]. So 
it is necessary to maintain classification
continuous review.  
 
We synthesize the provided four classes of 
sensitivity, in the table below.
 
TABLE 1. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF ASSETS
Security 
classes 
Description 
Class-0: 
Not 
sensitive 
Assets that enter in the 
normal course of 
business or support of 
business, and that don't 
present any stake for a 
company in case of loss 
of confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, or 
derived criteria. 
 
3: Verify the impact levels for stakes of 
Verify the impact levels for stakes of 
company, in terms of human, financial, brand image, 
business and legal, according to the organization, 
of a company. 
4: Review provisional level, about need of 
iew the appropriateness of the 
provisional need of security criteria (confidentiality, 
, according the level of 
stakes of company.  
5: Adjust/Finalize level, about need of 
Adjust/Finalize need of security 
criteria (confidentiality, integrity and availability) to 
, according to security strategy of the 
company, the real environmental context of the 
company, and the security policy in force in the 
security class to assets in IS. Assign 
classes to main assets in IS, and 
.  
7: Assign security class to each business asset. 
Assign the resulting security class to main business 
classification determined in step-6, 
the classification in a language 
understandable by the business. 
We recall that security engineering is assumed 
through ongoing process, like Deming wheel [14]. So 
it is necessary to maintain classification and conduct 
We synthesize the provided four classes of 
sensitivity, in the table below. 
ON OF ASSETS 
Examples of 
assets (*) 
Assets that enter in the 
normal course of 
business or support of 
business, and that don't 
present any stake for a 
company in case of loss 
of confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, or 
 
Provided 
courses, 
planning of 
courses, dates 
of exams, 
professional 
information on 
organizers. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Security 
classes 
Description 
Examples of 
assets (*) 
Class-1: 
Low 
sensitive 
Assets that enter in the 
normal course of 
business or support of 
business, and that 
present low stake (low 
levels of financial loss) 
for a company in case 
of loss of 
confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, or 
derived criteria. 
Professional 
information on 
students, 
detailed course 
material, 
earnings per 
course. 
Class-2: 
Sensitive 
Assets that enter in the 
normal course of 
business or support of 
business, and that 
present serious stake 
(important level of 
financial loss, loss of 
competitive advantage, 
loss of confidence in 
business strategy, 
damage to partnerships, 
relationships and 
reputation) for a 
company in case of loss 
of confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, or 
derived criteria. 
User access of 
students, 
examination 
subjects, 
enlistment 
strategy of 
students. 
Class-3: 
Top 
sensitive 
Assets that enter in the 
normal course of 
business or support of 
business, and that 
present vital stake 
(extreme damage to the 
integrity, effective 
service delivery, loss of 
life, substantial 
financial loss, major 
economic impact) for a 
company in case of loss 
of confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, or 
derived criteria. 
User access of 
organizers, 
personal 
medical record 
of students, 
online exam 
service. 
 
(*) – In order to comply with the confidentiality clause 
of our business agreements with customers, we have 
used a fictive e-Learning company as basis to build all 
the examples presented here.  
 
We elaborate the security classification of assets 
according to their value and importance for the target 
companies. We assign to a handled group of assets, at 
least the highest security class level of all assets 
forming the (no dissociable) group. In the case of some 
combination of assets, the real security class of the 
resulting combination must be determined. The security 
classification of an asset is adjustable depending on its 
life cycle and on its participation in the business cycles 
in a company. 
For each security class we develop a set of 
procedures for storage, copying, access, transmission, 
communication, 
disclosure, 
destruction 
and 
accountability. 
C. Define the security objectives to be met  
In defining the security objectives, we must, 
• 
Express the security needs on the assets, for the 
first time. 
• 
Establish the specifications appropriate to the 
triptych: “identified security needs”, “analyzed 
security risks” and “security policy of the 
company”. 
D. Analyze the security risks  
In this security act, we mention the following 
activities: 
• 
Identify the inherent vulnerabilities of each 
asset that expose it to potential threats 
• 
Identify threats to which each asset is exposed 
• 
Estimate the probability of occurrence of each 
threat 
(ignoring 
the 
context 
and 
the 
environment). 
• 
Analyze the impact of the occurrence of each 
threat. 
• 
Estimate the likelihood of occurrence of each 
threat (taking into account the facts, the 
existing measures, and environment). 
• 
Define the probability of occurrence, depending 
on the context. 
• 
Assess the overall level to which each asset is 
exposed, taking into account all evidence 
obtained above. 
There are different methods of risk analysis. We 
have developed the key security activities that are in use 
in the industries.  
E. Decide strategy on security risks  
In order to make a decision about the treatment of 
security risks, we must, for the first time, decide which 
type of treatment to apply for each identified risk. The 
decision of treatment belongs to one of these four types: 
acceptance, avoidance, reduction, transfer.  
After a strategy has been adopted, we deduce the 
residual risks.  
If the inferred residual risks are not acceptable, we 
make another decision about the type of risk treatment. 
In the general case, the act of deciding which treatment 
of risk to adopt leads to the reasonable decision of 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

reducing the risk. This results in the definition of the 
security requirements, to mitigate each risk.
F.  Define the security requirements to cover the risks 
The security requirements lead to defin
controls: Correction, Detection, Deterrence
Prevention. We insist on the consistency
requirements with the security objectives 
treatment strategy. We recall that the security 
objectives are themselves consistent with
needs and security policy. 
The security requirements cover all security 
objectives and define two types of requirements: 
functional requirements (security features to provide) 
and the associated insurance requirements (evidence on 
the quality of features). 
G. Select, implement and verify control tools 
In this security act, we first choose the security 
measures to meet the security requirements. 
next step, those measures are implemented, tested, 
integrated deployed.  
Security measures can be physical, organizational 
and / or software. They are kind of products from 
suppliers or specific developments. 
In all cases, this security act is the sound basis on 
which the IS security stands. Most approaches to 
security and security research are limited to this 
security act. 
H. Manage of security and its align
objectives  
In this security act, we mention the following 
activities: 
• 
Develop a document of the security policy in 
accordance with the corporate objectives, in its 
ecosystem competitive, regulatory and legal.
• 
 Decline of the security polic
security 
and 
safety 
indicators 
qualify, 
quantifiable and verifiable. 
• 
Review regularly (at intervals of time defined) 
the security policy and occasionally (not 
compulsory and optional) in case of significant 
events. 
• 
Ensure the harmony between 
activities of security (from “a” to “g”) and 
make them comply with the security policy.
 
 
IV.ILLUSTRATION - SECURITY
 
In 
a 
Top-Down 
approach 
management level to technical daily operations level)
applying the methodology in place in the company to 
the 
process 
of 
Information 
Engineering will lead to the concrete implemen
the risk. This results in the definition of the 
security requirements, to mitigate each risk. 
Define the security requirements to cover the risks  
to define the type of 
Deterrence and / or 
consistency of security 
objectives and with the 
We recall that the security 
sistent with the risks, 
ments cover all security 
objectives and define two types of requirements: 
requirements (security features to provide) 
nsurance requirements (evidence on 
Select, implement and verify control tools  
choose the security 
measures to meet the security requirements. On the 
are implemented, tested, 
Security measures can be physical, organizational 
d of products from 
suppliers or specific developments.  
is the sound basis on 
. Most approaches to 
security and security research are limited to this 
Manage of security and its alignment to company 
, we mention the following 
Develop a document of the security policy in 
corporate objectives, in its 
ecosystem competitive, regulatory and legal. 
Decline of the security policy features in 
security 
and 
safety 
indicators 
qualify, 
 
Review regularly (at intervals of time defined) 
security policy and occasionally (not 
compulsory and optional) in case of significant 
Ensure the harmony between the different 
activities of security (from “a” to “g”) and 
make them comply with the security policy. 
ECURITY METRICS 
 
(from 
strategic 
management level to technical daily operations level), 
logy in place in the company to 
nformation 
System 
Security 
will lead to the concrete implementation 
of 
security 
solutions. 
We 
suggest 
below 
an 
architectural diagram which illustrate
implementation of security 
points providing security metrics.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Process of ESIS – the technical implementation diagram 
 
Security metrics are necessary to 
alignment. The top management 
1. Corporate Reports as m
2. Measures of broad matters as
that of competitors; time required to
products 
3. Measures that help to establish
quality goals and to evaluate
performance against goals.
4. Technological units of measure for
elements of product, process,
The main objective is “
without losing clarity”. Our approach of Engineering 
of Information Security applied with Enterprise 
Architecture framework in place provide
solution.  
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
To stay under the admissible size
will develop the other security activities related the 
seven security acts (from “a” to “g”) 
In this paper we have 
activities related to assets classification
The preference of security activity “Classify assets” is 
motivated by the nowadays period to which companies 
are facing. 
After the era of the extended enterprise where the 
information system was opened to customers and 
partners, 
we 
are 
witnessing 
two 
phenomena, 
simultaneously: “the consumerism of computing
“the cloud computing”. W
computing" era, we observe 
from home to work, the blurring the boundary between 
We 
suggest 
below 
an 
architectural diagram which illustrates the concrete 
curity solutions and the control 
providing security metrics. 
technical implementation diagram  
Security metrics are necessary to manage strategic 
top management is interested in: 
oney, ratios, index 
Measures of broad matters as quality compare to 
competitors; time required to launch new 
Measures that help to establish departmental 
quality goals and to evaluate departmental 
goals. 
Technological units of measure for individual 
elements of product, process, service 
The main objective is “Moving up the stack 
Our approach of Engineering 
of Information Security applied with Enterprise 
framework in place provides the real 
ONCLUSION 
stay under the admissible size of this article, we 
other security activities related the 
seven security acts (from “a” to “g”) in future works,.  
In this paper we have presented the security 
classification in more details. 
The preference of security activity “Classify assets” is 
motivated by the nowadays period to which companies 
After the era of the extended enterprise where the 
information system was opened to customers and 
partners, 
we 
are 
witnessing 
two 
phenomena, 
the consumerism of computing” and 
With "the consumerism of 
we observe the import innovative uses 
blurring the boundary between 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

home and work, the mutual influence between 
technology and uses. With “the Cloud Computing”, 
PAAS, IAAS, SAAS, and others, the IS assets of 
enterprise are no more storage in well known 
geographic place. In these contexts the perimeter based 
security is obsolete. The challenge is in assisting. The 
CSO has to get closer to the core business of a 
company. While having an adaptive communication to 
the management and to all levels of the company, he 
also has to understand the strategy, and the technical 
applications. 
The CSO classifies the information of the 
companies and their assets. So in this context, access to 
information assets is defined according to:  
• 
Who is the person. 
• 
The trust level of the terminal. 
• 
Where is the terminal located. 
The access level to asset depends on the 
classification of asset and the trust level of these three 
parameters.  
 
VI. REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
David Elliott Bell and Leonard J. LaPadula. “Secure Computer 
Systems : Unified Exposition and Multics Interpretation”. 
Technical 
Report 
ESD-TR-75-306, 
MTR-2997, 
MITRE, 
Bedford, Mass, 1975. 
[2] 
Morrie Gasser. “Building a secure computer system”, Van 
Hoostrand and Reinhold ed., 1988. 
[3] 
Charles Bennett. “Quantum Cryptography – Uncertainty in the 
Service of Privacy”. Science Vol. 257. no. 5071, pp. 752 - 753. 
August 1992. 
[4] 
Fredéric Cuppens. “A Logical Analysis of Authorized and 
Prohibited Information Flows”. IEEE Symposium on Security 
and Privacy. Oakland, 1993. 
[5] 
Richard J. Hughes, Jane E. Nordholt, Derek Derkacs and Charles 
G. Peterson. “Practical free-space quantum key distribution over 
10 km in daylight and night”. New journal of physics 4 (2002). 
http://www.iop.org/EJ/abstract/1367-2630/4/1/343/ 
[6] 
William Stallings. “Cryptography and Network Security – 
Principles and practice”. Fourth edition. ISBN 978-0-1318-7316-
2. Prentice Hall Editions. New Jersey - USA 2006. 
[7] 
SANS (SystAdmin, Audit, Network, Security), “Rapport 2009 
CWE/SANS des 25 erreurs de programmation les plus 
dangereuses”, SANS 2009. http://www.sans.org/top25errors/  
Last access date : may 2011. 
[8] 
Security for Business Innovation Council; “The Time is now: 
making information security strategic to business innovation”; 
RSA Security; Bedford MA. 2008. 
[9] 
Benoît Dupont et Bénoît Gagnon. “La sécurité précaire des 
données personnelles en Amérique du Nord", Note de recherche 
n°1, Chair de recherche du Canada en sécurité, identité et 
technologie, 2008. 
[10] 
http://www.cnis-mag.com 
Site de magasine sur les problématiques de l’informatique et de 
la sécurité. Last access date : may 2011. 
[11] 
Jeremy Epstein, "Security Lessons Learned from Société 
Générale", IEEE SECURITY & PRIVACY, Vol. 6, 03, pp. 80-
82, MAY/JUNE, 2008. 
[12] 
Goudalo Wilson, “Business Security” in Engineering Secure 
Complex Software Systems and Services. Proceedings of the 
European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics 
Seminar on ICT Security. Brussels, 16 October 2008. 
http://www.ercim.org/ 
[13] 
“Managing IT in a Downturn - Beyond Cost Cutting”. McKinsey 
on Business Technology. Fall 2008 
[14] 
Goudalo Wilson et Seret Dominique. "Toward the Engineering 
of Security of Information Systems (ESIS): UML and the IS 
Confidentiality". Proceedings of the 2008 Second International 
Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and 
Technologies. 
Pages 
248-256. 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society 
Washington, DC, USA. ISBN: 978-0-7695-3329-2. 
[15] 
Wilson Goudalo et Dominique Seret. "The Process of 
Engineering of Security of Information Systems (ESIS): The 
Formalism of Business Processes ". Securware, pp.105-113, 
2009 Third International Conference on Emerging Security 
Information, Systems and Technologies, 2009. 
[16] 
Marwane El Kharbili, Sebastian Stein, Ivan Markovic and Elke 
Pulvermüller. “Towards a Framework for Semantic Business 
Process 
Compliance 
Management”. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Workshop SBPM 2007, Innsbruck 2007, ISSN 1613-0073 
[17] 
Ivan Markovic, Alessandro Costa Pereira. “Towards a Formal 
Framework for Reuse in Business Process Modeling”. In 
Workshop on Advances in Semantics for Web services 
(semantics4ws), in conjunction with BPM '07. Brisbane 
(Australia) 2007. 
[18] 
Praxeme institute – Public methodology of Enterprise 
Architecture. http://www.praxeme.org. Last access date : may 
2011. 
[19] 
TOGAF, The Open Group Architecture cadre. Version 8.1 
“Enterprise Edition” 2003. 
[20] 
Longépé Christophe. “The Enterprise Architecture IT Project – 
the Urbanisation Paradigm”. Penton, 2002 
[21] 
Club Urba SI. "Pratiques de l’Urbanisme des Systèmes 
d’Information en entreprises". Publibook, 2003. 
[22] 
John Zachman and John Sowa. “Extending and Formalizing the 
Framework for Information Systems Architecture”. IBM 
Systems Journal. Volume 31, No. 3, pp 590-616, 1992. 
[23] 
Jaap Schekkerman. “How to Survive in the Jungle of Enterprise 
Architecture Frameworks”, Trafford, Third edition, 2006 
[24] 
Tony Brown. “The Value of Enterprise Architecture”. ZIFA 
report, 2005. 
[25] 
Douglas W. McDavid. "A standard for business architecture 
description" in Enterprise Solutions Structure. IBM Systems 
Journal, Volume 38, Number 1, 1999 
[26] 
Celia Talma Martins and António Lucas Soares. “Dissecting 
Inter-Organizational Business Process Modeling: A Linguistic 
and Conceptual Approach” in Network-Centric Collaboration 
and Supporting Frameworks. pp 221-228. Springer Boston, 
2006. ISBN : 978-0-387-38266-1. 
[27] 
[GAN-08] Eswar Ganesan, Ramesh Paturi. “Bulding Blocks for 
Enterprise 
Business 
Architecture”. 
Infosys 
Research 
Publications. SETILabs Briefings. Volume 6, Number 4, 2008. 
[28] 
Beatriz. Bernardez, Amador Duran, and Marcela Genero. 
“Metrics for use cases: a Survey of Current Proposals”. In M. 
Genero, M. Piattini, and C. Colero Editors, Metrics for Software 
Conceptual Models. Pages 59-98. Imperial College Press, 2005. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

