Scanning Probe Microscopy Used for 3D Topography Image Acquisition of Marks
on Cartidge Cases in Forensic Ballistics
Milan Navrátil, Vojtěch Křesálek, Adam Koutecký 
Department of electronics and measurements
Faculty of applied informatics
Tomas Bata University in Zlín
Zlín, Czech Republic
e-mails: {navratil, kresalek, a_koutecky}@fai.utb.cz
Zdeněk Maláník 
Department of Security Engineering
Faculty of applied informatics
Tomas Bata University in Zlín
Zlín, Czech Republic
e-mail: malanik@fai.utb.cz
Abstract— In spite of the significance of tool mark analysis in
forensic ballistics, the image acquisition and comparison of tool
marks remains a difficult and time consuming effort. This
work deals with modified scanning probe microscopy applied
to examination of marks on the surface of fired cartridge cases.
Marks after firing pin are represented by 3-D topography
image from measured data and compared according to images
taken
from
confocal
microscope
and
scanning
electron
microscope.
Keywords - forensic balistic; scanning probe microscopy;
firing pin; cartridge case; marks; 3D; topography.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The identifying of the weapon which perpetrator used for
shooting includes the basic questions of forensic ballistics.
This individual identification is based on the axiom that the
components of the weapon which are in the contact with the
shot and cartridge case, leave on their surface characteristic
marks. They are a unique reflection of micro roughness of
contacted surface.
From a historical point of view, one of the earliest
references related to the rifling of firearms is in a book by
Harold Peterson [1]. In the early part of the 20th century, the
science
of
firearm
and
tool
mark
identification
was
recognized by numerous judicial systems in several countries
around the world. Legal recognition was due, in part, to the
efforts of several individuals that had conducted research and
experiments into the identification of fired projectiles and
cartridges cases to the specific firearms.
In the middle part of the 20th century, the science of
firearm and tool mark identification continued to evolve. For
example, in the United States, the Scientific Crime Detection
Laboratory
(SCDL)
began
operations
at Northwestern University in 1929, followed by formation
of the Federal Bureau of Identification (FBI) Laboratory in
1932. Moreover, many other countries also recognized the
requirement to provide this type of forensic analysis and
established firearm and tool mark sections either in existing
laboratories or as new laboratories. Over the next few years,
several
laboratories
were
established
and
commenced
operations, especially in many of the larger cities in Canada,
the United Kingdom, and the United States and in Europe.
In 1969, as a result of individual’s effort in scientific
research in the field of firearm and toolmark identification,
Association of Firearm and Toolmark Examiners (AFTE)
was founded.
In the last part of the last century, the science of firearms
and toolmark identification has continued to evolve with a
greater number of forensic scientists being employed as
firearm and tool-mark examiners around the world. The
science
has
greatly
benefited
from
the
numerous
technological advances that have occurred during this period.
These advances include innovations in one of the primary
tools of the firearm and toolmark examiner — the binocular
comparison microscopes. The immense majority of the
current comparison microscopes have been equipped with
digital cameras and
closed circuit television (CCTV) units,
which allow for direct viewing on a monitor or instant
documentation using digital photomicrography. The most
significant
advances
during
this
period
include
the
tremendous growth, popularity, and relatively inexpensive
cost of computers. The ability to fully utilize the immense
potential of computers has allowed science overall, and
forensic science more specifically, to take full advantage in
development of several useful ‘tools’ for use within the
firearms laboratory. The ongoing development of computers
has provided the firearms and toolmark examiner with such
useful
equipment
as
the
current
Integrated
Ballistics
Identification System (IBIS) from Forensic Technology
(Quebec, Canada) which combines a traditional 2D light
microscopy image with software for image comparison and
database search [2].
In recent years, researchers have started to explore a next
generation of techniques for tool mark imaging. These
methods
produce
3D
images
of
tool
marks.
Several
technologies have been considered, for example, focus-
variation microscopy, confocal microscopy, point laser
profilometry,
atomic
force
microscopy
or
scanning
interferometry. Mentioned techniques require expensive
equipment and often the sample preparation is not trivial. For
example, we can mention very fast method called TopMatch
GS-3 [3]. It is 3D scan acquisition based on GelSight
imaging technology that uses an elastomeric sensor and
enhanced photometric stereo [4][5][6][7]. The another novel
application of sensing technology, based on chromatic white
light, acquires highly detailed topography and luminance
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

data of cartridge cases simultaneously [8]. Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM) technique in forensic science was used
with combination of Fourier Transform Infrared Attenuated
Total Reflectance (FTIR/ATR) spectroscopy in analysis of
Gun-Shot Residue (GSR) to test their ability to determine
shooting
distance
and
discrimination
of
the
powder
manufacturers [9]. Using this method for tool mark analysis
is not suitable because regular Scanning Probe Microscopes
(SPM) and among them especially atomic force microscope
are the best techniques to measure very smooth surfaces. For
larger samples, such as cartridge cases, an analogy of
scanning probe microscopy was required. This work shows
the possibility of the assembled system and also indicates
possible trends for the future.
In Section 2, the principle of general scanning probe
microscopy and our custom scanning system are described.
Section contains series of acquired images from scanning
electron, scanning probe and optical microscopy of measured
cartridge cases together with their mutual comparison.
Section 4 presents a conclusion and an indication of the
future work.
II.
SCANNING PROBE MICROSCOPY
In general, scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a
technique to examine materials with a solid probe scanning
the surfaces. The SPM is relatively new for materials
characterization
compared
with
light
and
electron
microscopy.
It
can
examine
surface
features
whose
dimensions range from tenth of a millimetre to atomic
spacing. The main characteristic of the SPM is a sharp probe
tip that scans a sample surface. The tip must remain in very
close proximity to the surface because the SPM uses near-
field interactions between the tip and a sample surface for
examination. This near-field characteristic eliminates the
resolution
limit
associated
with
optical
and
electron
microscopy because their resolution is limited by the far-
field interactions between light or electro waves and
specimens. The lateral and vertical resolution of an SPM can
be better than 0.1 nm, particularly the vertical resolution. The
lateral range of an SPM measurement is up to about 100 µm,
and its vertical range is up to about 10 µm. The SPM must
operate
in
vibration-free
environment
due
to
atomic
proximity between the tip and the sample.
For surface morphology measurement, the mode of SPM
using atomic forces is very often utilized. Operation is based
on surface scanning using an elastic cantilever with a sharp
tip. The tip is moved closer to the surface with a small
constant force. The tip height ranges from hundreds of
nanometers up to 2 µm and tip curvature radius ranges from
2 to 60 nm. Interaction of the tip and the surface is detected
by the reflection of the laser beam from the top of a
cantilever on the four-segment photodiode detector.
Every
SPM
system
consists
of
several
basic
components: a probe and its motion sensor, scanner, electric
controller, computer and vibration isolation system. The
scanner controls the probe that moves over the sample in
three dimensions in a precise way (1 pm if atomic resolution
is required). To achieve this level of precision, a scanner is
made of piezoelectric materials. Moreover, the scanner must
be
well
calibrated
to
eliminate
piezoelectric
effects
(nonlinearity, hysteresis, creep of material). There are four
operational modes in the STM: constant current, constant
height, spectroscopic and manipulation modes. The most
commonly used mode is the constant current mode, where
the feedback loop controls the scanner moving up and down
to maintain a constant tunnelling current [10].
In case of forensic ballistics, the size of marks (shots,
cartridge cases, parts of gun, etc.) is often many times greater
than limits of SPM method. It is not possible to use
commercial instruments without any physical adjustment of
the sample because there is a danger that the sample can be
reversibly modified or damaged. For SPM systems, the
maximal size of scanned area rarely exceeds 100 µm.
Another limitation is the maximal height of the sample,
which is often about 1 cm together with surface roughness of
the examined sample. From reasons mentioned above, there
was a need to modify or design custom scanning systems
allowing measuring larger samples with larger roughness of
the surfaces.
A.
Custom SPM system
Our custom scanning system differs in several important
aspects from the above described general SPM system. The
present configuration of the system can examine only
metallic samples. It consists of stationary conductive probe
with sharp tip, stage connected to system of servomotors
(Mercury M110 1DG) controlled by stepper controllers
(Mercury C-862) through the computer and own user
software (programmed in MATLAB), it is illustrated in
Figure 1. As a feedback, a change in resistivity of the used
electronic circuit is employed. This change is caused by the
physical contact of the tip and sample; it is measured with
multimeter
(Hewlett
Packard
34401A).
Switch
SW1
represents contact between the tip and sample. Resistors
R1 = 1 MΩ and R2 = 100 Ω participate in overall measured 
circuit resistance. Schema of the electronic circuit can be
seen in Figure 2.
Figure 1. Scanning system with static probe where stage is moved
across three axes.
Figure 2. Simple electronic circuit for feedback system.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

This system allows the measurement of larger objects
(from few millimetres up to about 5 cm), maximal scanned
area is 5 x 5 mm. On the other hand, examined object must
be conductive, lateral and vertical resolution are given by
chosen scanning raster and limited by curvature radius of the
probe and also by used stepper motors. It can be said that the
scanning system works in spectroscopy mode. For each point
in chosen regular rectangular raster, the approach cycle is
successively
accomplished
to
get
Z-coordinate
which
corresponds to topography of the sample, which is illustrated
in Figure 3. All three coordinates are stored in common SPM
data format for further visualisation and analysis.
The accuracy of the system and the level of details during
scanning are dependent on chosen raster size, approaching
distance in Z-axis and its velocity. They are inversely related
to the total time of scanning process. On the basis of repeated
spectroscopy measurement at one single point of the sample
it was found out that relative slow approaching velocity of
the stage in Z-axis (in range up to 5 µm per second) leads to
uncertainty below 0.2 micrometers. On the other hand,
velocities over 15 µm per second exceed uncertainty of
1 micrometer. The correct and adequate settings of system
parameters is a question of compromise between quality and
measurement duration. Lots of important information is
shown in main window of the user application during
running measurement. It also includes the current 3D graph
together with measured topography profile, estimated time of
end measurement, information about stage movement and
many others.
B.
Scanning probe with a sharp conductive tip.
The indispensable part of the scanning system is the tip.
Maximal resolution we can reach with this system is given
by curvature radius of the tip. The curvature radius of used
tip was reached by mechanical sharpening and was measured
with optical microscopy and also with scanning electron
microscopy. Comparison of these two methods can be seen
in Figure 4 and Figure 5, where different determination of
curvature radius is obtained. The images from SEM method
have much better resolution so that measured values are
more accurate.
According with this value, the scanning raster is chosen,
in our case it was 50 µm. Additionally, the method is based
on resistivity change at contact during approach. Regarding
to possible physical damage of the tip or sample in case of
non-conductive contact (dust, impurity) because stage is
approaching the tip until resistivity change of the electronic
circuit occurs, tip attachment is also very important. From
this reason, the tip has possibility of free movement in Z-axis
inside guide conductive casing which is fixed and the tip
always get back to the same position.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For test measurement, two available firearms with
different specific marks of firing pin were chosen (Glock 17
and Walther PPQ). For every single gun, several fired
cartridge cases were collected and then the marks after firing
pin measured and analysed. Two of typical cartridge cases
from individual firearms were subjected to measurement
with
our
SPM
method.
For
comparison
of
obtained
topography images to images taken using contemporary
method, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) as well as
confocal microscopy were used, see Figure 6 – Figure 12.
All cartridge cases were scanned using SPM in the same
way, with the same system parameters, raster in both lateral
axes was 50 µm, total scanned area from 4000 µm to
3000 µm, depending on size of individual mark. Initial
Figure 3. Flowchart of approaching cycle.
Figure 4. Image of the used sharp conductive tip measured with optical
microscope.
Figure 5. Image of the used sharp conductive tip measured with SEM.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

sample positioning on the stage and the tip distance were
manually performed. Approaching speed was set 5 µm/s.
The scanning process of one mark took approximately
8 hours. All measured data was processed in Gwyddion
software [11] which is a modular program for SPM data
visualization and analysis [12]. Plane leveling was applied to
raw SPM data. The plane was computed from all the image
points
and
was
subtracted
from
the
data.
The
last
modification lay in data trimming according to region of
interest.
As it can be seen from Figure 9 and Figure 12, the level
of detail is very poor, but we have information about spatial
penetration of the firing pin, which is another useful
information. According to this, we can compare shape of
firing pin, its abrasion level so that its possible malfunction
can be predictable.
Figure 6. Visualised cartridge cases on primer side using confocal
microscope.
Figure 7. Image of mark after firing pin on cartridge case fired
from Walther PPQ measured with SEM.
Figure 8. Image of mark after firing pin on cartridge case fired
from Walther PPQ measured with optical microscope.
Figure 9. Views on 3D scan of mark after firing pin (Walther PPQ)
using our SPM method.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 7 and Figure 10 show SEM images that have,
from principal, unique resolution (can reach values of
0.02 nm) and large depth of field (the order of micrometers
at 104 magnification). We can observe very fine details,
images look plastic, but they are still only 2-D images.
Moreover, this type of instrument does not belong to
common laboratory equipment and its cost is very high.
Figure
6
shows
reduced
images
from
confocal
microscopy, which provides, except others, non-contact
surface profilometry with resolution of 0.15 µm. It can slice
clean thin optical sections so that it is able to compose a 3-D
topography image. The problem is for surfaces where there
is a steep decrease of the material. This represents edge and
deep inner part of mark after firing pin on the primer which
would be evident from Figure 6 and real comparison of the
cartridge case.
For marks after firing pin, STM method can be
considered as efficient, especially if the resolution improves.
Furthermore, not only topographic images can be the result
of this measurement. Another little modification of this
method it will lead to simultaneous acquisition of contact
potential, which gives us information about homogeneity of
metal crystal lattice and its imperfections.
IV.
CONLCUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In spite of the significance of tool mark analysis in
forensic sciences, the image acquisition and comparison of
tool marks remains a difficult and time consuming effort.
The comparison, in our case, is based on the fact that
microscopic firearm imperfections are transferred to a fired
cartridge case.
In this study, we were concerned with marks after firing
pin on fired cartridge casings that were measured with
custom SPM method. As a result of these measurements, 3-D
topography images were acquired. For the verification and
comparison of obtained results, images of the same samples
were measured with available optical methods (scanning
electron microscopy and confocal microscopy).
Using our SMP method, one single cartridge case was
scanned in order of hours which is impractical at this
Figure 12. 3D scan using our SPM method of mark after firing pin
(Glock 17)
Figure 10. Image of mark after firing pin on cartridge case fired from
Glock 17 measured with SEM.
Figure 11. Image of mark after firing pin on cartridge case fired from
Glock 17 measured with optical microscope.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

moment; but, there are also possibilities and reserves which
allows us increasing the scanning time. In future work,
construction of near field microwave microscope can be the
promising
improvement
from
the
point
of
time
consumptions. It is based on impedance change between the
tip and the sample in microwave spectra. Additionally, it is
non-contact method so that the possibility of tip or sample
damage falls behind. The tip is only moved in constant
height above the conductive sample within the raster and the
resonant curves of coaxial resonator are measured. Image
brightness component is arranged according to changes of
resonant curves.
The lateral resolution is limited by curvature radius of the
tip. By mechanical sharpening we were able to decrease the
radius below 50 micrometres which is still not enough to
observe details necessary to comparison of tool marks. Using
methods like chemical milling of the tip [12] or stretching of
the thin wire when heated the curvature radius of the
conductive
tip
can
be
dramatically
reduced.
As
a
consequence of mentioned improvements, 3D scan of
measured surface can be taken in much shorter time with
better resolution then it is presented here. It is evident, that
any SPM method for surface topography measurement is
much time-consuming then optical methods. Every method
has pros and cons, always it depends what information the
user wants to get and what is the worth.
Moreover,
every
single
scanned
surface
can
be
mathematically described as a unique vector of numbers; for
example, moment characteristics or Fourier descriptors [14]
can be utilized in combination of suitable segmentation
methods. These complementary aspects can be helpful in
tool mark comparison and firearms identification.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education,
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic within the National
Sustainability Programme Project No. LO1303 (MSMT-
7778/2014) and also by the European Regional Development
Fund
under
the
project
CEBIA-Tech
No.
CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089.
REFERENCES
[1]
H.
L.
Peterson,
“The
Fuller
Collection
of
American
Firearms: America's Military Long Arms. Eastern National
Park & Monument Association, 1967.
[2]
J. Hamby and J. Thorpe, “The History of Firearm, and
Toolmark Identification. AFTE Journal”, vol. 31, no. 3, 1999,
pp. 266-284.
[3]
R.
Lilien,
“Applied
Research
and
Development
of
a
ThreeDimensional
Topography
System
for
Firearm
Identification using GelSight”, USA, Patent No. 248639,
2015.
[4]
R. Li, “Touching is believing: sensing and analyzing touch
information
with
GelSight”,
2015,
PhD.
Thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[5]
R. Li and E. Adeslon, “Sensing and recognizing surface
textures using a gelsight sensor”, In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2013, pp. 1241-1247.
[6]
R. Lilien, “Applied Research, and Development of a Three-
Dimensional Topography System for Imaging and Analysis of
Striated and Impressed Tool Marks for Firearm Identification
using GelSight”, Department of Justice Award 2013-R2-CX-
K005, Document 248962, 2015
[7]
R. Tomcik, Cadre Forensics, “A Successful Case of End-User
Involvement”. National
Criminal
Justice
Reference
Service [online], 2014, [retrieved: 06, 2016], Available at:
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/247272.pdf
[8]
A. Makrushin et al., “3D imaging for ballistics analysis using
chromatic white light sensor” [online], In: Proc. SPIE 8290,
Three-Dimensional
Image
Processing
(3DIP)
and
Applications
II,
[retrieved:
06,
2016],
DOI:
10.1117/12.908105,
Available
at:
http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?doi=
10.1117/12.908105#
[9]
Y. Mou, J. Lakadwar, J. Rabalais, and J. Wayne, “Evaluation
of shooting distance by AFM and FTIR/ATR analysis of
GSR”, Journal of forensic sciences, vol. 53, no. 6, 2008, pp.
1381-1386.
[10] Y.
Leng, „Materials
characterization:
introduction
to
microscopic and spectroscopic methods“, 2nd ed. Weinheim:
J. Wiley, c2013, ISBN 978-3-527-33463-6.
[11] D. Nečas and P. Klapetek, “Gwyddion: an open-source 
software for SPM data analysis”, Cent. Eur. J. Phys., vol. 10,
no.1, 2012, pp. 181-188
[12] P. Klapetek, “Quantitative data processing in scanning probe
microscopy: SPM applications for nanometrology”, First
edition, New York: William Andrew/Elsevier, 2013. Micro &
nano technologies, ISBN 1455730580.
[13] M.
Fotino,
“Tip
sharpening
by
normal
and
reverse
electrochemical etching”, Review of Scientific Instruments,
1993, 64(1),
159,
[retrieved:
06,
2016],
DOI:
10.1063/1.1144419.
ISSN
00346748.
Available
at:
http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/rsi/64/1/10.1063/1.
1144419
[14] K. Arbter, W. E. Snyder, H. Burkhardt and G. Hirzinger,
"Application
of
affine-invariant
Fourier
descriptors
to
recognition of 3-D objects", in IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 640-
647, Jul 1990.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

