PASER: Position Aware Secure and Efﬁcient Route Discovery Protocol
for Wireless Mesh Networks
Mohamad Sbeiti, Andreas Wolff and Christian Wietfeld
Communication Networks Institute (CNI)
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
Dortmund University of Technology, Germany
Email: {Mohamad.Sbeiti, Andreas.Wolff, Christian.Wietfeld}@tu-dortmund.de
Abstract—In this paper we address an acceptable trade-
off between security and performance of the route discovery
process in wireless mesh networks. We propose a Position
Aware Secure and Efﬁcient reactive hierarchical Route dis-
covery protocol (PASER). The proposed protocol is tailored
for rescue and emergency operations and aims to combat
unauthorized nodes of joining the network or manipulating the
route look-up process. In addition, it deals with efﬁciency and
real-time capability requirements in such environments. From a
security perspective, the novelty of PASER is the combination
of digital signature with lightweight authentication tree and
symmetric block cipher to secure routing messages. Another
key feature is the support of nodes’ geo-positions to increase
the security while enabling an advanced network management.
Apart from that, PASER treats the network in a hierarchical
way and establishes the route discovery process to a large extent
upon reactive unicast messages. PASER is generally applicable,
as it does not make restrictive assumptions on the network
nodes. It provides generic metrics for the constituent links
of the discovered routes, allowing the implementation of any
route selection algorithm. As a result, PASER enables secure
and efﬁcient routing in a wide range of wireless mesh network
applications.
Keywords-Secure routing protocols; wireless mesh networks;
emergency and rescue operations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Mesh Networking (WMN) is an emerging tech-
nology, which is receiving increased attention as a high-
performance, low-cost and rapid deployment solution for
next generation wireless communication systems. A WMN
is deﬁned as a dynamic, self-organized and self-conﬁgured
wireless multi-hop network, consisting of gateways, mesh
routers and mesh clients. Gateways and mesh routers build
the network backhaul and are responsible for client data
transmission. Typically, gateways provide connection to the
Internet, whereas mesh routers are responsible for setting
up and maintaining the ad hoc network routes. Due to its
ubiquitous architecture and wireless transmit channel, it is
possible though that mesh routers deviate from the protocol
deﬁnition and exhibit malicious behavior. The challenge
is to prevent such nodes, which we term attackers, from
misleading other nodes that a path is better than it actually
is. If successful, an adversary can attract network trafﬁc and
degrade or disable the communication of other nodes, which
might be very crucial in many WMN applications.
Rescue and emergency operations, for instance, is a
WMN application ﬁeld addressed by the research project
SPIDER [1], where rescue ﬁghters deploy an ad hoc incident
network using dropped units [2]. These operations are very
time sensitive and dangerous minds might be on board.
Without a satisfactory level of security, terrorists or ben-
eﬁting organizations may try to disrupt the communication
route between rescue ﬁghters and the Command and Control
System (CCS). They might try to inject fraud packets to
falsify CCS decisions or create a routing black hole, which
attracts and sniffs data packets, where any release of such
sensitive data could cause a mass hysteria across countries.
Thus, one of the fundamental challenges of the WMN
technology is the design of a route discovery protocol
that can efﬁciently establish accurate routes in presence of
attackers. Hereby, it needs to deliver data packets between
mobile clients with minimum communication overhead, low
end-to-end delay and high throughput.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
reports on related work. Section III presents a review on
security threats in WMN and outlines the needed security
characteristics to secure routing protocols. In Section IV,
PASER is demonstrated, where in Section V its security
and performance are discussed. Finally, in Section VI we
conclude the paper and give some outlook for future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Most WMN mesh routers nowadays, e.g., HiMoNN [3],
are built upon routing protocols designed by the IETF
MANET working group: AODV [4], DYMO [5] and OLSR
[6]. These protocols along with a plenty of other MANET
routing protocols can not be fully applied in WMN for the
following reasons:
1) They are designed without having security in mind.
Retroﬁtting pre-existing cryptosystem (e.g., IPsec) to
secure them is inefﬁcient. These cryptosystems impose
huge overhead and processing delay, hence affecting
strongly the overall performance.
2) They deal with the network as a ﬂat network, which
is absolutely reasonable in MANET. Thereby, they
do not consider the different roles of WMN nodes,
namely, mesh routers and gateways. Thus, these pro-
tocols are not able to take advantage of WMN charac-
teristics, i.e., most data ﬂow is destined to the gateway
(e.g., from rescue ﬁghters to ofﬁcer in charge).
Many security solutions to secure routing in MANET have
been recently proposed, however most of them comprise
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

either high computational complexity [7] or impose a lot
of conﬁguration and management [8] or are still vulnerable
to several attacks [9][10][11].
To exploit the WMN characteristics, IEEE has been
discussing since 2003 the release of the IEEE 802.11s
standard, which deals with hierarchical mesh networks. The
current draft has deﬁned a routing mechanism for WMN
and termed it Hybrid Wireless Mesh Protocol (HWMP) [12].
However, security in routing or forwarding functionality is
not speciﬁed in that standard. The protocol does not provide
any authentication and integrity of routing messages. Apart
from that, HWMP as well as many protocols applied in
WMN incorporate a proactive part [13]. Though this part
is essential to keep the route to the gateway valid, it is very
resource consuming and is always active even when it is not
necessary.
In PASER, we address the latter point by adopting the
reactive route discovery method with two differences:
• Mesh routers are always responsible for maintaining a
route to the gateway. This brings the same advantage
as a proactive part in hybrid protocols while using the
resources only when needed.
• Route requests are forwarded, when possible, in a
unicast manner rather than ﬂooding them blindly, as
in conventional on-demand route discovery methods.
From a security point of view, PASER provides a
novel hybrid scheme, a combination of asymmetric and
lightweight symmetric cryptography, to secure route dis-
covery messages. This novel combination yields a huge
performance gain while providing a very high security level.
Apart from that, PASER supports the exchange of geo-
positioning, hence mitigating a wider range of attacks and
facilitating the network management.
III. SECURITY VULNERABILITIES IN WMN ROUTE
DISCOVERY
As mentioned before, PASER’s main target scenarios are
disaster rescue and relief operations. In such environments,
safeguards are indirectly applied to the nodes preventing
their compromise, e.g., nodes are mounted on ﬁre brigades
tubes. Thus, internal attacks, where nodes from within the
network are involved, are a less realistic threat in these
environments, whereas external attacks, which are performed
by illegitimated nodes, are of paramount importance. The
latter class of attacks essentially aims to violate the reliabil-
ity of the network and the availability of its services. The
most relevant attacks of this class with respect to the route
discovery process are listed below:
Impersonation attack: Using MAC and IP spooﬁng, an
attacker fakes the identity of authorized nodes and thereby
joins the network. The attacker can then carry out all types
of insider attacks - the lack of proper authentication of nodes
is the main reason for the success of impersonation attack.
Location disclosure attack: This attack reveals informa-
tion regarding the location of nodes or the structure of the
network. It gathers the node location information, such as a
route map, and attempts to learn the network trafﬁc pattern.
By analyzing changes in the trafﬁc pattern, attackers try
to ﬁgure out the identities of communication parties and
plans further attack scenarios - the lack of anonymity and
conﬁdentiality of routing information is the ground of this
attack.
Malign attack: An attacker blackmails an uncompro-
mised node, causing other nodes to exclude it from the
network, thus, prohibiting that node to exchange data - a
weak node revocation mechanism is the essential reason of
the network vulnerability to such an attack.
Man-in-the-middle attack: An attacker impersonates a
sender and a receiver by establishing independent connec-
tions to them and making them believe that they are talking
directly to each other. The success of such an attack gives the
attacker a full control of the entire conversation. The attacker
must be able to intercept all messages going between the
two victims and inject new ones, which is straightforward
in many circumstances (for example, an attacker within
reception range of two nodes, can insert himself as a man-in-
the-middle). A man-in-the-middle attack can only succeed
when the attacker can impersonate each endpoint to the
satisfaction of the other - weak mutual authentication is the
main reason for the attacker’s ability of man-in-the-middle
attack.
Replay attack: An attacker records another node’s valid
control messages and resends them later. First, this causes
other nodes to update their routing table with stale routes.
Second, unnecessary packets are processed and forwarded
within the network. The latter, also known as resource
consumption attack, targets to consume network bandwidth
and node battery power - the main reason of the network
vulnerability to such attack is the lack of adequate packet
freshness veriﬁcation mechanism.
Tempering attack: An attacker forges routing packets
generated by legitimated nodes (e.g., tempering sequence
number or metric of packets) and hence causes wrong rout-
ing decisions like redirection through suboptimal routes or
route loops. This attack causes severe degradation in network
performance - the fundamental reason of the attacker’s
ability of tempering the routing information is the lack of
packet integrity check.
Wormhole attack: A pair of attackers, linked via a fast
transmission path (tunnel), forward route requests more
quickly than legitimate nodes. The tunneled packets can
propagate faster than those through a normal multi-hop
route. This causes victim nodes to always use the tunneled
route to transmit their packets. The latter enables the
attackers to gain information about speciﬁc communication
trafﬁc in the network or selectively forward packets. The
attacker could even prevent the discovery of any routes
other than through the wormhole - the lack of authentication
of transmissions between neighboring nodes in the route
discovery is a main issue with respect to this attack.
Thus, in order to combat the aforementioned attacks and
to mitigate their risk to a large extent, a secure route
discovery protocol has to fulﬁll the following security goals:
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

1) Anonymity
2) Message conﬁdentiality
3) Message freshness and integrity
4) Neighbor transmissions authentication
5) Node authentication
The ﬁrst goal is only necessary to combat location dis-
closure attack. We didn’t consider this goal while designing
PASER for the following reasons:
• The location and role of nodes in environments such
as disaster rescue and relief operations are to a large
extent known and hence protection against this attack
is not really required.
• The performance cost of achieving the anonymity goal
is very high and we are seeking a good trade-off
between security and performance.
IV. THE PASER PROTOCOL
In this Section, we describe the main components of
PASER.
A. PASER Objectives
PASER is an efﬁcient secure route discovery protocol for
wireless mesh networks. It is a mechanism that provides
a route to a node (mesh router or gateway) wishing to
send a packet to a destination. Hereby, PASER asserts
that the discovered route is accurate in terms of metric
and legitimized nodes in the presence of external attackers.
Moreover, it keeps the consumption of network resources
minimal. That is, PASER aims to ensure the reliability of
the network and the availability of its services in an efﬁcient
manner.
From security point of view, PASER has to fulﬁll the
following goals:
Message conﬁdentiality, message fresh-
ness and integrity, neighbor transmissions authentication
and node authentication. Message conﬁdentiality is only
used where PASER is vulnerable against man-in-the-middle
attacks. From performance point of view, PASER aims to
strongly decrease the number of messages it exchanges over
the network and to keep the cost of its security mechanisms
minimal. To achieve these goals, we consider the following
assumptions in the given priority:
1) Only legitimated nodes hold a valid certiﬁcate.
2) Nodes feature low mobility.
3) GPS signals are available at the application scene and
nodes incorporate a secure GPS device, i.e., received
GPS information is secure in terms of integrity and
authenticity.
B. PASER Cryptographic Primitives
In this Subsection, we describe how the main security
building blocks of PASER are applied.
1) Digital Signature Scheme: PASER speciﬁes to apply
a digital signature on its broadcast-messages. This signature
is mainly necessary to guarantee the authenticity of these
messages and thereby to establish trust between one hop
neighbors. We recommend any of the standardized algo-
rithms in [14]. The key pair used by the algorithm is the
one bounded to the node identity in his certiﬁcate.
2) Symmetric Block Cipher: PASER prescribes the use
of symmetric block cipher to encrypt its unicast-messages.
This encryption is mainly necessary to protect these mes-
sages against man-in-the-middle attacks within a short time
interval after sending them. The key used by the cipher
is a group key distributed to the nodes during the setup
phase of the network. The selection of the block cipher
depends on the application of PASER and therefore it is left
open. We recommend however the usage of the lightweight
block cipher PRESENT [15]. PRESENT was speciﬁcally
designed with constrained applications such as passive low-
cost RFID-tags in mind. PRESENT is a simple substitution-
permutation network with a block size of 64 bits and two
different key sizes: 80 or 128 bits. We recommend the
version with an 80 bit key for PASER since here we are
seeking short-term security.
3) Authentication Tree: An authentication tree [16] is
a complete binary-tree equipped with a hash function and
an assignment function F such that for any interior node
nparent and two child nodes nleft and nright the function F
satisﬁes: nparent = F(nleft, nright) = hash(nleft||nright),
with || denoting concatenation. The hash function to be used
should be practically secure and efﬁcient, such as SHA-
256 or the winner of the SHA-3 competition [17]. We use
authentication tree in PASER to build from hash functions an
lightweight secure authentication scheme between one hop
neighbors. Figure 1 illustrates an example of this approach.
Each node generates 2n secrets, where n is a conﬁguration
parameter and is determined based on the application of
PASER; these secrets are the leaf pre-images of the tree.
Each leaf node is a hash of these secrets and each internal
node is the hash of the concatenation of two child values.
After computing root, a node (Alice) publishes that root to
its one hop neighbors (Bob). A node can then authenticate
itself to a neighbor by disclosing one secret, e.g., Secret1,
Root:= hash ( a₁₂ || a₃₄)
a₃₄ := hash ( a₃ || a₄)
          
a₁₂ := hash ( a₁ || a₂)
          
a₁ := hash (Secret1)
          
a₂ := hash (Secret2)
          
a₃ := hash (Secret3)
          
a₄ := hash (Secret4)
F
F
Hash
          
Secret2
Hash
          
Secret3
Hash
          
Secret4
||        
Revealed secret 
and corresponding
authentication path
Hash
          
Secret1
F
Legend
Concatenation
Alice
Bob
Payload + Secret1, a2, a34
RootCalculate (    ) = RootAlice à 
Generation of random secrets 
RootAlice
Figure 1.
Authentication Tree Application
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Table I
PASER MESSAGES
Name
Notation
Untrusted Broadcast Route Request
UB-RREQ
Untrusted Unicast Route Reply
UU-RREP
Trusted Unicast Route Request
TU-RREQ
Trusted Unicast Route Reply
TU-RREP
Trusted Unicast Route Reply-Acknowledge
TU-RREP-ACK
and sending it along with its authentication path, a2 and a34,
see Figure 1. The authentication path of a secret consists of
values of all the siblings of the secret corresponding leaf
on the path between that leaf and the root. To verify the
disclosed secret a receiver needs to compute the potential
values of its ancestors by iteratively using of the F function.
A secret is authenticated and accepted as correct if and only
if the computed root value is equal to the already known
root value of the node.
PASER tree secrets are l bits long, where l is a conﬁgu-
ration parameter and l > n. A secret shall be constructed as
speciﬁed in Figure 2.
100111 1
0 00
00
00
00
00
00
Initialization Vector (Public Counter)
Random Value
(l-n) bits
n bits
l bits
00
00
00
00
Figure 2.
Authentication Tree Secret Construction
The least signiﬁcant (l − n) bits are generated randomly
for each secret. The most signiﬁcant n bits constitute an
initialization vector, the value of which is 0 for the ﬁrst
secret. The initialization vector is then incremented by
one by each subsequent secret. When the maximum value
(2n − 1) is reached, a node must generate a new root. The
latter asserts the freshness of a secret. That is, a secret value
can never be used twice for a given root. This technique is
used to prevent replay attacks.
C. PASER Messages
PASER differs between messages destined to new neigh-
bors and messages addressed to already known, trusted
neighbors. From security perspective, messages addressed
to new neighbors comprise identiﬁcation ﬁelds that aim to
establish a trusted relationship. These messages are always
signed and their name is always preﬁxed with U, which
stands for untrusted. Messages sent to trusted neighbors just
include authentication ﬁelds to conﬁrm the identity of the
sender. These messages are always encrypted and their name
is preﬁxed with the letter T, for trusted. PASER comprises
ﬁve types of messages as depicted in Table I.
Table II (see next page) depicts the ﬁelds which consti-
tutes these messages,
where * denotes ﬁelds that are included in a message
if and only if the gateway ﬂag GFlag is set. Seq is a
concatenation of message type and node ID, where ID
matches a sequence number in [4]. The address range list
indicates all the addresses a node is responsible for. The
latter is necessary in case of multiple interfaces. It allows the
declaration of all node interfaces that participate in another
routing domain. This is necessary in WMN since mesh
routers mostly comprise at least two interfaces.
D. PASER States
In PASER, a node can be in two different states as
illustrated in Figure 3.
At power-up the node enters the UNREGISTERED state.
In this state the node is not known to the network. Before any
communication can take place, it undergoes the following
steps in the given order:
1) It generates empty routing and neighbor tables accord-
ing to Table III. Hereby, a neighbor table comprises
the position ﬁeld if and only if the node is mesh
router. In contrast, this ﬁeld is included in the routing
table by a gateway, because a gateway in PASER has
knowledge of the position of all nodes. The neighbor
Flag (NeighFlag) reﬂects the trust relation between a
neighbor and that node.
2) It computes a hash tree root element and depending
on the node type it executes the following:
Gateway: It requests a random group key from a key
distributing center (KDC). The physical location of the
latter is less signiﬁcant. For instance, in emergency and
rescue operations it is reasonable to install the key dis-
tribution center as a web service at the CCS. Typically,
gateways are placed near to the ﬁre-ﬁghting command
and control vehicle and have a stable Internet link to
the KDC, e.g., via satellite.
Mesh router: It starts a route discovery for a gateway.
To augment the security of this step, gateways may be
assigned with the role “gateway“ in their certiﬁcates.
3) It requests a certiﬁcate revocation list from a certiﬁcate
authority and enters the registered state. We do neither
restrict the choice of the protocol used to request the
Power-Up
· Uninitialized PASER tables and
root element
· No route to a gateway (mesh router)
· No fresh group key (gateway)
· No fresh certificate revocation list
Power-Down
UNREGISTERED
REGISTERED
ACTIVE
· Processing   
of control 
messages
IDLE
· Sleeping
· Waiting for 
incoming 
messages
Figure 3.
Node Lifetime State Machine
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Table II
MESSAGE CONTENT DECLARATION
Field
UB-RREQ
UU-RREP
TU-RREQ
TU-RREP
TU-RREP-ACK
Basic ﬁelds
Message type
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Querying node
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Destination node (Dest)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Sequence number (Seq) of querying node
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Destination node gateway ﬂag (GFlag)
✓
✓
✓
✓
Address range list (AddL) of forwarding node
✓
✓
✓
Route list from querying node
✓
✓
✓
✓
to forwarding node
Metric for the route between
✓
✓
✓
✓
querying node and forwarding node
Metric for the route between
✓
✓
destination node and forwarding node
Neighbor (Neigh) identiﬁcation ﬁelds
Certiﬁcate (Cert) of querying node
*
*
Certiﬁcate of forwarding node
✓
✓
Root of forwarding node
✓
✓
Initialization vector (IV) of forwarding node
✓
✓
Geographical position (Geo) of querying node
✓
✓
*
Geographical position of forwarding node
✓
✓
Encrypted group transient key (GTK)
*
*
Signature (Sign) of forwarding node
✓
✓
Neighbor authentication ﬁelds
Secret (Sec) of forwarding node
✓
✓
✓
Authentication path (Auth)
✓
✓
✓
of forwarding node’s secret
Hash of message ﬁelds
✓
✓
✓
revocation list nor the location of the certiﬁcation
authority. At this stage of the network setup, it is
assumed that also the mesh routers have a stable route
to the CA/KDC, since they are typically turned on
before disposing them (near to the gateways), thereby,
they have a very good connection to the gateways.
For the secure und fast communication between the
mesh nodes and the CA/KDC we proposed in [18]
an efﬁcient single sign-on solution called Role in-
tegrated Certiﬁcate-based Single Sign-On (RC-SSO).
This solution is based on the SSL/TLS communication
procedure with certiﬁcates. Hereby, the certiﬁcates are
integrated with roles, which reﬂect predeﬁned mesh
nodes’ type (either router or gateway). Simulation and
experimental results show that RC-SSO outperforms
the widely spread Security Assertion Markup Lan-
guage (SAML) by up to 80 %- Implementing this
solution makes PASER robust, among others, against
malign attacks executed on the communication link to
the CA/KDC.
The UNREGISTERED state is mainly a state used at
power up. Once the node has registered with the network, it
is typically in one of the two sub-states, ACTIVE or IDLE
of the REGISTERED state. ACTIVE is the sub-state where
the node is active with transmitting and receiving PASER
messages. IDLE is a low activity sub-state in which the node
Table III
ROUTING AND NEIGHBOR TABLE FORMAT
Routing Table
AddL
Dest
Seq
GFlag
Cert
NextHop
Metric
Neighbor Table
Neigh
NeighFlag
Root
IV
Position*
sleeps in order to reduce battery consumption. Note that a
mesh router in REGISTERED state must always maintain a
route to a gateway. That is, when the route to the gateway
is not valid anymore; it has to restart a route discovery for
the gateway.
UN-/REGISTERED
Route
Request/Reply/Ack
Generation
Route 
Request/Reply/Ack
Processing
Route Reply
Timeout
IDLE
Group Key / 
Revocation List
Request
Figure 4.
Node Lifetime Operations
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

(TU-RREP-ACKbasic, SecY0, AuthY0) 
EncGTK, Hash
(TU-RREQbasic, CertS, SecY1, AuthY1, 
GeoS)EncGTK, Hash
Mesh Router (S)
Mesh Router (Y)
Gateway (G)
(UB-RREQbasic, CertY, RootY,
IVY, GeoY) SignY
(UU-RREPbasic, CertG, RootG, IVG, GeoG, 
(GTK)EncPK-Y) SignG
Wireless Signal  
Range
Processing Time
Node Lifetime 
(online)
Legend
Internet
Key Distribution Center / 
Certificate Authority
Group Key (GTK) and Certificate
Revocation List Request and Response
(UB-RREQbasic, CertS, RootS, IVS, 
GeoS) SignS
(TU-RREPbasic, SecG0, AuthY0, (GTK)EncPK-S) 
EncGTK, Hash
(UU-RREPbasic, CertY, RootY, IVY, 
GeoY, (GTK)EncPK-S) SignY
(TU-RREP-ACKbasic, SecS0, AuthS0 ) 
EncGTK, Hash
( TU-RREP-ACKbasic, SecY2, AuthY2) 
EncGTK, Hash
Certificate Revocation List  Request and Response
Certificate Revocation List  Request and Response
Secure Channel
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
t7
t1>t5>t2≈ t3>t4≈t7
t6=t2
(2)
(21)
(22)
(3)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(1)
(23)
(36)
Gateway (G) Registration
Mesh Router (Y) Registration
Mesh Router (S) Registration
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Figure 5.
Node Registration Process
E. PASER Operations
In this Subsection, we elaborate all the operations a node
undergoes when it executes PASER. These operations are
depicted in Figure 4. To ease their understanding, we refer
our explanation to a simple example given in Figure 5. The
example illustrates three nodes, one gateway (G) and two
mesh routers (Y) and (S). These nodes join the network in
the order G-Y-S, which corresponds to the depicted steps 1,
2 and 3 respectively.
1) Route Request/Reply/Ack Generation:
• UB-RREQ: This message is generated if and only if a
node has no route to the destination. The node creates
a UB-RREQ message according to Table II. Hereby, it
sets the gateway ﬂag to 1 if the requested destination
is a gateway. After creating the message, the node
broadcasts it and initializes a RREQ-TIMEOUT timer.
Messages (2) and (3) in Figure 5 provide an example
of a UB-RREP.
• TU-RREQ: After receiving a UB-RREQ, an intermedi-
ate node, that has a route to the destination, generates
this message and sends it to the next hop on that route,
e.g., message number (31) in our example. Hereby,
the querying identity remains the UB-RREQ originator
identity, whereas Seq changes, since the message type
has changed.
• UU/TU-RREP: Upon receiving a UB-RREQ or a TU-
RREQ, a destination node generates a UU-RREP or a
TU-RREP, respectively, e.g., messages (21) and (32). If
the destination is a gateway and the GFlag in RREQ
is set, the RREP message comprises the group key
encrypted with the querying node public key.
• TU-RREQ-ACK: This message is generated by a
querying node when it receives a route reply to a
query identiﬁed by Seq. It creates the TU-RREQ-ACK
message and sends it to the next hop on its route to the
destination, as in messages (22) and (34).
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

2) Route Request/Reply/Ack Processing: Based on the
querying node Identity and the message sequence parameter
Seq, a node veriﬁes the freshness of a received message. If
it has been previously processed, the message is discarded
(replay attack). Otherwise, it extracts the identity of its
predecessor and executes the following veriﬁcations:
• UB-RREQ/UU-RREP:
Is the predecessor the owner of the included
certiﬁcate?
Is the predecessor in my signal range? Is the
difference of our geo-positions smaller than
the maximum range of my WLAN device?
Is the predecessor’s message signature valid?
• TU-RREQ/RREP/RREP-ACK
Is the predecessor a neighbor of mine?
Is the predecessor’s secret fresh?
Is the predecessor’s secret valid?
If one of these veriﬁcations fails, the node drops the
message (impersonation attack, man-in-the-middle attack,
tempering attack or wormhole attack). Otherwise, it updates
its tables with the message information. Hereby, it sets
the neighbor ﬂag NeighFlag of its predecessor to 0 if the
received message is a UB-RREQ and the predecessor hasn’t
been registered yet as a neighbor. Otherwise the NeighFlag
of the predecessor is set to 1. Depending on the type of
the received message, the node afterwards undergoes the
following steps:
• UB-RREQ: It checks if it has a route to the destination,
if not it updates the message with its own information
(e.g., it adds its identity to the route list) and broad-
casts it again. Otherwise, it generates a TU-RREQ as
described above, e.g., message (31).
• TU-RREQ/RREP-ACK: The node updates the message
with its own information and forwards it to the next hop
on its route to the destination, e.g., message (35).
• UU/TU-RREP: It extracts the successor identity and
veriﬁes the value of its NeighFlag, if it is 0, it for-
wards a UU-RREP to that node, e.g., message (33)and
otherwise it forwards a TU-RREP.
3)
Route Reply Timeout: This operation occurs at the
querying node when the RREQ-TIMEOUT timer expires.
The latter happens in either of the following cases: First,
no replies from destination, in response to the query, were
received or accepted by the querying node, or, second, at
least one reply was accepted. In the former case the route
discovery is considered failed, while, in the latter case, the
route discovery concludes, and the querying node ignores
route replies that are further delayed.
Route Discovery Failure: The querying node initiates
a new route discovery using a higher value for RREQ-
TIMEOUT than the one previously used for the failed route
discovery.
Route Discovery Conclusion: Upon accepting a RREP,
the querying node considers the discovery concluded after
RREQ-TIMEOUT elapses. From all incoming RREP, the
querying node always chooses the best route based on the
metric ﬁeld and updates its tables with this route. If the
querying node is in the UNREGISTERED state and the
discovered route is a route to the gateway, it requests a
certiﬁcate revocation list via the discovered route, as in
messages (23) and (36). Based on that list, the node veriﬁes
if it has fraud routes and deletes them. Afterwards, the node
switches to the REGISTERED state.
4) Group Key/Revocation List request: Both requests
occur at the end of the node registration phase. It is assumed
at this stage of the network setup, that all nodes have a stable
route to the CA/KDC. The gateways are anyway provided by
a reliable link, e.g., Long Term Evolution (LTE) or satellite,
and the mesh routers are typically located during power up
near to the ﬁre-ﬁghting command and control vehicle, i.e.,
they are in the best signal range of the gateways. While the
group key request solely occurs at the gateway, message (1),
revocation list request occurs at both types of nodes, mesh
router and gateway, see messages (1), (23) and (36). PASER
rather speciﬁes the security goals that must be ensured by
these requests than the mechanism used. These goals are
authenticity and integrity by both requests in addition to
conﬁdentiality by the group key request.
V. PASER ANALYSIS
Based on a hop-to-hop trusted relation, PASER promises
to achieve the following goals:
Node authentication: This goal is guaranteed by the digi-
tal signature in untrusted messages (including revocation list
messages) and by the hash tree authentication mechanism in
trusted messages - PASER is robust against impersonation
and malign attacks.
Message freshness and integrity: The freshness goal is
provided by the sequence number included in each message.
The integrity is achieved by the digital signature in untrusted
messages and by the hash element in trusted messages -
PASER is robust against replay and tempering attacks.
Messages conﬁdentiality: It corresponds to the symmet-
ric encryption of trusted messages, which is mainly applied
to combat man-in-the-middle attack. Then, theoretically, an
attacker located between two neighbors is able to eaves-
drop on trusted messages and prevent the destination from
receiving them. As a result, it uses the secrets of these
messages to impersonate the messages’ sender. Now, due to
the encryption in trusted messages, the attacker is not able to
reveal those secrets. Apart from that, message conﬁdentiality
of trusted messages strongly reduces trafﬁc analysis in
PASER. In untrusted messages man-in-the-middle attack is
not possible due to the digital signature - PASER is robust
against man-in-the-middle attacks.
Neighbor transmission authentication: Provided satel-
lite GPS information is not falsiﬁed, PASER guarantees
to a large extent that node’s neighbors are always in that
node transmission range. This goal is provided by the
fault tolerant distance awareness between new neighbors
combined with the achievement of the node authentication
goal. - PASER is robust against wormhole attacks.
From efﬁciency perspective, PASER incorporates the fol-
lowing characteristics:
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• Nodes always have a route to a gateway.
– Nodes thereby detect all intermediate nodes on that
route.
– The route is found and maintained in a reactive
way. Gateways do not ﬂood the network with
beacons.
• It is mainly based on unicast messages, strongly reduc-
ing the network overhead of control messages.
• Its security is essentially based on symmetric cryptogra-
phy, keeping the cost of security mechanisms minimal.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we propose a novel secure and efﬁcient
position aware hierarchical route discovery protocol for
wireless mesh networks. From a security perspective, the
novelty of our approach is its hybrid scheme to secure the
route discovery process. This novel combination of digital
signature, hash tree authentication scheme and symmetric
block cipher yields a huge performance gain while providing
a high security level. Another key feature is the integration
of nodes’ geo-positions in the route discovery, allowing an
advanced network management while mitigating a wider
range of attacks. Apart from that, dealing with the network
as a hierarchical network and building the route discovery
process to a large extent upon unicast messages strongly
decreases the overhead of this protocol.
In future work we intend to capture explicitly the in-
herently quantitative nature of security, via a concrete or
exact treatment of security using practice-oriented provable
security. This enables an exact assessment of how much
security the protocol achieves rather than just being secure
or non-secure. Furthermore, we designate to thoroughly
investigate the performance of PASER in different scenarios
experimentally as well as in the simulation to recognize its
advantages and its limitations. Apart from that, we intend
to analyze the energy consumption imposed by PASER
especially by the GPS component it incorporates. Besides,
we intend to extend PASER to a route maintenance part and
thereby to design an efﬁcient secure routing protocol for
wireless mesh networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Our work has been conducted within the SPIDER project,
which is part of the nationwide security research program
funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) (13N10238).
REFERENCES
[1] (2011,
May)
Security
System
for
Public
Institutions
in Disastrous Emergency scenaRios (SPIDER). [Online].
Available: http://www.spider-federation.org
[2] A. Wolff, S. ˇSubik, and C. Wietfeld, “Performance Analysis
of Highly Available Ad hoc Surveillance Networks Based
on Dropped Units,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Technologies for Homeland Security, Boston, USA, May
2008, pp. 123–128.
[3] (2011,
May)
Highly
Mobile
Network
Node
(HiMoNN).
IABG
mbH.
[Online].
Available:
http://himonn.iabg.de/index.php?lang=en
[4] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc On-
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) routing,” RFC 3561, Jul.
2003.
[5] I. Chakeres and C. Perkins, “Dynamic MANET On-Demand
(DYMO) Routing,” draft-ietf-manet-dymo-21, Jul. 2010.
[6] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized Link State Routing
(OLSR) Protocol,” RFC 3626, Oct. 2003.
[7] K. Sanzgiri, D. Laﬂamme, B. Dahill, B. N. Levine, C. Shields,
and E. Belding-Royer, “Authenticated Routing for Ad hoc
Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, vol. 23, pp. 598–610, Mar. 2005.
[8] Y. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. Johnson, “Ariadne: A Secure
On-Demand Routing Protocol for Ad hoc Networks,” ACM
Journal on Wireless Networks, vol. 11, no. 1-2, pp. 21–38,
Jan. 2005.
[9] L. Butty´an and I. Vajda, “Towards Provable Security for Ad
hoc Routing Protocols,” in Proc. 2nd ACM Workshop on
Security of Ad hoc and Sensor Networks (SASN), Washington
DC, USA, Oct. 2004, pp. 94–105.
[10] M. Burmester and B. de Medeiros, “On the Security of
Route Discovery in MANET,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1180–1188, Feb. 2009.
[11] L. Abusalah, A. Khokhar, and M. Guizani, “A Survey of
Secure Mobile Ad hoc Routing Protocols,” IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 78–93,
2008.
[12] IEEE P802.11s, IEEE Draft Amendment: Mesh Networking,
Rev. 10.0, Mar. 2011.
[13] (2011, May) Better Approach To Mobile Ad hoc Networking
(B.A.T.M.A.N.). Freifunk Community. [Online]. Available:
http://www.open-mesh.org/
[14] Digital Signature Standard (DSS), National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology (NIST) Std. FIPS PUB 186-3, Jun.
2009.
[15] A.
Bogdanov,
L.
R.
Knudsen,
G.
Leander,
C.
Paar,
A. Poschmann, M. J. B. Robshaw, Y. Seurin, and C. Vikkel-
soe, “PRESENT: An Ultra-Lightweight Block Cipher,” in
Proc. 9th Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embed-
ded Systems (CHES) 2007, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (LNCS), no. 4727.
Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 450–
466.
[16] A. Menezes, P. van Oorschot, and S. Vanstone, Handbook of
Applied Cryptography.
CRC Press, 1996, ch. 13, p. 556.
[17] (2011, May) Cryptographic Hash Algorithm Competition.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
[Online]. Available: http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/hash/sha-
3/index.html
[18] T. Tran, M. Sbeiti, and C. Wietfeld, “A novel Role- and
Certiﬁcate-based Single Sign-On System for Emergency Res-
cue Operations,” in IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications - ICC, Jun. 2011, pp. 1–6.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

