 
 
Secure and Flexible Establishment of Temporary WLAN Access 
 
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk  
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Several use cases demand for the setup of a 
separate, dedicated communication channel that provides a 
specific quality of service, or to separate communications of 
different criticality. Different properties of communication 
channels are performance, latency, but may be also security 
related. In several cases, a reliable association to an already 
established communication channel is required. Specifically, if 
a first communication channel has been securely established, a 
cryptographic binding of a second communication channel to 
this first communication channel is needed. One example use 
case is the charging of electric vehicles. Besides the charging 
control, also value-added services like software updates for the 
infotainment system shall be provided. To avoid interfering with 
the charging-related control communications, a second, 
separate communication channel is established. The two 
communication channels require different quality of service. 
However, authorization to access value-added services and 
maybe also the billing of consumed value-added services shall 
be to bound to the user that has been authenticated in the setup 
of the first communication channel. The paper proposes a 
general 
solution 
that 
allows 
establishing 
arbitrary 
communication channels of different nature on the example of 
an electric vehicle and a charging station, all bound to the actual 
charging control session. 
 
Keywords–communication security; cryptographic channel 
binding; quality of service; industrial automation and control 
system; Internet of Things. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In network communications, it is typically required to 
have distinct relations between communicating endpoints, 
which are defined by several parameters, like the addresses of 
the communicating endpoints, security credentials connected 
with the endpoints, but also by certain quality-of-service 
related features. Quality-of-service (QoS) features may relate 
to a specific throughput expected by the communication 
channel or a specific response time or latency of the 
communication, but also to specific security properties of the 
communication like integrity protection or combined integrity 
and confidentiality protection. These properties may be 
provided by the utilized transport protocol or application 
protocol, but may already be enforced by the network access. 
Network access may be achieved as wired access using a 
classic cable installation, but also using wireless access via 
wireless LAN (WLAN), 4G, or 5G mobile communications.  
Specific QoS features are required for a variety of 
applications. Examples comprise electric vehicle charging, 
real-time control of, e.g., industrial control, voice-and-video 
conferences, or video streaming. Also, specific security 
applications may leverage a separate communication channel 
like the provisioning of credentials using a link with weak 
protection or general access authentication. If the setup of a 
communication channel with certain QoS features is based on 
a previously established communication relation, a binding of 
the two communication sessions can be leveraged in multiple 
ways.  
The aim of this paper is to propose a solution for setting 
up a new wireless communication channel that utilizes a 
previously established communication channel. The initial 
target use case was provided by electric vehicle charging 
systems that, in addition to the actual charging, provide value-
added services. These value-added services may relate to 
updates of the firmware, software, or map material for the 
infotainment system of an electric vehicle.  
This paper is structured in the following way. Section II 
provides an overview about a potential target scenario, taking 
electric vehicle charging as example. Section III investigates 
existing approaches to provide distinct communication 
channels with distinct properties. Section IV describes a new 
approach, and section V analyzes its advantages. Section VI 
concludes the paper and provides and outlook to future work. 
II. 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING WITH VALUE ADDED 
SERVICES  
The number of electric vehicles as bicycles, motorcycles, 
and cars has increased in the recent years significantly. They 
are connected to the Digital Smart Grid for charging. 
Developments are also ongoing for bidirectional charging, 
which allows to utilize electric vehicles as energy storage 
system and to feedback energy to the power grid when 
necessary. Depending on the charging interface between the 
electric vehicle and the infrastructure, the charging may be 
accomplished within minutes, or it may need up to several 
hours. While connected to a charging station, the vehicle 
exchanges constantly control data with the charging station to 
provide data like locally measured energy consumption on the 
vehicle side or charging commands with parameter 
adaptations from the charging station. This connection time 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
may also be used to provide value-added services by utilizing 
the connection already established between the electric 
vehicle and the charging station. 
 
 
Figure 1. Electric Vehicle Communication Connections 
 
As depicted in Figure 1, there is a multitude of potential 
communication options with different actors of the system. 
The communication channel established between the electric 
vehicle and the charging station may be setup using different 
standards like ISO/IEC 15118 [1] or CHaDemo [2]. The focus 
in this paper is placed on ISO/IEC 15118.  
The communication may use power line communication 
when the vehicle is connected via a wired interface, or 
wireless using WLAN in case of inductive charging. In this 
case, the charging station provides a WLAN access point to 
facilitate the communication also in a wireless fashion. 
According to ISO/IEC 15118, access to the charging station is 
not protected on the WLAN access layer, but on higher 
communication layers. This avoids a specific WLAN access 
configuration of electrical vehicles for a specific charging 
station. The communication performed in the context of 
ISO/IEC 15118 allows to provide charging parameter 
information, billing relevant information, and also to perform 
mutual authentication of the electric vehicle and the charging 
station. The security of ISO/IEC 15118-2 has been studied 
from the early beginning of standardization (cf. for example 
[3]). Meanwhile, the standard has been completed, and a 
revision will be published soon as Edition 2.  
The communication channel is part of the Digital Grid 
communication and the control network of an energy utility. 
Value-added service providers may utilize the communication 
channel as well, but are independent of the power system 
operator. The energy distribution network as critical 
infrastructure relies on the availability of the information 
infrastructure. Therefore, the information infrastructure must 
be managed and operated according to the same level of 
reliability as required for the stability of the power system 
infrastructure to prevent any type of outage or disturbance. 
The immediately apparent security needs target the prevention 
of financial fraud and ensure the reliable operation of the 
power grid. Especially the interaction between new market 
participants and value-added services has been investigated 
and is also addressed in ISO/IEC 15118.  
Common to both editions of the standard ISO/IEC 15118 
is the security approach and specifically the security setup 
between the electric vehicle and the charging infrastructure. It 
relies on the establishment of a secured communication 
channel based on Transport Layer Security (TLS, version 1.2 
specified in IETF RFC 5246 [4], version 1.3 in IETF RFC 
8446 [5]). It requires that the charging station authenticates 
towards the electric vehicle using an X.509 certificate during 
the TLS handshake. In turn, if the electric vehicle uses plug-
and-charge, or if it wants to consume value-added services, it 
authenticates with an own X.509 certificate that is bound to 
the charging contract that the vehicle owner has established 
with his mobility operator. This allows for a seamless 
charging experience for the vehicle owner, and to access 
value-added services after connecting to the charging station.  
The value-added service communication is performed 
separately from the control and measurement communication 
channel. This is to avoid any interference with the charging 
related control communication. ISO/IEC 15118 facilitates this 
by establishing a separate communication channel that is 
bound to the initial authentication of both peers and outlined 
in section III.C below.  
The following section investigates different options of 
providing an authenticated channel that is bound to a mutual 
authentication between the electric vehicle and the charging 
station. 
III. 
EXISTING APPROACHES  
There exist different approaches for setting up a 
communication channel bound to another communication 
channel, which has certain cryptographic properties like the 
authentication of a single peer or of both peers. This section 
investigates known approaches.  
A. Socket Secure – SOCKS 
SOCKS [6] is an internet protocol that allows applications 
(client or server) to connect through proxies in an application 
layer independent way. This is done by using a SOCKS proxy 
that creates a TCP connection to the target server on behalf of 
the client. As SOCKS operates on layer 5, it can handle 
different application protocols like HTTP, SMTP, or FTP. It 
allows a client to open a connection from behind a firewall to 
an external server in an authenticated and authorized way. 
SOCKS5 allows for different authentication methods, in 
which the client authenticates towards the SOCKS server. It 
may also be used in conjunction with TLS. After 
authentication and authorization check by the SOCKS server, 
the application protocol is tunneled over the established 
connection and forwarded to the external target server.  
The authentication is done between the requesting client 
and the SOCKS server, and the tunneling of the application 
protocol binds to this authentication. However, the server is 
not aware of this authentication and needs to authenticate the 
client by other means. As the tunnel is provided on an 
application base, multiple tunnels for different applications 
are necessary, all with an own, independent security setup. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
B. Virtual LAN – VLAN 
VLAN or virtual local area networks are defined in IEEE 
802.1Q [7]. The standard defines a logical network and allows 
the separation of different communication channels on 
layer 2. Different properties may be assigned in addition to 
this virtual LAN like performance or throughput. To achieve 
this, infrastructure components like managed switches are 
used, supporting the differentiation of traffic according to 
VLANs. A peer sending information in this VLAN (unicast or 
multicast) will only reach other peers that are part of the same 
VLAN.  
Two basic approaches exist for VLANs. The first 
approach is a port-based VLAN in which the association to a 
logical LAN is done by attaching the client to a dedicated 
physical port of a managed switch. The second approach is a 
tagged VLAN, in which the Ethernet frames are tagged with 
a specific VLAN identifier (VLAN ID). Based on this VLAN 
tag, a switch can forward the Ethernet frame according to its 
configuration.  
With this, VLANs themselves provide a way to separate 
traffic, which is also a step towards improved security. The 
definition of this separation is not done on cryptographic 
means, as stated before. Therefore, it is recommended to 
provide additional protection of the communication. 
Examples are IEEE 802.1X [8], providing port-based access 
control. With this, a client authenticates to the infrastructure 
(typically a RADIUS or DIAMETER server) via the 
infrastructure access network switch using different means, 
e.g., based on the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) 
[9]. EAP allows for authentication with username and 
password, but also for a certificate-based authentication 
employing a client’s X.509 certificate. In addition, MAC 
security (MACSec), specified in IEEE 802.1AE [8], can be 
used to provide integrity and/or confidentiality protection for 
the traffic between the device and the network switch in a hop-
by-hop fashion.  
Security for VLAN can be provided using additional 
security means like IEEE 802.1X as outlined. If associated to 
a dedicated VLAN, quality of service parameter may be 
assigned.  
C. Transport Layer Security Features 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a protocol defined in 
IETF RFC 5246 as version 1.2 [4]. Meanwhile, it evolved to 
version 1.3 in IETF RFC 8446 [5]. While version 1.3 is being 
increasingly adopted [14], version 1.2 is still widely used. TLS 
is probably the most commonly used security protocol to 
protect TCP-based communications. Prominent applications 
are protection of web-based communication over http. Also, 
other TCP-based protocols leverage the bump in the wire 
properties of TLS, like ISO/IEC 15118. ISO/IEC 15118-20 
mandates the support of TLS v1.3, while TLSv1.2 may still 
be used.  
TLSv1.3 features a re-designed handshake, which is not 
backward compatible to TLSv1.2. The version handling in 
TLS allows to fall back to TLSv1.2, if TLSv1.3 is not 
supported yet. The handshake is encrypted, except for the very 
first message, to better protect the privacy of client certificate 
information that is thereby already send encrypted. Moreover, 
the handshake may already transmit application data, which 
can accelerate the communication setup. This feature is called 
0-RTT (zero round-trip time), but the use requires careful 
review.  
 
Figure 2. TLS v1.3 Session Establishment with full handshake 
The full handshake of TLSv1.3 is depicted in Figure 2. 
TLS supports different authentication options: 
- 
server-side authentication (mainly used in web traffic) 
using X.509 certificates; 
- 
mutual 
authentication 
involves 
the 
client 
to 
authenticate using an X.509 certificate in addition to 
server authentication;  
- 
authentication based on a pre-shared key, which is 
applied also within TLS as described below; 
- 
authentication based on raw public keys.  
Besides the peer authentication, the TLS handshake is 
used to negotiate further session parameters like the cipher 
suite 
for 
protecting 
communication 
integrity 
and 
confidentiality.  
TLS 
with 
mutual 
authentication 
is 
applied 
in 
ISO/IEC 15118-20 for plug-and-charge and for access to 
value-added services. This ensures that billing-relevant 
charging and service consumption can be associated with a 
dedicated account.  
Besides the establishment of a protected channel, TLS 
defines further operations for the management of this secured 
channel, beyond them the update of session parameters during 
an ongoing session, like the utilized cryptographic key. One 
important functionality is the so-called session resumption. 
Session resumption allows a previously established and closed 
session to be resumed, based on the security parameters 
negotiated in the initial session. This saves the asymmetric 
cryptographic operations during the TLS handshake, and it 
utilizes a pre-shared key included in a ticket from the initial 
handshake. Note that there is a timely limitation how long a 
closed session may be resumed, depending on the TLS 
version. While TLSv1.2 recommends 24 hours, TLSv1.3 
limits the validity time in the tickets used for resumption to 
seven days.  
Besides the re-establishment of a closed connection, TLS 
session resumption may also be used to “clone” an existing 
session. This can be achieved by opening a TLS connection to 
a different port on the target host than the original one used 
and referencing the existing session. Using this, a separate 
TLS-protected TCP communication channel is established. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
As the second communication channel relies on the security 
parameters of the first one and thus is cryptographically bound 
to it, it also provides the assurance of mutual authentication to 
both participants.  
ISO/IEC 15118 utilizes this feature to allow the 
establishment 
of 
value-added 
service 
communication 
channels. Note that these are currently restricted to TCP-based 
communications. There also exists a TLS-like protocol with 
Datagram Transport Layer Security protocol (DTLS, IETF 
RFC 9147, [11]) that provides a similar functionality as TLS, 
but for UDP-based communications. It could be used to 
protect, e.g., media traffic, which is often transmitted via 
UDP. Note that interactions between both (TLS and DTLS) 
are not considered in ISO/IEC 15118, as the protection of the 
actual value-added service data is left to the value-added 
service itself.  
 
Figure 3. TLS Session Resumption to establish second communication 
channel  
As shown in Figure 3, a second session is opened between 
the electric vehicle and the charging station using TLS session 
resumption. This saves communication overhead and 
provides a binding to the TLS channel protecting the ongoing 
charging session. Note that while TLSv1.3 has specific 
optimizations like sending application data already in the 
resumed handshake (called 0-RTT), this feature is not allowed 
in ISO/IEC 15118 to avoid replay attacks of application data. 
Port forwarding is used at the charging station to forward 
the traffic to the intended value-added service provider. The 
security of the communication channel to the value-added 
service provider is out of scope of ISO/IEC 15118 and needs 
to be defined and setup by the value-added service separately. 
For protecting UDP-based traffic between the electric vehicle 
and the charging station, OpenVPN is mentioned. 
D. TLS Channel Binding  
IETF RFC 5929 [12] describes a binding of a higher layer 
communication protocol to a negotiated TLS channel. 
Different approaches are specified. The most versatile is the 
definition of the tls-unique value. The tls-unique value is 
essentially the first “Finish Message” sent in the latest TLS 
handshake. The finish message contains a hash over all 
messages exchanged in the handshake phase. 
This definition makes this parameter specific to a session. 
When a session is resumed or renegotiated (only for TLS 1.2), 
the tls-unique value will change accordingly. This has to be 
obeyed by the applying application. Using tls-unique in an 
application provides a direct linkage to the properties of the 
TLS handshake.  
An example is the application in the context of Enrollment 
over Secure Transport (EST, IETF RFC 7030, [13]), a 
certificate enrollment protocol executed over TLS. In this 
protocol, the client sends a certification request to enroll a new 
client certificate. The certification request is signed with the 
private key of the freshly generated key pair. This provides a 
proof-of-possession to the receiver, that the sender, i.e., the 
client, knows the private key corresponding to the contained 
public key. Part of the certification request can be a tls-unique 
value. As the TLS handshake is performed with mutual 
authentication, the receiver gets in addition a proof-of-identity 
of the client, due to the link to the utilized client certificate in 
the TLS handshake. This is enabled through the inclusion of 
the tls-unique value. 
IV. 
SOLUTION PROPOSAL 
As discussed in section I, the aim is to propose a solution 
for setting up an additional wireless communication channel 
that utilizes a previously established communication channel. 
The existing solutions discussed in section III provide 
elements that are used in the approach. 
The following description takes the electric vehicle 
charging as example as in section II and provides an 
alternative solution. This described solution specifically 
allows for multiple connections between a value-added 
service provider and an electric vehicle, which are all bound 
to an existing charging session. These multiple channels may 
be of different nature like TCP/IP or UDP/IP traffic.  
SSID: 
public
Charging Station (CS1)
Electric Vehicle (EV1)
Establishment of V2G 
Communication to well-
known port over TLS 1
Construction of temporary SSID: h(EV1EVSE1vas1), 
Extraction of tls_unique from TLS1, 
Derivation of password for WPA2 for EV1EVSE1vas1
SSID: 
h(EV1EVSE1vas1)
Establishment of Communication to VAS Provider vas1
Secure access to VAS provider (vas1) 
depends on his security policy 
Value-Added Service 
Provider (vas1)
 
 
Figure 4. Application of tls-unique to protect second WLAN 
Figure 4 provides an overview of the solution. According 
to ISO/IEC 15118-20, a TLS connection is established 
between the electric vehicle EV1 and the charging station CS1 
via a well-known service-set identifier (SSID) of the charging 
station. The well-known SSID may be either preconfigured, 
or it may be broadcasted using Bluetooth beacons in the 
vicinity of the charging station. The connection is established 
based on the authentication of CS1 as server towards EV1. 
The EV1 authentication can be carried out over the already 
TLS protected link to protect the identity information of EV1. 
The client-side authentication may be done based on an X.509 
certificate but also using other methods on application layer 
like HTTP digest authentication or based on a token. Specific 
for the electric vehicle charging, the owner of the EV may also 
authenticate directly towards the charging station, avoiding 
any information to be transmitted over the communication 
link. In each case, a binding to the originally established TLS 
connection is required.  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
To achieve this, the tls-unique value is extracted, which is 
intended as means to provide the binding to the originally 
established TLS channel for further connections to be opened. 
This extraction equals to the TLS channel binding described 
in section III.D.  
Over the established TLS channel, an information is 
provided to the electric vehicle regarding available value-
added services via the charging station, which can be 
consumed during the charging period. These value-added 
services may be software updates for the infotainment system, 
normal web access, gaming, or videos to bridge the charging 
time. 
While in section II the additional communication channel 
for value-added services is opened using TLS session 
resumption on a different port than the one for the charging 
communication, the following describes an alternative, which 
can be used for different types of data exchange. 
When the EV selects a value-added service, it will receive 
the additional configuration information for setting up a 
second, temporary WLAN access to the charging station for 
the electric vehicle. The configuration information shall be 
specific to the charging session between EV1 and CS1 and a 
specific value-added service provider vas1. This allows for 
correct billing of consumed services, based on the association. 
For setting up a temporary access point, a second network 
access policy needs to be provided, which may comprise 
information regarding protection means or quality of service 
parameter. In case of WLAN, a temporary network name 
(SSID) and a pre-shared key for access protection to the 
temporary WLAN are also required to utilize WPA2 and 
WPA3 for access protection to the temporary WLAN.  
Instead of providing this information directly. it can be 
derived locally on the communication peers based on the 
already existing charging control communication session as 
following: 
Temporary SSID = Hash (EV ID | CS ID | VAS ID) 
In the example in Figure 4, this will result in the hashed 
value of “EV1CS1vas1”. Depending on the utilized hash 
function the result can be truncated to, e.g., 20 Bytes. With the 
goal to bind the temporary WLAN to the already existing 
charging session, the temporary WLAN access credentials in 
terms of a shared secret are derived incorporating the tls-
unique value of the initial TLS session as following: 
Temp. SSID PW = Hash (tls-unique | EV ID | VAS ID) 
The derivation may consist of further parameter besides 
the EV identifier and the VAS identifier. Depending on the 
security policy of the charging station operator, the temporary 
WLAN access for the value-added services may be terminated 
as soon as the charging session ends. There may be cases for 
leaving the session open for a grace period, e.g., for ending a 
specific transaction. This option may also be part of the 
contract a customer has with a specific charging station 
operator. 
As described, the approach can be generalized to provide 
the binding also to other network access methods like 4G or 
5G. It may also be leveraged to setup further VLANs for 
separate communication, utilizing derived parameter for 
VLAN name and access credentials.  
V. 
EVALUATION 
The evaluation of the proposed solution is done based on 
the concept only, as it has not been implemented, yet. In 
general, the security of an industrial system is evaluated in 
practice in various approaches and stages of the system’s 
lifecycle: 
− 
A Threat and Risk Analysis (TRA, also abbreviated as 
TARA) is typically conducted at the beginning of the 
concept definition, as for ISO/IEC 15118, product design 
or system development, and updated after major design 
changes, or to address a changed threat landscape. In a 
TRA, possible attacks (threats) on the system are 
identified. The impact that would be caused by a 
successful attack and the probability that the attack 
happens are evaluated to determine the risk of the 
identified threats. The risk evaluation allows to prioritize 
the threats, focusing on the most relevant risks and to 
define corresponding security measures. Security 
measures can target to reduce the probability of an attack 
by preventing it, or by reducing the impact.  
− 
Security checks can be performed during operation or 
during maintenance windows to determine key 
performance indicators (e.g., check compliance of 
device configurations) and to verified that the defined 
security measures are in fact in place.  
− 
Security testing (penetration testing, also called 
pentesting for short) can be performed for a system that 
has been built, but that is currently not in operation. A 
pentest can usually not be performed on an operational 
automation and control system, as the pentest could 
affect the reliable operation auf the system. Pentesting 
can be performed during a maintenance window when 
the physical system is in a safe state or using a separate 
test system.  
As long as the solution proposed in the paper has not been 
proven in a real-world operational setting, it can be evaluated 
conceptually by analyzing the impact that the additional 
security measure would have on the identified residual risks 
as determined by a TRA. The main objective is to determine 
the specific benefits that are relevant for the selection of a 
suitable protection approach. The main aspects relevant for 
the evaluation of the proposed solution are: 
a. 
The 
level 
of 
isolation 
of 
different 
types 
of 
communications (charging control communication; 
value added services communication); 
b. the scope of protection, i.e., what exactly is protected 
concerning integrity and or confidentiality, and  
c. 
the flexibility to use it for various protocols used by 
different value-added services.  
These aspects can be evaluated qualitatively as follows: 
a. 
The control communication for charging control and the 
communication of value-added services are taking place 
on separate layer 1 / layer 2 communication links. While 
a reliable traffic isolation can be implemented also on a 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
logical level, the isolation realized by having separate 
layer 1 / layer 2 communication links ensures by design 
a strong isolation, avoiding logical interference between 
these different types of communications. Moreover, this 
separation offers the option to not only provide different 
protection options for the communication links, but also 
to assign different quality of services classes to ensure 
for instance a dedicated throughput or latency. 
b. The proposed solution protects all communications, 
including, e.g., dynamic host configuration by DHCP or 
IPv6 auto configuration, or DNS requests. Thereby, also 
user privacy protection is increased, as meta-data of 
communication as, e.g., network addresses, cannot be 
intercepted as all communication is protected on layer 2. 
Also, active manipulations by 3rd parties, e.g., injected 
false DNS responses, can be avoided.  
c. 
The solution can be used with any types of 
communication, 
including 
UDP 
datagram 
communication. So, it can be flexibly applied also for 
value-added services using UDP-based communications 
(e.g., multi-media communications based on RTP). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
This paper provides a new generic approach for setting up 
a separate temporary network access channel allowing to 
assign specific quality of service parameter to the new 
network access, which is cryptographically bound to an 
already established communication channel. The approach is 
discussed in the context of electric vehicle charging combined 
with value-added services.  
The advantage of the proposed approach is the ability to 
be applied in an application layer protocol independent way 
by preserving the privacy of user credentials for observers of 
the network. This is especially important for wireless 
communication as the exchanged communication can be 
easily accessed.  
The proposed approach is available as concept and needs 
to be implemented a proof of concept, which would be a future 
intended step. Such a proof of concept can leverage already 
specified base mechanisms like tls-unique extraction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] ISO/IEC 15118-20: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid 
Communication Interface — Part 20: Network and 
application protocol requirements, Work in Progress 
[2] CHAdeMO, https://www.chademo.com/, [retrieved: July, 
2022]  
[3] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure – Security Considerations and Approaches”, 
Internet 2012, June 2012, ISBN: 978-1-61208-204-2, pp.58-
64 
[4] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, IETF RFC 5246, “Transport Layer 
Security (TLS)  Protocol v1.2, 08/2008, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246, [retrieved: July, 2022] 
[5] E. Rescorla, IETF RFC 8446, “Transport Layer Security 
(TLS)  Protocol v1.3”, 08/2018, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446, [retrieved: July, 2022] 
[6] M. Leech et al., IETF RFC 1928, „SOCKS Protocol Version 
5, 03/1996, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1928, [retrieved: July, 
2022] 
[7] IEEE 802.1Q, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks – Bridges and Bridged Networks”, 2018,  
https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/802.1Q/6844/, [retrieved: July, 
2022] 
[8] IEEE 802.1X, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks – Port-Based Access Control”, 2020,  
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9018454, [retrieved: 
July, 2022] 
[9] B. Aboba, L. Blunk, J. Vollbrecht, J. Carlson, and 
H.Levkowetz., IETF RFC 3748, “Extensible Authentication 
protocol (EAP)”, 06/2004, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3748, 
[retrieved: July, 2022] 
[10] IEEE 802.1AE “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks – Media Access Control (MAC) Security”, 
2018,  https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8585421, 
[retrieved: July, 2022] 
[11] E. Rescorla, H. Tschofenig, and N. Modadugu, IETF RFC 
9147, “The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) 
Protocol Version 1.3”, April 2022 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9147, [retrieved: July, 
2022] 
[12] J. Altman and N. Williams, IETF RFC 5929, TLS channel 
binding, July 2010, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5929, 
[retrieved: July, 2022] 
[13] M. Pritikin, P. Yee, and D. Harkins, IETF RFC 7030, 
“Enrollment over Secure Transport “, 10/2013, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7030, [retrieved: July, 2022] 
[14] SSL Puls: TLS Dashboard, continuously updated,  
https://www.ssllabs.com/ssl-pulse/, [retrieved: July, 2022] 
 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

