An Analysis of Automotive Security Based on a  
Reference Model for Automotive Cyber Systems 
 
Jasmin Brückmann, Tobias Madl 
Munich University of Applied Sciences 
MuSe – Munich IT Security Research Group 
Munich, Germany 
email: madl@hm.edu, brueckma@hm.edu 
Hans-Joachim Hof 
Technical University of Ingolstadt 
CARISSMA – Center of Automotive Research on Integrat-
ed Safety Systems and Measurement Area 
Ingolstadt Research Group Applied IT Security 
Ingolstadt, Germany 
email: hof@thi.de
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an analysis of automotive secu-
rity based on a reference model for Automotive Cyber Systems 
(ACS). In IT security, reference models are useful to conduct 
security analyses for either systems that do not exist yet, or for 
a number of existing systems that have similar properties. 
With Automotive Cyber Systems, both cases are present: some 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) are already run-
ning Automotive Cyber Systems, whereas other OEMs only 
implemented partial Automotive Cyber Systems. The reference 
model presented in this paper is based on existing systems, as 
well as system architectures of research papers describing not 
yet existing applications of Automotive Cyber Systems. Hence, 
the reference model is of high relevance for future approaches 
on automotive security. The reference model was used to iden-
tify generic security requirements for automotive security in 
Automotive Cyber Systems. These security requirements are of 
high relevance for the design of upcoming Automotive Cyber 
Systems, as well as emerging applications like autonomous 
driving. 
Keywords- Automotive Security; Automotive Cyber System; 
Cyber-Phyiscal System; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Digitalization is currently a big driver of the automotive 
industry. Unique features of new vehicles often are based on 
software, communication between vehicles, and connected 
automotive services. Forbs expects 152 million connected 
vehicles worldwide in 2020 [1]. The interconnection of ve-
hicles with infrastructure, other vehicles, as well as a whole 
ecosystem of services will result in a so-called Automotive 
Cyber System. Current systems are limited, as the Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) usually try to keep sys-
tems closed, offering only a very small set of services to 
drivers, limiting the potential of the ecosystem. However, 
startups in the automotive domain nowadays implement 
their services by using On-Board Diagnostics (OBD) don-
gles. An OBD dongle connects to the OBD II interface of a 
vehicle, as well as to a smartphone that provides Internet 
connectivity. By doing so, startups can access internal 
communication of vehicles via the Internet. Due to this 
strategy, OEMs are likely to open their platforms for third-
party services to avoid dangerous fiddling with the OBD 
interface. With the increasing connectivity of vehicles, in 
combination with the importance of mandatory safety re-
quirements and some serious hacks, e.g., [10], IT security 
became a priority for Automotive Cyber System. SAE 3160 
is the first automotive safety standard that also addresses IT 
security. It is to be expected that more automotive security 
standards will be published in the near future.  
This paper presents a reference model for Automotive 
Cyber Systems. Nowadays, in the observation of the au-
thors, the automotive industry tends to favor partial security 
solutions over a holistic approach to IT security. The refer-
ence model aims on promoting a holistic approach to IT 
security in Automotive Cyber systems. The second part of 
the paper describes a security analysis based on the refer-
ence model. It results in a set of generic security require-
ments for Automotive Cyber Systems. These generic securi-
ty requirements can be specialized for future systems in the 
automotive domain, hence support holistic approaches to IT 
security in Automotive Cyber Systems. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
discusses related work on reference architectures for Auto-
motive Cyber Systems. Section III presents the reference 
model for Automotive Cyber Systems. Section IV presents 
the security analysis. Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Most reference models in the automotive domain just 
model small parts of the whole systems. This is due to a 
very distinct “silo thinking” in the automotive industry in 
combination with the special structure of the automotive 
industry (many component suppliers that implement only 
small parts of the overall system). These reference models 
hinder a holistic approach to IT security. The reference ar-
chitecture presented in this paper targets the whole Automo-
tive Cyber System, including in-vehicle components, vehi-
cle-to-vehicle 
communication, 
vehicle-to-infrastructure 
communication, as well as communication with an ecosys-
tem of automotive services.  
The works most similar to this paper are [2]-[4]. The 
models presented in these papers consider multiple parts of 
a full Automotive Cyber System. However, an analysis of 
these models showed that important components and data 
flows are missing. The reference architecture presented in 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

this paper takes these components and data flows into con-
sideration. Hence, it is more complete. 
III. 
REFERENCE MODEL FOR AUTOMOTIVE CYBER 
SYSTEMS 
The reference model for Automotive Cyber Systems was 
compiled from two sources: existing systems that imple-
ment parts of an Automotive Cyber System, and visions of 
future Automotive Cyber Systems collected from research 
papers and presentations on future products. Figure 1 gives 
an overview of the reference model. 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of Automotive Cyber Systems (ACS) reference model. 
 
The model consists of four components:  
• 
OEM and external partners component 
• 
Communication infrastructure component 
• 
Infrastructure component 
• 
Car component 
The car communicates with nearby infrastructure and ve-
hicles by Ad-hoc Long Term Evolution (Ad-hoc LTE) or 
WiFi. For long distance communication and access to other 
networks, the car component uses LTE or Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications System (UMTS). Both LTE and 
UMTS communication are represented by the communica-
tion infrastructure component in the reference model. The 
communication infrastructure component provides connec-
tivity to the component OEM & external partners compo-
nent. The OEM and other external partners offer automotive 
services. Components of the reference model are described 
in more detail in the following sections.  
A. OEM and External Partners component 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show sub components and data 
flows of the OEM & External Partners component.  
Subcomponent Management Services provide essential 
services for maintaining functionality and security of the 
car. Managed services include software updates over the air 
(SOTA) and firmware updates over the air (FOTA). Vehi-
cles in Automotive Cyber Systems communicate a lot with 
other systems (vehicles, infrastructure, services). Hence, any 
vulnerability in a connected component is a potential danger 
for the vehicle. A timely provisioning of patches for vulner-
abilities is considered a key success factor for security in 
Automotive Cyber Systems.  
Advanced services become possible with the availability 
of statistics of vehicle usage and other mobility data. The 
Data Analysis Platform subcomponent is responsible for 
data collection, privacy-preserving data transformation, and 
data storage.  
The OEM Services component offers additional services 
of the OEM. For example, an OEM could offer personalized 
reminder for service attendance. It could also provide in-
formation or sponsored offers from external partners. The 
car’s 
driving 
assistance 
system 
(FAS 
- 
Fahr-
zeugassistenssysteme) and high autonomous driving (HAF - 
Hochauomatisiertes Fahren) systems get their information 
from OEM services, because these services have a better 
overview of the overall traffic situation. 
 
Sponsored 
offeres/
Promotions
Car
External Partners
Original Equipment Manufacturer
Statistics Data
Incidents
HAF/FAS Data
SOS Request
Traffic Requests
Location Data
Car-related Information
Management Data
Service Information
HAF/FAS Data
SOS Response
Traffic Updates
Gateway
Security Platform
OEM Services
Data Analysis Platform
Management Services
Processed Data
 
Figure 2. Subcomponents and their data flows at the OEM. 
 
Figure 2: OEM and External Partner - compon
For example, OEMs have to provide software- and ﬁrmware-
updates. Emerging attacks require security updates for vehicle
software. Important updates should be distributed over-the-air
(FOTA and SOTA), because a fast dissemination of updates
is important especially to close possible vulnerabilities in
software. FOTA and SOTA are a good example of the holistic
approach. We don’t look only on the start by the OEM or the
end at the car. We are looking on both and additionally on the
step between, the communication infrastructure. Every part is
important because every interface could be vulnerable.
OEM services are additionally features that the OEM offers.
For example, an OEM could serve personalized offers like a
reminder for service attendances. It can also provide trafﬁc
information or sponsored offers from external partners. The
FAS (Fahrzeugassistenssysteme, driving assistance system)
and HAF (Hochauomatisiertes Fahren, high autonomous driv-
ing) systems from the car are also getting information from the
OEM. These tw
car. To improve
data for their ow
what the custom
to be collected, a
Analysis Platfor
As example
and ADAC (’All
german automob
of the external
providing. Both
the current trafﬁ
partner are colle
and the passeng
To secure ext
outside to the in
with security pr
Figure 3: External Partner - data ﬂow di
 
Figure 2: OEM and External Partner - component diagram
For example, OEMs have to provide software- and ﬁrmware-
updates. Emerging attacks require security updates for vehicle
software. Important updates should be distributed over-the-air
(FOTA and SOTA), because a fast dissemination of updates
is important especially to close possible vulnerabilities in
software. FOTA and SOTA are a good example of the holistic
approach. We don’t look only on the start by the OEM or the
end at the car. We are looking on both and additionally on the
step between, the communication infrastructure. Every part is
important because every interface could be vulnerable.
OEM services are additionally features that the OEM offers.
For example, an OEM could serve personalized offers like a
reminder for service attendances. It can also provide trafﬁc
information or sponsored offers from external partners. The
FAS (Fahrzeugassistenssysteme, driving assistance system)
and HAF (Hochauomatisiertes Fahren, high autonomous driv-
ing) systems from the car are also getting information from the
OEM. These two services require statistic/usage data from the
car. To improve their services or line card the OEM needs the
data for their own propose, too. These are important to learn
what the customer wants or needs. Therefore information has
to be collected, anonymised, evaluated, and stored by the ’Data
Analysis Platform’.
As example for external partners, the companies Google
and ADAC (’Allgemeiner Deutscher Automobil Club’, general
german automobile association) are selected. The components
of the external partners are a choice of services they are
providing. Both offer Mobility Services like information about
the current trafﬁc situation. As well as the OEMs, the external
partner are collection statistic and usage data from the vehicle
and the passengers with a Data Analysis Platform.
To secure external communication, all the trafﬁc from the
outside to the inside and back should pass a Security Platform
with security procedures such as a ﬁrewalls, to gain a single
Figure 3: External Partner - data ﬂow diagram
 
Figure 3. Subcomponent and data flows at two examples for external part-
ners (Google and ADAC). 
 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

For the sake of this paper, Google and ADAC (“Allge-
meiner Deutscher Automobil Club”, association similar to 
the AAA in the US) were chosen as example of external 
partners. It is assumed that their subcomponents are proto-
typic for a wide range of other external partners. Subcom-
ponents of external partners differ based on the services they 
are offering. Both institutions, ADAC and Google, offer 
mobility services, including information about the current 
traffic situation. Similar to the OEMs, external partners use 
a Data Analysis Platform component for data gathering, 
processing, and storage. The Security Platform component 
is similar to the Security Platform of the OEM. External 
partners may also offer some of their standard services 
adapted for automotive use. For example, Google may pro-
vide emails using their Gmail service, but emails are read to 
the user instead of a textual presentation. It should be noted 
that adaptations of standard IT services for automotive use 
might open new attack vectors for attackers. 
ADAC offer extra subcomponents Maintenance Control 
and Insurance Adjustments. Among other things, the 
Maintenance Control subcomponent monitors the mainte-
nance status of the car and informs the driver if the vehicle 
needs an inspection. The Insurance Adjustment subcompo-
nent monitors the driving behavior and adjusts the insurance 
fee if the driver does not drive carefully (a so-called 
telematics tariff).  
Figure 3 does not only show the subcomponents, but also 
the data flows of the OEM & external partners component. 
Most communication takes place between the OEM and the 
car. The data analysis platform receives statistics from the 
car, such as driving hours, hardware, or software incidents. 
Traffic and location data can be used for statistics, too. Once 
the collected data is processed, the OEM might improve its 
services and extends its product portfolio based on the data. 
The OEM Services receive traffic and emergency (SOS) 
requests and send the corresponding responses. For traffic 
requests and extended information they need the location 
data from the car. Additionally, they communicate with the 
HAF/FAS systems of the car, for example, to get advanced 
traffic information. This includes redirection because of 
current accidents or disruptions or automatic searching for a 
parking site. The Management Services component receives 
car related information to support the driver, for example, in 
case of incidents or hardware and software issues. Addition-
ally, software and firmware updates are provided by the 
management services (called management data in Figure 3). 
Service information about the car and the OEM are also 
delivered by the management services.  
Figure 3 also shows the data flows of external partners. 
The Google Search component receives search requests and 
answers with search results. For navigation purposes, maps 
and navigation instructions can be retrieved by the car from 
the Maps component. Gmail grants the passengers access to 
their mail accounts. The Mobility Services subcomponent is 
used to request a report on the current traffic situation. All 
components are sending statistics and usage data to the data 
analysis platform to be processed and used to improve of-
fered services and to inspire new services. The Maintenance 
Control subcomponent monitors if the car should come to 
an inspection in the near future and informs the driver as 
needed. In order to analyze the driving behavior, the Insur-
ance Adjustment subcomponent needs the driving data from 
the car. Both external partners are in contact with the OEM 
to share special or sponsored offers for the customers like 
bargains for. 
B. Communication Infrastructure component (external 
component) 
The Communication Infrastructure component handles 
long distance communication and access to other networks. 
Vehicles typically use LTE or UMTS. The communication 
infrastructure component provides connectivity to the com-
ponent OEM & external partners component. It should be 
noted that the communication infrastructure is an external 
component. 
C. Infrastructure component 
The Infrastructure component includes the subcompo-
nents Road-Side Units (RSUs) and Location Based Services 
(LBS) as can be seen in Figure 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RSUs include traffic control devices like streetlights, 
road signs, or speed measurements.  
LBS are services providing information that has been 
created, compiled, selected, or filtered taking into considera-
tion the current locations of the users or those of other per-
sons or mobile objects [11]. Local stores may provide LBS, 
for example, to promote current offers. An OEM may offer 
LBS to inform drivers about points of interest.  
RSUs, as well as LBS communicate with the car using 
LTE, WiFi, or UMTS. Thereby, the RSU is directly talking 
with the cars Onboard Unit (OBU). The car and RSUs are 
exchanging status information, for example the current sta-
tus of streetlights or the speed of the car. RSUs support 
emerging car applications like autonomous driving, as well 
as safety assistant systems. The Infrastructure component is 
communicating with the OEMs and external partners, too. It 
regularly sends status information about traffic or speed 
signs, receives commands to readjust the tempo limit, etc. 
Local stores or establishments provide LBS to the car. They 
may also send status information for big data analysis to the 
OEMs and external partners, or receive status information or 
additional offers. 
D. Car component 
The car has five subcomponents. The Infotainment Unit 
subcomponent, the Processing Unit subcomponents, the 
Communication System subcomponents, and the Sensor and 
Figure 5: Infrastructure - data ﬂow
the OEMs customers from the external partner, so the whole
data exchanges are showed to represent the whole system view.
C. vehicle to infrastructure
The component ’Infrastructure’ represents the environment
of the car. This includes trafﬁc control devices like street
lights, road signs or speed measurements just as stores or other
establishments which are directly communicating with the car
and in order to that a part of the holistic system view, too.
RSU stands for ’Road Site Unit’ and summarizes all trafﬁc
control devices while Location Based Services (LBS) are
IT services for providing information that has been created,
compiled, selected, or ﬁltered taking into consideration the
current locations of the users or those of other persons or
mobile objects. [6]. LBS are provided for example by local
stores, OEMs or third party companies to supply current offers,
promotions, location based advertising or information about
the current location like restaurants, points of interests or
service stations in the immediate vicinity. [6]
The RSU as well as the LBS are exchanging their informa-
tion over LTE, WIFI or UMTS with the car. Thereby the RSU
is directly talking with the cars OBU (Onboard Unit). [7]
The car and the RSU are exchanging status information, for
example the current status of the street light or the speed of
the car.
The infrastructure is talking to the OEMs and external
partners, too. It can send status information about the trafﬁc
or speed signs receive commands to readjust the tempo limit
e.g.
Local stores or establishments can provide LBS to the car.
For example, sponsored or special offers or promotions. They
can send their range of products or personalized advertisement.
They can send status information for big data analysis to the
<<component>>
Infrastructure
<<component>>
RSU
Street
Light
<<component>>
Location Based
Services
Beacon Service
SOS
Boxes
Figure 6: Infrastructure - component diagramm
Figure 4. Subcomponents of Infrastructure component. 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Actor subcomponents. Figure 5 shows the subcomponents 
and the data flows between those subcomponents. 
The Infotainment Unit subcomponent is the main inter-
face for human interactions. It provides apps and services 
like telephone, mail, WWW, contacts, navigation, music, 
and emergency calls. It offers a wide range of short-range 
communication technologies that are suitable to connect to 
consumer devices. Supported communication standards typ-
ically include Bluetooth, WiFi, and USB.  
Next, there are Processing Unit subcomponents. Normal-
ly, each subcomponent has at least one associated Electronic 
Control Unit (ECU) for processing incoming data and con-
trolling resulting actions. These ECUs are distributed over 
the whole car and communicate with the respective unit to 
be controlled. An example would be a sensor ECU for re-
ceiving raw data from ultrasonic sensors and converting it to 
standardized data for further processing in the car. This data 
is then send to the central controlling ECU for processing.  
The Communication System subcomponent supports var-
ious bus technologies for intra-vehicle communication. This 
system also provides interfaces for external communication 
(with OEM, external partners, or infrastructure). Inter-bus 
communication is possible via gateways. The Communica-
tion System also provides the well known OBD II interface 
that enables quick, easy and profound analysis of vehicles.  
Other subcomponents include sensor and actuators. These 
are spread over the whole vehicle to provide various func-
tionality. Sensors are used to gather data about the physical 
world (e.g., GPS position, open doors, park distance control, 
engine temperature, tire preassure, etc). Actuators are used 
to start actions, e.g., to start the windshield wipers. 
IV. 
SECURITY ANALYSIS AND SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 
FOR AUTOMOTIVE CYBER SYSTES 
The security analysis presented in this paper is based on 
CORAS [9]. CORAS is customizable on any system and 
component and offers an own risk-modeling notation that is 
Car
 Sensors
 Actuators
Sensordata
 Processing Units
Sensors ECU
Aktors ECU
Communication ECU
Infotainment ECU
In-vehicle Infotainment Unit
Activate Actuators
Sensordata
Processed
Sensordata
Location
Data
Infotainment Data
Statistic/Usage Data
Management Data
SOS Signal
Location Based Services
Infrastructure
GPS
LTE/WLAN/
UMTS
Sensordata
In-Vehicle Infotainment Unit
USB
Bluetooth
WLAN
Entertainment Data
Navigation Information
SOS Signal
etc.
WLAN Hotspots/
WLAN Devices
Management Data
Sensorinformation/
Sensorwarning
SOS Signal
Infotainment Data
Statistic/Usage Data
Location Based Services
Apps
Bluetooth
USB
WLAN
Figure 3: Car data ﬂow
which exchange data with the external partners and the OEM
via the car communication.
The subcomponent of the processing units receive and send
lots of information. On the one hand, they process input data
from sensors or human interactions, on the other hand they
calculate the resulting actions and transmit the commands
to the relevant parts. They also manage the communication
interfaces of the vehicle.
IV. AUTOMOTIVE CYBER SYSTEM HIGH RISK
COMPONENTS
In the following section above shown elements are analyses
and, via a threat modeling approach, high risk components
identiﬁed. Said components can be divided in three groups.
First of all the greatest dangers originate from components
with direct user interaction. An example is the infotainment
unit. It partly consists of apps, which can be malicious by
itself and try to attack the car or an attacker could try
to exploit vulnerabilities in the installed applications. Both
could lead to a possible compromising of the system and
pushed further to gain access to more internal systems via
the connected bus. A similar entry point is provided by the
offered interfaces of the infotainment unit like USB, Bluetooth
and WiFi. All devices connected to these interfaces could try
to attack the infotainment system and exploit vulnerabilities,
either by purpose of an attacker or by accident from virus
infected devices. Another openly vulnerable component is
the OBD II connector. By itself the OBD II should only be
accessible from inside the car for maintenance purposes, but
in the meantime it is common practice to connect dongles
on this interface to expand the car for 3rd party services. An
example of an exploit of such dongles is presented in [6]. Via
this interface an attacker can instantly communicate with the
CAN network in the vehicle. By this, it is possible to sniff
valuable information or even start attacks against the car, like
forging wrong information or ﬂooding the system to prevent
Figure 5. Subcomponent and data flows of the Car component. 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

inspired by UML. Its adaptability allowed for an application 
of CORAS on the presented reference model, and allows 
integrating previous work on application-specific attacker 
models [5-8]. CORAS is used to identify risks for assets. 
CORAS consists of 8 steps.  
In the first step, the scope of the analysis is defined. The 
scope of the analysis presented in this paper is an analysis of 
an Automotive Cyber System implementing the reference 
model presented in Section IV.  
The second step involves an adjustment of the scope of 
the analysis by the customer of the analysis. This step was 
omitted, as there is no customer for this analysis.  
The third step involves refining the target description us-
ing asset diagrams. The following assets were identified: 
"personal data" (personal data of driver and passengers), 
"critical systems" (systems ensuring safety of the car or 
safety of other critical systems), "integrity of the car" (car 
does not get harmed), "integrity of human" (humans do not 
get harmed), and "public trust" (trust in products of OEM 
and external partners). In step 4, the importance of the assets 
is rated (1=very important, 5= minor importance). The most 
important assets are "integrity of humans" and "personal 
data", see Figure 6 for the complete ranking. Strict laws for 
safety of humans, as well as very strict privacy laws of the 
European Union motivate this rating. 
spect to this
spect to the
risk picture
of Step 7”
ependencies
ssets:
ver and the
employees
ata directly
e the OEM
communi-
as systems
the safety
the brakes
the OEMs
ncludes the
aced in the
component
ar or critical
ates of the
Ms as well
e car.
It includes
e, if some-
is affected,
error has to
or example
and the car
ssengers of
ause of the
ch could be
re a human
data has to
le personal
tomers and
artners and
ccident due
ded by the
EM and its
es. Because
ata) has to
In table I the high level risk table can be seen, which was
worked out in a short brainstorming, as intended in Coras. It
gives an rough overview of the threats and is a basis for the
following steps.
D. Step 4 - Approval of target description
In this step, a more detailed description of the target
takes place. It includes assumptions and preconditions, which
contain a classiﬁcation of the assets by importance, a con-
sequence scale of every asset and a scale of the likelihoods.
The consequence scales are separated in the particular assets,
because it’s often difﬁcult to classify the damage to all assets
with the same scale. On the contrary, the likelihood scale
should be the same for all assets and, for example, could
be based on time-intervals or probabilities. Finally the risk
evaluation criteria should be determined, which deﬁne the
minimal level of risk, wherefrom risks should be treated. At
the end of this step, the client has to review and approve the
previous documentation. [10]
The classiﬁcation of the importance of our assets can be
seen in table III. Thereby 1 means very important and 5 minor
important:
Asset
Importance
Type
Integrity of human
1
Indirect asset
Personal data
1
Direct asset
Critical data
2
Direct asset
Critical systems
2
Direct asset
Integrity of the car
2
Indirect asset
Public trust
3
Indirect asset
TABLE III: Asset table
The integrity of human and personal data are of uttermost
importance, mostly because in the Basic Law for the Federal
Republic of Germany (GG Art. 1 (1) S.1) states that the dignity
of humans is inviolable and should be protected.
The assets critical data, critical systems and the integrity
of the car have the important 2, because they inﬂuence the
humans health and personal data directly.
Public trust is prioritised with 3 because it doesn’t inﬂu-
ence the most important assets directly but can have high
ﬁnancial harms to the companies like OEMs and external
partners.
Afterwards the likelihood scale of possible incidents is
deﬁned as seen in the table II. The probabilities are affected
by numbers of German car incidents in 2016 and the tolerable
Description
Deﬁnition
then twenty per year
[200, 1i : 10y = [10, 1i : 1y
twenty times per year
[100, 200i : 10y = [10, 20i : 1y
o nine times per year
[50, 90i : 10y = [5, 9i : 1y
to four times per year
[20, 40i : 10y = [2, 4i : 1y
s than once per year
[0, 10i : 10y = [0, 1i : 1y
ABLE II: Likelihood scale
 
Figure 6. Asset rating. 
In this step, a likelihood scale (see Figure 7), as well as  
consequences scales for each asset (see Figure 8 for the con-
sequence scale of the asset "critical system") are defined. 
The likelihood scale is motivated by statistics about German 
car incidents in 2016.  
o a large extent be ignored since risks with respect to this
can be identiﬁed by identifying risks with respect to the
assets. The analysts still need to provide a risk picture
he indirect asset during the risk evaluation of Step 7”
The arrows between the entities represent dependencies
een the assets. The following describes our assets:
rsonal data’ are the personal data of the driver and the
ngers as well as all other involved persons like employees
stomers. Every component may handle any data directly
d to the driver or his passengers, for example the OEM
know the identity of the car owner.
ritical systems’ include system applications, communi-
n systems inside and outside the car as wall as systems
e external partner and OEM’s, which ensure the safety
e car or other critical systems. For example the brakes
s systems inside the car or the it-systems of the OEMs
g to it. Because the asset ’Critical systems’ includes the
munication between the components, it’s placed in the
e of the components and depends on every component
ll as every component on it.
ritical data’ refers to data about/from/to the car or critical
m information. For example software updates of the
nal partners or ﬁrmware updates of the OEMs as well
ta transferred over the bus systems inside the car.
e ’Integrity of the car’ names the car itself. It includes
physical objects as well, because we assume, if some-
gets broken by the car, the cars integrity is affected,
This is an indirect asset, because a technical error has to
ﬁrst, to endanger the integrity of the car. For example
tegrity is damaged, if the brakes fail to act and the car
quently causes an accident.
e asset ’Integrity of human’ refers to the passengers of
ar as well as all humans (and animals, because of the
importance just humans are mentioned) which could be
by the car. It’s an indirect asset, because before a human
hurt, a technical error of critical systems or data has to
The integrity is harmed, too, if high sensible personal
got stolen or abused.
e asset ’Public trust’ means the trust of customers and
ble customers in the OEMs and external partners and
products. For example, if a car causes an accident due
system error, which could have been avoided by the
, the conﬁdence of the customers in the OEM and its
cts would be harmed and may decrease sales. Because
thing like a system error (critical system/data) has to
beforehand, this asset is an indirect asset.
In table I the high level risk table can be seen, which was
worked out in a short brainstorming, as intended in Coras. It
gives an rough overview of the threats and is a basis for the
following steps.
D. Step 4 - Approval of target description
In this step, a more detailed description of the target
takes place. It includes assumptions and preconditions, which
contain a classiﬁcation of the assets by importance, a con-
sequence scale of every asset and a scale of the likelihoods.
The consequence scales are separated in the particular assets,
because it’s often difﬁcult to classify the damage to all assets
with the same scale. On the contrary, the likelihood scale
should be the same for all assets and, for example, could
be based on time-intervals or probabilities. Finally the risk
evaluation criteria should be determined, which deﬁne the
minimal level of risk, wherefrom risks should be treated. At
the end of this step, the client has to review and approve the
previous documentation. [10]
The classiﬁcation of the importance of our assets can be
seen in table III. Thereby 1 means very important and 5 minor
important:
Asset
Importance
Type
Integrity of human
1
Indirect asset
Personal data
1
Direct asset
Critical data
2
Direct asset
Critical systems
2
Direct asset
Integrity of the car
2
Indirect asset
Public trust
3
Indirect asset
TABLE III: Asset table
The integrity of human and personal data are of uttermost
importance, mostly because in the Basic Law for the Federal
Republic of Germany (GG Art. 1 (1) S.1) states that the dignity
of humans is inviolable and should be protected.
The assets critical data, critical systems and the integrity
of the car have the important 2, because they inﬂuence the
humans health and personal data directly.
Public trust is prioritised with 3 because it doesn’t inﬂu-
ence the most important assets directly but can have high
ﬁnancial harms to the companies like OEMs and external
partners.
Afterwards the likelihood scale of possible incidents is
deﬁned as seen in the table II. The probabilities are affected
by numbers of German car incidents in 2016 and the tolerable
Likelihood value
Description
Deﬁnition
Certain
more then twenty per year
[200, 1i : 10y = [10, 1i : 1y
Likely
ten to twenty times per year
[100, 200i : 10y = [10, 20i : 1y
Possible
ﬁve to nine times per year
[50, 90i : 10y = [5, 9i : 1y
Unlikely
Two to four times per year
[20, 40i : 10y = [2, 4i : 1y
Rare
Less than once per year
[0, 10i : 10y = [0, 1i : 1y
TABLE II: Likelihood scale
 
Figure 7. Likelihood scale. 
3.5 Risk Identiﬁcation Using Threat Diagrams
33
Table 3.4 Consequence
scale for Health records
Consequence value
Description
Catastrophic
1000+ health records are affected
Major
101–1000 health records are affected
Moderate
11–100 health records are affected
Minor
1–10 health records are affected
Insigniﬁcant
No health records are affected
Table 3.5 Risk evaluation matrix
Finally, the representatives of the customer deﬁne the risk evaluation criteria.
The risk evaluation criteria assert whether a risk to an asset should be evaluated fur-
ther or not. A risk that is not accepted according to the risk evaluation criteria may
nevertheless have to be accepted as a result of the cost-beneﬁt analysis conducted
when deciding how to respond to the conclusions from the risk analysis. They deﬁne
these criteria by means of a risk evaluation matrix for each asset. The risk analysis
leader draws the matrix for the asset Health records on a blackboard. It has like-
lihood and consequence values as its axes so that a risk with a speciﬁc likelihood
and consequence will belong to the intersecting cell. Based on a discussion in the
group, the risk analysis leader marks the cells in the matrix as either acceptable or
unacceptable (i.e., must be evaluated) by ﬁlling the cells with the colour green or
red, respectively. The resulting risk evaluation matrix is shown in Table 3.5. The
participants decide to use these criteria for the other assets as well.
After all this has been approved by the customer, including the target description
with the target models, the analysts have the framework and vocabulary they need to
start identifying threats (a potential cause of an unwanted incident), vulnerabilities
(weaknesses which can be exploited by one or more threats), unwanted incidents
and risks.
Figure 12: Risk evaluation matrix [10]
numbers of incidents per year. The scale was collected in a
brainstorming session.
The next step is creating the consequence tables (table IV).
In this part only the consequence table of the asset ’Critical
systems’ is described as an example, the other tables could be
seen in the appendix.
Consequence value
Description
Catastrophic
Safety critical systems
Major
Most valuable core systems
Moderate
Valuable systems
Minor
Standard systems
Insigniﬁcant
Additional feature systems
TABLE IV: Consequence scale for the asset ’Critical systems’
As mentioned before, critical systems include the systems
of the car, the OEM and external partners. The following
describes examples for the scale of critical car systems:
Safety critical systems include techniques like the engine
or brakes. If one of these systems fails, it is very dangerous
for all participants (catastrophic).
Most valuable core systems are systems, which are very
important like lights. If they fail it could be very dangerous
for all participants (major), for example if the lights fail at
how to respond to the conclusions from the risk analysis” [10].
These criteria are deﬁned for every asset.
E. Step 5 - Risk identiﬁcation using threat diagrams
The goal of this step is to collect as many as possible
unwanted incidents, threats, vulnerabilities and threat scenarios
through a structured brainstorming session. The promise of a
structured brainstorming is, that all participants have different
knowledge and experiences, so that everyone will view the
target from a different side and ﬁnd more diverse risks. The
results are detailed threat diagrams. These threat diagrams are
separated in three kinds of threats: Human threat (deliberate),
human threat (accidental) and non-human threat. [10] For the
diagrams, the Coras language as shown in ﬁgure 10 is used.
In the following, only one diagram of every kind is described,
because all diagrams would exceed the scope of this paper. In
the appendix, all diagrams are suspended.
Figure 13 shows the initial threat diagram of the accidental
human threat ’Employee OEM & External Partner’. For exam-
ple, a developer of the OEM could, because of an insufﬁcient
training, develope a vulnerable software (for the car as well
as for the OEM or external partner itself). If this software
part isn’t reviewed sufﬁciently due to ’Insufﬁcient control’,
a vulnerable system can be generated. Which, for example,
can let a hacker in, who can threat the assets critical system,
 
Figure 8. Consequence scale for asset "critical systems". 
 
In the next step, risks are identified using threat diagrams 
showing threat scenarios. The sixth step identifies conse-
quences and likelihoods of the incidents that were identified 
in the prior step. In step seven, the risks are evaluated based 
on a risk matrix. The risk matrix uses likelihood and conse-
quence of an incident to distinguish between acceptable 
risks and unacceptable risks. Figure 9 shows, as an example, 
the risks for the asset “personal data”, unacceptable risks are 
located in grey cells; acceptable risks are located in white 
cells. The risk matrix uses the shortcuts shown in Figure 10. 
 
Insgnificant 
Minor 
Moderate 
Major 
Catastrophic 
Rare 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlikely 
 
 
COI 
CIU 
COE, COI(1), COE(1) 
Possible 
 
 
 
CCS, CCT, COC 
COC(1) 
Likely 
 
 
LDI 
LUT 
LUT(1) 
Certain 
 
 
VUS(1) 
 
VUS 
 
Figure 15: Risk evaluation matrix of the asset ’Personal data’
often, because there are many different systems on the market.
But if both happens, then there is a possible major leak in
personal data. Also this app can try to gain full control over the
car, which again requires more vulnerabilities in the system.
If the latter happens, then a catastrophic consequence towards
the critical data and system, as well as major consequences
for personal data can be assumed.
Another example is the hacker in ﬁgure 12, who tries to
manipulate or get access to the car. This can be done via
a vulnerable connected device or vulnerable software or even
by trying to sneak in the car. If any of this is possible it
is very likely, that the hacker gets access to the vehicle.
Then he has to try compromising said car, for example by
connecting a malicious OBD II dongle. This is possible, but
requires preparation. If all these come together we again have
catastrophic consequences towards critical systems and critical
data and major consequences towards personal data.
Last but not least, the non human threats have to be thought
through as in ﬁgure 13. In our example we need a single point
of failure to get a system malfunction which is rather unlikely,
because in the automotive area selected important systems are
redundant. But if it happens a possible but rather unlikely
outcome is an unpredictable behaviour of the component,
because it also has to be an untested case. If all of this comes
together, then we have a catastrophic consequence for our
critical systems.
G. Risk Evaluation Using Risk Diagrams
In the penultimate step, the found risks have to be evaluated
in order to determine which ones must be considered for
possible treatments. In this step the indirect assets are also
taken in regard, to determine the full consequences of the harm
to direct assets. [9]
The following ﬁgure 14 describes the indirect assets for
deliberate actions. An example would be the compromised car,
which affects the critical system. The car consists of critical
systems and therefore the integrity of the car is catastrophically
effected. If this happens, the integrity of human affected in the
same level, because if the critical systems fail and the car fail,
the death of a person is very likely. As wrote before, this is
only a small excerpt of the models, the rest can be found in
the appendix.
Next we have to ﬁll in the risk evaluation matrix, but before
we have to deﬁne the shortcuts:
Shortcut
Unwanted Incident
CIU
Compromised infotainment unit
CCS
Compromised communication system
UAC
Unauthorized access to car
SBS
Slow or broken system
VUS
Vulnerable system
CCT
Compromised conﬁdentiality of transmitted data
COC
Compromised car
COE
Compromised oem or external partner
COI
Compromised infrastructure
LUT
Loss or unusability of transferred data
LDI
Loss of data/compromised integrity
UPB
Unpredictable behaviour
CSF
Complete service failure
TABLE V: Risk Shortcuts
In the following ﬁgure 15 an example risk table of the
“personal data” asset is presented. This is achieved by sorting
the risks in the correct cell of likelihood and consequences.
A short example can be the compromised car. The likelihood
is possible and the consequence for personal data is major. In
the matching cell we’ll ﬁnd “COC” and because public trust
is an dependent indirect asset with consequence catastrophic,
we’ll ﬁnd “COC(1)” to the right.
As a brief overview the following ﬁgure 16 is created,
which shows the acceptable and unacceptable risk. In our case
only the compromised infrastructure is accepted and won’t be
considered in the treatment phase of Step 8 of the CORAS
method. “The same is the case for the risks with respect to
the indirect assets” [9].
H. Risk Treatment Using Treatment Diagrams
The task of this step is to identify treatments for the found
unacceptable risks. This is again organized as a workshop and
presented in CORAS treatment diagrams. The main goal is to
reduce the likelihood and/or consequences of said risks. The
costs of the treatments are also considered to get an optimal
cost-beneﬁt treatment plan. The goal is reached, when all risks
reach acceptable levels.
The following ﬁgure 17 shows the treatment diagram for the
hacker with the proposed treatments. An example are “Restrict
functional access” and “authenticate devices” in order to coun-
 
Figure 9. Risk evaluation matrix for asset "personal data". 
Figure 15: Risk evaluation matrix of the asset ’Personal data’
often, because there are many different systems on the market.
But if both happens, then there is a possible major leak in
personal data. Also this app can try to gain full control over the
car, which again requires more vulnerabilities in the system.
If the latter happens, then a catastrophic consequence towards
the critical data and system, as well as major consequences
for personal data can be assumed.
Another example is the hacker in ﬁgure 12, who tries to
manipulate or get access to the car. This can be done via
a vulnerable connected device or vulnerable software or even
by trying to sneak in the car. If any of this is possible it
is very likely, that the hacker gets access to the vehicle.
Then he has to try compromising said car, for example by
connecting a malicious OBD II dongle. This is possible, but
requires preparation. If all these come together we again have
catastrophic consequences towards critical systems and critical
data and major consequences towards personal data.
Last but not least, the non human threats have to be thought
through as in ﬁgure 13. In our example we need a single point
of failure to get a system malfunction which is rather unlikely,
because in the automotive area selected important systems are
redundant. But if it happens a possible but rather unlikely
outcome is an unpredictable behaviour of the component,
because it also has to be an untested case. If all of this comes
together, then we have a catastrophic consequence for our
critical systems.
G. Risk Evaluation Using Risk Diagrams
In the penultimate step, the found risks have to be evaluated
in order to determine which ones must be considered for
possible treatments. In this step the indirect assets are also
taken in regard, to determine the full consequences of the harm
to direct assets. [9]
The following ﬁgure 14 describes the indirect assets for
deliberate actions. An example would be the compromised car,
which affects the critical system. The car consists of critical
systems and therefore the integrity of the car is catastrophically
effected. If this happens, the integrity of human affected in the
same level, because if the critical systems fail and the car fail,
the death of a person is very likely. As wrote before, this is
only a small excerpt of the models, the rest can be found in
the appendix.
Next we have to ﬁll in the risk evaluation matrix, but before
we have to deﬁne the shortcuts:
Shortcut
Unwanted Incident
CIU
Compromised infotainment unit
CCS
Compromised communication system
UAC
Unauthorized access to car
SBS
Slow or broken system
VUS
Vulnerable system
CCT
Compromised conﬁdentiality of transmitted data
COC
Compromised car
COE
Compromised oem or external partner
COI
Compromised infrastructure
LUT
Loss or unusability of transferred data
LDI
Loss of data/compromised integrity
UPB
Unpredictable behaviour
CSF
Complete service failure
TABLE V: Risk Shortcuts
In the following ﬁgure 15 an example risk table of the
“personal data” asset is presented. This is achieved by sorting
the risks in the correct cell of likelihood and consequences.
A short example can be the compromised car. The likelihood
is possible and the consequence for personal data is major. In
the matching cell we’ll ﬁnd “COC” and because public trust
is an dependent indirect asset with consequence catastrophic,
we’ll ﬁnd “COC(1)” to the right.
As a brief overview the following ﬁgure 16 is created,
which shows the acceptable and unacceptable risk. In our case
only the compromised infrastructure is accepted and won’t be
considered in the treatment phase of Step 8 of the CORAS
method. “The same is the case for the risks with respect to
the indirect assets” [9].
H. Risk Treatment Using Treatment Diagrams
The task of this step is to identify treatments for the found
unacceptable risks. This is again organized as a workshop and
presented in CORAS treatment diagrams. The main goal is to
reduce the likelihood and/or consequences of said risks. The
costs of the treatments are also considered to get an optimal
cost-beneﬁt treatment plan. The goal is reached, when all risks
reach acceptable levels.
The following ﬁgure 17 shows the treatment diagram for the
hacker with the proposed treatments. An example are “Restrict
functional access” and “authenticate devices” in order to coun-
 
Figure 10. Shortcuts for risks 
The last step identifies risk treatment for unacceptable 
risks. To avoid unacceptable risks, the following generic 
security requirements were identified based on the presented 
reference model for Automotive Cyber Systems. Security 
requirements also include requirements for processes of the 
organizations running an Automotive Cyber System or au-
tomotive services: 
Technical requirements: 
• Trustworthy software sources: Software should only 
be downloaded from trustworthy sources. Authen-
ticity of data sources must be ensured, as well as in-
tegrity protection of software during transit. 
• Security Warning during software installation: Driv-
ers should have the ability to avoid software installa-
tion in improper situations. 
• Appropriate access control for all components and 
subcomponents of the Automotive Cyber System. 
• Restriction of functional access for components. 
• Authentication of all connecting devices and all 
communication partners. 
• Integrity checks of incoming traffic. 
• Encryption of all communications. 
• Strict control of incoming and outgoing connections 
and traffic. 
• Redundancy of important systems. 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• 
Fail checks for important components. 
• 
Fail safe states for important components. 
 
Process requirements: 
• 
Appropriate scope of training programs for em-
ployees. 
• 
Use of secure software development life cycles 
throughout the development of all components of a 
Automotive Cyber System. 
• 
Review of important changes and work. 
• 
Careful selection for suppliers of software and 
hardware. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The contribution of this paper is twofold: first, the paper 
provides a reference model for Automotive Cyber System 
that is more complete than previous models and takes into 
consideration upcoming applications like autonomous driv-
ing. The reference model is of great help for engineering 
new applications for Automotive Cyber Systems. The se-
cond contribution is a security analysis of Automotive 
Cyber Systems using the reference model as a basis. Output 
of the security analysis is a set of generic security require-
ments for automotive security in Automotive Cyber Sys-
tems. The generic security requirements are considered to be 
highly useful for the design of upcoming Automotive Cyber 
Systems, as well as emerging applications like autonomous 
driving. The use of the reference model allowed for a holis-
tic approach to automotive security.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. McCarthy, “Connected Cars By The Numbers”, Forbes 
Business, 
January 
2015, 
https://www.forbes.com/ 
sites/niallmccarthy/2015/01/27/connected-cars-by-the-
numbers-infographic [last access August 1st, 2017]. 
[2] L. Zhang, “Modeling automotive cyber physical systems,” in 
Distributed Computing and Applications to Business, 
Engineering & Sci- ence (DCABES), 2013 12th International 
Symposium on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 71–75.   
[3] C. Ebert and I. N. Adler, “Automotive cyber-security” 
ATZextra, vol. 21, no. 2, 2016, pp.58–63.   
[4] H. Abid, L. T. T. Phuong, J. Wang, S. Lee, and S. Qaisar, “V-
cloud: 
vehicular 
cyber-physical 
systems 
and 
cloud 
computing,” in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and 
Communication Technologies. ACM, 2011, p. 165.  
[5] C. Ponikwar, H.-J. Hof, and L. Wischhof, "Towards a High-
Level Security Model for Decision Making in Autonomous 
Driving“, ACM Chapters Computer Science in Cars 
Symposium 2017 (CSCS 2017), Munich, Germany, July 
2017, pp. 1-4. 
[6] C. Ponikwar and H.-J. Hof, "Beyond the Dolev-Yao Model: 
Realistic 
Application-Specific 
Attacker 
Models 
for 
Applications Using Vehicular Communication“, The Tenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Emerging Security 
Information, Systems and Technologies (SECURWARE 
2016), Nice, France, July 2016, pp. 4-9. 
[7] M. Woerner and H.-J. Hof, "Realistic Attacker Model for 
Smart Cities“, Applied Research Conference 2016, Poster, 
Augsburg, Germany, 2016. 
[8] C. Ponikwar, H.-J. Hof, and L. Wischhof, „Towards a High-
Level Security Model for Decision Making in Autonomous 
Driving“, ACM Chapters Computer Science in Cars 
Symposium 2017 (CSCS 2017), Munich, Germany, July 
2017, pp. 1-4. 
[9] M. S. Lund, B. Solhaug, and K. Stølen, Model-driven risk 
analysis: the CORAS approach. Springer Science & Business 
Media, 2010.    
[10] A. Greenback, „The jeep hackers are back to prove car 
hacking can get much worse“, Wired, 08-Jan-2016. 
https://www.wired.com/2016/08/jeep-hackers-return-high-
speed-steering-acceleration-hacks/. [last access: August 1st 
2017]. 
[11] K. Axel, “Location-based services: fundamentals and 
operation,” John Wiely & Sons, 2005.   
 
 
 
 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

