An Information Flow Modelling Approach for Critical Infrastructure Simulation
Denise Gall, Christian Luidold, Gregor Langner, Thomas Schaberreiter, Gerald Quirchmayr
Faculty of Computer Science,
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria
email: denise.gall@univie.ac.at, christian.luidold@univie.ac.at, gregor.langner@univie.ac.at,
thomas.schaberreiter@univie.ac.at, gerald.quirchmayr@univie.ac.at
Abstract—Building a realistic environment for simulating cas-
cading effects in critical infrastructures depends heavily on
information received from experts, as well as on an accurate
representation of processes and assets related to critical infras-
tructures. The approach introduced in this paper provides the
conceptualization and implementation of an information ﬂow
model as a foundation for the subsequent development of a
multi-layered risk model. The designed models represent both
a process view, with the focus on procedures carried out by
critical infrastructures, and a more technical object view, by
deﬁning objects and parameters representing assets and interac-
tions. Starting with an analysis of relevant threats and affected
infrastructures, use case scenarios are prepared in textual form
and subsequently evaluated together with critical infrastructure
representatives in end-user workshops. Based on the respective
use case, a process view is established in form of an activity dia-
gram including information ﬂows, displaying processes of critical
infrastructures during a threat. The activity diagram supports
the evaluation and collection of information during subsequent
end-user workshops with the aim to review and substantiate
the model. The object diagram provides technical aspects of the
use cases, for supporting the realization of a simulation and a
corresponding risk model. The approach was developed in the
context of a national research project for analyzing cascading
effects in and between critical supply networks. The resulting
diagrams demonstrate how cascading effects can be modelled in a
structured form to support discussions with and between experts
of critical infrastructures and emergency services, and how such
models can serve as a foundation for subsequent simulation.
Index Terms—Information Flow Modelling; Critical Infrastruc-
ture; Infrastructure Simulation; Cascading Effects.
I. INTRODUCTION
In times of advanced automation in critical supply networks,
critical infrastructures (CIs) need to be resilient against a
multitude of threats in order to maintain public interests.
Regarding the protection against threats against their own
infrastructure, providers are in many cases well prepared.
However, when facing cascading effects due to failures in
other CIs due to intentional or unintentional causes, protection
measures are harder to establish as possible cascading effects
are often unknown. Therefore, it is an essential step to assist
CI providers in identifying cascading failures in scenarios
that are not part of the daily processes within the CI’s
own ecosystem, but pose relevant and potentially devastating
threat scenarios. Historic examples underlining the gravity
of cascading effects provide exceptional insights regarding
the importance of resilience against external events, e.g., as
shown in Oslo, Norway in 2007. This incident affected public
transportation and underlying systems for around 20 hours. In
addition, network systems were also affected by disruptions
for around 10 hours and the central train station had to be
evacuated due to a ﬁre, triggered by a short circuit caused by
a destroyed high-voltage cable [1].
In order to facilitate the mitigation of risks, an additional fo-
cus on the aspect of communication and collaboration among
dependent CIs should be considered. Collaboration among CIs
supports identifying dependencies between the infrastructures
and thus enables them to prepare themselves speciﬁcally
for impacts of cascading failures. Furthermore, sharing this
information with external stakeholders like emergency services
can lead to more efﬁcient strategies for emergency services in
case of large-scale incidents that require close coordination
between ﬁrst responders. An effective approach lies in the
implementation of an adapted information ﬂow model, which
provides a framework that helps to organize how speciﬁc types
of information are to be communicated.
In this paper, we present an approach for supporting CI
providers and emergency services by creating an instantiated
information ﬂow model, composed of an activity diagram and
an object diagram, based on a textual description of a threat
scenario. The information ﬂow model offers a new way to
represent cascading effects of incidents in interdependent CIs
in a structured form. The aim of this model is to facilitate
discussions on the feasibility of cascading threat scenarios,
and to encourage CI stakeholders to contribute to the shared
knowledge represented by the information ﬂow model. Simu-
lations based on this shared understanding of threat scenarios
will be able to optimize response to incidents based on those
threat scenarios and help to coordinate ﬁrst response with
external actors like emergency services. In the context of CI
networks, information ﬂow does not only represent the digital
information that is exchanged between CIs, but follows the
broader deﬁnition of goods and services that are exchanged
between infrastructures.
Our approach for information ﬂow modelling is based
on activity and object diagrams established from a textual
description of a threat scenario. The information ﬂow model
includes an activity diagram for providing a process view and
a technical view implemented by an object diagram, which
provides a deﬁnition of objects and their parameters. The
information sources utilized to derive the diagrams included
multiple workshops with experts from CIs and emergency
services. We evaluate the results in a case study derived from
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

results carried out in the ongoing ODYSSEUS project [2].
Section II provides an overview of related work and the
applied methodologies. The subsequent Section III describes
the modelling approach including the modelling prerequisites,
the activity and object diagram deﬁnitions, and iterative reﬁne-
ments of the models. In Section IV, we present a case study
within the scope of the ODYSSEUS project [2] and evaluate
the ﬁndings in Section V. Section VI provides a conclusion
and an outlook on future work.
II. RELATED WORK
The methodology used for the presented modelling ap-
proach was greatly inﬂuenced by the design-science method-
ology described by Hevner et al. [3], as well as initially by
the Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) described by Check-
land [4]. The design-science research methodology consists
of seven guidelines, from which an in-depth understanding
of a given design problem and potential solutions can be
gained. We utilize the design-science principles to create a
design artifact in the form of a conceptual information ﬂow
model. The reﬁnement and evaluation of the resulting artifact
is conducted by multiple workshops with experts applying
the world cafe methodology [5] described below, as well as
technical evaluations conducted by project partners for further
reﬁnement. The principles of design-science were applied in
the iterative reﬁnement of the modelling results in all phases
of the process.
Regarding the execution and the results of the workshops,
the adopted world cafe process consists of seven design
principles, which offers the participants to share their expertise
in small groups [5]:
1) Set the Context
2) Create Hospitable Space
3) Explore Questions that Matter
4) Encourage Everyone’s Contribution
5) Connect Diverse Perspectives
6) Listen Together for Patterns and Insights
7) Share Collective Discoveries
In terms of information ﬂow modelling, Kupfersberger et
al. [6] propose an approach for deﬁning a conceptual security-
driven information ﬂow model for international software inte-
gration projects that was evaluated in a case study regarding an
EU cybersecurity project CS-AWARE [7]. The authors focus
on the representation of internal processes, what relevant data
is used and how the communication with other components is
realized in order to derive the framework conditions of their
model [6]. Considering the comparable environments between
Kupfersberger et al. [6] and this work, a similar approach
was chosen with a set of adaptions regarding a broader ﬁeld
of stakeholders, and the goal of creating a multi-layered risk
model, as well as to satisfy the requirements mentioned above.
For establishing a model representing activities as well as
information ﬂows, a lot of available approaches exist, includ-
ing UML (Uniﬁed Modeling Language) activity diagrams,
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) or Data Flow
Diagrams (DFD). In our context, activity diagrams based on
BPMN [8] were identiﬁed as most suitable, since BPMN is
an established standard for representing business processes
and workﬂows, and is not restricted to a certain domain or
organization. Additionally, BPMN is a suitable instrument for
presenting processes to different user groups, and provides a
notation for message ﬂows between layers [9].
Regarding modelling a more technical view, UML class dia-
grams [10] were selected as this technique allows to develop a
representation of objects and parameters. However, the model
had to be slightly expanded to support information ﬂows and to
suit our domain by adding modelling entities for representing
information ﬂows including shared information.
III. MODELLING APPROACH
Identifying dependencies and potential risks caused by
cascading effects between CIs is a complex issue. CIs are in
many cases highly dependent on the services provided by other
CIs, and failures in both the physical and cyber systems of
one CI may cause service disruptions or failures in other CIs.
Another major concern for interdependency risks is caused
by geographical proximity of CIs, since a catastrophic event
in an area can cause major disruptions in CI services, with
potentially high impacts on the population [11]. The model
presented in this paper is speciﬁcally designed for dealing
with such sophisticated multi-stakeholder domains by applying
the design-science method [3] as well as the SSM [4]. These
methodologies offer procedures and guidelines on how to
retrieve information and model highly complex environments
such as CIs and how to reveal unknown problematic issues.
Following the design-science method introduced by Hevner
et al. [3], we pursue an iterative approach, including:
• Analyzing the modelling prerequisites, which includes
deﬁning threat scenarios in textual form, based on an
analysis of possible threats affecting CI networks.
• Based on the previously deﬁned use cases, activity di-
agrams are established including the most important
information ﬂows between CIs and emergency services.
• For obtaining a more technical view of the use cases,
relevant objects and parameters necessary for simulation
are identiﬁed and modelled in an object diagram.
• Both the activity diagram and the object diagram are
further reﬁned in multiple workshop settings, as described
in Section III-D.
The goal of the modelling approach is to create a structured
activity diagram from the textual threat scenarios, to be able to
model cascading effects and message ﬂows between CIs and
emergency services. The model forms the foundation for later
simulations of the critical networks and serve as a basis for
CIs and emergency services to get more insights into cascading
effects and their impacts.
A. Modelling Prerequisite
The basis for the modelling efforts described in this work
are textually composed threat scenarios that describe proce-
dures and cascading effects in CIs during threats. In order
to create realistic scenarios, the ﬁrst step is to gather more
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

information on threats affecting CIs and their dependencies.
Therefore, possible dangers in urban areas were analyzed
by creating a catalog of various threats, based on static
and dynamic sources dealing with disasters and emergencies.
These data sources include the Swiss catalog of threats,
disasters and emergencies [12], newspaper articles and reports
from authorities and other relevant organizations, dealing with
incidents and threats. The identiﬁed threats were evaluated in
terms of likelihood and impact in combination with national
and international historical data and current developments,
which resulted in a ﬁrst set of use case scenarios. The main
categories of threats identiﬁed were social threats, natural
disasters and technological threats, according to the Swiss
catalog of threats, disasters and emergencies [12].
The ﬁrst drafts of threat scenarios were validated and reﬁned
in a workshop with security and business continuity experts
from multiple CIs. The workshop’s goal was to receive as
much information from end-users for establishing realistic use
cases and for the subsequent modelling activity.
In line with the principles of the SSM [4], the end-user
workshops were composed of a large variety of stakeholder
groups, in order to be able to obtain their views and expertise,
and to gain a holistic understanding of the dynamics caused
by an incident as modelled by the threat scenarios.
In the context of the project, the main stakeholders are
an interdependent network of CI providers and emergency
services, who are an integral part of the threat scenarios in the
incident response. They were deeply involved in establishing
realistic threat scenarios, as the goal of the project is to support
the stakeholders by providing simulations on cascading effects.
Furthermore, security experts are part of the stakeholder group,
as the introduced method allows to identify information ﬂows
and dependencies between CIs, in order to gain an additional
perspective on the potential ramiﬁcations of cascading inci-
dents. Similarly, simulation experts are part of the stakeholder
group in order to ensure that the translation of real-world
incidents into simulation is viable and realistic. Furthermore,
the perspective of ﬁrst responders is crucial in understanding
the dynamics of large-scale cascading incidents. Therefore, the
input of emergency services and other ﬁrst responders as part
of the stakeholder group is important
In order to facilitate information collection in end-user
workshops, the SSM [4] offers an approach that supports
gathering information from experts by enforcing participants
to model a big picture of the domain. However, due to limited
possibilities in the context of the project, the world cafe
process [5] was chosen for data gathering from the stakeholder
groups. In the context of the project, the setting of a world cafe
offered every end-user the possibility to reveal their expertise
and estimation of relevance for each deﬁned event and the
associated impacts.
The information gathered during the workshop was used as
basis for the resulting updated textual description of the use
cases, comprising threats, impacts and the threat response by
individual CIs. An especially interesting area of discussion
in those stakeholder groups are the cascading failures that
affect more than one CI. While failures contained within their
own infrastructures are usually well understood and managed,
there is great potential in better understanding the dynamics of
cascading failures affecting multiple CIs. CI operators rarely
have the opportunity to discuss cascading effects in a broad
multi-stakeholder set-up, leading to valuable information to
be uncovered and incorporated into the threat scenarios and
subsequent models.
B. Modelling Scenario Behavior in Activity Diagrams
The activity diagram presented in this section represents a
process view of events, including cause and impact on de-
pendent infrastructures, extracted from the textual description
of the threat scenarios. This is an important basis for the
subsequent scenario simulation, as it transforms all the events
deﬁned in textual form in the threat scenario description into
structured sequences, including information ﬂows between
infrastructures.
Additionally, visual models facilitate the evaluation and adap-
tation of end-user provided content, since the visual represen-
tation and grouping of information facilitates comprehension
of sequences of events and cause and impact relationships [13].
The transformation of textual information to the repre-
sentation in the activity diagram starts by identifying all
involved CIs and other relevant stakeholder assets, followed
by the identiﬁcation of tasks and activities that are performed
by those assets during the threat scenario. Those tasks and
activities that change the state of an asset during a threat
scenario need to be considered for modelling. The identiﬁed
activities are to be sorted logically and chronologically, as that
may not be necessarily preset in textual form.
After identifying CIs and tasks, the most essential step
of the process, identifying information ﬂows according to
activities, is conducted. These information ﬂows are of such
importance, as they affect other CIs’ states due to cascading
effects. For example, if there is an area-wide power outage,
which may lead to trafﬁc accidents due to failures in trafﬁc
lights, emergency services have to secure these accidents sites,
which in turn affects the capacity of available emergency
response units. In case of another emergency, there might be
bottlenecks.
Identifying information ﬂows between stakeholders includes
thoroughly reading the given textual use case and extracting
all information ﬂows predeﬁned in the description. Addition-
ally, information ﬂows can be identiﬁed by perusing every
identiﬁed task and deepen the knowledge relating to each
task by conducting background research or seek for additional
input from the stakeholder group, as suggested by [6] and [1].
This is especially relevant in the case of cascading failures,
where only the perspective of some elements of the failure
chain has been initially captured, and additional input from
potentially affected stakeholders is required. Other information
ﬂows may have been revealed by end-users intentionally
or unintentionally during the conducted workshop. Once all
information from the textual form is extracted, the actual
model can be built.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

In order to ensure the practical relevance of the constructed
activity diagram, established notations, such as BPMN, were
applied. BPMN allows to demonstrate process sequences
within one layer as well as information exchange between
different layers. For facilitating the activity diagram, a layered
design is recommended, where one infrastructure is visualized
by a pool corresponding to the BPMN standard. Within one
pool, the sequence ﬂow of processes is modelled for one
infrastructure. Tasks can be either activities that do not impact
other infrastructures, or activities that send information to
other infrastructures. To emphasize the differentiation between
the two forms of tasks, we suggest using different coloring,
as presented in Figure 1.
Sequence flow within one layer
Message flow between layers
Task, Process
Task that sends information to other layers
Incoming message
Annotations with time specifications
Additional information specifing task
Pool representing an infrastructure
Task
Receiving message
Sharing information
Additional
information
Time annotations
Infra-
structure
 A
Fig. 1. Notation for Activity Diagram
Receiving information from other infrastructures is demon-
strated by Intermediate Message Events, according to the
BPMN concepts. Information ﬂows are demonstrated by
dashed blue lines with an arrow, which demonstrates in-
formation exchange from one infrastructure to another one.
Information ﬂows included in the model are unidirectional,
which means that information is exchanged only in one way,
namely from the sending to the receiving infrastructure. If
information should be shared in both ways, it is necessary to
model information ﬂows separately, by utilizing an individual
information ﬂow in each direction. Sequence ﬂows within one
infrastructure are represented by a black line with an arrow at
one end. Furthermore, we would emphasize to use different
coloring for information and sequence ﬂows, to distinctly dif-
ferentiate those two ﬂows. Additionally, the modelling entities
provide the option to add time annotations and other additional
information, if required.
C. Modelling Scenario Parameters in Object Diagrams
The designed activity diagram allows to develop an ad-
vanced information ﬂow model and to identify objects and
parameters needed for simulating behaviors and information
ﬂows in CIs in the context of the described threat scenarios.
This step requires close cooperation with simulation experts,
as they offer input regarding requirements and limitations of
simulation environments.
The ﬁrst step of developing an object diagram is to identify
and specify the objects that are relevant for the speciﬁed threat
scenario. This requires a closer look at the CIs and other assets
identiﬁed in the context of the activity diagram, and extract
the objects that are actually affected by it. When considering
the scenario of a blackout, which results in failure of trafﬁc
lights, trafﬁc light represents an object of the transport CI.
For consistency and simple representation, a layered design is
suggested, where all objects of one infrastructure are combined
in one layer.
Necessary objects that describe the use case can be revealed
by considering questions like ”Which objects present the
infrastructure in general?”, ”Which objects are necessary for
processing the tasks presented in the activity diagram?” or
”Which objects are required for processing information ﬂows
from other infrastructures?”.
Once the objects are identiﬁed, parameters for each item
are deﬁned, whereby only descriptive parameters are con-
sidered, as values will be assigned in another phase of the
project. Distinguishing between descriptive parameters and
their values is important, as the value changes depending on
the simulation environment, while the descriptive parameter
remains the same. However, it can be helpful to consider
values at this point for determining descriptive parameters
[14]. Declaring parameters can be facilitated by dividing them
into the following subcategories:
• Private: Parameters that are predeﬁned
• Public: Parameters that are set during simulation
• Derived: Parameters derived from other parameters’ val-
ues
The suggested categories are based on the UML standard
attribute categories, but their meaning is adapted to the needs
of the domain. After considering all parameters, relationships
between objects are speciﬁed by considering relations between
objects within a layer and information ﬂows between objects
of different layers, according to the activity diagram. For
completing the technical view, parameters that are shared
between infrastructures need to be identiﬁed, for allowing
correct simulation of information ﬂows.
For visualizing the object diagram, we suggest UML class
diagram representation, since it offers entities relevant for
our method. Small adaptions were made to support the do-
main’s requirements, as presented in Figure 2. As UML class
diagrams do not provide modelling entities for representing
information ﬂows, a notation for this concern was added.
Through this notation it is possible to represent information
shared between infrastructures involved in the use case, which
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

is especially required for simulation purposes. In this context,
UML also does not have a notation for representing parameters
that are shared between entities according to information
ﬂows. A notation to represent shared parameters within a blue
rectangle as an annotation to the information ﬂows was added.
Information flow between layers
Parameters that are shared 
according to the information flow
Object with parameters
Relations between objects
within one layer
Layer that contains objects
Layer
Parameter A
Parameter B
Object
- Predefined Parameter
+ Parameter set during simulation of a use case
/ Parameter derived from other parameters' values
Fig. 2. Notation for Object Diagram
Similar to the activity diagram, we recommend to use layers
for representing infrastructures. An object is represented by
the UML entity of a class and contains parameters presented
according to their characteristics. For specifying the type of
the parameter, the standard notation from UML was used
but semantically adapted to the domain’s needs. According
to UML, the symbol ”-” preceding the name of an attribute
classiﬁes the visibility as private and ”+” deﬁnes it as public
[10]. For the presented domain the semantics of the symbols
are adapted. The symbol ”-” before the parameter classiﬁes
that the parameter’s value is speciﬁed prior to the simulation
start, ”+” however classiﬁes parameter values that are initiated
during the simulation and ”/” speciﬁes a value that is derived
from other parameters’ values.
Relations between objects can either represent relations
within one infrastructure, or information ﬂows between objects
owned by different stakeholders. Information ﬂows in this
context are only unidirectional, with the arrow on one end
indicating the receiving object. For an easy distinction between
the two types of relations, it is also suggested to use different
coloring.
D. Iterative Reﬁnement of Modelling Results
Once the diagrams are established, it is vital to hold
additional workshops in the stakeholder group in order to
gather additional feedback from domain experts and evaluate
information captured in the diagrams. This is in line with
the design-science methodology [3] as well as the SSM [4]
presented in Section II, which both include iterative reﬁnement
of the established models of the studied domain as a core
principle of the methodology. Reviewing the results together
with the stakeholders allows to identify inaccuracies or wrong
representation of events and allows to reﬁne modelled informa-
tion ﬂows between CIs. Furthermore, it enables to substantiate
speciﬁc aspects of objects or behaviors with more detail, until
the desired level of detail is reached to derive a meaningful
and realistic simulation.
The goal of further workshops is to reveal information
regarding every-day processes, threats which can lead to
failures in the CI’s services, how such a failure would affect
other infrastructures, how the CI can be affected by failures of
other stakeholders and to assign realistic values to identiﬁed
parameters in the context of the threat scenarios. Workshops
should support revealing such dependencies, which can be fur-
ther analyzed within the simulations. Additionally, information
on communication and collaboration with other stakeholders
can be revealed.
After such workshops the activity diagrams and possibly
also the textual description can be adapted to obtain realistic
use cases that capture all relevant information for modelling
processes during a threat. The visual models enforce feedback
and discussion in workshops as information is presented more
clearly and organized than it is in a purely textual representa-
tion.
IV. CASE STUDY
In the context of the ODYSSEUS project [2], a case study
was conducted with domain experts ranging from research
partners to employees from various CIs including experts from
the ﬁeld of cyber security, operations, and business continuity.
The following section provides an in-depth overview of the
case study and the evaluation process.
The project’s goal is to identify and simulate cascading
effects between CIs in an urban area to improve procedures
and reactions in case of a threat scenario. Therefore, main end-
users in this context are CI providers and emergency services,
who participated in multiple workshops and offered insights
into the procedures of their domain.
According to the approach introduced in this paper, use
cases representing threat scenarios in urban areas were de-
signed and evaluated in the context of end-user workshops.
The workshops were held in form of a world cafe, where
use cases were evaluated by the relevance for providers of
CIs. Due to their profound feedback, only three out of four
initially deﬁned use cases were considered as relevant enough
to be further elaborated.
Once the newly gained information was applied to adapt
the use cases, the textual form was converted into an activity
diagram. Figure 3 shows an excerpt of the created activity
model with information ﬂows between CIs. The activity dia-
gram shows the case of a power failure. The CIs involved and
presented in the diagram are power supply, private transport
and police forces represented as pools. The yellow tasks are
activities within the CI with no inﬂuence on other ones. The
blue tasks represent activities that send information to other
CIs. For instance, activity P2.3 ”Serious trafﬁc accidents”
sends a message to police forces, as they receive emergency
calls due to these accidents. In consequence of these received
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

emergency calls, police forces have to secure accident sites as
stated in task P3.2, sending a message ﬂow to private trafﬁc
indicating that trafﬁc will be regulated.
activitydiagram
Private Transport
Private Transport
P2.3
Serious traffic
accidents
P2.2 Failure
of traffic
lights
Several
vehicles
involved
Several
injured
P2.1 Blackout
5:45 PM
P2.4 Traffic control
by police
Police
Police
P3.2 Securing
accident sites
and controlling
of traffic
P3.1 Receiving
emergency calls
Power Supply
Power Supply
P1.1
Blackout
Winter evening
5:30 PM
Due to storm
damage a high
voltage power
line is destroyed
5:30 PM
Fig. 3. ODYSSEUS Activity Diagram - Snapshot
Additional information that is not part of the actual informa-
tion ﬂow, but can provide useful annotations for the scenario
or the users of the scenario, can be annotated to each node
via a comment, as can be seen in the context of node P2.3.
Figure 4 presents an excerpt of the resulting object diagram
in the project’s context, created according to Section III-C.
Police
Private traffic
Power Supply
Location of accident scene
Number of emergency calls
Number of injured people
Location of traffic jams
Time of travel to accident site
State of power supply
Affected area
Police
- Capacity
- Location
+ Time of day
+ Current operation
Traffic lights
- Location
- State
Power supply region X
+ Status
+ Region
Street
- Name
- Road capacity
- Utilization
+ Time of day
+ Weekday
+ Traffic accident [Number of injured people,
Number of emergency calls]
/ Traffic jam
Injured people
+ Number
+ Location
+ Severity of the injury
Fig. 4. ODYSSEUS Object Diagram - Snapshot
The model presents each CI and its main objects relevant
for simulating the deﬁned use cases. Each object includes
parameters that are necessary for presenting the infrastructure
and indicating its actual state, e.g., infrastructure private trafﬁc
is presented by the objects trafﬁc lights, street and injured
people. Each object is further depicted by parameters that
are additionally classiﬁed due to their behavior. The object
”Police” for example is presented by the predeﬁned parameters
”Capacity” and ”Location”, which indicates that these param-
eters do not change during simulation. ”Time of day” and
”Current operation” on the other hand are parameters, which
change during simulation, according to inputs from other
infrastructures or the simulation environment itself. Most of
the objects include a parameter “Capacity” to capture whether
the object should change its state, if the maximum capacity is
reached.
The ﬁrst draft of the diagram included objects, parame-
ters and information ﬂows, but after evaluation with project
partners, it was decided to additionally include parameters
exchanged by information ﬂows. Information ﬂows are pre-
sented by blue lines, where the arrow states the receiving
infrastructure. Parameters exchanged during an information
ﬂow are represented by blue rectangles including the parameter
names. For instance, there is an information ﬂow from ”Power
supply region X” to ”trafﬁc lights”. Information shared in this
example is the state of the power supply and which area is
served by the power supply.
The aim of the created models is to present processes
and information ﬂows between CIs executed during a given
threat event and to provide a basic model for simulation.
In line with the modelling approach presented in Section
III-D, for evaluating the current state of the use cases and
according models, workshops with experts of each area of
CIs individually were performed. The main goals of these
workshops were to gain more insight regarding the general
processes of the infrastructure, as well as processes happening
during our deﬁned threats. With each workshop, we obtained
important feedback from participating domain experts, which
was used to adapt the use cases and activity diagrams, to
provide a more realistic view of behaviors during a threat.
V. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
The paper presents an information ﬂow modelling approach
to support simulating cascading effects in CIs by achieving the
following objectives:
• Modelling cascading effects through CIs in a structured
form
The resulting activity diagram demonstrates how cascad-
ing effects and information ﬂows through CIs during
threat scenarios can be transformed from a textual de-
scription into a structured visual form. The output is able
to adequately model the activities depicted in the threat
scenarios, and is especially helpful in outlining the poten-
tial cause and effect relationships of cascading failures.
Additionally, the created model supports evaluating the
realistic representation of events and information ﬂows
with experts during information gathering workshops.
• Establishing a basis for subsequent simulation
The model has shown to be a valid basis for subsequent
simulation, as it provides a process view of the threat
scenarios including information ﬂows and the objects
needed for establishing a simulation environment. The
activity diagram represents the process view of behaviors
and events, while the object diagram provides the tech-
nical view including assets and parameters needed for
simulation.
• Supporting discussion with and between CI providers and
emergency services
During the expert workshops, we observed that the activ-
ity diagram supported stakeholders in easier following our
intention of providing scenario based CI interdependency
models, and the activities observed in the involved CIs
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

during those scenarios. The subsequent discussions with
stakeholders in the context of iterative reﬁnement of
the model have shown that many of the relationships
presented in the activity diagram were not adequately
considered and understood by CI operators. In this sense,
the activity diagram has proven to add value in adding
to the holistic understanding of threat scenarios for CI
providers. The stakeholders have shown particular interest
in those ﬁndings during our workshop sessions.
• Supporting emergency services to prepare emergency
plans
The activity diagram and subsequent simulation outputs
should support emergency services for establishing emer-
gency plans in case such threat scenarios occur. At this
point we are not yet able to provide an evaluation of this
aspect, since the validation will be part of a later phase
of the currently ongoing ODYSSEUS project. Thus, a
ﬁnal conclusion regarding the aspect of communication
and collaboration between CIs and emergency services
cannot yet be made.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The presented modelling approach demonstrates how textual
descriptions of threat scenarios can be transformed into a
process view and a technical view to support simulating
cascading effects in CIs. With this method cascading effects
through CIs can be modelled in a structured form, to support
discussions in workshops with stakeholders and to provide
a comprehensible basis for establishing communication and
collaboration between CIs and emergency services. The mod-
elling approach consists of multiple steps from analyzing
the requirements on threat scenarios, reviewing the deﬁned
scenarios in end-user workshops on the basis of established
activity diagrams and ﬁnally designing a technical view by
creating object diagrams. The textual descriptions and the
constructed diagrams serve as a core enabler for specifying
an environment for simulation of the scenarios, which can be
to a large extent directly based on this model. The modelling
approach was used in the context of the ODYSSEUS project,
where the method has proven to be quite helpful in building
a common understanding of the basic foundations for all
partners involved in the project, especially for the simulation
experts. Additionally, the designed activity diagrams supported
the evaluation of the deﬁned threat scenarios in the end-user
workshops, which resulted in substantial feedback based on the
realistic representation of behaviors in threat scenarios. Future
work on this approach within the ODYSSEUS project includes
obtaining values for identiﬁed objects’ parameters and further
evaluation with end-users.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially funded by the Austrian FFG re-
search program KIRAS in course of the project ODYSSEUS
(”Simulation und Analyse kritischer Netzwerk-Infrastrukturen
in St¨adten”) under Grant No. 873539.
REFERENCES
[1] I. B. Utne, P. Hokstad, and J. Vatn, “A method for risk modeling of
interdependencies in critical infrastructures,” Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 671–678, 2011.
[2] KIRAS Sicherheitsforschung, “ODYSSEUS - simulation and analysis
of critical network infrastructures in cities,” [retrieved: October, 2020].
[Online]. Available: https://www.kiras.at/en/ﬁnanced-proposals/detail/d
/odysseus-simulation-und-analyse-kritischer-netzwerk-infrastrukturen-i
n-staedten/
[3] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science
in information systems research,” Management Information Systems
Quarterly, vol. 28, pp. 75–, 03 2004.
[4] P. Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice: Includes a 30-Year
Retrospective.
Chichester, England, UK: Wiley, Jun 1981.
[5] The World Caf´e Community Foundation, “The World Cafe,” [retrieved:
October, 2020]. [Online]. Available: http://www.theworldcafe.com
[6] V. Kupfersberger, T. Schaberreiter, and G. Quirchmayr, “Security-driven
information ﬂow modelling for component integration in complex
environments,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Advances in Information Technology, IAIT 2018, Bangkok, Thailand,
December
10-13,
2018.
ACM,
2018,
pp.
19:1–19:8.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3291280.3291797
[7] “A cybersecurity situational awareness and information sharing solution
for local public administrations based on advanced big data analysis
CS-AWARE,” Sep 2020, [retrieved: October, 2020]. [Online]. Available:
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/740723
[8] OMG, “Business process model and notation (bpmn)-version 2.0.2,”
2013, [retrieved November, 2020]. [Online]. Available: http://www.om
g.org/spec/BPMN/2.0.2/
[9] M. Chinosi and A. Trombetta, “Bpmn: An introduction to the standard,”
Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 124–134, 2012.
[10] OMG, “Uniﬁed modeling language (uml 2.5.1.),” 2017, [retrieved:
October, 2020]. [Online]. Available: https://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2
.5.1
[11] S. M. Rinaldi, J. P. Peerenboom, and T. K. Kelly, “Identifying, under-
standing, and analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies,” IEEE
control systems magazine, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 11–25, 2001.
[12] Bundesamt f¨ur Bev¨olkerungsschutz (BABS), “Catalog of threats.
disasters and emergencies Switzerland,” 2019, [retrieved: October,
2020]. [Online]. Available: https://www.babs.admin.ch/de/aufgabenbab
s/gefaehrdrisiken/natgefaehrdanalyse/gefaehrdkatalog.html
[13] B. C. Hungerford, A. R. Hevner, and R. W. Collins, “Reviewing
software diagrams: A cognitive study,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 82–96, 2004.
[14] J. Sokolowski, C. Turnitsa, and S. Diallo, “A conceptual modeling
method for critical infrastructure modeling,” in 41st Annual Simulation
Symposium (anss-41 2008).
IEEE, 2008, pp. 203–211.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

