An Empirical Study of Root-Cause Analysis in Information Security Management
Gaute Wangen, Niclas Hellesen, Henrik Torres, and Erlend Brækken
NTNU Gjøvik
Teknologiveien 22,
2802 Gjøvik, Norway
Email: gaute.wangen@ntnu.no, niclashellesenl@gmail.com,
henrik.torres@gmail.com, erlendlbr@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper studies the application of Root-cause
analysis (RCA) methodology to a complex socio-technical in-
formation security (InfoSec) management problem. InfoSec risk
assessment (ISRA) is the common approach for dealing with
problems is InfoSec, where the main purpose is to manage risk
and maintain an acceptable risk level. In comparison, the RCA
tools are designed to identify and eliminate the root-cause of a
reoccurring problem. Our case study is a complex issue regarding
multiple breaches of the security policy primarily through access
control violations. By running a full-scale RCA, this study ﬁnds
that the beneﬁts of the RCA tools are a better understanding
of the social aspects of the risk; RCA highlighted previously
unknown social and administrative causes for the problem
which in turn provided an improved decision-basis. The problem
treatments recommended by the ISRA and the RCA differed
in that the ISRA results recommended technical controls, while
the RCA suggested more administrative treatments. Furthermore,
we found that the ISRA and RCA can complement each other in
administrative and technical issues. The main drawback was that
our cost-beneﬁt analysis regarding hours spent on RCA was on
the borderline of being justiﬁable. As future work, we propose
to develop a leaner version of the RCA scoped for information
security problems.
Keywords—Information Security; Root cause analysis; Risk
Management; Case study.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Judging by the available literature on standards and
methods, the common approach to dealing with problems
in information security (InfoSec) is risk assessments. Risk
assessment aims to estimate the probability and consequence
of an identiﬁed scenario or for reoccurring incidents, and
propose risk treatments based on the results. By estimating the
expected risk of repeating incidents or an identiﬁed scenario,
risk assessment aims at proposing risk treatments based on
the estimated results. The InfoSec risk assessment (ISRA) has
been developed to analyze risks that occur when applying
technology to information, and revolve around securing the
conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability of information or
other assets [1]. By focusing on assets and vulnerabilities,
these assessments tend to have a technical scope [2] [3]
with estimates of consequences and respective probabilities of
events as key outputs. Although the InfoSec risk management
(ISRM) approach is useful for maintaining acceptable risk
levels, they are not developed to solve complex socio-technical
problems. In comparison, the Root Cause Analysis (RCA) is
”a structured investigation that aims to identify the real cause
of a problem and the actions necessary to eliminate it.” [4]
RCA incorporates a broad range of approaches, tools, and tech-
niques to uncover causes of problems, ranging from standard
problem-solving paradigms, business process improvement,
benchmarking, and continuous improvement [4]. The ISRA
and RCA approaches are different in that RCA investigates
incidents that have occurred with some frequency aiming to
understand and eliminate the problem from a socio-technical
perspective. While ISRA attempts to estimate the risk and
propose and implement risk treatments based on the results
to achieve acceptable risk.
The case study presented in this paper extends the ISRA
of a complex socio-technical problem with RCA and discusses
the cost/beneﬁt of the results. The objective of ISRM is to
reduce risk to an acceptable level. A typical ISRA would be to
estimate annual incident cost, compare it to risk appetite, and
if found unacceptable: implement a treatment to address either
probability, consequence, or both, to maintain the risk within
acceptable levels, while RCA aims to remove the problem in
its entirety. However, both approaches seek to treat the problem
at hand, which makes the output comparable. The application
of formal RCA tools is an area that has remained largely
unexplored in InfoSec literature. Therefore, the problem we are
addressing in this study is to determine the utility of RCA for
InfoSec and if it provides useful input to the decision-making
process beyond the ISRA. The problem is investigated using a
case study, qualitative assessment of results, and cost-beneﬁt
analysis.
The case is of breaches to the access control (AC)
security policy (SecPol), such as access card and Personal
Identiﬁcation Number (PIN) exchange between employees.
This complex problem is located at the intersection of the
social and technological aspects that many organizations may
face. The Scandinavian organization in our case study had
logged multiple occurrences of policy violations together with
costly incidents as a consequence. This study investigates if
RCA can be applied as a useful extension to the ISRM process
for the AC SecPol problem. To investigate this issue, we
qualitatively assess the results of a RCA conducted as an
extension to a high-level ISRA of the problem. Further, we
discuss if RCA can be justiﬁed for complex InfoSec problems
through cost-beneﬁt analysis. This paper applies the seven-
step process RCA methodology [4] for comparison of results.
The data collected for this study was primarily from historical
observations and data in the target institution together with
qualitative interviews of thirty-six representatives from six
relevant stakeholder groups.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows:
The following section addresses previous work on RCA in
InfoSec. Section III provides a description of the applied
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ISRA method and the RCA tools methods including statistical
analysis. Further, we present the results from the ISRA and the
RCA. Lastly, we discuss the qualitative differences and discuss
cost-beneﬁt. Finally, we discuss the limitations, propose future
work, and conclude the results.
II.
RELATED WORK
RCA was developed to solve practical problems in tradi-
tional safety, quality assurance, and production environments
[4]. However, RCA has also been adopted in selected areas
of InfoSec: Julisch [5] studied the effect of the RCA, by
considering RCA for improvement of decision-making for
handling alarms from intrusion detection systems. The study
provides evidence towards the positive contribution of RCA,
but it does not apply the RCA tools as they are proposed in the
recent literature [4], [6], [7]. Julisch builds on the notion that
there are root causes accounting for a percentage of the alarms,
but proposes his tools for detecting and eliminating root causes
outside of the problem-solving process, Fig. 1. A more recent
study conducted by Collmann and Cooper [8] applied RCA for
an InfoSec breach of conﬁdentiality and integrity in the health-
care industry. Based on a qualitative approach, the authors
ﬁnd the root cause of an incident and propose remediation.
Their results also show a clear beneﬁt from applying RCA,
although their RCA approach seems non-standardized, being
primarily based on previously published complex problem-
solving research articles. Wangen [9] utilizes RCA to analyze
a peer review ring incident, where an author managed to game
the peer review process and review his papers. This incident
is analyzed by combining RCA tools and the Conﬂicting
Incentives Risk Analysis (CIRA) to understand the underlying
incentives and to choose countermeasures. Further, Abubakar
et.al. [10] applied RCA as a preliminary tool to investigate the
high-level causes identity theft. The study applies a structured
RCA approach [7] and identiﬁes multiple causes and effects
for setbacks to the investigation of identity theft. The Abubakar
et.al. study shows the utility of RCA for InfoSec by providing
an insight into a complex problem such as identity theft.
Hyunen and Lenzini [11] discuss RCA application in InfoSec
by contrasting the traditional approaches to Safety and Secu-
rity to highlight shortcomings of the latter. Furthermore, the
authors propose an RCA-based tool for InfoSec management
to address said shortcomings and demonstrate the tool on a use
case. The tool is designed to reveal vulnerable socio-technical
factors.
Some of the tools applied in an RCA are also recog-
nizable in the risk assessment literature, for example, instru-
ments such as Flowcharts and Tree diagrams model processes
and events visually. Typical comparable examples from risk
assessment are Event-tree and Fault-tree analysis, where the
risk is modeled as a set of conditional events, however, these
approaches are not speciﬁcally developed for InfoSec risk
analysis. Schneier adapted the Fault-tree analysis mindset and
created Attack Trees [12]. These tools resemble those of RCA.
However, the frame for applying them is different in the sense
that attack trees focus on the technical threat and vulnerability
modeling, while RCA tools focus on problem-solving.
Although there are a couple of published studies on
the application and utility of formal RCA methodologies, the
previous work on RCA in InfoSec is scarce, and there is a
research gap in experimenting with the RCA tools for solving
re-occurring InfoSec problems. The studies we found provided
positive results and motivation for further experiments with
RCA for InfoSec problems.
III.
METHOD
The primary research approach was a case study which
was conducted in a Scandinavian R&D institution to inves-
tigate the complex problem of internal AC policy violations.
The ISRA was conducted as a high-level risk assessment for
the institution which revealed the need for deeper analysis
of the problem. Three independent researchers conducted the
RCA and gathered data from 36 scientiﬁc interviews and
applied historical data on incidents caused by unauthorized
access.
Further, we qualitatively compare the results where we
analyze the differences in approaches, ﬁndings, and treatment
recommendation. Additionally, we applied a cost-beneﬁt anal-
ysis to measure resources regarding time spent on conducting
RCA and beneﬁts concerning additional knowledge about the
problem.
The following section brieﬂy describes the ISRA ap-
proach applied in this study, while the second section de-
scribes the RCA approach. The latter contains a description
of the seven-step RCA process, the tools used, data collection
method, and a brief overview of the statistical methods used
for data analysis.
A. ISRA Method
The ISRA method applied for the case study is based on
the standard ISO/IEC 27000-series [1]. Further substantiated
with the Wangen et.al. [13] [14] approaches which centers on
estimations of asset value, vulnerability, threat, and control
efﬁciency, these are combined with available historical data
to obtain both quantitative and qualitative risk estimations.
The applied method identiﬁes events together with adverse
outcomes and uses conditional probability to estimate the risk
of each identiﬁed outcome. The results section provides a
summary of the initial ISRA results.
B. Approach to Root cause analysis
In choosing a RCA framework, we looked at compre-
hensiveness, academic citations, and availability. Based on the
criteria, our study chose to follow the seven-step RCA process
proposed by Andersen and Fagerhaug [4], as shown in Fig.
1. Each step consists of a set of tools to produce the results
needed to complete the subsequent steps, whereas step 7 is
out of scope. Each step consists of different tools to solve
problems where one or more are required to complete the
RCA and conclude the root cause(s). As recommended in the
methodology, we chose tools per step based on our judgment
of suitability. The RCA in this study was conducted by a three-
person team supported by a mentor. We have anonymized in-
formation according to the employer’s requests. The following
subsections describe each step in the RCA process and our
selected tools (see [4] for further description).
Step 1 - Problem understanding, Performance Ma-
trices. The goal of this step is to understand the problem and
rank the issues. Performance Matrices are used to illustrate
the target system’s current performance and importance. The
performance matrix contributes towards establishing priority of
the different problems, factors, or problems in the system [4]
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Fig. 1: Seven step process for RCA [4].
(P.36-41): (i) which part of the problem is the most important
to address, and (ii) which problem will reduce the highest
amount of symptoms. The problems are qualitatively identiﬁed
and ranked on a scale from 1 to 9, on performance (x-axis)
and importance (y-axis).
Step 2 - Problem cause brainstorming. The main idea
of this step is to cover other possible issues that may be
causing the problem, not thought of in Step 1. For this purpose,
we applied unstructured Brainstorming, which is a technique
where the participants verbally suggested all possible causes
they could think of, which was immediately noted on a
whiteboard and summarized together at the end.
Step 3 - Problem Cause Data Collection - Interviews.
RCA recommends several data collection techniques [4], this
study chose scientiﬁc interviews as the main data collection
approach as the study required an in-depth understanding of the
motivations for AC SecPol violation problem. The interviews
were conducted in a face-to-face setting, and was designed
using category, ordinal, and continuous type questions together
with open-ended interview questions for sharing knowledge
about the problem. The interview subjects were primarily
categorized as representatives of key stakeholder groups within
the organization and one group of external contractors. Each
interview had twenty-six questions with follow-up questions
if deemed necessary to clarify the opinion or to extract
valuable knowledge from particularly knowledgeable individ-
uals.
Step 4 - Problem Cause Data Analysis - Statistics
& Afﬁnity diagram. We applied a variety of statistical
data analysis methods speciﬁed in the results, and the IBM
SPSS software for the statistical analysis. A summary of the
statistical tests used in this research is as follows.
For Descriptive analysis on continuous type questions,
we applied the median as the primary measure of central
tendency. We also conducted Univariate analysis of individual
issues and Bivariate analysis for pairs of questions, such as a
group belonging and a continuous question, to see how they
compare and interact. As the Likert-scale seldom will satisfy
the requirements of normality and not have a deﬁned scale of
measurement between the alternatives, we restricted the use of
mean and standard deviation. We analyzed the median together
with an analysis of range, minimum and maximum values,
and variance. This study also analyses the distributions of the
answers, for example, if they are normal, uniform, bimodal, or
similar. We used Pearson two-tailed Correlation test to reveal
relationships between pairs of variables as this test does not
assume normality in the sample.
The questionnaire had several open-ended questions
which we treated by listing and categorizing the responses.
Further, we counted the occurrence of each theme and sum-
marized the responses. We also applied the Afﬁnity diagram
for analyzing our qualitative data, which is a RCA tool for
grouping data and discovering underlying relationships.
Step 5 - Root Cause Identiﬁcation - Cause-and-
Effect Charts. The goal of this step is to identify the
root cause(s) of the problem. For this task, we applied the
Cause-and-Effect chart (Fishbone diagram) which is a tool for
identifying the major causes of a problem, together with the
secondary causes/factors inﬂuencing the problem. The results
from this process should map to the undesired effect, the
problem.
Step 6 - Problem elimination - Systematic Inventive
Thinking (SIT). The goal of this step is to propose solutions
to deal with the root causes of the problem, Andersen and
Fagerhaug [4] describe primarily two types of tools for drafting
treatments; one is designed to stimulate creativity for new
solutions, while the other is designed for developing solu-
tions.
IV.
CASE STUDY: ACCESS CONTROL POLICY
VIOLATIONS
In this section, we ﬁrst present a summary of the results
from the ISRA, in terms of risk estimation and proposed
treatment. Further, we present the results from our RCA for
comparison.
The case data was collected from an institution whose
IT-operations delivers services to about 3000 users. The organi-
zation is a high-availability academic organization providing a
range of services to the users, mainly in research, development,
and education. The IT Operations are the internal owners of
the AC regimes and most of the lab equipment; they represent
the principal in this study. The objectives of the IT-operations
is to deliver reliable services with minimal downtime, together
with information security solutions.
During the last years, the Institution has experienced
multiple incidents of unauthorized access to its facilities. The
recurring events primarily lead to theft and vandalism of
equipment in a range of cost that is deemed unacceptable.
Thus, the hypothesis is that this has partially been caused
by employees and students being negligent of the SecPol
regarding AC, providing unauthorized access to the facilities.
While the SecPol explicitly states that both the token and
the PIN are personal and shall not be shared, there has been
registered multiple incidents of this occurring.
A. The Risk of Access control policy violations
The goal of the ISRA was to derive the annual risk of
the incidents. This section summarizes the asset identiﬁcation
and evaluation, vulnerabilities assessment, threat assessment,
control efﬁciency, and outcomes.
The Institution had two key asset groups: (i) hard-
ware and (ii) physical sensitive information, both stored in
access controlled facilities. The hardware’s primary protec-
tion attribute was availability, and the value was estimated
in the range of moderate according to the budget, with a
low to medium importance in the day-to-day business pro-
cesses.
The two controls in place are primarily (i) AC mech-
anisms - physical control in place to prevent unauthorized
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

accesses and mitigate the risk of theft. (ii) The SecPol -
administrative control, which is a written statement concerning
the proper use of AC mechanisms.
For the vulnerability assessment, experience showed that
illegitimate users were accessing the facilities on a daily
basis. We identiﬁed two primary vulnerabilities; (i) lack of
security training and awareness, whereas the stakeholders
do not understand the risk exposure of the organization.
(ii) Insufﬁcient organizational security policies, whereas the
SecPol itself lacks clear consequences for breaches, leaving
the personnel complacent. The main attack for exploiting these
two vulnerabilities was social engineering, where the attacker
either manages to get a hold of a security token and PIN.
Alternatively, the attacker manages to gain unauthorized access
to the facilities by entering with others who have legitimate
access (tailgating). With the number of stakeholders having
access, both attacks are easy for a motivated threat actor. The
exposure is summarized in Table I.
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF VULNERABILITY
ASSESSMENT.
Scenario
Vulnerability
Attack
Attack
Vulnerability
Exposure
Description
description
Difﬁculty
Severity
Assessment
A1
Lack of Security
Social Engineering -
Medium
Very High
High
Training and
Employee or Student
Awareness,
Gives away Token
Insufﬁcient
and PIN (Likely)
InfoSec Policies
A2
Lack of security
Social Engineering-
Easy
Medium
Medium
training and
Employee or Student
awareness,
leaves doors opened
Insufﬁcient
for convenience
InfoSec Policies
For the threat assessment, the experts identiﬁed one
threat group motivated by a ﬁnancial incentive with the intent
of stealing either physical equipment or sensitive information,
with two actors; (i) Actors who frequently steals small items,
representing high frequency - low impact risk. (ii) Actors who
conduct a few signiﬁcant thefts, representing the low frequency
- high impact risk.
B. Risk Analysis Results.
The ISRA results showed that the most severe risk
facing the organization is theft of sensitive information, while
physical theft of equipment is also a grave risk. According
to past observations, the risk is greatest during holidays
with few people on campus. The two primary risks were
major equipment thefts during the holiday season and several
minor equipment thefts that aggregated into an unacceptable
amount.
C. Implemented Treatment - Camera Surveillance
As a result of the ISRA, the treatment implemented to
reduce the two risks was camera surveillance of the main entry
points of buildings. Firstly, this treatment has a preventive
effect in the sense that it will heighten the attack threshold
for threat actors. Besides, it will provide audit trails that will
be useful in future investigations. Camera surveillance had also
been proven to reduce the number of incidents as well as
increasing the amount of solved crimes in similar institutions.
This data indicates a high control efﬁciency; however, the mea-
sure also comes with some drawbacks, such as equipment cost
together with the required resources to operate the system. Due
to the data collection on employees surveillance brings, this
Fig. 2: Performance matrix.
risk treatment also subjects the organization to requirements
from data privacy protection laws. Neither did it address the
socio-technical problem with the SecPol, card swapping, and
card lending.
V.
ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS RESULTS FOR A
SOCIO-TECHNICAL PROBLEM
In this section, we present the results from conducting
the RCA according to the method described in Section III-B.
The results are derived from conducting RCA on the previously
outlined problem and risk; we outline the hypothesized root
causes and proposed treatments.
A. RCA Process, Step 1 & 2 - Problem Understanding and
Cause Brainstorming
The goal of these steps is to scope the RCA and center on
the preliminarily identiﬁed problem causes. The performance
matrix, Fig. 2, is used to rank the identiﬁed causes on their
Importance and Performance. With the help of resource per-
sons, the team derived six topics from the preliminary RCA
steps 1 & 2, Fig. 1): (i) Theoretical knowledge of the SecPol
for AC, (ii) Practical implementation of the SecPol for AC,
(iii) Consequences for policy breaches, (iv) Security Culture,
(v) Backup solutions for forgotten and misplaced cards, and
(vi) Card hand out for new employees. The RCA team and
the expert ranked the issues and prioritized the data collection
step accordingly, illustrated in Fig. 2.
B. RCA Process Step 3 - Data Collection
Fig. 3: Stakeholder groups included in the study
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE II. DEMOGRAPHICS INCLUDING AGE AND
SEX DISTRIBUTIONS
Age
Sex
Group
Freq.
Percent
Group
Freq.
Percent
Valid
20-29
8
22,2
Valid
Women
10
27,8
30-39
7
19,4
Men
26
72,2
40-49
10
27,8
Total
36
100,0
50-59
8
22,2
60-69
3
8,3
Total
36
100,0
For the categorical analysis, the team used age, gender,
and stakeholder group as the primary categories, with the
emphasis on the latter as our hypothesis was that parts of the
root cause are found in conﬂicting interests between internal
groups. The team interviewed thirty-six people located at the
site, Fig. 3 displays age and gender distributions, with the
six primary stakeholder groups. The interview subjects for the
academic staff, Ph.D. Fellows, B.Sc. and M.Sc. students were
chosen at random. The representatives of management and IT
and security were key stakeholders in the organization, such
as decision-makers and policy writers.
C. RCA Step 4 - Problem Cause data analysis
The Descriptive analysis showed that about half of the
respondents had read the SecPol. All but two reported that it
is was not allowed to lend away cards, whereas the remaining
two did not know, indicating a high level of security awareness
for the issue. Also, the study uncovered uncertainty among
the respondents when we asked them about what the potential
consequences for breaching the SecPol would bring for the
employees. Whereas most of them assumed no consequence,
and none perceived any severe consequences. We also uncov-
ered that most people would be reluctant to admit to sharing
cards. Further, we asked them ”How often do you think access
cards are shared at the Institution?” on a scale from 1 - 5
(1- Never, Yearly, Monthly, Weekly, 5 -Daily), to which the
respondents thought that this is an issue that occurs on at
least a weekly basis (Median 4). Using the same scale, the
team asked how often the respondents had the need to borrow
cards from others. Over half reported to not ever had the need,
while twelve reported having had to lend cards on an annual
basis, only two reported having the problem more than that.
However, half of the respondents said to have been asked by
others to borrow cards, which documented the frequency of
the problem.
TABLE III. NOTABLE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
GROUPS ON ”HOW LONG DID IT TAKE FOR YOU TO
GET ACCESS TO THE FACILITIES YOU NEEDED?”
(BETWEEN 1 VERY LONG - 6 IMMEDIATE ACCESS)
Category
N
Range
Median
Minimum
Maximum
Variance
Management
3
0
6,00
6
6
0,000
Senior Academic Staff
17
4
6,00
2
6
1,654
Ph.D. Students
7
5
5,00
1
6
3,238
BSc. and MSc. Students
3
4
3,00
1
5
4,000
External Contractors
3
3
4,00
1
4
3,000
Total
33
5
5,00
1
6
2,729
1) Summary of categorical analysis: The statistical anal-
ysis showed differences between the responses of men and
women; where the latter viewed incidents involving card
borrowing among employees more severely than men. The
women in our sample also believe that it is more likely
that employees admit to borrowing cards. Another visible
difference between the stakeholder groups was who had read
the policy, where all the representatives of the Management
and IT and Security groups had read it. The Ph.D. Fellows
and the student groups scored the lowest on having read the
policy. Another observable ﬁnding was that the waiting time
varied between the groups, whereas the permanent employees
perceived the shortest waiting times, Table III.
2) Qualitative analysis of differences between groups:
IT and Security. The IT operations owned much of the hard-
ware in the facilities and was in charge of both designing, im-
plementing, and operating the AC policy. Both representatives
had read the policy and considered it important that staff and
students also know the policy. The IT operations believed that
card lending is an increasing problem within the institution,
especially in the modern facilities where AC mechanisms are
more frequent. One also answered that since he had been
involved in developing the policy, he felt more ownership of it
and, therefore, experienced a greater responsibility to follow it
than other departments. They also felt the legal responsibility
not to break the policy due to owning the AC system.
Management. This group consists of middle and upper
management, which had all read the SecPol. Half believed
it was important to have those who will be subject to the
policy involved in the policy development process. When we
asked this group about what they saw as the worst scenario,
this group had similar opinions: their main concerns was loss
and compromise of information together with relevant legal
aspects. Two members of this group reported that they did
not get the service they expected from IT regarding forgotten
cards. Three out of four said that they believed the security
culture to be good, while the last one reported the security
controls to be cumbersome.
Senior academic staff. Consists of different types of
professors, researchers, and lecturers, and represents the ma-
jority of employees in the case. This group was the largest with
the most widespread opinions. Regarding the SecPol, several
expressed discontent and said that it was neither security
department or IT service that should be responsible for it.
The organization should provide the content of the policy to
ensure that it was not an obstacle in the day to day work.
Further, delivering on the aims and goals of the organizational
assignment should be compared to the potential harm from
card swapping incidents, meaning that the policy should be
designed with a better understanding of risk. An example of
this was that employees must have access to rooms to do their
job where a too-strict policy would stand in the way. Regarding
this, several mentioned that if the cards were not lent to other
employees, it would be very problematic due to the lack of
backup solutions. They missed good fallback solution if one
had forgotten access card.
Ph.D. Fellows. Out of this group, only one had read
the SecPol. Most assumed it was not allowed to lend out
their access cards, but two said they did not know. One
expressed discontent from not receiving his access card quick
enough, which he hypothesized as one of the reasons for
borrowing other people’s cards. Longer times to hand out
access cards may force them to lend cards internally in an
ofﬁce. Another issue was that Ph.D. Fellows occasionally
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

worked with students and that they often needed access to
restricted facilities to be able to work. This issue required
the Ph.D. fellow either to open the door physically for the
students or to loan them their card. When we asked about
the security culture, the responses were split: Two did not
know, one thought that security was good, another one said
that people trust each other, one said it was wrong, while one
said that people knew that they should not lend it to others.
The last one said that others could borrow it for practical
reasons.
Students. Represents the main bulk of people with
access to the main facilities, but with limited access to ofﬁces
and employee areas. Only one of the students had read the
policy, and none of the students who participated knew of any
instances of card lending, although two out of three had been
asked by someone if they could lend them their cards.
External contractors. Represents the contractors in
charge of running the physical facilities, such as cleaning
personnel and physical maintenance. In the External group,
only one had read the policy. All believed that it was not
allowed to borrow cards and that the school saw this as a
serious offense. Only one of them reported having had the
need to borrow a card.
D. RCA Step 5 - Identiﬁed Root causes
The interviews with the groups provided an insight into
the many views on this problem and the complexity it entails,
visualized with the Fishbone diagram in Fig. 4. Based on our
RCA we found ﬁve possible root causes:
1. Uncertainty regarding fallback solutions. We found
that there was uncertainty surrounding available backup so-
lutions among all the stakeholder groups. Where 14 of the
31 respondents were undecided if there existed any fallback
solution, and suggested to create better backup solutions. 17
said there existed backup solutions, but we uncovered different
opinions regarding what these were and who was responsible
for them. For example, six respondents thought they could
summon the IT department, three thought the student help
desk, while the remainder thought either management could
help or ask a colleague to lend them access cards. Even from
the two key stakeholders in IT the replies were contradic-
tory.
2. Discomfort when using fallback solutions. Two of
our respondents reported to have forgotten their cards and had
contacted the on-campus card distributor to use the fallback
solution. The respondents meant they had not been well-
received and had not gotten the help they needed. Overall,
they reported the situation to be discomforting, which was
unfortunate, as this may lead to the employees using different
methods for solving the problem.
3. Misaligned SecPol regarding authorization. Our
interviews highlighted that being able to do their work is the
most important goal for every employee. Thus, the SecPol
should aim to facilitate this aim. Too strict AC will in some
cases lead to obstruction in day-to-day tasks and lead to em-
ployees ﬁnding workarounds which may compromise security,
such as asking trusted co-workers to borrow cards. Some of
the respondents reported not having been included in the de-
velopment of the SecPol and felt that it was misaligned.
4. Too much security. In especially one of the most
modern buildings, there is a very strict AC regime in place,
where low-level security rooms and facilities are regulated.
Several of the respondents highlighted this as the main reason
for card lending. These low-security rooms only required the
card and not the PIN code, so the respondents did not consider
this a serious breach of policy. Several of our respondents said
that this was too much security and could not understand the
reasoning underlying this decision.
5. Lack of risk awareness and consequences. 33 out of
36 deﬁned possible negative consequences for the institution,
so, the awareness around possible risks for the institution was
high. However, we found that less than half of the respondents
had read the overarching SecPol and that the respondents
were unaware and uncertain about the organization’s and their
personal risk if their cards went astray. Everybody agreed that
it was a bad thing, but nobody could say with certainty what
the consequences would be, if any at all.
E. RCA Step 6 - Proposed root cause treatments
Based on our ﬁndings we conducted Systematic In-
ventive Thinking and came up with following root cause
treatments:
Improve fallback solutions. Regarding root cause 1 and
2, the RCA team proposed to develop a solution for reserve
access cards with adequate and tailored room access. The solu-
tion should provide basic access to low-security level facilities,
with tailored room access according to stakeholder needs. This
suggestion should be a public and low threshold offer for those
who have forgotten or misplaced their cards.
Align SecPol with objectives. Regarding root causes
3 and 4, the RCA team proposed to risk assess the need
for physical security and AC for the facilities based on the
organizational goals, employee needs, and the assets stored in
the room. Include key stakeholders in the process and focus
on balancing productivity and security to revise the security
baseline.
Improve the overarching SecPol. Regarding cause 5,
the RCA team proposed to improve the overarching SecPol,
the suggestions were: (i) clarify consequences for breaches of
policy, (ii) assigning a responsible for sanctions per depart-
ment, (iii) including the employees in the shaping of policy,
and (iv) increase the accessibility of the policy.
Improving risk awareness. Regarding root cause 5, we
also propose to improve risk awareness among the stakehold-
ers, by running awareness campaigns including both the risks
the organization and employees are facing. As a part of this,
we proposed to create an information bank regarding risks,
fallback solutions, and how to make use of them.
VI.
DISCUSSION
This section discusses the additional insight gained from
the RCA; ﬁrst qualitatively, and then through cost/beneﬁt
analysis.
A. Additional insight gained from RCA
Upon completing the RCA, we see that the results from
the ISRA and RCA provide different models of the same
problem. The information gathered from the ISRA process
was scoped towards technical risks with solutions for reducing
probability and consequence. Furthermore, we found the RCA
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Fig. 4: Fishbone diagram illustrating contributing causes to the main problem.
to work better to visualize complexity and providing insight
into the human aspects of the problem. However, the RCA
process was resource intensive and required extra training to
complete. The RCA process also required the inclusion of
more stakeholders than the ISRA.
The results show that the beneﬁts of the RCA are a better
understanding of the social dimensions of the problem, such
as conﬂicts between users and the security organization. This
insight provides an improved decision basis and an opportunity
for reaching a compromise with the risk treatment. The risk
assessment team were aware of two (cause 3. and 5.) out of
the ﬁve identiﬁed root causes of the problem. Thus, in our case
study, the RCA did provide a valuable extension to the risk
assessment for solving the problem. The RCA results showed
all root causes to be on the administrative and human side
of the problem. Thus, the treatments produced from the two
approaches were different; ISRA produced a technical treat-
ment in camera surveillance, while RCA produced multiple
administrative treatments, each for addressing separate root
causes.
Although the ISRA did highlight the vulnerabilities
related to the human factor and risk perception as one of
the risk factors, in this case, the decision-makers did not
opt for revision of the AC policy. To summarize, the ISRA
ﬁndings viewed card lending as a technical security problem,
while RCA extended the knowledge into the administrative
problem.
B. Cost-beneﬁt analysis
For cost-beneﬁt analysis, we consider time spent on tasks
and usefulness of the task. Table IV shows that the process of
achieving desired results was time and resource consuming for
our team. The reported hours are the total amount from start
to end without having a budget constraint. The reported hours
does contain resources spent beyond the three-man team, e.g.
from interview attendance and supervision.
The most time consuming and crucial tasks were the steps 3
and 4, data collection and analysis. Further, the table shows
that the resource demand for the Root cause identiﬁcation and
elimination phases as low, this is because the team primarily
identiﬁed the root causes during the data analysis. While
TABLE IV. TOTAL HOURS SPENT CONDUCTING RCA
FOR AN UNTRAINED THREE MAN TEAM
(APPROXIMATELY 220 HOURS PER TEAM MEMBER)
Step
Phase
Tasks
Time spent
Preliminary
Preparations
Collecting available data
100 hours
Preliminary
Preparations
Testing and choosing tools
72 hours
1
Problem Understanding
Performance Matrix
3 hours
2
Problem cause brainstorming
Brainstorming
1 hours
3
Problem cause Data Collection
Planning interviews
150 hours
3
Problem cause Data collection
Conducting interviews
100 hours
4
Data analysis
Qualitative & Statistical
220 hours
5
Root cause identiﬁcation
Fishbone
7 hours
6
Root cause elimination
SIT
7 hours
Total 660 h.
Only RCA Process
Total 488 h.
the main task of the root cause identiﬁcation phase was to
formalize the causes and effects, and the elimination was used
to propose treatments.
As the team gain experience with using RCA on cases,
the time estimate should be signiﬁcantly be reduced. For
example, our study spent 172 hours in the preparation phases
gathering data on the problem and testing tools. With more ex-
perience, the preliminary steps will be signiﬁcantly shortened.
Our team also estimated that the whole process itself would
become leaner with practice.
To summarize, we derived the primary beneﬁt from
the problem cause data collection and analysis phases, which
enabled the root cause identiﬁcation. Furthermore, the group
beneﬁted from working on the performance matrix, which set
the direction for the remainder of the project. Regarding the
remaining tools, the beneﬁts the problem cause brainstorming
was that it helped to provide an overview of the problem space
and invited creative thinking. The advantage of the Fishbone
tool was to group and visualize the identiﬁed problems in the
context. Further, the process step contributed to determine and
analyze causes. The SIT tool has a series of ﬁve principles
that attempts to discover how to solve the components of the
root cause. This tool offers a well-structured way to traverse
a problem situation but could be resource intensive when
handling many problems with all their components.
Issues of minor importance should not be subject to such
an extensive effort as RCA requires. During the preparations
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

for this study, we ran RCA for minor issues and found it
not worthwhile as it was unproductive to use a complicated
problem-solving process to less costly problems. However,
future projects should consider RCA when they perceive the
issue as important and do not know its nature or cause. The
problem should be expensive, complicated, and cannot be
addressed sufﬁciently with less comprehensive methods. These
properties make conducting an RCA on the project justiﬁable
and a valuable addition to the decision-making process.
C. Limitations & Future Work
The case study presented in this article is speciﬁc to
the organization and culture; thus our results have limited
generalizability, but the RCA method and results provide an
insight into what to expect from the process. Another aspect
is that our RCA team was inexperienced and other more
experienced teams will run the process more efﬁciently with a
better cost-beneﬁt. Another issue is if a similar insight could
have been gained if we delegated a similar amount of resources
into the ISRA to investigate the problem. It is possible that the
results of the ISRA would have overlapped more with the RCA
with more time and resources spent on the former. However,
the ISRA process does not argue for such a deep dive into
the problem as the RCA process and does not provide tools
for doing so. It is therefore unlikely that a more thorough
ISRA process would have produced a similar result. However,
the incentive for such an investigation was not there, and we
perceive the ISRA methodologies as immature in this area [14].
Instead of considering the RCA as an extension of the ISRA, a
possible path for future work is to conduct case studies where
the researchers invest a similar amount of resources into both
the RCA and ISRA and then compare results.
An additional direction for future work is to apply RCA
to more and diverse case studies to get a better understand-
ing of the contributions and limitations of the approach for
InfoSec. Recent work has also proposed a novel approach for
conducting socio-technical security analysis [11], and a path
for future work is to adapt, develop, and improve RCA tools for
InfoSec. Furthermore, the future efforts could research RCA
efﬁciency through automation of tasks and build knowledge
repositories. Regarding the latter, a repository of tools for
data collection would help streamline step 3 in the RCA
process.
VII.
CONCLUSION
This study has applied RCA tools to propose a solution
to a complex socio-technical InfoSec problem and found the
RCA method a valid but costly extension to the ISRA. Running
a full-scale RCA requires a lot of time and resources and
the problem should be expensive enough to justify the RCA.
The results from the RCA overlapped slightly with the initial
ISRA. The main differences were that the RCA team proposed
administrative treatments aimed at solving problems in the
social domain, while the ISRA produced a more technical
analysis and treatment for the problem. We conclude that prac-
titioners should look at these two approaches as complimentary
for dealing with complex socio-technical risks and problems.
The combination of the ISRA and RCA will also have utility
when planning for defense-in-depth, where administrative and
technical risk controls can work in coherence to mitigate
threats. The main drawback was that our cost-beneﬁt analysis
of the time and resources invested in the project is on the
borderline of being justiﬁable, and the cost of the problem
should be considered before launching a RCA. Thus, the
RCA provides a viable option when dealing with complex and
costly InfoSec problems and should be a part of the InfoSec
management toolbox.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the help and support from Professor
Einar Snekkenes, Christoffer Hallstensen and Stian Husemoen.
We also extend our gratitude to all the participants in our study
and to the anonymous reviewers.
REFERENCES
[1]
Information technology, Security techniques, Information Security
Risk Management, International Organization for Standardization Std.,
ISO/IEC 27005:2011.
[2]
G. Wangen and E. Snekkenes, “A taxonomy of challenges in in-
formation security risk management,” in Proceeding of Norwegian
Information Security Conference - NISK 2013 - Stavanger, vol. 2013.
Akademika forlag, 2013, pp. 76–87.
[3]
P. Shedden, W. Smith, and A. Ahmad, “Information security risk
assessment: towards a business practice perspective,” in Australian In-
formation Security Management Conference.
School of Computer and
Information Science, Edith Cowan University, Perth, Western Australia,
2010, pp. 119–130.
[4]
B. Andersen and T. Fagerhaug, Root cause analysis: simpliﬁed tools
and techniques.
ASQ Quality Press, 2006.
[5]
K. Julisch, “Clustering intrusion detection alarms to support root
cause analysis,” ACM transactions on information and system security
(TISSEC), vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 443–471, 2003.
[6]
P. F. Wilson, Root cause analysis: A tool for total quality management.
ASQ Quality Press, 1993.
[7]
A. M. Doggett, “Root cause analysis: a framework for tool selection,”
The Quality Management Journal, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 34, 2005.
[8]
J. Collmann and T. Cooper, “Breaching the security of the kaiser
permanente internet patient portal: the organizational foundations of
information security,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 239–243, 2007.
[9]
G. Wangen, “Conﬂicting incentives risk analysis: A case study of the
normative peer review process,” Administrative Sciences, vol. 5, no. 3,
p. 125, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/2076-3387/5/
3/125
[10]
A. Abubakar, P. B. Zadeh, H. Janicke, and R. Howley, “Root cause
analysis (rca) as a preliminary tool into the investigation of identity
theft,” in Cyber Security And Protection Of Digital Services (Cyber
Security), 2016 International Conference On.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[11]
J.-L. Huynen and G. Lenzini, “From situation awareness to action: An
information security management toolkit for socio-technical security
retrospective and prospective analysis,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy,
2017, pp. 213 – 224.
[12]
B. Schneier, “Attack trees,” Dr. Dobbs journal, vol. 24, no. 12, pp.
21–29, 1999.
[13]
G. Wangen, A. Shalaginov, and C. Hallstensen, “Cyber security risk as-
sessment of a ddos attack,” in International Conference on Information
Security.
Springer, 2016, pp. 183–202.
[14]
G. Wangen, C. Hallstensen, and E. Snekkenes, “A framework for
estimating information security risk assessment method completeness,”
International Journal of Information Security, Jun 2017. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10207-017-0382-0
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

