Challenges for Evolving Large-Scale Security Architectures
Geir M. Køien
Institute of ICT
Faculty of Engineering and Science
University of Agder, Norway
Email: geir.koien@uia.no
Abstract—In this paper, we conduct an informal analysis of
challenges that face evolving large-scale security architectures.
The 3rd generation partner project (3GPP) mobile systems is
our example case and we shall investigate how these systems
have evolved and how the security architecture has evolved with
the system(s). The 3GPP systems not only represent a truly
long-lived system family, but are also a massively successful
system family, serving billions of subscribers. What once was
an auxiliary voice-based infrastructure has evolved to become
a main (and thereby critical) information and communications
technology (ICT) infrastructure for billions of people. The 25+
years of system evolution has not all been a linearly planned
progression and the overall system is now clearly also a product
of its history. Our ultimate goal is to capture some of the essence
of security architecture evolution for critical ICT system.
Keywords–Evolving Security; System Security; Security Archi-
tecture; Long-term security planning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we carry out a case-study analysis of some of
the challenges that evolving large-scale security architectures
must meet. The object of our study, the 3GPP systems, has
gradually become important, all-encompassing and pervasive
on a global scale. The systems have emerged to become a
critical ICT infrastructure and this makes the system robustness
and security a concern for society-at-large.
A. The 3GPP System Context
The ﬁrst 3GPP system is the second generation (2G)
Global System for Mobile communications (GSM), developed
in the mid/late 1980ies. Originally, GSM only featured circuit-
switched (CS) services, but was later adapted to also include
packet-switched (PS) services through the General Packet
Radio Service (GPRS) extension. With the new millennium
came the third generation (3G) Universal Mobile Telecommu-
nications System (UMTS), which natively features both CS
and PS services. From around 2010 we also have the fourth
generation (4G) Long-Term Evolution (LTE) system, which is
a broadband PS-only system. LTE is further developed into
LTE-Advanced (LTE-A).
1) Principal Parties: From a subscriber perspective, the
system can be described with three types of principal parties.
•
The Home Public Land Mobile Network (HPLMN)
•
The Visited Public Land Mobile Network (VPLMN)
•
The subscriber/user (USER)
These parties are legal entities, and the relationships are
determined by contractual agreements. A national telecom
regulator will also be involved, in addition to external service
providers. One may also add intruders to the list. The external
service providers usually have little inﬂuence on how the net-
works operate and so we exclude those for further discussion.
Likewise, in this context, we do not see a need for including
virtual mobile network operators (VMNOs).
2) System Development: The 3GPP system speciﬁcations
are developed by the 3GPP, but ratiﬁcation is done by the
organizational partners (formal standardization bodies). As
with other such groups, the 3GPP is contribution driven. This
has an important impact on what is actually being done.
The impact is noticeable when it comes to priorities and
efforts spent. Early on, when GSM/GPRS was speciﬁed, the
operators took considerable responsibility and led many of the
efforts. Subsequently, the vendors have taken over more and
more of this work. The impetus to carry out work is clearly
related to the business potential the work has. Unfortunately,
investments in security functions seldom look like a good
business proposition prior to an incident.
The 3GPP differentiates between mandatory for imple-
mentation and mandatory for use. That is, a feature may be
mandatory to be implemented by the vendors if they want
compliance with a system release. At the same time, the
operators may freely disregard the feature if they want. Other
functions may be mandatory both to develop and deploy.
3) License to Operation and Regulatory Requirements:
Cellular systems operate in licensed bands and are subject to
regulatory requirements. These requirements include support
for lawful interception (LI) and emergency call (EC). The last
decade we have also had anti-terrorist measures such the EU
Data Retention Directive (DRD) [1].
B. Brief Introduction to 3GPP Systems
1) 2G – GSM and GPRS: The GSM and GPRS systems
are the 2G systems. It is common to see monikers like 2.5G
used for GPRS, and 2.9G used for GPRS with Enhanced
Data rates for Global Evolution (EDGE). The main GSM
features are mobility, speech and text messaging. GPRS is
an overlay system to GSM. It features two additional core
network nodes and provides PS support. With EDGE (new
codecs) it provides up to 236 kbps data-rate. There is also an
“Evolved EDGE” extension on the horizon, with yet higher
data-rates. The 2G-based radio access network is called GSM
EDGE Radio Access Network (GERAN).
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

2) 3G – UMTS (incl. High-Speed Packet Access (HSPA)):
The UMTS system was ﬁnalized in late 1999 and is a com-
bined CS/PS system. It can readily achieve >10 Mbps data-
rates (w/max. rates >100 Mbps downlink). The system is a mix
of GSM/GPRS technology and protocols and, increasingly,
IP-based protocols and technology. The radio access network
is called the Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network
(UTRAN).
3) 4G – LTE and LTE-A: The LTE systems are designed
as all-IP networks (AIPN) and features true mobile broadband.
The core network is fully IP based and there are no CS
components to be found. The radio system is highly advanced
and provides true broadband services. The radio base-stations,
called eNB, are logically mesh connected. There are no
longer any controllers in the access network (E-UTRAN). The
VPLMN mobility functions are carried out by the mobility
management entity (MME) server.
C. Paper Layout
In Section II, we brieﬂy outline the security of the 3GPP
systems. In Section III, we attempt to capture some of the trig-
gers for changing the security architecture. Then we proceed
in Section IV, with observations regarding successful systems,
and for security and cryptography in those systems. We also
include observations regarding the typical intruders. In Section
V, we try to learn from the lessons and provide some advice.
Finally, we sum up our effort and provide some concluding
remarks in Section VI.
II.
SECURITY IN THE 3GPP SYSTEMS
In this Section, we provide a (necessarily) short description
of the main features of the 3GPP security provisions.
A. 2G Security
There is no well-deﬁned security architecture per se in
the 2G systems. The main security speciﬁcation was technical
speciﬁcation (TS) 03.20 “Security-related network functions”,
which subsequently has been transposed into TS 43.020 [2].
It deﬁnes the identity- and location privacy scheme, the en-
tity authentication protocol and the smart-card based security
functions. It also outlines the over-the-air cipher function.
1) Background and Requirements: In the voice-only 1G
systems one had experienced charging fraud and impersonation
fraud. Two distinct types of attacks quickly came into focus:
a) Eavesdropping was a big problem as the analogue voice
channel was unprotected and easy to listen-in on. b) Faking
the call setup signaling, which was digital, was quite easy
and could in principle be done by simply recording a setup
sequence and then later replay it. The main priority for a fully
digital system a la GSM was therefore to a) protect the over-
the-air channel against eavesdropping, such that it would no
longer be the weakest link, and b) provide credible subscriber
authentication to avoid impersonation attacks.
2) The 2G Security Architecture: GSM security is based
on a physical subscriber identity module (SIM). For portability
reasons it was decided to use a smart-card. The SIM comprises
both hardware and software functionality, and it contains the
authentication and key agreement (AKA) functions (symmetric
crypto). The SIM also contains the security credentials, like the
permanent subscriber identity (IMSI) and the corresponding
128-bit authentication secret, called KI in the 2G SIM. Figure
1 outlines the GSM security procedures.
The AKA protocol used is called GSM AKA, and it is a
single-pass challenge-response protocol with a signed response
(SRES). The challenge is a pseudo-random 128-bit RAND
bit-ﬁeld and the response is the 32-bit SRES element. The
challenge-response part is dependent on an “authentication set”
forwarding stage, in which the HPLMN forwards the authen-
tication credentials to the VPLMN network. The protocol is
run between the SIM and the visited network. This scheme
is efﬁcient and allows for fast and simple authentication of
the subscriber as well as deriving a session key (the 64-
bit KC). The SIM features the A3 and A8 AKA interfaces,
which are only found in the SIM and the home subscriber
database (HLR). The original example implementation, called
COMP128, is cryptographically broken [3], but still seems to
be in use in many markets.
B T S
T e l e n o r  R & D
F u t u r e  N e t w o r k
B S C
V L R /
M
S C
M
S
H L R /
A u C
T e l e n o r
D u  h a r  f o r  l i t e  å  g j ø r e !
S I M
H o m
e  E n v i r o n m
e n t  ( H E )
S e r v i n g  N e t w o r k  ( S N )
U s e r  E q u i p m
e n t
C o r e  N e t w o r k  ( C N )
A c c e s s  N e t w o r k  ( A N )
S c o p e  o f  G S M
c o n f i d e n t i a l i t y  
p r o t e c t i o n  
A U T H E N T I C A T I O N _ R E Q U E S T ( R A N D )
A U T H E N T I C A T I O N _ R E S P O N S E ( S R E S )
S E N D _ A U T H _ I N F O ( I M S I )
S E N D _ A U T H _ I N F O - a c k ( A u t h S e t )
P r o v i d e  I d e n t i t y  ( I M S I )
C I P H E R _ M O D E _ C O M P L E T E
C I P H E R _ M O D E _ C O M M A N D
Figure 1: GSM security overview
Over-the-air encryption is by means of the A5 stream
cipher family, which is located in the mobile phone and
the base tranceiver station (BTS). There are several A5
versions available, but the original A5/1 is still the default
and mandatory-to-deploy algorithm. It can easily be broken
today by a dedicated attacker [4]. The A5/2 algorithm, which
was explicitly designed to be weak (CoCom regulations), is
ofﬁcially deprecated. The A5/3 algorithm, which is based on
the 3G KASUMI design, is the current best option for GSM,
but rainbow table attacks still work since the algorithm is
limited to 64-bit [5]. The A5 family is based around a 64-
bit key, expect the new (and not deployed) A5/4 cipher, which
is a 128-bit design based on the KASUMI algorithm. In GPRS
one uses the GSM AKA protocol as-is, but here one uses
the GPRS Encryption Algorithm (GEA) ciphers to protect the
asynchronous packet transfers.
3) Omissions and Shortcomings: There are many obvious
omissions and shortcomings to GSM security. This is not
strange as the 2G systems do not have a security architecture as
such; it is more akin to a collections or measures put together
without well-deﬁned requirements. The following list (derived
in [6]) identiﬁes some of the ﬂaws. Even with all these ﬂaws,
the GSM/GPRS system has been a remarkably secure system.
However, some 25 years down the line and the shortcomings
have become serious liabilities. There are also a number of
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

implementations issues [7]. The list is not fair with regard to
the threats found early on, but it is certainly valid now.
•
One-way authentication is utterly inadequate
•
Delegated authentication is naive trust-wise
•
No inter-operator authentication
•
No way to authenticate system nodes
•
No uniqueness/freshness to challenges
•
Unauthenticated plain-text transfer of security credentials
•
Unprotected key transfer
•
Missing key binding and too short keys
•
Key refresh dependent of re-authentication
•
Missing expiry condition on security context
•
Weak A3/A8 functions and no key-deriving key structure
•
Short A5 key stream cycle and key stream re-use
•
Redundant and structured input to A5 (expand-then-encrypt)
•
Highly redundant input to A5 (in signaling message)
•
Protection coverage/range too short (only MS – BTS)
•
Missing integrity protection
•
Weak/inadequate identity/location privacy
•
No core network control plane (signaling) security features
•
No core network user plane protection
•
No IP protection (GPRS)
•
No mobile phone (MS) platform security
B. 3G Security
1) Background and Requirements: Security in the UMTS
system is described brieﬂy in [6, 8] and in considerable depth
in [9]. The main security speciﬁcation is TS 33.102 [10].
One also provided a “Security Objectives and Principles”
[11] background document, as well as conducting a threats
and requirements analysis [12]. One also introduced Network
Domain Security (NDS), which includes IPsec proﬁles for
use with 3GPP systems [13] and a standard set of public-key
infrastructure (PKI) protocols and methods [14].
2) The 3G Security Architecture: The UMTS security ar-
chitecture, depicted in Figure 2, is an important overhaul of
the GSM security, yet the underlying system model remains
much the same. Amongst the features are:
•
New subscriber card (UICC) with security module (USIM)
•
Introduction of 128-bit crypto primitives
•
Improved two-way AKA algorithm (UMTS AKA)
•
Introduction of core network protection (IP protocols)
Sadly, backwards compatibility concerns also dictated that
the GSM SIM could still be used, which re-introduces many
if not most of the 2G weaknesses.
3) The IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS): IMS came with
UMTS (Rel.5). We do not include IMS in our discussions as
it is an optional service-level feature.
T e l e n o r
H L R /
A u C
T e l e n o r
D u  h a r  f o r  l i t e  å  g j ø r e !
U I C C /
U S I M
 M
E
 N o d e  B
M
A P _ S e n d A u t h I n f o ( I M
S I )
M
A P _ S e n d A u t h I n f o - a c k ( A V )
C h a l l e n g e ( R A N D , A U T N )
R e s p o n s e ( R E S )
 V L R /
S G
S N
R N C
S c o p e  o f  
c o n f i d e n t i a l i t y  a n d  i n t e g r i t y
U s e r  E q u i p m
e n t  ( U E )
S e r v i n g  N e t w o r k  ( S N )
H
o m
e  E n v i r o n m
e n t ( H
E )
A c c e s s  N e t w o r k  ( A N )
K e y  t r a n s p o r t  ( C K , I K )
K e y  t r a n s p o r t
( C K , I K )
Figure 2: UMTS security
4) Omissions and Shortcomings: The 3G security is sub-
stantially better and more future proof than the 2G security,
and one really has a security architecture. The architecture
is by no means perfect or complete, but it does at least
capture the main risks/threats and deﬁnes what one wants to
protect. Completeness will always be an issue, but in the 3G
systems we also have that there sometimes is a considerable
mismatch between stated goal and what the mechanisms
achieve. A case in point would be the identity/location privacy
requirements, which does capture the problem well, but the
mechanisms that should provide the necessary services are
woefully inadequate. They are however a) exactly the same
as for the 2G systems and b) they are intimately tied to
the identity presentation scheme deﬁned in the basic mobility
management (MM) protocol machinery (discussed in [6, 15]).
Making changes here would have been a major undertaking,
and since there was considerable time pressure to complete the
3G standard, improvements to identity/location privacy simply
did not happen (there were efforts investigating the possibilities
during the Rel.99 design).
Many of the items on the 2G list of omissions and
shortcomings are mitigated and resolved, but sufﬁce to say
that many of the 2G weaknesses were inherited or permitted
through backwards compatibility requirements. Another main
problem with 3G security is the limited scope.
C. 4G Security
1) Background and Requirements: The book “LTE Secu-
rity” [16] is good and thorough introduction. The main security
standard for LTE is TS 33.401 [17]. LTE and LTE-A are very
similar with respect to the security architecture, which for
historical reasons is called the “System Architecture Evolution
(SAE)” security architecture. The term Evolved Packet System
(EPS) is also used.
The radio access architecture changed signiﬁcantly with
LTE and this triggered large-scale changes to the whole
system, including the security architecture. The security re-
quirements were retained more or less as-is. For compatibility
reasons and due to time constraints during the design phase,
the UMTS AKA protocol was retained as a component of the
EPS AKA protocol.
2) The 4G Security Architecture: The LTE security archi-
tecture has a lot in common with 3G security, but with some
important changes. Amongst the LTE features are:
•
UICC/USIM is retained and required
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

•
Introduction of full key-deriving key hierarchy
•
Session keys not dependent on re-authentication
•
Auth. master key (KASME) bounded to VPLMN id.
•
New session keys for every handover
•
Separation of user plane and control plane protection
•
Introduction of improved AKA algorithm (EPS AKA)
A welcome change is that backwards compatibility with
GSM SIM is prohibited for access to E-UTRAN. UMTS
AKA derived security contexts can be used (mapped) to LTE
contexts. Figure 3 depicts the EPS key hierarchy, which is very
different from the 2G/3G schemes. The new key derivations
take place exclusively outside the UICC/USIM. This makes
for a signiﬁcant departure from previous practices.
K
U I C C / U S I M
 
a n d  H S S
C K , I K
K
A S M E
M
E  a n d  H S S
P e r m a n e n t  s e c r e t
f o r  t h e  s u b s c r i p t i o n
P r o d u c e d  b y
" U M
T S  A K A "
p a r t  
P r o d u c e d  b y
S 1 0  k e y  d e r i v a t i o n
K
N A S i n t
K
R R C i n t
K
e N B
K
R R C e n c
K
U P e n c
K
N A S e n c
M
E  a n d  e N o d e B
M
E  a n d  M
M
E
P r o d u c e d  b y
S 1 1  k e y  d e r i v a t i o n
( a l s o  S 1 2  a n d  S 1 3 )
P r o d u c e d  b y  S 1 5  k e y  d e r i v a t i o n
Figure 3: The EPS key hierarchy
3) Omissions and Shortcomings: The list of omissions and
shortcoming is shorter for LTE, but there are also new threats.
In a world of smart phones, it is obvious that 128-bit crypto
on the access link may count for nothing if the mobile phone
is infested with malicious Apps. Likewise, the networks are
often hybrid systems, and it is common to have base stations
that are 2G/3G/4G compliant. With different security levels
and common hardware/software, it is clear that strong 4G
protection may easily be offset with weak 2G/3G protection.
For 4G this is quite important, as the mesh architecture means
that all eNBs will be able to reach all other eNBs. Thus, one
compromised eNB can reach all other eNBs in the network
segment (which may span the entire operator network). It
is also clear that many of the nodes, including the base
station (BTS/NB/eNB) may be running commodity operating
systems (OS). The chosen OS, likely a Linux variant, may
be reasonably secure, but even a high-security OS will have
weaknesses and must be properly managed to remain secure.
Also, introduction of ﬁrewalls and intrusion detection systems
will be required for these systems now. Server hardening is
a must, and even so it is clear that not all attacks can be
prevented. This means that prevention alone cannot be a viable
future strategy.
The EPS security architecture does require the eNB to be
secure, but the speciﬁcation is not very speciﬁc [17]. It also
has recommendations on use of ﬁrewalls, but the speciﬁcation
is quite vague on this subject too. For a greenﬁeld 4G system,
the security may be quite good at what the system provides,
but the standard system does not do all it needs to do.
Also, it is obvious that even though the user equipment (UE)
normally is not owned or controlled by the network operator,
the mobile devices must have a minimal level of protection.
This is not only to protect the user, which a HPLMN should
be interested in anyhow, but also to protect the network as
a population of broadband devices could disrupt the access
network. Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks would
be but one possibility.
D. Architectural Oddities
One puzzling aspect of the 3GPP security architectures
is that while identity presentation and entity authentication
is fully standardized, there is no authorization mechanisms
present. There are of course mechanisms to discriminate sub-
scriber based on the type of subscription, but these schemes
are not a feature of the security architecture.
Another aspect to be noted is that the subscriber identity
that actually is authenticated, the IMSI, is basically a link layer
identiﬁer. Since there is only basic connectivity present at the
link layer it may help explain why there never was any built-in
authorization scheme in the 3GPP security architecture.
III.
EVOLVING SECURITY ARCHITECTURE
A. Why Change the Security Architecture?
The short answer is that we need to change the security
architecture because some of the premises for the original
security architecture have changed. A slightly longer answer
would revolve around the following aspects.
B. High-level change triggers
There are many high-level change triggers, amongst others:
•
Changes to the assets of the system
This could include changes to the value of the existing
assets, inclusion of new assets or removal of assets.
•
Changes in the threats towards the assets
This includes assets exposure, new intruders, new
intruder capabilities. For new assets it could also
include missing or mismatched protection.
•
Changes to the system context
The system may initially have played a limited role,
but may have evolved into something more.
C. Evolution aspects
Large-scale long-lived systems cannot remain as static
objects for long. Instead, they must be dynamic and adapt to
changing environments.
•
Evolving Target System
If the target system changes, then this will likely affect
the security architecture. Still, the nature of the change
may be such that it does not trigger a need for updating
the security architecture.
•
Evolving Security Architecture - Externally triggered
The security architecture may need updates and mod-
iﬁcations due to external circumstances, or even com-
pletion of planned features that were not initially fully
speciﬁed. Changes in the threats towards the assets, the
exposure of the assets, and the number of users will
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

also affect the system. It could also involve changing
trust-relationships and changes to value of the assets.
•
Evolving Security Architecture - Internally triggered
Change in use. The internal circumstances would en-
compass altered or increased use, which would include
changes to the assets of the system.
•
Security Evolution History
An evolving system is obviously a product of its
history. Decisions taken during the design of GSM
still have an impact on LTE. For instance, the basic
identity presentation scheme essentially remains the
same for LTE as for GSM [18, 19].
•
Societal Impact
When a system reaches certain thresholds it will take
on a new role. It enters a state of criticality to society
and will become an object of regulatory interest. The
critical infrastructure (CI) requirements, will focus on
system survival and service availability rather than
security and privacy for the individual.
•
Privacy
Privacy requirements may not have mattered too much
for a small system with few users back in the early
1990ties. Today privacy requirements are often man-
dated by laws and regulations.
IV.
ASSUMPTIONS REGARDING SYSTEMS, SECURITY
AND CRYPTOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
The following set of assumptions not all be true for all
systems, but we advocate assuming that they are true.
A. Assumptions about Successful Systems
We assume that when people start to design a system they
intend it to be successful. Thus, they must therefore take the
above into account in their design. Our high-level assumptions
about a successful system:
1)
It will outlive its intended lifetime (and design)
2)
It will have many more users then originally intended
3)
It will need to scale its services cost-effectively
4)
It will become highly valuable (many/valuable assets)
5)
It will outlive its base technologies
6)
It may become a critical system (company, organization)
7)
It may become a critical infrastructure (society-at-large)
8)
It will spawn unsuccessful branches/features
9)
It will have to deal with multi-vendor cases
10)
It will need to operate with multiple releases in place
11)
It must encompass all of operations & maintenance too
12)
It will be subject to regulatory interventions
B. Assumptions about System Security
Our assumptions about a long-lived security architecture:
1)
The assets will change (value/number/types)
2)
The principal parties will change and multiply
3)
The threats will change
4)
Trust models will fail (and/or become outdated)
5)
Trust will be betrayed
6)
Risk evaluations will be outdated
7)
The weaknesses, vulnerabilities and exposure will change
8)
The intruders will become more powerful and proliferate
9)
Attacks will only be better over time
10)
There will be security incidents
11)
Scalability in security mechanisms will be decisive
12)
No single security scheme or approach will be sufﬁcient
13)
Effective and efﬁcient defense-in-depth will be needed
14)
Pro-active security protection will not be sufﬁcient
15)
Re-active security will be very important (detect & respond)
16)
Ability to handle large incidents will be required
17)
Mitigation and recovery must be supported
18)
Pervasive resilience and robustness is required
19)
Autonomous sub-system response will become important
20)
There will be security architecture omissions
21)
There will be security compatibility issues (multi-vendor)
22)
There will be security compatibility issues (multi-release)
23)
Fixing minor security wholes can take a very long time
24)
Fixing the security architecture take years (next generation)
25)
Security management will be crucial
26)
Security conﬁguration management is crucial
27)
Security migration methods should be built-in
28)
Privacy will become ever more important
C. Assumptions about Cryptographic Solutions
Our assumptions related to cryptographic solutions:
1)
The cryptographic base functions must be future-proof
2)
Cryptographic primitives will be broken (or too weak)
3)
Key sizes will be changed
4)
Security protocols will be broken (or too weak)
5)
Cryptographic parameters will need to be negotiated (se-
curely)
6)
Cryptographic primitives will need to be revoked
7)
Implementations will contain weaknesses
8)
Management of cryptographic elements will be crucial
It is clear that the basic boot-strapping fundament must be
very solid. This minimal base is what you will depend on if you
need to boot-strap new security solution and new cryptographic
primitives in the rest of the security architecture. It needs to
contain enough to support boot-strapping and it needs to be
future-proof. Efﬁciency is not a main priority here.
D. The Scalability War
The classical Dolev-Yao Intruder (DYI) is not the most
realistic intruder [20]. Real intruder will use any available
means (subversion, physical intrusion, tricking the principals),
ultimately being as powerful as a DYI. There is a reasonably
body of papers detailing various intruder model, but sufﬁce to
say that a modern CI system must be able to handle all types of
intruders. And many of them! This essentially means that the
system must have efﬁcient as well as effective protection, and
that mechanisms that do not scale well, compared to intruder
capabilities, will be doomed to fail in the long run.
Our assumptions related to scalability and efﬁciency:
1)
Security scalability will be a major concern
2)
Efﬁciency is highly important
3)
Effectiveness is imperative for core mechanism
4)
Auxiliary defense-in-depth solution are needed
5)
Avoid speciﬁc-attack measures if at all possible
6)
Security management must scale well
Assumption three and four are apparently somewhat at
odds, but in the end assumption three can be supported given
that these means are complementary and cost-effective. See
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

also considerations about the economy of attacks and defenses
outlined in [21], This indicates that for broad sweeping attacks,
even quite weak mechanisms may successfully thwart the
attacks. Measures that are only effective for one speciﬁc attack
should be avoided.
E. Other Concerns
1) Passive Regulatory Authorities: One main concern is
that the regulatory authorities generally are quite passive with
regard to security requirements. This is apparent for the cellular
system and regulations concerning the operators. The 3GPP
standards are by no means perfect or complete, but it is still the
case that many of the standardized and recommended security
mechanisms are not deployed in the networks. The regulatory
authorities are generally more reactive than proactive, unless
they have a clear political mandate to be stringent. One should
also be concerned about regulations just subsequent to a
major public incident, since it is likely that the urge to “do
something” is strong while it is also likely that one focuses
narrowly on details. One may end up with security theater, as
coined by Schneier [22].
Part of this problem is a that one sometimes ends up with a
lot of attention to correct and strengthen unimportant features.
To do something right is not enough, one must also do the
right thing.
2) False Security: Security theater may over time develop
into the more elaborate cargo cult security type of deception.
Then the main functions and mechanisms may all be there
(or mimicked closely), but with some vital part missing or
done completely wrong. Cargo cultism is deﬁned by “perfect
form”, but it simply does not work as intended. Feynman has
an amusing description of “cargo cult science” that nicely
illustrates the principles [23]. Since security can be very
difﬁcult to get right and to verify, cargo cult security may
look like the real deal.
3) Security Testing and Security Conﬁguration: In [7] the
authors clearly also demonstrate that not only is not all security
options exercises, but that, unsurprisingly, there are implemen-
tation weaknesses and vulnerabilities. The ASMONIA project
provides many more examples of weakness, vulnerabilities and
risks facing a mobile system [24]. The ASMONIA project
published a lot of useful documents for operators wanting
to improve their security level. The documents also include
advice and methods for how to test the security. The EU
body ENISA provides a lot of useful security-related input,
but generally have no mandate to impose security [25]. When
it comes to IP network security and server security there is a
large body of standards and methods for how to design and test
security hardening [26–29]. There are also various checklists
available [30].
V.
LESSONS LEARNED
A. Verify Assumptions
One must verify assumption about the system and the
security periodically or when there are substantial changes to
the system. That is, an audit is called for to verify assumptions
about the assets, the principal entities, trust relationships etc.
Security policies will be affected by changes to these assump-
tions. This is a process oriented task that must take place both
for the design phase and for the deployed system(s).
B. Rock Solid Bootstrapping Security
There needs to be a rock solid fundament that will be
secure for the foreseeable future. The smart-card has served
this purpose in the 3GPP systems on the subscriber side. The
smart-card is not tamper-proof, but it has successfully served
as a high-trust platform.
C. Planned Deprecations
A scalable and evolving system must be able to handle
deprecation of almost all cryptographic algorithm, security
protocols and security services. The deprecation, needless
to say, must be conducted in a secure manner. Backwards
compatibility requirements and fallback solutions must be
handled in a secure way.
D. Negotiable and Adaptable
Given that one must plan for deprecation of security
features/services, one must also plan how to negotiate new
features/services. This feature must be built-in and have high
assurance. Adaptation may be necessary to account for local
requirements, but is vital that adaptations must be fully com-
pliant with a well-deﬁned security policy.
E. Proactive & Reactive Security
Basic security functionality to identify and authenticate
principals and entities is necessary, but not sufﬁcient. Adding
authorization, protected storage and protect communication is
also necessary, but still not sufﬁcient. More may be added,
but in the end it is impossible to fully secure the system.
This means that one must handle and deal with incidents.
There is therefore a clear need for intrusion detection and
response systems, to deploy ﬁrewalls, anti-virus protection,
secure backups, secure audit trails etc. The reactive measures
must be included in the overall system security plans and
subject to revisions as need be.
F. Stability, Resilience and Recovery
System integrity is imperative to ensure a stable and re-
silient system. System integrity is a system-level characteristic
and does not preclude partial or local failures. What is imper-
ative is to prevent the failures to scale. Failures, whether man-
made intentional or unintentional, cannot entirely be prevented.
Procedures that support mitigation and recovery must be an
integral part of the overall system security plan.
G. Conﬁguration Management
Proper planned conﬁguration management, which must
include security functionality, is an absolute necessity.
H. Privacy Matters
Privacy is one feature that must be accounted for in all
systems that include human users or any kind of data pertaining
to humans. This must be planned for from the design phase
and handled in all phases of system deployment.
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

VI.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The results in this paper cannot be said to be fully
supported by the evidence provided in this paper (or in the
referenced papers). They are neither rigorous nor complete.
This is to be expected for such a complex issue. Thus, while
the results may be valid and true, they will hardly be complete
and not always necessary either. That is, the usual “necessary
and sufﬁcient” conditions are not really there. Still, experience
and empirical evidence should not be discounted, and we
advocate that the lessons learned are taken into account, not as
mathematical axioms, but inputs to be considered. We therefore
recommend that scalable evolving security architectures should
be designed with these assumption as background.
In this paper, we have outlined the 3GPP security architec-
ture as it has evolved over more than 25 years. From being an
auxiliary service for the few, it has grown to literally cater to
billions of subscribers, and the number and types of services
provided has changed dramatically over the years. The use-
patterns of these systems has changed as well. All in all, there
has been a complete transformation of almost all aspects of
these systems. During this process, the security architecture
has evolved with the system and the changing system context,
though not without some noticeable failures and a growing
number of security problems.
We have argued that to achieve scalable security architec-
tures that are able to evolve over time, one needs to take into
account the fact that almost all assumption one initially had
will become false or moot. This means that adaptability and
ability to support changes is crucial. This is important in a
world where the internet-of-things (IoT) landslide is about to
happen and where the systems will be ever more important.
In the wake of the Snowdon revelations, it is also clear that
cyber-security is under constant pressure, and while we do not
want to over-state the Snowdon case per se, it should be clear
that the cyber-war methods will (over time) become available
to many organizations and individuals. So we need to learn
how to cope with this and do so fast.
REFERENCES
[1]
European Parliament/European Council, “Directive 2006/24/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the
retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision
of publicly available electronic communications services or of public
communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC,” EU,
Directive 24/EC, 2006.
[2]
3GPP, TS 43.020, “Security related network functions,” 3GPP, France,
TS 43.020 (2G), 2014.
[3]
J. R. Rao, P. Rohatgi, H. Scherzer, and S. Tinguely, “Partitioning attacks:
or how to rapidly clone some gsm cards,” in Security and Privacy, 2002.
Proceedings. 2002 IEEE Symposium on.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 31–41.
[4]
M. Kalenderi, D. Pnevmatikatos, I. Papaefstathiou, and C. Manifavas,
“Breaking the gsm a5/1 cryptography algorithm with rainbow tables and
high-end fpgas,” in Field Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL),
2012 22nd International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 747–753.
[5]
P. Papantonakis, D. Pnevmatikatos, I. Papaefstathiou, and C. Manifavas,
“Fast, fpga-based rainbow table creation for attacking encrypted mo-
bile communications,” in Field Programmable Logic and Applications
(FPL), 2013 23rd International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[6]
G. M. Køien, Entity authentication and personal privacy in future
cellular systems.
River Publishers, 2009, vol. 2.
[7]
F. van den Broek, B. Hond, and A. Cedillo Torres, “Security Testing of
GSM Implementations,” in Engineering Secure Software and Systems,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. J¨urjens, F. Piessens, and
N. Bielova, Eds.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, vol. 8364,
pp. 179–195.
[8]
G. M. Køien, “An introduction to access security in UMTS,” Wireless
Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 1, Feb 2004, pp. 8–18.
[9]
V. Niemi and K. Nyberg, UMTS Security.
John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
[10]
3GPP, TS 33.102, “3G Security; Security architecture,” 3GPP, France,
TS 33.102 (3G), 2014.
[11]
3GPP, TS 33.120, “Security Objectives and Principles,” 3GPP, France,
TS 33.120 (3G), 2001.
[12]
3GPP, TS 21.133, “3G security; Security threats and requirements,”
3GPP, France, TS 21.133 (3G), 2001.
[13]
3GPP, TS 33.210, “3G security; Network Domain Security (NDS); IP
network layer security,” 3GPP, France, TS 33.210 (NDS/IP), 2012.
[14]
3GPP, TS 33.310, “Network Domain Security (NDS); Authentication
Framework (AF),” 3GPP, France, TS 33.310 (NDS/AF), 2014.
[15]
G. M. Køien, “Privacy enhanced cellular access security,” in Proceed-
ings of the 4th ACM workshop on Wireless security.
ACM, 2005, pp.
57–66.
[16]
D. Forsberg, G. Horn, W.-D. Moeller, and V. Niemi, LTE security. John
Wiley & Sons, 2012, vol. 1.
[17]
3GPP, TS 33.401, “3GPP System Architecture Evolution (SAE); Secu-
rity architecture,” 3GPP, France, TS 33.401 (3G), 2014.
[18]
G. M. Køien, “Privacy enhanced mutual authentication in LTE,” in
Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
(WiMob), 2013 IEEE 9th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013,
pp. 614–621.
[19]
G. Køien, “Mutual entity authentication for LTE,” in Wireless Com-
munications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2011 7th
International.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 689–694.
[20]
D. Dolev and A. C. Yao, “On the Security of Public-Key Protocols,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 29, no. 2, 3 1983, pp.
198–208.
[21]
D. Florˆencio and C. Herley, “Where do all the attacks go?” in Eco-
nomics of Information Security and Privacy III.
Springer, 2013, pp.
13–33.
[22]
B. Schneier, “Beyond fear,” Copernicus Book, New York, 2003.
[23]
R. P. Feynman, “Cargo cult science,” in Surely You’re Joking, Mr.
Feynman, 1st ed.
W. W. Norton, 1985, Originally a 1974 Caltech
commencement address.
[24]
“The ASMONIA project,” See www.asmonia.de, 2014.
[25]
“ENISA - European Union Agency for Network and Information
Security,” See www.enisa.europa.eu/, 2014.
[26]
K. Scarfone, W. Jansen, and M. Tracy, “Guide to General Server
Security,” NIST, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, Special Publication
800-123, 2008.
[27]
Z. Anwar, M. Montanari, A. Gutierrez, and R. H. Campbell, “Budget
constrained optimal security hardening of control networks for critical
cyber-infrastructures,” International Journal of Critical Infrastructure
Protection, vol. 2, no. 1, 2009, pp. 13–25.
[28]
R. Dewri, I. Ray, N. Poolsappasit, and D. Whitley, “Optimal security
hardening on attack tree models of networks: a cost-beneﬁt analysis,”
International Journal of Information Security, vol. 11, no. 3, 2012, pp.
167–188.
[29]
R. Dewri, N. Poolsappasit, I. Ray, and D. Whitley, “Optimal security
hardening using multi-objective optimization on attack tree models of
networks,” in Proceedings of the 14th ACM conference on Computer
and communications security.
ACM, 2007, pp. 204–213.
[30]
NIST, “Security conﬁguration checklists program,” See http://csrc.nist.
gov/groups/SNS/checklists/, 2014.
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

