Electromagnetic Weapons as Means of Stopping Vehicles  
A Proposal of  a Stationary Electromagnetic Device for Stopping Vehicles  
 
Jan Valouch, Hana Urbančoková 
The Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin  
Zlin, Czech Republic 
e-mail: valouch@fai.utb.cz, e-mail: urbancokova@fai.utb.cz
 
 
Abstract – The development of automobile technology is 
associated with the increase of application of electronic 
elements. One possible method to stop the vehicle is to disrupt 
the operation of electronic systems using a high power 
electromagnetic pulse. This article describes the design idea of 
a stationary generator of electromagnetic pulses that would be 
useful for stopping vehicles at checkpoints, at the entrances to 
the object and in front of sensitive infrastructure. An 
important aspect of the proposal is the effectiveness of the 
generator with respect to the electromagnetic immunity of 
vehicles.  
Keywords-direct 
energy 
weapons; 
car; 
vehicle; 
electromagnetic susceptibility; high power microwave; non-lethal 
weapons. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Electromagnetic weapons are referred to as Directed 
Energy Weapons (DEW). These weapons use highly 
focused energy to damage targets. The energy could be 
delivered via electromagnetic radiation, sound, or subatomic 
particles. The DEW, which operate in the frequency range 
of 100 KHz - 1 GHz (Directed Energy Weapons - Radio 
Frequency DEWRF) and in the range from 1 to 300 GHz 
(microwave, DEWM) are devices designed to disrupt, 
degrade, or destroy electronic and electrical systems [1]. 
Automobiles contain a large number of electronic systems. 
Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) coupled into the electronic 
circuits of the vehicles can interfere with the operation of 
the electronic control unit [2]. Disruption of the function of 
the control unit may result in the engine stalling. This effect 
allows: 
 
Stopping the engine stationary or slow moving 
vehicles (e.g., vehicles used for bank robberies, 
drug-handovers, within the needs of detention 
persons or identification of criminals, or when the 
driver breached the traffic rules), 
 
Stopping speeding vehicles, 
 
Protection of convoys (reduce the risk of attack from 
other vehicles - collision, shooting) [3]. 
Only a few companies produce electromagnetic devices 
for stopping vehicles. These devices are used for the needs of 
police, army, special operations units or protecting of 
important events [4]. These electromagnetic weapons are 
very expensive. This article describes the design idea of a 
stationary generator of electromagnetic pulses that would be 
useful for stopping vehicles at checkpoints, at the entrances 
to the object and in front of sensitive infrastructure. Initial 
ideas and design conditions of stationary electromagnetic 
system for stopping vehicles: 
 
The system will be used for stopping vehicles at the 
entrances to objects [5], 
 
Security personnel will use the system to stop 
suspicious vehicles [4], 
 
The system will be integrated with the access control 
system for use in security applications (this solution 
is missing), 
 
The system can be integrated with an alarm security 
system and video surveillance system (this solution 
is missing), 
 
The system can be activated automatically in 
response to a negative event (e.g., an attempt to 
break into the object, a vehicle in the vicinity of 
object, etc.), 
 
The power level of system will be set efficiently 
with a view of electromagnetic immunity vehicles, 
 
Possible inclusion of the system into a series of 
technical standards to complement alarm systems. 
Project schedule should include: 
 
Analysis of design of contemporary DEW (USA, 
Germany, China, Australia, etc.), 
 
Comparison of contemporary devices and systems 
used for stopping vehicles, 
 
Analysis of the requirements of technical standards 
for electromagnetic immunity of vehicles, 
 
Selection of the type of generator of electromagnetic 
pulses (several solutions exist), 
 
The proposal the automatic generator control (main 
advantage of suggested approach), 
 
Simulation of the effects-similarly [4], 
 
Main goal-Creating a product prototype. 
DEW basic description is given in Section 2. 
Contemporary 
electromagnetic 
systems 
for 
stopping 
vehicles are described in Section 3. Detailed information 
about the proposed system (use of alarm outputs of the 
access control system or cameras, detectors, wiring, etc.) will 
be addressed in our future work. 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II. 
DIRECTET ENERGY WEAPONS  
Electromagnetic weapons that operate in radio wave and 
microwave 
(DEWRF 
and 
DEWM) 
ranges 
use 
electromagnetic impulses. These weapons use two types of 
the generators: narrowband (HPM- High Power Microwave) 
and wideband (UWB- Ultra Wide Band). UWB weapons 
emit radiation in a wide frequency range, but with a low 
energy density. These devices are suitable where it is not 
possible to accurately identify the characteristics of the 
target- especially its working frequencies. HPM weapons 
emit pulses at the individual frequencies with very high 
power. The impact on the target is very effective, because the 
impulse resonates with the known frequency of the attacked 
device [1]. 
High-Power Microwave (HPM) electromagnetic energy 
can be produced as a near-instantaneous pulse created 
through special electrical equipment that transforms battery 
power, or powerful chemical reaction or explosion, into 
intense microwaves that are very damaging to electronics 
[2].  
For the HPM systems some types of generators can be 
used like: MILO- Magnetically Line Isolated Oscillator, 
RKA-Relativistic Klystron Amplifier, TWT-Traveling Wave 
Tube, 
BWO-Back 
Wave 
Oscillator 
[3], 
MWCG- 
Cherenenkov generator, Vircator-Virtual Cathode Oscillator, 
reltron, magnetron, gyrotron [4], etc. UWB Generator use as 
power component: special spark gaps, laser-activated 
semiconductor switches, quick switches for disconnecting 
circuits with inductance [4].  
III. 
CONTEMPORARY ELECTROMAGNETIC SYSTEMS FOR 
STOPPING VEHICLES 
Figure 1 shows the system HPEMcarStop, which is 
produced by a company Diehl BGT Defence GmbH & Co., 
Roethenbach/Pegnitz, Germany [5]. The company produces 
HPEM (High Power Electro Magnetics) effectors in the form 
of systems with product names: HPEMcarStop and 
HPEMcheckPoint. System HPEMcarStop can be used, e.g., 
for activities by the police, army, special operations units or 
protection of important events (e.g., the Olympic Games).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The system HPEMcarStop (adapted from [5]) 
The system is designed so that EMP operates on the 
target vehicle from its front side; it means that the EMP 
generator is installed on a platform in the rear part of the 
vehicle. HPEMcarStop was successfully tested with more 
than 60 different types of vehicles and allows stopping the 
target vehicle at a distance of 3 to 15 m with more than 75% 
success rate. HPEMcheckPoint is designed to the stopping of 
vehicles at checkpoints and in front of important objects 
(e.g., the critical infrastructure). It combines a system 
HPEMcarStop with another source HPEM, which is located 
on trailer. 
Figure 2 shows the next system for stopping a car with 
the designation HPEMcase. This mobile system is used to 
influence command and data centers, computers, alarm 
systems control devices, surveillance installations, as well as 
all other kinds of electronics. Maximum peak radiated power 
is 365 MW and operating frequency 350 MHz [5].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The System for protecting buildings and persons HPEMcase 
(adapted from [5]) 
Other manufacturers, which produce similar devices are: 
the company Eureka Aerospace (Pasadena, California, USA, 
system RF Safe Stop) or British company e2v (Chelmsford, 
England, system HPEMS) [6] [7]. 
IV. 
ELECTROMAGNETIC IMMUNITY OF AUTOMOTIVE 
TECHNOLOGY  
During the research, it is necessary to analyze the 
requirements of the standards for electromagnetic immunity 
of automotive technology. Verification of Electromagnetic 
Compatibility (EMC) requirements is performed for 
automobiles, e.g., in compliance with European Directive 
2006/28/ EC and with standards ISO 11451, 11452, 7637, 
CISPR 12, CISPR 25, SAE J1133, etc. 
Vehicle manufacturers also use their own standards (e.g., 
BMW- GS 95002, Jaguar, Land Rover- CS2010JLR, 
Renault- 36.00.808, etc.). These standards are stricter than 
international standards. These standards contain information 
about the requirements of testing electromagnetic immunity 
(type tests, signal levels, etc.) for automotive components. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
An effective way to stop a vehicle is to disrupt the 
operation 
of 
electronic 
systems 
using 
high 
power 
electromagnetic pulses, which can be generated using 
electromagnetic weapons. We presented the idea to use a 
stationary generator of electromagnetic pulses for stopping 
vehicles at checkpoints and at the entrances to the object. An 
important aspect of the proposal is the comparison of 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

contemporary devices and systems used for stopping 
vehicles and analysis of the requirements of technical 
standards for electromagnetic immunity of vehicles. A 
novelty is the possibility of automatic generator control 
through integration with the alarm system. The output signal 
of the alarm system can trigger a HPM generator. The engine 
of vehicles within the radiation zone will stop and will not 
work as long as the HPM source is switched on. Another 
possibility is to use a camera system to identify the type of 
vehicle and its speed. This is one of the possible ways to 
adjust power of generator. It is not advisable to calibrate 
HPM generator for one type car. Suitable orientation of the 
antenna HPM generator is important, regardless of the car 
construction (cars with metalized windows and a full steel 
body or cars based on carbon fiber and aluminum). To 
achieve the best possible result (vehicle stop), target cars 
must be radiated from the front. Exposure time of HPM 
signals required to stop the vehicle is dependent on the 
vehicle type, construction, speed, etc.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Urbancokova, J. Valouch and S. Kovar, “Stopping of 
transport vehicles using the power electromagnetic pulses,” 
in: Przegląd Elektrotechniczny. vol 91, no 8. Poland, 
Warszawa, 2015,  pp. 101-104.  
[2] C. Wilson, High Altitude Electromagnetic Pulse and High 
Power Microwave Devices: Threat Assesment. Washington, 
D.C.: Congressional Research Service, p. 25, 2008. 
[3] L. Drazan, “Electromagnetic Weapons Threat to Industrial 
Society” Conference Proceedings BTSM. Zlín, Tomas Bata 
Univerzity in Zlín 2013, pp. 10-15.  
[4] K. Hong and S. Braidwood, “Stopping Car Engines Using 
High Power Electromagnetic Pulses” Electromagnetics in 
Advanced Applications (ICEAA), International Conference 
on Electromegnetics in Advance Applications, September 20-
24, 2010, pp. 378-381. ISBN 978-1-4244-7366-3. 
[5] Diehl Bgt Defence. White Paper on HPEM Technology 
Roethenbach/Pegnitz, Germany, 2013. [online]. Available 
from: http://www.vdi.de/. [retrieved: June, 2016]  
[6] Eureka Aerospace. High-Power Electromagnetic System for 
Stopping 
Vehicles. 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.eurekaaerospace.com. [retrieved: June, 2016]  
[7] E2v Bringing life to technology. Directed Energy Weapons 
Systems 
DEWs. 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.e2v.com/. [retrieved: June, 2016]  
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

