Electric Vehicle Authentication and Secure Metering in Smart Grids
Yutaka Yamaguchi
Faculty of Engineering,
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
1TE20110W@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Dirceu Cavendish
Department of Computer Science and Elect.,
Kyushu Institute of Technology
Fukuoka, Japan
cavendish@net.ecs.kyutech.ac.jp
Hiroshi Koide
Research Institute of Info. Tech.,
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
koide@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Electric vehicles have been recently produced at a
very aggressive pace as a way to curb carbon emissions in the
21st century. Public utility companies are rushing to provide
electric vehicle charging station infrastructure needed to serve
a rapidly growing ﬂeet of EV users in various countries around
the world. Equipped with smart meters, charging stations must
check vehicle’s characteristics prior to charging, as well as
securely report charging data back to public utility companies.
In this paper, we propose to leverage an Authentication and Key
Agreement protocol used in cellular networks into an electric
vehicle authentication and secure metering framework. Starting
with a vehicle Subscriber Identiﬁcation Module, we show how
generic vehicle services can be securely provided, including
mutual authentication, key agreement, and key management
issues.
Index Terms—Smart Grids; Electric Vehicle Charging; Authen-
tication and Key Agreement.
I. INTRODUCTION
Electric Vehicles have become very popular in recent years,
with hybrid and all electric models being sold in large numbers
in developed countries. In addition, residential solar panels
have also become popular in new house developments across
the world. As a result, power utility companies in the United
States and other developed countries are installing Smart Me-
ters at residential and business buildings, in order to manage
renewable energy generation and consumption to efﬁciently
manage the electric grid [2]. These efforts are seen as evolu-
tionary steps towards Smart Grids, which consists of intelligent
power generation and transmission utilities, equipped with me-
ters, sensing devices, and information gateways that controls
energy distribution and consumption in near real time. Aggres-
sive Smart Grid projects are currently being pursuit in US, EU,
and Asia [3]. As Power Utility Companies rely on accurate
metering information from smart meters, secure metering is
key to a reliable electric grid management system. From
a consumer’s perspective, accurate billing is important. For
instance, some charging stations may charge extra for vehicles
staying in the stations longer than needed. Authentication and
encryption mechanisms for reliably transmitting and recording
data consumption of users between power companies and users
via smart meters are needed.
Symetric key based authentication and encryption requires
a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) that is complex to manage,
in addition to requiring more computational power than sym-
metric key based counterparts. About complexity, maintaining
a mobile device uptodate about certiﬁcates that have been
revoked is not a trivial matter. As far as processing power,
although smart meters are not typically limited in power con-
sumption, they do not necessarily come equipped with state of
the art processing chipsets. Finally, symmetric key encryption
is more suitable to cellular wireless interface, usually the
interface of choice of Smart Meters. In this work, we propose
a vehicle to Power Utility Company (PUC) authentication
and secure metering scheme based on symmetric keys and
cryptographic one way functions widely used in the cellular
industry. We ﬁrst advocate for an extension of Subscriber Iden-
tity Module (SIM) card industry to vehicles. Then, we show
how to realize authentication and key agreement protocols
between Power Utility Companies and EV vehicles, in order
to support secure charging via smart meters. Provided that
smart meters are physically protected within charging stations,
the framework proposed obviates the need to manage meter
credentials while still supporting secure metering.
There has been a number of research work on Security
of Smart Grids in the last several years. A comprehensive
survey on security issues in Smart Grids can be found at
[5]. Similar to our work, [10] have proposed authentication
mechanisms using credentials stored in the Electric Vehicle,
using a Hardware Security Module. Due to economy of scale,
a vehicle SIM is likely to be as secure and a cheaper solution
than an onboard EV HSM. A Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
has been proposed to safely store credentials within EVs
[11]. We see such proposal to be complementary, rather than
competing with our framework, as we can use TPM to store
and process master keys generated by the AKA algorithm
safely.
The paper material is organized as follows. Section II
describes EV charging Ecosystem, its functionalities, security
requirements and credential management. Section III shows
how to leverage cellular authentication and key agreement
protocols to provide EV/PUC mutual authentication and secure
metering of charging services. Section IV discusses smart grid
standards and their relation to or aka authentication protocol
proposal. Section VI provides a security threat analysis of our
protocol proposal. Section VII summarizes our contributions
and discusses future work.
II. SMART GRID EV SYSTEM AND SECURITY
Figure 1 deﬁnes the scope of the system our work is focused
on. A Public Utility Company (PUC) retails energy from
distribution grid via sub-stations (not shown). For that purpose,
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Vehicle Registration Authority
Public Utility Company
EV Charging/Metering
TLS
AKA
SecCharging
TLS
Figure 1: EV Registration and Public Utility Company Ecosystem
PUCs own and control smart meters (SM), which provides
energy metering of users at energy consumption end-points,
such as residential homes and commercial buildings. SMs
are connected to EV charging stations, which provide both
home and on the road EV charging services. Consumers EV
ownership is controlled by a Vehicle Registration Authority,
which manages vehicle ownership during the lifetime of the
vehicle, issuing registration and license plates.
A. Secure EV charging
Secure EV charging consists of the following components:
• Mutual authentication of service provider (PUC) and
consumer/vehicle: PUC needs to recognize a licensed
vehicle and associate it with a legitimate owner upon
which charging fees are assessed. Consumers, on the
other hand, need to have trust that the charging station
and its SM belongs to a trustworthy PUC.
• Secure charging metering: Energy consumption me-
tering needs to be reliable and conﬁdential between
PUC service provider and user/vehicle. In this paper, we
assume a separate mechanism to ensure Smart Meters/EV
chargers can be trusted by the PUC. Several mechanisms
are possible to authenticate a SM, from a X.509 certiﬁcate
to Physically Unclonable Functions [6].
For authentication between PUCs and user/vehicle, we
propose a symmetric cryptographic based Authentication and
Key Agreement mechanism, similar to the one widely used in
cellular networks [1]. We advocate that an alternative asym-
metric key scheme, based on Public Key Infrastructure (PKI),
is not appropriate for mobile devices, due to complexities in
managing certiﬁcate revocations and other key management
issues.
B. Vehicle SIM Credential
A Subscriber Identity Module is an integrated circuit that
securely stores an International mobile subscriber number
(IMSI) and a unique cryptographic symmetric key. Authen-
tication of the mobile device is predicated on the veriﬁcation
of the device possession of the key, and hence the key must be
kept hidden into the Universal Integrated Circuit Card (SIM
card/UICC) at all costs. The authentication of the device is
based on the sharing of this key only between the user and
the service provider, in this case the mobile network operator.
The sharing of the device key with operators is executed
between UICC manufacturer and network operators via secure
ceremonies, which are secure protocols to ensure that no other
1st character:
Where vehicle was built
1 H G B H 4 1 J X M N 1 0 9 1 8 6
Vehicle Identification Number
2nd and 3rd characters:
Manufacturer
4th to 8th characters:
Vehicle brand, engine size
and type
11th character:
Assembly plant
9th character:
Security code that identifies
VIN as recognized by manufacturer
10th character:
Model year
Last 6 characters:
Vehicle Serial Number
Figure 2: Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number
TABLE I: LIST OF VARIABLES
K
EV Vehicle key: shared secret between user and provider
RAND
Random challenge: challenges user identity
SQN
Sequence number: prevents replay attacks
AMF
Authentication Management Field: manages multiple AKA protocols
CK
Conﬁdentiality key: encrypts data between user and provider
IK
Integrity key: provides data integrity between user and provider
AK
Anonymity key: obfuscates SQN
MAC
Message authentication code: veriﬁes integrity of authentication msgs.
XMAC
Expected message authentication code: veriﬁes provider
RES
Challenge response: produced by user for authentication
XRES
Expected challenge response: veriﬁes user response
PUC-MSK
Master session key between a PUC and vehicle
SN id
Serving Network: In EV charging context, unique id of a PUC
entity has knowledge of a valid mobile cryptographic key and
its IMSI association.
As SIM card industry has proven to be reliable and
scaleable, we propose the extension of it to vehicles. That is, a
cryptographic key is associated with the Vehicle Identiﬁcation
Number (VIN), which is a unique but readily available vehicle
number etched into every car chassis. As shown in Figure
2, a VIN encodes vehicle manufacturer, model, engine size,
among other characteristics. For our purposes, manufacturer
and model information may be used to verify the type of
charger required, useful if charging stations are not standard-
ized. In addition, charging parameters speciﬁc to a vehicle
model can be supported.
III. VEHICLE AND UTILITY COMPANY AUTHENTICATION
AND KEY AGREEMENT
Figure 1 depicts mutually authenticated and encrypted
communication protocols for secure communication between
entities. PUC communicates securely with vehicle registration
authority via mutually authenticated TLS session. Secure
communication between PUC and EV is supported via an
Authentication and Key Agreement protocol, as per Figure
3.
Upon reading of the vehicle license plate, PUC requests
authentication vectors to the vehicle registration authority for
the vehicle to be charged via a secure TLS connection. A
stolen/fake license plate will result in vehicle authentication
failure, and hence denial of EV charging service.
Authentication vectors are generated as per Figure 4 (see
Table I for a glossary), as follows. A sequence number SQN is
maintained between the registration authority and the vehicle,
to prevent replay attacks. A fresh random number RAND
is generated for each set of authentication vectors. RAND
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Home Authentication and Key Agreement
RA:Home Server
Captures vehicle
license plate
PUC: Auth Server
SM/Charging St.
Electric Vehicle
vAuthReq(license plate)
homeAuthReq(license plate)
Generates auth
vectors(K)
homeAuthResp(home-av)
vAuthChall(RAND,AMF,...)
vAuthChall(RAND,AMF,...)
Verifies MSG
Computes response
vAuthChall(RES)
Verifies Response
Establishes PUC-MSK
vAuthChall(RES)
authorizesCharging(CK,IK)
Cashes CK, IK
SecureChargingSession
Figure 3: Home Authentication and Key Agreement
Generate SQN
AMF
Home/PUC
Authentication
Vector Generation
Auth Vector
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
K
SQN
Generate RAND
RAND
MAC
XRES
CK
IK
AK
KDF
SQN xor AK
SN id
PUC-MSK
AV: RAND || XRES || CK || IK || SQN xor AK || AMF || MAC
PUC-MSK
Figure 4: Authentication Vector Generation
and SQN, together with the vehicle cryptographic key K and
authentication management ﬁeld AMF (to be described later)
are fed into ﬁve one way functions, as per [1]. A Message
Authentication Code MAC is generated to verify the authen-
ticity of the vector. An expected response XRES to challenge
RAND is also produced. In addition, a conﬁdentiality key CK
(encryption), identity key IK (authentication), and anonymity
key AK are produced. The authentication vector results from
the concatenation of RAND, XRES, CK, IK, IK, SQN xor AK,
AMF, and MAC. Upon reception of the authentication vector,
PUC challenges the identity of the EV by passing the random
challenge RAND, SQN xor AK, and AMF to the vehicle,
for challenge response computation. It also sends MAC for
message veriﬁcation.
Vehicle computes challenge response as per Figure 5. Ve-
hicle ﬁrst uses RAND and its key K to retrieve AK using one
way function f5. AK then is used to retrieve SQN, which,
together with vehicle key K and challenge RAND, are used
AMF
(Home/PUC)
VerificationResponse
Provider Authentication
Verification
f1
f2
f3
f4
K
PUC-MSK
SQN
RAND
XMAC/MAC
RES/XRES
CK
IK
KDF
SQN xor AK
SN id
PUC-MSK
Verify: MAC = XMAC ; SNQ in range
xor
SQN xor AK
f5
AK
Master Key Generation
User Authentication
Verification
Verify: XRES = RES
Extracts SQN xor AK
Extracts RAND
Figure 5: Provider/User Veriﬁcation
to compute an expected message authentication code XMAC,
a challenge response RES, and conﬁdentiality and identity
keys CK and IK, respectively. The vehicle then validates the
message by comparing XMAC with MAC received from the
PUC, and then sends the challenge response RES computed
back to PUC, which authenticates the vehicle if XRES=RES.
Finally, both PUC and vehicle use a key derivation function
KDF (e.g., SHA-256) to generate a master session key PUC-
MSK, which becomes a shared key between PUC and the
vehicle. A serving network id is used to constraint the scope of
the PUC-MSK to a speciﬁc PUC provider. We hence suggest
the use of the AMF as SN id in the generation of PUC-MSK.
Once vehicle is authenticated, PUC authorizes the smart
meter to initiate a charging secure session with PUC, using
CK and IK keys. We assume the smart meter software has not
been compromised. Mechanism to verify smart meter software
vulnerabilities and secure updates is beyond the scope of
this paper. Notice that during the authentication process no
credential is exchanged between the parties involved. If the
vehicle key K is safely stored at registration authority and
the electric vehicle, authentication and key agreement process
can not be compromised. In addition, user conﬁdentiality is
protected by requiring only the vehicle license plate to jump
start the authentication process, and not even its VIN number.
This help mitigate VIN number based cyber attacks. For
additional protection, encryption of license plate information
by a PUC managed symmetric key residing in the Smart
Meter/charging station can mitigate even the harvesting of
license plate information during authentication. This key can
be securely distributed from PUC to its smart meters via secure
TLS connection.
Once a master session key PUC-MSK is established be-
tween PUC and the vehicle, a variant version of the authenti-
cation protocol can be run, by replacing vehicle cryptographic
key K with PUC-MSK in the ﬁgures above. This way, after
ﬁrst authentication of a vehicle, PUC no longer requires
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

PUC Independent Authentication and Key Agreement
Captures vehicle
license plate
PUC: Auth Server
SM/Charging St.
Electric Vehicle
vAuthReq(license plate)
vAuthChall(RAND,AMF,...)
vAuthChall(RAND,AMF, ...)
Verifies MSG
Computes response
vAuthChall(RES)
Verifies Response
Establishes PUC-MSK
vAuthChall(RES)
authorizesCharging(CK, IK)
Cashes CK, IK
Retrieves PUC-MSK
SecureChargingSession
Figure 6: PUC Authentication and Key Agreement
contacting the registration authority to authenticate the vehicle.
We call the ﬁrst version of the protocol home-AKA, and the
second version puc-AKA. As the vehicle needs to differentiate
which AKA variant is engaging with, a different AMF is used
for home-AKA and puc-AKA. Generalizing it, AMF becomes
a pointer to the cryptographic key to be used by the vehicle
to authenticate itself. Figure 6 illustrates PUC independent
authentication protocol.
Mutual authentication of PUC/EV should be executed as a
pre-requisite for every charging operation. In addition, authen-
tication should be enabled only if the charging station cable
is physically connected to the vehicle charging outlet. Any
disconnect of the charging cable should trigger the need for a
fresh authentication handshake upon re-establishing physical
connectivity to resume charging.
A. Service key management
Key management of a ﬂeet of Smart Meters within Smart
Grids is not a trivial matter. A recent survey on multiple
approaches for Smart Grid Key management can be fond in
[4], where various key generation and distribution schemes are
compared. Our Vehicle-SIM based secure metering framework
obviates the need to distribute keys across the Smart Grid, as
shared master keys between PUCs and vehicles are generated
at the endpoints. Key management then reduces to two issues:
i- deﬁning when these keys are generated and under which
conditions they should be renewed/rotated; ii- how to support
multiple PUCs.
B. Power Utility Company Key Rotation
Rotation of Public Utility Company master session key
PUC-MSK is driven by the following use cases:
• New user use case: A Smart Meter is assigned to a home,
attached to a home EV charger. SM allows the running
of a home-AKA algorithm, with generation of a public
utility company master session key (puc-MSK).
• Vehicle change of ownership: A new master session key
must be generated for the same vehicle. This requires
the rotation of PUC-MSK at a cadence, perhaps once
a month, to ensure the vehicle is still owned by the
same utility user. A side use case would be a vehicle
that is reported stolen. In this case, registration authority
may stop issuing authentication vectors to the vehicle,
effectively preventing the vehicle from being charged.
• House change of ownership: A new PUC-MSK must be
generated, as the Home Smart Meter changes ownership.
PUC-MSK rotation may be supported by the home smart
meter only. In addition, multiple PUCs will typically need to
provide charging services along multiple jurisdictions. In this
case, different AMFs must be used among multiple PUCs.
We propose the use of a hash function with low collision
probability, with a unique PUC input, such as the private key
of a PUC X.509 certiﬁcate, to generate an unique AMF.
C. Multiple Public Utility Company key management
As travel typically involves charging stations from multiple
PUCs, each PUC requires fetching of authentication vector
from the vehicle regulatory body. As each authentication
vector generated increments SEQN, and given the fact that
the vehicle veriﬁcation involves checking a valid range of
SEQNs, it is possible that the vehicle gets out of sync about the
acceptable range of SEQN and RA:Home Server in a multiple
PUC scenario. A synchronization mechanism between the
registration authority and the vehicle needs to be established.
We propose to execute this synchronization at a trusted EV
charging station, such as the one at home. That is, when
the smart meter engages in home-aka authentication with the
vehicle, the vehicle resets its SEQN valid window around
the SEQN resent in the challenge received, as per Figure 5
(replacing the SEQN in range veriﬁcation with expected SEQN
- XSEQN - assignment to the received SEQN).
D. Supporting other Smart Grid services beyond EV Charging
The secure metering framework proposed in this work can
be extended in few ways.
• Secure Vehicle Services: Smart devices controlling park-
ing lot gates can be used to automatically grant entrance
access to vehicles equipped with SIM cards. For instance,
in some countries with advanced smart grid systems,
airports may grant free parking to EV vehicles which
allows one cycle charging during their stay, so as to
smooth airport energy peak hours. In this case, a PUC is
replaced by another service provider, which interacts with
the vehicle registration authority. The authority then may
provide a “authentication as a service” business model to
help with operational costs.
• Non-vehicle Secure Metering Services: Power utility
companies may use user electronic credentials other than
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

vehicle to generate master service keys at smart meters
for smart grid services other than vehicle charging. As
a ﬁrst step towards that scenario, PUCs may use vehicle
generated master key to provide secure metering services
for smart home. In this case, a PUC would simply rotate
the ev charging master key for charging, but retain the
previous key in the smart meter for other home services.
In future, PUCs could engage with a network operator
owning a cellular network SIM card to retrieve authen-
tication vectors, and generate master keys for generic
metering services. Smart meters then could engage with
user cellular phone in order to enable the generation of
smart grid service keys.
IV. LEVERAGING STANDARDS AND PROTOCOLS
The management of charging operation within EV charging
ecosystem has evolved via different protocols, some of which
have been standardized. ISO 15118 [7] allows EVs and SMs
to dynamically exchange information for a proper charging. In
terms of security, ISO 15118 supports a Plug & Charge feature,
upon which a secure EV to SM secure communication link is
established. In ISO 15118, secure EV to SM link requires
agreement between EV and SM on a symmetric key - our
proposal fulﬁlls this requirement, providing a different key
per EV.
Another widely used protocol is Open Charge Point Proto-
col (OCPP) [8], which supports all communication between
the SM and its “control center” (within PUC). Various ver-
sions of the protocol exist, with version 2.0 having the most
advanced security features, such as secure communication
channel, secure ﬁrmware update, logging of security events.
OCPP allows the SM to behave as a communication gateway
between the EV and PUC backend system. This architecture
blends well with our security framework. In fact, the symmet-
ric cryptographic keys generated by our AKA framework may
be used to mitigate lingering protocol vulnerabilities [9].
V. IMPLEMENTATION PROOF OF CONCEPT
This section describes a proof of concept implementation of
the security protocols introduced in this paper. Authentication
and Key Agreement algorithms were simulated in Python.
Using a library called Pykka, we created an actor model of
the four components of secure metering ecosystem: Home
Server, PUC, Smart Meter, and Electric Vehicle (Figure 7).
Pykka allows messages to be sent to other actors by tell()
function. Key exchanging was implemented by using tell()
with a dictionary type list in tell(), such as message = [”order”:
”start , ”key”:00112233]. Since on receive() is a message
handler, it reads the ”order” of the message and performs
the following conditional branching according to transactions
name.
As per Figure 8, the output of the program uses print() to
output the name of the actor sending message data, the name
of the transaction, and the generated key to visually track how
communication between entities is taking place. Even though
c l a s s
HomeServer ( pykka . ThreadingActor ) :
def
i n i t
( s e l f ) :
super ( HomeServer ,
s e l f ) .
i n i t
( )
def
l i n k
c l a s s ( s e l f ,
instance name ) :
s e l f . PUC ref = instance name
def
on receive ( s e l f ,
message ) :
print ( ” ” )
print ( ”HS” )
s e l f . message = message
s e l f . order = message [ ” order ” ]
i f ( s e l f . order ==
” Send License Plate ” ) :
print ( ” (Home AKA) Generate Key ” )
s e l f . l i c e n s e
p l a t e
=
message [ ” l i c e n s e
p l a t e ” ]
s e l f . Generate Key ( )
def
Generate Key ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . key = 0x0011223344556677
8899 aabbccddeeff
−
s e l f . l i c e n s e
p l a t e
s e l f . PUC ref . t e l l
({ ” order ” :
” Send Registration Complete Message ” ,
” key ” : s e l f . key })
Figure 7: Software Implementation
the ﬁgure shows Home AKA output, a similar output from
PUC-AKA has also been veriﬁed, omitted for space’s sake.
VI. AUTHENTICATION AND KEY AGREEMENT ENHANCED
CHARGING - SECURITY EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate our AKA EV charging frame-
work vis a vis security threats. The analysis is structured
around three actors: EV, Charging station(CS)/Smart Me-
ter(SM), PUC/Charging control center.
• EV: The following threats are devised:
– Impersonation: Impersonating an arbitrary vehicle is
impossible as long as the vehicle cryptographic key
is safely stored in the v-sim card. As a consequence,
the protocol supports non-repudiation of charging
session.
– Denial of Service: Assuming a EV to SM (WiFi/cel-
lular) wireless link, DoS attack may be staged, for
instance, via radio jamming.
– Distributed DOS: As charging section is initiated via
AKA by the reading of the vehicle license plate,
staging a DDoS from the vehicle would require
multiple fake license plates. To mitigate such attacks,
PUC control center may keep track of license plates
that have failed authentication in the past, as in
a blacklist concept, and discard charging requests
coming from vehicles that have failed authentication
multiple times.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

SM
home AKA communication initiation
PUC
(Home_AKA)Send_License_Plate
HS
(Home_AKA)Generate_Authentication_Vector
SQN: 4738849701895016728
(Home_AKA)Generate_XRES_MAC
XRES: 15568641829527999796
MAC: 968201358740978223
PUC
(Home_AKA)Extract_RAND_AMF_SN_SQN_XRES_MAC
SM
(Home_AKA)Send_RAND_AMF_SQN_MAC
EV
(Home_AKA)Extract_RAND_AMF_SQN_MAC
(Home_AKA)Generate_RES_AK_CK_IK_XMAC
RES: 15568641829527999796
XMAC: 968201358740978223
AK: 22205989251187
CK: 30244256743587035516588858386965182340
IK: 204382471729976753096951681390175295497
OK! MAC = XMAC
(Home_AKA)Generate_PUC_MSK
PUC_MSK = 886499507777074393188636241814219822
SM
(Home_AKA)Forward_Encrypted_RES
PUC
(Home_AKA)Compare_RES_and_XRES
OK! XRES = RES
PUC_MSK: 886499507777074393188636241814219822
Figure 8: Software Output
– Data tampering: To mitigate data tampering, crypto-
graphic storage/operations should be executed within
a secure hardware in the vehicle and SM.
• SM: The following threats are devised:
– Privacy: License place is read by the charging station
and sent to charging control/PUC via a secure TLS
session. This information does not need to be re-
tained by the charging station/SM, once transmitted
to PUC, mitigating leakage. All data exchanged
between vehicle and SM is protected by the crypto
keys generated by AKA algorithm, within the secure
session.
– Data tampering: Any attempt to alter data exchanged
between the vehicle and the SM will be detected via
the integrity key IK, and should be discarded.
• PUC/Control Center: The following threats are devised:
– Denial of Service: Communication between the
smart meter and the PUC can be supported via
cloud service infrastructure (such as Amazon Web
Services), for which DoS protection techniques do
exist.
– Data tampering: Communication between Smart Me-
ter and PUC is protected via server authenticated
TLS session. This ensures not only data integrity,
but also prevents man-in-the-middle attacks.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have proposed a symmetric key based authentication and
key agreement protocol to support Electric Vehicle Charging
in Smart Grids. PUC and vehicle mutual authentication and
secure metering are achieved without the need for the Smart
Meter to store credentials. In addition, new cryptographic
keys are used by the smart meter on every charging session,
rendering key stealing via SM tampering unproﬁtable. The
framework hence reduces Smart Meter security requirements,
as well as its attack surface. We have analyzed service
keys’ management on multiple Power Electricity Company
scenarios. In addition, we have provided a proof of concept
implementation of the authentication and symmetric keys
generation involved in the framework. As future work, we
plan to evaluate our proposal via prototyping.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by JSPS Kakenhi Grant Number
21K11888 and Hitachi Systems, Ltd.
REFERENCES
[1] “Speciﬁcation of the MILENAGE algorithm Set: An Example algorithm
set for the 3GPP authentication and key generation functions f1; f1*,
f2, f3, f4, f5, and f5*,” Document 2: Algorithm speciﬁcation (3GPP TS
35.206 version 14.0.0 Release 14), 2017-04.
[2] H. M. Rehmani et al., “Integrating Renewable Energy Resources into
the Smart Grid: Recent developments in information and communication
technologies,” In IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., Vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 2814-
2825, Jul. 2018.
[3] L. Alejandro et al., “Global Market for Smart Electricity Meters:
Government policies driving strong growth,” US Int. Trade Commission,
Washington, DC, USA, Rep. ID-037,2014.
[4] A. Ghosal and M. Conti, “Key Management Systems for Smart Grid
Advanced Metering Infrastructure: A Survey,” In IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 2831-2847, Third Quarter 2019.
[5] P. Kumar et al., “Smart Grid Metering Networks: A Survey on Security,
Privacy and Open Research Issues,” In IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 2886-2927, Third Quarter 2019.
[6] B. Harishma et al., “Safe is the New Smart: PUF-Based Authentication
for Load Modiﬁcation-Resistant Smart Meters,” In IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 663-680,
January/February 2022.
[7] “Road vehicles - Vehicle-to-grid communication interface-Part 2: Net-
work and application protocol requirements,” Int. Org. Stand., Geneva,
Switzerland, Rep. ISO/CD 15118-2, 2014.
[8] F. Buve, P. Klapwijk, and R. de Leeuw, “OCPP 2.0.1, part 0-
Introduction,” Open Charge Alliance, Arnhem, The Netherland, Rep.
2020-03-31, 2020.
[9] Z. Garofalaki et al., “Electric Vehicle Charging: A Survey on the
Security Issues and Challenges of the Open Charge Point Protocol
(OCPP),” In IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 24, No.
3, pp. 1504-1532, Third Quarter 2022.
[10] A. Fuchs et al., “HIP: HSM-based identities for plug-and-charge,” In
ACM 14th Int. Conf. Availability Rel. Security, Dublin, Ireland, Aug.
2020, pp. 1-33.
[11] A. Fuchs et al., “TrustEV: trustworthy electric vehicle charging and
billing,” In ACM 35th Annual Symposium on Applied Computing, Brno,
Czech Republic, Mar. 2020, pp. 1706-1715.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-092-6
SECURWARE 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

