Education System in Commercial Security
Vladislav Stefka
Faculty of Applied Informatics, Department of Security Engineering
Tomas Bata University in Zlin
Zlin, Czech Republic
stefka@fai.utb.cz
Abstract— This paper addresses the preparation of the new
Law on private security services in the Czech Republic, pitfalls
and possibilities of practical use in the field of security work.
This new law should adjust the position of private security
services in their business, but also the opportunity for
involvement in the Integrated Rescue System of the Czech
Republic.
Keywords-
Commercial
Security,
Detective
Activities,
Property Protection and Security.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Czech Republic - as perhaps the only country in the
European
Union,
does
not
have
a
law
that
would
comprehensively regulate Commercial Security proceedings.
On the one hand, this situation is seen as a particular
example - because it is a business that should not be
constrained
by
other
actors,
especially
actors
in
the
Executive Powers sphere; on the other hand, the fact is that
most security services employees only have very low
qualifications - which is reflected in the fact that staff
salaries are on the lower end of the wage curves.
Despite these and other problems in connection with
Private Security Services´ activities and working in the
Private Detective trade, a number of changes in this area
have been recently made.
The amendment to the Trade Act - in the area of Security
Services, which came into effect on 1, January, 2009,
modified the conditions of doing business in the Security
Guard and Private Detective fields. Given that earlier
adaptation of the contents of individual trades was contained
in the Government regulations, it can be assumed that the
adjustment made by the Small Business Act - a superior rule
of law, will contribute to improve and provide a higher social
status of these activities.
The great development of PSS finally occurred after the
fall of the Communist regime, i.e. from the early 90s.
Regarding their legal basis, their activities were cancelled in
1991 by the Decree of the Federal Ministry of the Interior;
but, a new trade law - ranked them among the Licensed
Trade sector and the "Private Eyes Service" as follows,
"undertakings providing for the security of property and
persons", (later referred to as "the Security of Property and
Persons", and later again, under the "Provision of Technical
Services for Persons and Property", and created a new legal
basis for this kind of business. At the same time however,
dating back to 1992, the introduction of special treatment for
the PSS area was mooted, as was the need for a separate law;
however, these efforts were unsuccessful, and ended there.
The last attempt to create such a special act was seen in the
Spring of 2011; in June, 2011 - but interdepartmental
commentary procedures were terminated, and there was not
much time for further noticeable developments. According to
information from the Ministry of the Interior, they were still
"working hard" on the Bill and it was planned to send this to
the Government to 31. 12. 2012.
The amendment to the Trade Act itself includes newly
specified conditions for Security and Private Detective
services - which refers to the fact that the required
professional competence for these trades, inter alia, is
evidenced by a Professional Qualification Certificate for the
relevant work activities, which will be issued by an
authorized body established under special regulations of the
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports. This is actually the
accreditation process based on the authorisation by the
Ministry of the Interior.
This otherwise set the conditions for implementing the
Ministry of Interior Decree No. 16/2009 Coll., “On the
Content and Scope of Qualifications for Security and Private
Detective Services”. The decree was published in Volume
No. 6 of the Collection of Laws of the Czech Republic,
which was distributed on January 16, 2009, and came into
force on its publication in the Official Gazette.
The content of this ordinance is to establish the
conditions for the acquisition of competence in operating a
licensed
Security
Guards
trade
and
licensed
Private
Detective trade services and for them to become proficient
employees and for entrepreneurs operating a licensed
Security Guards trade and licensed Private Detective trade
services, as well as the method for the implementation of
proficiency
tests
in
order
to
acquire
professional
qualifications for the above activities and the content of the
test.
The condition for obtaining such expertise is to create a
Qualification
Standard
-
which
consists
of
upgrading
proficiency and the development of criteria and evaluation
methods.
II.
THE NATIONAL SYSTEM OF QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE
LICENSED TRADE
1. Guarding Property and Persons; and...
2. Private Detective Services
This established the qualification standards with effect
from June 19, 2009 as follows:
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A.
Guards (Code 68-008-E)
Where, for competence standards, this implies training of
at least 20 hours, followed by an examination before a three-
member expert committee composed of duly authorised
people.
The Training Content is primarily:
-
The implementation of protection and security of
persons and property
-
Manipulating technical security systems
-
The application of the principles of interaction with
the Integrated Rescue System - especially the
Police, and other defined entities
-
The application of the legal basis of security
activities
-
The control of persons and vehicles at personnel
gates and other gates
-
The control of guarded object activities
-
The surveillance of buildings and public spaces
-
Implementing simple actions to ensure and restore
security and to reduce losses to property and
human health
-
The use of physical security funds
-
The documentation of surveillance controls and
services provided
B.
Detective Trainee (Code 68-009-M)
Where, to obtain proficiency training, it is expected to
cover at least 20 hours, followed by an examination
before a three-member expert committee of duly
authorised persons.
The content of this training is primarily:
-
Orientation
in
the
basic
legal
standards
and
provisions with emphasis on security
-
Legal issues and the protection of personal data
-
Readiness to apply the basic forms and methods of
Private Detective duties, and for their practical
implementation
-
The principles of the operation and control of basic
private detective resources and aids
-
Other activities
-
Documenting and evaluating information, and their
registration and preparation for handover to the
client
-
A readiness to use Informatics
Based on the evaluation standard, they then have to show
the extent of the requirements and evaluation criteria in the
form of written, oral and practical examinations.
Both of the above-mentioned tests include a written
exam, in the form of test questions that are randomly
generated from a set of questions - which is an examination
system available on a data-carrier. The test results are
validated by the test board, as are the oral and practical
exams, which are designed to address particular situations.
The final evaluation is carried out by the Examination
Committee,
which
evaluates
the
fulfilment
of
the
professional competence and conduct requirements and the
outcome of the tests and these are entered into the record
during the test.
A candidate who satisfies the conditions set out in the
criteria and evaluation method is evaluated such that the
Commission issues a final "Pass" rating. Otherwise, the
rating "Failed" is recorded; while the evaluation is carried
out by means of commission members´ votes, and the result
is then communicated to the Commission Chairman.
The test is performed on the basis of a written
application. The applicant for consideration´s preparation
time is 20 minutes, while the written exam can take up to 45
minutes, and the oral and practical exams that follow-on may
last 30 minutes.
An applicant who passes the exam shall be issued a
Certificate
of
Professional
Qualification
by
the
duly
authorised person(s); among other things, this must include
the Certificate´s Registration Number and the name of the
appropriate scope of business activities for which the
professional qualification certificate is issued.
The decision to grant accreditation from the Ministry of
Education, Youth and Sports to an organisation is authorised
in accordance with: § 108, Para. 2, Act No., 435/2004 Coll.,
“On Employment”, as amended; as well as Decree No.
524/2004 Coll., on “Providing Retraining to Applicants and
Applicants for Employment”
The original intention, in terms of this certificate was that
it will be valid for five years from the date of its issue.
C.
Security Services Handlers, (Code: 68-001-H)
Other professional qualifications have been established
for this licensed trade; they must be able to:
a)
Demonstrate their knowledge of Dog Handling
(K9,
Cynology)
Methology
and
explain
the
difference between tame and domesticated animals
b)
Explain the concept of the instinctive conduct of
dogs/K9s, and the importance for the survival of
the individual as and when this arises, and to cite
two examples
c)
Explain the Conditioned Response (Behaviour)
concept for dogs, and the importance for the
survival of the individual as and when this arises,
and to cite two examples
d)
Explain the Habituation (loosely - adaptation)
Concept, and the importance for the survival of the
individual as and when this arises, and to cite two
examples
e)
Divide dogs by type of Higher Nervous Activity
into four groups (i.e. IP Pavlova distribution), and
each type simple way to characterize and explain
the appropriateness of different types of dogs for
guard duty,
f)
Describe
the
expression
f
(threat)
confident
aggressive dog ready to attack (describe position,
ruff, the position of the ears, tail, revealing teeth,
view dog, sound speech)
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

g)
Describe the expression (threat) dog for aggressive
behaviour, which is caused by a sense of danger
and fear of the dog (describe position, ruff, the
position of the ears, tail, revealing teeth, view dog,
sound speech),
h)
Describe the expression obeying dog (especially in
active and passive subordination) - describe the
attitude, the movement of the dog, the position of
the ears, tail, facial expressions, audible speech and
specify the territorial negotiations dog, the reason
for this behaviour, speech, application and use of
security service,
i)
Describe the defensive reaction of the dog -
especially active (escape, attack) and especially
passive, explain the reason for this behaviour and
explain the use of active defence reaction of the
dog in the direct attack on the dog and handler,
j)
Shall be determined by lot three of the criteria that
the applicant meets the test.
Orientation in laws and regulations relating to the
possession, training and use of dogs/K9s to protect the health
and property of persons
In your own words, explain: a) § 1, Para. 1 of Act no.
409/2008 Coll., on the Protection of Animals against
Cruelty; b) in your own words - explain: § 4, Para. 1, Points
a), b), d), h), s) of Act No. 409/2008, Coll., “On Protection of
Animals against Cruelty; in connection with § 4, Para. 1,
Point a) to § 4, Para., 3; c) In your own words, explain: § 28
of the Criminal Code, No. 40/2009 Coll. (Destitution); d)
Cite the wording of § 29 of the Penal Code, No. 40/2009
Coll. (Necessary Defence) and explain and introduce the
main principles of Health and Safety in the use of a dog to
protect the health and property of persons; In your own
words, explain: 1) § 76, Para., Detention of a Suspected
Person. 2) ...and of the Criminal Code (Limiting Personal
Freedom), and give a practical example of the application of
this section during Guard Duty.
Practical demonstration of Dog/K9 Training (Cynology)
- Handler Defence
a)
Demonstrate “field screening” – the dog/K9, on
command, runs to the handler - once to the right,
and once to the left of the handler´s axis; procedure
will be repeated, but withdrawn at least twenty
steps and examine a shelter
b)
Demonstrate “finding and exposure” (marking) a
hidden person – they must find a hidden person and
indicate the place by persistent barking
c)
Demonstrate “guarding suspect” during the tour –
the dog lies at a distance of about five steps from
the handler and inspects the suspect(s) as to
whether they are carrying a concealed weapon – or
not; the dog demonstrates how it controls each
suspects´ and perpetrators´ behaviour in an attack
on the handler - and is ready to effectively prevent
injury to the handler
d)
Demonstrate the Dog/K9´s defence of the handler –
i.e. “Dribbling”, thereby effectively helping the
dog handler in averting an attack by perpetrators
e)
Demonstrate the skill of Escorting Suspects – how
a handler with a dog must accompany the suspect
to a designated place and transfer them into the
custody of a responsible person. Handlers escort
suspects as follows: “Rear Escort” – involves
accompanying a suspect at a distance of about five
paces, while the dog is kept by the handler´s left
leg, and is ready to defend effectively.
D.
Supervision Centre Worker, (Code: 68-003-H)
The Maintenance of Technical Security Systems oriented
on a Receiving Device and Signal Evaluation from security
systems; they must be able to:
a)
Describe the principles, design, use and operation
of Technical Security Systems with a focus on the
Receiving Device
b)
Evaluate signals from security systems in the
monitoring centre
c)
Describe the principles of personal data protection
when processing and evaluating technical security
systems
d)
Describe the principles of protection of information
received in the monitoring centre
e)
They must meet all the criteria
a) They must applying the principles of co-operation
with the Integrated Rescue System, and especially with the
Police and other defined entities and to characterise the
principles of cooperation with Police and Municipal Police
operations at the monitoring centre under the applicable
provisions of the relevant laws; b) Characterise the principle
of consultation with Fire-fighting Units, and the Ambulance
and Emergency Services, in averting damage to property
and the health of persons, under the provisions of the
relevant laws in the operations of a Monitoring Centre, as
well as State Emergency Telephone Numbers. They must
meet both criteria.
E.
The Head Detective Code, (68-002-T)
They must know how to:
a)
Apply legal standards with an emphasis on Safety
and the legal issues of Privacy; and understand the
Constitutional Law - with an emphasis on the
activities of Private Detective services
b)
Apply the Civil and Commercial Law with an
emphasis on typical contractual relationships in the
Private Detective Business
c)
Apply Trade Law, Labour Law, and Tax Law
d)
Apply Criminal Law and Criminal Procedure,
Administrative Law and Administrative Procedure
- with an emphasis on Administrative Offences and
the Law on Weapons and Ammunition
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

e)
Apply the Law on the Free Access to Information
Act and the Data Protection Act
f)
Understand the Act on the Czech Police and
Municipal Police and explain its use in the
performance of their work.
They must meet all the criteria.
III.
CONCLUSION
The introduction of mandatory training and testing in
personnel security agencies and private detectives – apart
from its positive aspects, also has its practical shortcomings.
The number of employees in these services range from a
sober estimate of 50,000 workers. This raises the question as
to whether it is possible for authorised persons to handle
such numbers of people and to train and test them - and it is
thus
necessary
to
consider
the
Economic
Impact
on
businesses in this field, and especially, during the current
economic crisis.
Another unresolved issue so far, is just how far the
extension of both programmes for authorisation - and even
Accreditation. Granting authorisation is a five-year period,
and accreditation requires another three years.
Furthermore, the logical question arises as to whether it
would be appropriate to amend that part of the Evaluation
Standard that would deal with the need to commission three-
member examination committees, comprised of the duly
authorised persons.
REFERENCES
[1]
BAHYLOVA, L., PHILIP, J., MOLEK, P. et al. Constitution
of the Czech Republic: comment. Prague: Linde, 2000
[2]
BARTA, M. et al. Private security services: general concepts.
Prague: Czech Police Academy Republic, Prague, 2011.
[3]
MACEK, P. NOVAK, F.: Private security services. Police
History 2005
[4]
KINCL,
J.
:
Professional
qualifications
in
commercial
security. Professional Publishing , Prague 2010
[5]
FRYSAR, M. : Safety managers, businessmen and politicians,
Public history 2016 Prague
[6]
PROTIVINSKY, M. : Crime prevention, ARMEX,
Prague
2009
[7]
STRADAL , J. : Qualification based on practice, NUOV
Prague 2014
[8]
VYSKOCIL,
K.
:
Management
support
processes
,
Professional Publishing , Prague 2014
[9]
STEFKA, V. : Handbook for training employees in security
services Zlin 2012 . Internal syllabi – unpublished
[10] HUNTINGTON,
S. 2008
Political
Order
in Changing
Societes. Yale University Press ISBN 0300001717.500 s.
[11] PASHA,M.K., Globalizarion,Difference und Human Security,
Florenc,Routlege 2014 ISBN 978-04157065
[12] TOLK, A., NABIL, R.A., : Defense And Security
Berlin
2012 ISBN 978-4673-4781-5
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

