Using Avatars for Improved Authentication with Challenge Questions
Nicholas Micallef
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
nicholasmicallef@gmail.com
Mike Just
School of Engineering & Computing
Glasgow Caledonian University
Glasgow, UK
mike.just@gcu.ac.uk
Abstract—We present a novel method for improving the
security of challenge question authentication, which tradition-
ally requires a user to answer questions such as “What is
your Mother’s Maiden Name?”. In our method, users create
an Avatar representing a ﬁctitious person, and later use the
Avatar’s information to authenticate themselves. The Avatar
Proﬁle consists of basic identifying information (e.g., name,
address) as well as personality information (e.g., pets, interests).
This info is pseudo-randomly generated from a large corpus of
information. For authentication purposes, a small amount of
the Avatar Proﬁle information is used to respond to challenge
questions. In terms of security, the use of information that is
not personally associated with the user is intended to thwart
observation attacks such as, for example, knowing the user’s
mother’s maiden name. In terms of usability, our design
establishes a bond between the user and their Avatar using
graphical images and periodic associations by, for example,
presenting an image of the Avatar at each login. This nurturing
of the bond between a user and their Avatar leverages known
psychological phenomena. At the same time it also provides a
novel adaptation to security of the emotional investments that
users exhibit in virtual worlds and massively multi-user online
graphical environments. In this paper, we describe our work-
in-progress towards an Avatar Authentication design, partially
guided by an initial pilot experiment. Our initial results are
promising and point to a possible future for the use of avatars
for authentication.
Keywords-authentication; avatar; security; usability.
I. INTRODUCTION
A secure and usable authentication system is of criti-
cal importance for applications nowadays. A secure sys-
tem prevents impersonation, which otherwise could lead
to monetary loss, embarrassment, inconvenience, and other
problems. A usable system not only encourages more se-
cure behaviour, but also results in a more enjoyable user
experience and can increase user enrolment.
Password authentication is the most ubiquitous authen-
tication method used today, yet its security and usability
weaknesses have been known for many years [1][2][3]. It
is also important to note that with increases in attacker
capabilities and an ever-increasing quantity of accounts that
users must manage, these problems are further exacerbated.
Alternatives such as biometrics and smartcards continue to
present usability issues and deployment challenges [4].
Recently, signiﬁcant research effort has been focused on
alternatives to text passwords. Numerous graphical password
systems have been developed and tested, and recent research
suggests good potential, and a path toward more consistent
evaluation [5]. Challenge question authentication is as ubiq-
uitous as passwords, and is often used as a form of secondary
authentication in case a user forgets their original password.
Their use of personal information and memories, as opposed
to memorized passwords, has been the main focus of the
latest research [6][7][8][9]. Unfortunately, in their basic
implementation, the answers to challenge questions are most
vulnerable to observation attacks in which the information
and memories used by a user to authenticate, are also known
to (or easily determined by) attackers.
Our approach to authentication uses an Authentication
Avatar which represents the identity, including personality,
of a ﬁctitious person that is almost randomly generated from
minimal user input. An Avatar Proﬁle (AP) contains infor-
mation about the avatar, and a subset of the AP information
is used by the user to respond to challenge questions such
as “What is your Avatar’s pet’s name?”, or “What was your
Avatar’s secondary school?”. In this way security might
be improved since, unlike the user’s own information, the
avatar information is not as easily determined by an attacker.
In terms of usability, since such ﬁctitious information is
likely to be more challenging for a user to recall (than their
own, personal information), our design uses techniques such
as repeated exposure and graphical imagery whereby, for
example, a user might be exposed to an image of their avatar
at every login in order to improve the memory association.
Such images can be associated with the avatar itself, and also
with elements of the AP, e.g., a picture of the Avatar’s pet.
From our early designs, it appears that such methods can be
seamlessly integrated into the authentication process. In this
way, as with avatars used in virtual worlds and massively
multi-user online graphical environments, our authentication
avatar design attempts to build upon the degree of emotional
investment that users exhibit with avatars.
In Section II we describe several factors inﬂuencing our
design. In Section III we describe our current, prototype im-
plementation and highlight some possible design variations.
In Section IV we describe some plans for our ﬁnal design,
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

and discuss our plans for measuring security and usability.
Section V provides some concluding remarks and direction
for future work.
II. MOTIVATION AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
In designing an avatar for authentication purposes, we
were motivated by existing work in secure and usable
authentication, and also reﬂective of avatars designed for
other purposes, such as virtual worlds. Our goal was to build
a structure containing information that could be used by a
user to authenticate in such a way that the structure holds
some meaning for the user, but not for attackers. For the
authentication protocol, we chose to base our solution upon
challenge question authentication, and note that avatars may
similarly prove useful for other security methods.
There are two main issues to securing challenge question
authentication. Firstly, answers with inherently small, or
non-uniform answer spaces should be avoided [7][8]. And
while most questions share this risk, it can be partially
mitigated with appropriate question selection, and the en-
forcement of a requirement to use multiple authentication
questions. Secondly, the answers to challenge questions are
often observable, so that a determined attacker can observe
or recover answers to challenge questions with relative
ease [6][9]. For this reason our design introduces a proxy
for the answers to the challenge questions: an Avatar.
In terms of usability, the same research indicates that users
struggle in recalling their own answers to challenge ques-
tions, despite the fact that the answers are already known
to the user (and shouldn’t require additional memorization).
There are several potential reasons for this, including a
user’s changing or conﬂicting memories. In this sense, it
may be that current designs have relied too heavily upon
users to accurately and speciﬁcally recall one of their various
memories, especially when it is likely that the memory
originated in some other other context. The potential of
authenticating with an avatar is to create new memories,
but in such a way that users establish a close, personal bond
with this information. The idea of creating this information
in the context of their authentication application is to make
the information more memorable when re-used in that same
context to later authenticate. For our solution we attempt to
build this relationship through nurturing, where an electronic
pet is used as a daemon [11]. In our solution, the user is
consistently exposed to their avatar through a representative
image, ideally forming an association that improves the
recall of the answers to the related challenge questions. We
also apply some additional memory techniques at registra-
tion such as story writing and repetition [12].
In terms of the data upon which the AP is constructed,
we collected a large corpus of proﬁle and personality
information based upon existing sources, often used for
different purposes, such as registering for aggregate news
sites [13][14][15]. Whereas such sites are often used for “one
time” registrations (e.g., when information is collected for
marketing purposes), it is a portion of our AP information
that is used for repeated and consistent authentication.
III. AN AUTHENTICATION AVATAR IMPLEMENTATION
From these considerations, we can begin to design, imple-
ment and evaluate an avatar authentication system. Below,
we describe some additional detail involved in this design,
and include a couple of screen-shots from our current proto-
type implementation. The design focuses on the creation of
an Avatar Proﬁle during user registration. The AP includes
information that would likewise be associated with a real
person, e.g., name, family. From this information, the user
will then choose three challenge questions where the answers
relate to the information contained in the AP. The AP
which builds upon elements used elsewhere for fake name
generation [14], consists of two parts: the Avatar User Proﬁle
(AUP), and the Avatar Personality (APY). We now describe
the process for building this proﬁle in more detail.
Figure 1.
Avatar User Proﬁle Setup
Figure 1 shows the ﬁrst stage of user registration. The user
seeds the AUP with information about the avatar, selected
from three drop-down lists: the avatar’s gender, name set,
and country of birth. In our current implementation, the
gender choice is either male or female, the name set is one
of 18 different cultures (e.g., American, Arabic, Hispanic),
and the country is one of 19 countries, where details for the
latter two were taken from Fake Name Generator [13]. The
generated AUP information includes a name, address, city &
postcode, email address, password, phone number, mother’s
maiden name, birthday, credit card number & expiry date,
and occupation for the Avatar, in addition to a random image.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

To continue, the user populates the Avatar Personality
(APY) as depicted in Figure 2, consisting of information
about pets, vacations taken, family (siblings & parents),
friends, as well as various character traits. In our current
implementation, rather than seeding from user input, the
APY information is initially chosen randomly, and a user
is thereafter able to toggle the selections in each category.
Also notice that for many of the elements of the APY, an
image is associated with the Avatar information.
Figure 2.
Avatar Personality (APY) Setup
For the AUP and APY, we chose elements with large an-
swer spaces, and random selection should produce relatively
ﬂat distributions (to be veriﬁed as part of our experiments).
Once the Avatar Proﬁle (including the AUP and APY) has
been populated, there are at least two options for selecting
the challenge questions. Firstly, the user could be presented
with a list of candidate challenge questions and be asked to
choose three questions from the list, providing the answers
that correspond to the information from the AP.1 This is the
option that we have currently implemented for our prototype
design. Alternatively, the user could select three categories
of information from the AP, and then challenge questions
associated with this information could be presented to the
user. Based upon early results from our pilot experiment (see
Section IV) we plan to implement the second option in our
next prototype version as it should allow the user to more
1The answer information could be automatically populated, but requiring
the user to enter the information would help to improve answer retention.
clearly focus on elements of the AP that are most relevant
(and ideally, memorable) to them.
As noted above, our current implementation associates
images with most of the elements of the AP. For example,
our sample Avatar is represented by a small character with a
red and white helmet, and family members such as pets and
siblings are also represented with images. These images can
serve as cues to the AP information, and can help to prompt
the user for their answer. For example, if the user registers
the challenge question “What is the name of my sister?”,
an image of the Avatar’s sister would be associated with
the answer. When later authenticating, the user would be
presented with the question and the image cue, and be asked
to provide the answer.
If challenge questions are used as a user’s primary form
of authentication, then the user would regularly be presented
with the images at login, reinforcing the answers at each
login as a form of nurturing [11]. If, as is more typical
today, the challenge questions are less regularly used for
situations such as recovery due to a forgotten password, then
the images could still be regularly presented to the user as a
way of reinforcing the memory of the answers. For example,
at password login the user could be shown the image of
their Avatar as a reminder of their Avatar’s character. This
regular engagement with the avatar images will (hopefully)
encourage improved recall of the avatar information, and
has a side beneﬁt of contributing to the authentication of
the server to the user. We plan to validate these hypotheses
as part of an experiment on our ﬁnal design.
IV. FINE TUNING OUR IMPLEMENTATION
To inform our ﬁnal design we conducted a pilot ex-
periment of our initial prototype with approximately 100
staff and students from the University of Edinburgh. Partic-
ipants conﬁgured an Avatar Proﬁle, registered a set of three
challenge questions and corresponding answers, and then
returned after two weeks to attempt to authenticate with the
answers to the challenge questions.
In terms of security, our design supports a random popu-
lation of the AP information suggesting that for a challenge
question with n possible answers, an attacker would have
a guessing probability of 1/n. However, the answers aren’t
completely random due to the impact of user choice in their
selection. For example, in the pilot experiment, while almost
75% of participants used the Avatar Proﬁle information to
populate answers to their challenge questions, 25% did not
(and possibly used their own personal information). For this
reason, we are implementing the aforementioned modiﬁca-
tion in which users will be presented challenge questions
based upon their identiﬁcation of preferred information from
the AP. In addition, we need to determine whether users
exhibit a bias in choosing the Name Set or Country for
their Avatar User Proﬁle, or similar bias with the Avatar
Personality (APY), e.g., users might toggle to choose more
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

familiar pet or sibling names. Such effects weren’t noticed
in our pilot experiment, but need to be conﬁrmed with a
larger set of diverse users.
In terms of usability, even though we had not yet im-
plemented the nurturing features of our system, more than
one-third of the challenge questions were answered correctly
by our participants – a surprisingly positive result in that
some users were able to recall newly memorized information
for a ﬁctitious person, giving us further hope when we
implement our methods to increase this bond. We expect
this number to increase signiﬁcantly upon implementation
of our nurturing features and will compare the recall results
of users with baseline results for existing challenge question
systems [6][7].
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Avatar authentication is a new way to view information-
based authentication which utilizes fake personas (an Avatar)
that can be created by users in order to authenticate them-
selves. The use of an Avatar is intended to thwart attackers
who are otherwise able to obtain personal information about
a user. We describe how nurturing of the bond between
the user and the Avatar leverages known psychological
phenomena and provides a novel adaptation to security of
the emotional investments that users exhibit in virtual worlds
and massively multi-user online graphical environments in
order to better recall information associated with the Avatar.
We described our initial prototype design and some plans
for improvement following a pilot experiment with 100
participants in which participants showed a surprising ability
to recall information associated with their Avatar (despite
the fact that our initial prototype had not yet included key
nurturing features).
Looking to future work, there may be other ways to set-
up a fake persona for authentication purposes, for example,
by randomly gathering information from disparate users on
a social network, or even by gathering information related
to digital objects [16]. Also, there are likely different ways
to build the bond between the user and the Avatar, perhaps
more fully leveraging components of a virtual world.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Bill Cheswick for initially suggesting the use
of false information for authentication.
REFERENCES
[1] E. H. Spafford, “Observing reusable password choices,” in
In Proceedings of the 3rd Security Symposium. Usenix, pp.
299–312.
[2] D. V. Klein, “Foiling the cracker: A survey of, and im-
provements to, password security,” in Proceedings of the 2nd
USENIX UNIX Security Workshop.
[3] J. Yan, A. Blackwell, R. Anderson, and A. Grant, “Password
memorability and security: Empirical results,” IEEE Security
and Privacy, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 25–31, 2004.
[4] L. Ballard, S. Kamara, and M. K. Reiter, “The practical
subtleties of biometric key generation,” in SS’08: Proceedings
of the 17th conference on Security symposium. Berkeley, CA,
USA: USENIX Association, 2008, pp. 61–74.
[5] R. Biddle, S. Chiasson, and van Oorschot P.C., “Graphical
Passwords: Learning from the First Twelve Years,” ACM
Computing Surveys, 09 2009.
[6] S. Schechter, A. J. B. Brush, and S. Egelman, “It’s no secret.
measuring the security and reliability of authentication via
’secret’ questions,” in SP ’09: Proceedings of the 2009 30th
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 375–390.
[7] M. Just and D. Aspinall, “Personal choice and challenge
questions: a security and usability assessment,” in SOUPS
’09: Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1–11.
[8] J. Bonneau, M. Just, and G. Matthews, “What’s in a name?
evaluating statistical attacks on personal knowledge ques-
tions,” in Proceedings of Financial Cryptography 2010. N/A:
SpringerLink, 2010.
[9] A. Rabkin, “Personal knowledge questions for fallback au-
thentication: security questions in the era of facebook,” in
SOUPS ’08: Proceedings of the 4th symposium on Usable
privacy and security.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008,
pp. 13–23.
[10] N. Yee, “The psychology of massively multi-user online role-
playing games: Motivations, emotional investment, relation-
ships and problematic usage,” in Avatars at Work and Play,
ser. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, R. Schroeder and
A.-S. Axelsson, Eds. Springer Netherlands, vol. 34, pp. 187–
207.
[11] P. Briggs and P. Olivier, “Biometric daemons: authentication
via electronic pets,” in UPSEC’08: Proceedings of the 1st
Conference on Usability, Psychology, and Security. Berkeley,
CA, USA: USENIX Association, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[12] A. D. Baddeley, Essentials of Human Memory.
Psychology
Press, 1999.
[13] CorbanWorksLLC, “Generate a random name, last accessed:
2010-08-18, http://www.fakenamegenerator.com/gen-female-
sw-us.php,”
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
fakenamegenerator.com/gen-female-sw-us.php
[14] WikiHow,
“Create
a
fake
real
person,
last
accessed:
2010-08-18, http://www.wikihow.com/create-a-%22fake-real-
person%22,” 2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.wikihow.
com/Create-a-%22Fake-Real-Person%22
[15] ——,
“How
to
make
an
imaginary
friend,
last
accessed:
2010-08-18,
http://www.wikihow.com/make-an-
imaginary-friend,”
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.wikihow.com/Make-an-Imaginary-Friend
[16] R. Biddle, M. Mannan, van Oorschot P.C., and T. Whalen,
“User Study, Analysis, and Usable Security of Passwords
Based on Digital Objects,” School of Computer Science,
Carleton University., Tech. Rep., 10 2010.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

