Risk Identification for an Information Security Management System Implementation 
 
Nor Aza Ramli, Normaziah Abdul Aziz 
Kulliyyah of Information and Communication Technology 
International Islamic University Malaysia 
Gombak, Malaysia 
azaramli@gmail.com, naa@iium.edu.my  
 
 
 
Abstract — ISO/IEC 27001 is an international standard that 
provides a set of requirements for an Information Security 
Management System (ISMS) implementation. A risk assessment 
exercise for an ISMS implementation requires human expertise 
with comprehensive understanding and considerable knowledge 
in information security. A common risk assessment exercise is 
based on three sub-processes, namely, risk identification, risk 
analysis and risk evaluation. The lack of tools especially in the 
automation of risk identification emphasized the need of 
experienced personnel and this becomes a challenge for 
organizations seeking compliance with the ISMS standard. This 
paper proposes a relationship concept in asset and threat 
identification which is part of the risk identification sub-process. 
The concept provides a foundation to automate the risk 
assessment process for an identified scope of an ISMS 
implementation. 
Keywords – ISMS; information security risk; asset identification; 
threat; risk assessment 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Information security 
Information is an asset that has value to an organization. It 
is, like other important business assets, essential to an 
organization’s business and consequently needs to be suitably 
protected, which is especially important in the increasingly 
interconnected business environment [1]. The International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization 
and 
International 
Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) published various 
standards for ISMS. ISO/IEC 27002 defined information 
security as the preservation of confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of information; in addition, other properties, such 
as authenticity, accountability, non-repudiation, and reliability 
can also be involved [1]. In order to achieve information 
security, an organization needs to first identify what are the 
assets that need the protection and perform a risk assessment 
exercise to determine the level of risks and the suitable set of 
controls to minimize these risks, eventually securing the assets.  
B. Information security risk 
Organizations 
that 
are 
dependent 
on 
information 
technologies consequently have to face a common issue of 
managing information security risks which are inherited with 
the use of the technologies. In 2009, SANS Institute has issued 
a report entitled “The Top Cyber Security Risks” that discussed 
on the importance of understanding security threats and their 
corresponding vulnerabilities prior to identifying security 
controls to mitigate the associated risks [2]. Global State of 
Information Security Survey, 2010 has in its findings, 
organizations have considered taking a risk-based approach as 
well as adopting a recognized security framework in addressing 
information security issues [3]. According to Humphreys, if an 
organization does not know the risks it faces, it will not be able 
to implement proper and effective protection [4]. In 1995, 
Kailay and Jarrat have highlighted that one of the gaps then 
was the limited risk analysis methodologies and corresponding 
tools for certain domain users [5]. At present, that gap has been 
addressed through publication of documented guidelines on 
several risk assessment methodologies such as the ISO/IEC 
27005:2011 [9]. However, methodologies alone could not 
guarantee an effective information security risk assessment. 
Risk assessment process comprises of three sub-processes, 
namely, risk identification, risk analysis, and risk evaluation. 
Automation of the process is common in many risk assessment 
tools with the exception of risk identification. Hence, 
automation of risk identification would be useful for 
organizations especially for those carrying out risk assessment 
for the first time. 
C. Information Security Management System (ISMS) 
Acknowledging the importance of understanding and 
managing information security risk, a global effort by 
information security practitioners has resulted in the 
development of a standard for an Information Security 
Management System (ISMS). ISMS standards started in the 
early 90s with the first draft of an information security 
management standard published as British Standard (BS), BS 
7799. It focused on security related to people, processes, 
information as well as information technology [4]. In 2005, BS 
7799 Part 2 became an international standard known as 
ISO/IEC 27001:2005 [6]. ISO/IEC 27001 standard is a 
specification for information security management system 
developed jointly by the ISO/IEC, and was published in 2005 
[7]. This standard adopts a risk-based approach for an effective 
information security management taking into consideration the 
information security aspects of various areas within an 
organization [6]. In an ISMS implementation, organization will 
have to identify a scope for the ISMS and this scope will be 
subject to a risk assessment to identify appropriate controls to 
mitigate the identified risks.  
Current tools including documented guidelines in risk 
management such as the ISO/IEC 27005:2011 could be used by 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

organizations to facilitate the risk assessment process [9]. 
However, these tools are lacking in automation and its usage 
requires human expertise with professional judgment and 
knowledge of information technologies as well as capability to 
relate information security threats with organizational risk 
management [5], [8], [10], [12].  
The lack of tools especially in the automation of risk 
identification emphasized the need of experienced personnel 
and 
this 
becomes 
a 
challenge 
for 
organizations 
in 
implementing information security management especially 
those seeking compliance with the ISMS standard. 
This paper discusses some relationship concepts in asset 
and threats identification. Identifying accurate assets and 
relevant threats are very important to ensure reliable risk 
assessment results. This is part of our current work to automate 
the risk assessment process. 
The contribution in this paper is the identification of assets 
and their relationships to relative threats for an ISMS scope to 
facilitate automation of the risk assessment process. The 
relationships developed in this study are limited to the 
identified ISMS scope which is secure data centre. It aims to 
address automation in risk assessment for network security 
threats which can be expanded to other category of threats. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Previous works on similar efforts to automate risk 
assessment process are reviewed in this section. In 1995, a 
prototype expert system for computer security risk analysis and 
management was developed at the School of Computer 
Science, University of Birmingham. RaMEX was developed 
based on RAM (Risk Analysis and Management) methodology 
and concentrated on the category of intentional threats [5]. As 
the name suggests, RaMEX facilitates risk assessment step-by-
step following a methodology developed specific for it.  
Another work sighted has emphasized on the importance of 
using previously acquired knowledge in risk analysis. A risk 
analysis system in electronic commerce environment was 
developed at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Seoul [10]. The system was based on case-based 
reasoning (CBR), taking advantage of the experience and 
learning from incidents knowledge into the analysis of risks. 
According to Liao and Song [11], even though the CBR 
approach could make use of past solutions, it takes time to 
collect such cases and in the event that a case is the first one to 
occur, the results of the assessment could be limited. 
Liao and Song have taken a different approach in 
developing a computer-aided system to facilitate risk 
assessment process [11]. Their work has focused on 
transaction-based risk assessment by looking at the value of a 
transaction to an organization to determine the impact of losses 
to the business. Instead of depending on past solutions, risk 
assessment is performed based on transactions that have been 
defined and known to the system [11]. 
Similarly, a work by Aime, et al. [8] approached risk 
analysis based on models that can be built at runtime and 
during system monitoring of a known target system. The model 
was used to automate some portion of the risk analysis 
processes namely the collection of threats data, the 
identification of applicable threats to the target system and the 
calculation of risk level. 
In 2007, Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon 
University has published a technical report on OCTAVE 
Allegro which focused on information assets in its 
methodology that is used for identifying and evaluating 
information security risks. It approached risk assessment by 
focusing on information asset and its containers such as people, 
physical and technology aiming to produce a more robust 
assessment result [12]. In 2009, Chivers et al. has assessed 
risks to a particular system incrementally using formally 
defined risk profiles [13]. 
As a summary, scholars have carried out studies applying 
different approaches on various scope of assessment to achieve 
improvements in risk assessment process including targeting its 
automation. 
III. 
OUR PROPOSAL 
The core idea of this research is to automate all the three 
sub-processes in a risk assessment process for an identified 
scope of ISMS. We are proposing to focus on the risk 
identification as this is a sub-process where domain knowledge 
in information security needs to be applied. Domain knowledge 
on what are the significant assets for an identified ISMS scope, 
and what are the threats and corresponding vulnerabilities on 
those assets, will be modelled using an ontology editor to 
develop relationships of these important risk assessment 
parameters. With our proposed work, the tools are expected to 
be easily comprehended by a non-experienced risk analyst as 
both angles of the risk assessment i.e. the methodology and 
information security domain knowledge would have been 
carefully modelled with the use of ontology rules. Involvement 
of an experience risk analyst could be minimized and their 
resources could then be utilized effectively, only when needed. 
There are various tools for ISMS implementation that 
addressed the whole process of the management system based 
on the “Plan-Do-Check-Act” (PDCA) model. The tools have 
been designed to ensure implementation complies with the 
standard, i.e., ISO/IEC 27001:2005. As ISMS adopts a risk-
based approach, risk assessment is one of the main components 
of these tools. As far as automation is concerned, current tools 
have been observed to facilitate the end-to-end risk assessment 
methodology as well as performed calculation based on 
selected formulas during risk analysis and risk evaluation sub-
processes exercises. Automation of the risk identification sub-
process, however, has not been included as part of the tools’ 
feature. Considerable involvement of a competent risk analyst 
with information security domain knowledge was still required. 
For example, to identify assets of an ISMS scope given the 
possible list of asset types which is taken from guidelines such 
as the ISO/IEC 27005 is rather confusing. Is an identified asset 
subject to risk assessment or the asset is in fact a control that 
has been implemented to mitigate a risk? As an example, is a 
firewall an asset that needs to be protected or is it a control that 
has been implemented to protect an asset? Forming the basis of 
what assets are indeed subject to risk assessment for a specified 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ISMS scope have yet seen to be explicitly addressed by 
existing tools. In a common risk assessment exercise, expert 
resources have been observed to be utilized ineffectively due to 
this lack of automation. The output of this study is to build a 
prototype that enables risk assessment automation for 
organizations going for ISO/IEC 27001 certification. The 
proposed 
relationship 
concepts 
in 
asset 
identification 
contributed to the automation of the risk assessment for an 
identified scope of implementation. Protégé OWL (Web 
Ontology Language) was used to create classes and 
corresponding rules to demonstrate the relationships. Protégé is 
an ontology editor which is based on an open-source platform. 
It was developed by Stanford Center for Biomedical 
Informatics Research at the Stanford University School of 
Medicine. There are two types of the system; Protégé Frames 
and Protégé Owl. The former supports frame-based ontology 
while the latter supports Web Ontology Language. Both are 
actively being used as well as updated from time to time as 
observed from its website [14]. 
A. ISMS Scope 
According to the International Register of ISMS 
Certificates, there were 7,686 certificates registered by 
organizations from eighty-five countries [15]. Malaysia held 
fifty-eight certificates and was ranked at 14th place as of March 
2012. About eighty percent of the certificates in Malaysia have 
identified scope that is related to secure data centre service. 
Implementation of ISMS to manage a secure data centre is thus 
indicated to be very relevant in the context of organizations that 
highly depending on IT as their business enabler.  
B. Asset identification 
Asset identification is the first step in risk identification. 
Following the ISMS requirements, assets within the ISMS 
scope shall be identified prior to carrying out a risk assessment 
process [7]. There are two categories of assets as described in 
the ISO/IEC 27005; primary asset and supporting asset [9]. 
Primary assets are core business processes and their 
corresponding information whilst supporting assets are those 
required to be in place to support the activities of the primary 
assets. OCTAVE Allegro on the other hand has a different 
approach in asset identification. Its asset profiling is focused on 
information assets and their corresponding containers in which 
these assets lived [12]. The concepts used by the ISO/IEC 
27005 and OCTAVE Allegro are similar i.e. information was 
identified as the key asset and other relevant assets were 
identified in relation to the information. For this work, both 
approaches were adopted and streamlined to assist in the asset 
identification. 
TABLE I: TYPES OF ASSETS 
Asset 
Descriptions 
Remarks 
Information 
Digital format/ printed on 
hardcopies 
 
i) Application data 
ii) System configuration 
files 
iii)System log files 
Here, data is divided into 
three types to ensure 
consistent approach & 
understanding of the type of 
information that require 
protection. 
 
Adoption & extension of: 
Asset 
Descriptions 
Remarks 
a) Octave Allegro 
i) information asset 
ii) physical container 
 
b) ISO/IEC 27005 – i) 
primary asset: information 
ii) supporting asset: 
hardware 
Data centre 
system 
Applications and systems 
storing the ‘Information’ 
asset. 
The system includes 
software and hardware. 
 
Adoption & extension of: 
a) Octave Allegro: 
i) technical container 
 
b) ISO/IEC 27005: 
i) supporting asset: software, 
hardware & network 
Data centre 
infra 
The physical location; data 
centre including general 
telecommunication 
equipment, utilities such as 
power, air –conditioning & 
humidity control. 
Adoption & extension of: 
 
ISO/IEC 27005 
i) supporting asset: site 
People 
The people involved with 
the information asset: 
Staff - internal 
Client & Contractor - 
external 
Adoption & extension of: 
a) Octave Allegro – people 
container 
 
b) ISO/IEC 27005 – 
supporting asset: personnel 
 
 
Taking a common and significant scope of ISMS 
implementation from Section III.A, an example of secure data 
centre is used to demonstrate the relationship concept derived 
for asset identification. 
Table I listed the generic type of assets in a data centre, 
mapping them to how assets are being described in ISO/IEC 
27005 and Octave Allegro. 
At this stage, it is very important to fully understand and 
able to identify the assets involved and their corresponding 
types. Inaccurate asset identification with vague description of 
each asset type may lead to unnecessary efforts in the 
subsequent steps of the risk assessment. In Table 1, each of the 
asset type and its description is detailed and these descriptions 
are supported by the corresponding guidelines provided by 
ISO/IEC 27005 and Octave Allegro. The four types of assets 
above are proposed to be the set of assets for ISMS scope of a 
secure data center. The types of assets are explicitly set for the 
automation of the risk assessment exercise. 
The relationship concept used for the asset identification 
phase above is designed to further eliminate complexity when 
it comes to threats and vulnerabilities identification. An 
experience risk analyst would be able to easily point out a 
potential repetition of risk exercises due to unstructured 
identification of assets.  For the purpose of this paper, ‘People’ 
as an asset will not be included in rest of the discussion as it 
has a unique relationship which is addressed separately for the 
automation of the risk assessment. The relationship concepts 
are further discussed in the following section. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

IV. 
ANALYSIS 
In many ISMS implementations, the identification of assets 
was driven by organizational asset management process. This 
could pose as a challenge especially when the asset definitions 
and categorizations did not consider the information 
infrastructure which the organization had in place. This section 
discusses the analysis of the proposed relationships for the set 
of assets identified in Table I above. The discussion is limited 
to the scope of ISMS as discussed in Section III.A, i.e., secure 
data centre. The following relationships are demonstrated by 
ontology graphs which were generated using ontology editor, 
Protégé OWL. 
A. Relationship 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Assets within an ISMS scope 
A secure data centre commonly housed key information 
asset. This asset is in digital format and requires corresponding 
hardware and software for it to be usable to an organization. 
These hardware and software components are defined as ‘Data 
Centre System’. 
The ‘Data Centre System’ requires a suitable environment 
for it to operate at its maximum capacity with minimal 
disruption. This environment is defined as ‘Data Centre Infra’. 
Thus the identified assets for ISMS scope of a secure data 
centre are Information, Data Centre System and Data Center 
Infra. Therefore, these three assets are subject to a risk 
assessment. 
B. Relationship 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Information asset 
The information asset of a secure data centre is further 
broken down into ‘Application Data’, ‘System Configuration’ 
and ‘System Log’. These are important components of 
Information asset which are susceptible to threats related to 
information asset. The threats are defined as ‘Data Security 
Threat’. 
It is noted that up to this point, the relationships described 
are very common. It is however very significant to be discussed 
in this section as the rest of the relationships are based on these 
foundations.  
C. Relationship 3 
This relationship is for identifying threats for Data Centre 
System which is an asset of a secure data centre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Threats 
1) Descriptions 
a) Two types of threats are shown in Figure 3; Network 
Security Threat and Data Security Threat 
b) Data 
Security 
Threats 
are 
DisclosureOfData, 
TamperedData and UnavailabilityOfData 
c) Network security threats are reconnaissance attacks, 
session attacks, unauthorized network access, DoS/DDoS 
(denial-of-service/ distributed denial-of-service) and malware 
attacks. 
d) Network Security Threats are threats to Data Centre 
System.  
e) Data Security Threats are threats to Information 
f) Network Security Threats on Data Centre System 
resulted into Data Security Threats on Information 
2) Analysis 
a)  “Network Security Threats” will eventually lead to 
threats on Information. This is justified due to the fact that 
Information resides in the Data Centre System and hence 
inherited the threats to the Data Centre System. 
b) “Data Security Threats” are therefore inferred to be the 
results of “Network Security Threats”. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

c) This is an example of a relationship between data 
security 
threats 
and 
network 
security 
threats. 
Other 
relationships involving different types of threats might have 
the same results and will be used later in this study. 
d) In a common risk assessment exercise, asset owners 
will need to be involved. Threat identification phase for an 
application owned by a business unit, may have the following 
scenario: 
TABLE 2: THREAT IDENTIFICATION – A SCENARIO 
Asset 
ID 
Asset Description 
Asset 
Owner 
Asset Type 
Asset 1 
Business Application-
System 
Business 
Unit 
Data centre 
system 
Asset 2 
Business Application-
Application Data 
Business 
Unit 
Information 
Asset 3 
Business Application-
System Log 
Security 
Unit 
Information 
 
Guided by Relationship 1, Business Unit has 
identified both system (Asset 1) and data (Asset 2) as 
their assets. The latter could be unintentionally left out 
during an assessment as it could be assumed to be 
bundled in Asset 1 without specifying it explicitly and 
may result in an incomplete assessment. Next, with 
Relatioship 2, system log (Asset 3) has been identified by 
Security Unit which was not the main owner of the 
application. 
Applying Relationship 3, unauthorized network access 
from a network security threat may be exploited by some 
vulnerabilities and could cause tampered data for Asset 2 
and Asset 3. However, in a common risk assessment 
exercise, this threat may have only been identified for 
Asset 1 and the cascading impact on information asset 
residing in it might not be properly highlighted and 
analysed. Instead, a different set of assessment could have 
been carried out on information assets resulting in risk 
assessment results which were repetitive and lack of 
clarity. 
e) Hence, Relationship 3 indicates that risk assessment 
could be conducted in a more structured manner whereby 
repetition of identifying threats for both Information and Data 
Centre System would be avoided. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Three relationship concepts have been discussed. These 
concepts were used to develop other relationships which have 
enabled the automation of risk assessment for an identified 
ISMS scope. An advisory system prototype was developed 
based on a risk assessment approach taken from the ISO/IEC 
27005 to demonstrate the relationship concepts. Four types of 
assets were identified during the asset identification phase. 
However the threats identification phase had focused on two 
types of the assets namely Data Centre System and 
Information. 
Future work will extend the relationships into selection of 
control measures to mitigate the identified risks. 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 27002 Code of practice for information security 
management," ISO/IEC, 2005. 
[2] “The Top Cyber Security Risks”, (SANS Institute), [online] September 
2009, http://www.sans.org/top-cyber-security-risks (Accessed: 29 March 
2012). 
[3] “Trial by fire”, (PWC), [online] 2009, http://www.pwc.com/giss2010 
(Accessed: 25 April 2010). 
[4] E. 
Humphreys, 
"Information 
security 
management 
standards: 
Compliance, governance and risk management," Information Security 
Technical Report, vol. 13, 2008, pp. 247-255. 
[5] M. P. Kailay and P. Jarratt, "RAMeX: a prototype expert system for 
computer security risk analysis and management," Computers & 
Security, vol. 14, 1995, pp. 449-463. 
[6] E. Humphreys, Implementing the ISO/IEC 27001 Information Security 
Management System Standard. Boston,London: ARTECH House, 2007, 
pp 21-25. 
[7] ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 27001 Information Security Management Systems - 
Requirements," ISO/IEC, 2005. 
[8] M. D. Aime, A. Atzeni, and P. C. Pomi, "AMBRA - Automated Model-
Based Risk Analysis," in CCS: Conference on Computer and 
Communications Security (Proceedings of the 2007 ACM workshop on 
Quality of protection table of contents, SESSION: Risk analysis), 
Alexandria, Virginia, USA, 2007, pp. 43-48. 
[9] ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 27005 Information security risk management," 
ISO/IEC, 2011. 
[10] C. Jung, I. Han, and B. Suh, "Risk Analysis for Electronic Commerce 
Using Case-Based Reasoning," International Journal of Intelligent 
Systems in Accounting, Finance & Management, vol. 8, 1999, pp. 61-
73. 
[11] G.-Y. Liao and C.-H. Song, "Design of a Computer-Aided System for 
Risk Assessment on Information Systems," in IEEE 37th Annual 
International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, 2003, pp. 
157-162. 
[12] R. A. Caralli, J. F. Stevens, L. R. Young, and W. R. Wilson, 
"Introducing OCTAVE Allegro: Improving the Information Security 
Risk Assessment Process," May 2007. 
[13] H. Chivers, J. A. Clark, and P.-C. Cheng, "Risk profiles and distributed 
risk assessment," Computers & Security, vol. 28, 2009, pp. 521-535. 
[14] “What is protégé?”, (protégé), [online] 2012, http://protege.stanford.edu 
(Accessed: 29 March 2012) 
[15] “International 
Register 
of 
ISMS 
Certificates”, 
[online] 
2012, 
http://iso27001certificates.com/ (Accessed: 29 March 2012) 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

