Trust Management in Space Information Networks
Anders Fongen
Norwegian Defence University College, Cyber Defence Academy (FHS/CISK)
Lillehammer, Norway
Email: anders@fongen.no
Abstract—The concept of a Space Information Network (SIN)
is evolving from a satellite transport infrastructure towards a
provider of a range of services, including even Application-as-a-
Service (AaaS). Client endpoints connected to a SIN will invoke
services in other connected endpoints, as well as services inside
the SIN itself. Interactions taking place between clients and SIN
components will create trust relations that must be protected
from the usual threats. Traditional cryptographic protocols can
offer adequate protection from some threats, but the particular
conditions of a satellite network requires modiﬁcations of the
methods used for authorization control and key management.
The amount of connectivity and transport capacity required
by a traditional Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) conﬁguration
causes excessive use of SIN resources, and a modiﬁed approach to
key deployment, credential validation and authorization control
should be investigated.
Keywords—LEO satellites; trust management; space information
networks; AaaS in space
I. INTRODUCTION
The term satellite networks indicates the evolution of satel-
lites from being radio mirrors to form complex infrastruc-
tures where the spacecrafts cooperate for the provisioning of
communication services. Satellite networks for communication
services have been in operation for three decades and have
proven the feasibility of their operation, capacity and utility.
We foresee the further evolution of satellite networks into the
Application-as-a-Service (AaaS) domain, where the network
not only provides communication services, but also different
kinds of discovery services, collaborative services and even
platforms for general AaaS. The descriptive term for this
evolving concept is Space Information Networks (SIN). Not
only will a SIN provide global coverage, but also a very low
Round Trip Time (RTT). A satellite at 300 km altitude can
offer an RTT as low as 2 ms, much less than any terrestrial
network path.
The evolution presented in the above paragraph creates
service endpoints inside the network elements of the SIN,
representing high value for both providers and customers,
so trust management must be in place not only between
client endpoints, but also inside the SIN infrastructure, as
services in satellites are invoked from other satellites and
client endpoints. Existing technology for authentication and
authorization control may not be well suited for the particular
properties of a SIN infrastructure, which this paper aims to
address.
The illustration in Figure 1 shows the endpoints involved in
transactions in or trough a SIN: The Client Endpoints (CE) are
computers connected to the SIN (blue lines). A CE can both
Figure 1. Service endpoint and links which forms the structure of a SIN
.
have client and server roles, but they are still clients to the SIN
services. The service endpoints in satellites are called Satellite
Endpoints (SE) and may be invoked from CEs as well as other
SEs. There are a number of terrestrial endpoints called Ground
Stations (GS), used by the satellites for communication with
the Internet. Services offered by GS are never invoked from
CE, only from SE. Red lines in the ﬁgure indicate intra-SIN
communication endpoints not addressable for CE use.
The general architecture principle of an AaaS oriented SIN
has been published in a previous article [1], where a number
of future research problems were presented. In the present
paper, a model for SIN trust management will be described
in some detail. The general principles of the proposed trust
management architecture have originally been developed with
tactical military networks in mind [2], and have been modiﬁed
to match the properties of a satellite network.
A key property of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites is the
long idle periods as they ﬂy over inhabited areas, and the
predictability of the bursts of requests they receive as they ﬂy
over densely populated areas. Non-interactive tasks can thus be
scheduled to idle periods, where data stores can be replicated,
software updated, etc. Intelligent replication of frequently used
resources can contribute to reduced latency and efﬁcient use
of infrastructure capacity. [1].
The contribution of this paper is a model for key manage-
ment, authentication and authorization control using protocols
well suited for the particular properties of a SIN. The identiﬁ-
cation of Delay Tolerant operations in credential management
that can be scheduled to idle periods is essential in this respect.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, a short survey of relevant research is presented.
Section III identiﬁes the shortcomings of the PKI design.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Section IV presents the author’s alternative to X.509, the
Identity Statement, and how its properties better serve the
purpose of trust management and protected service invocation
in a SIN. Section V summarizes the arguments of this paper
and identiﬁes future research activities.
II. RELATED RESEARCH
The term Space Information Network (SIN) has been used
to describe networks of satellites and high altitude aircrafts
(drones, balloons) with different service levels. Existing satel-
lite networks like Iridium and the upcoming Starlink [3] offer
only communication services, the latter on a very large scale
and with high bandwidth. A number of authors have proposed
“Cloud Computing in Space” through the addition of larger
satellites with sufﬁcient energy and computing resources for
taking on these tasks [4] [5].
In order to improve the communication capacity of SIN
units, lots of research has gone into the development of
antennas for spatial multiplexing (Space-Division Multiple Ac-
cess, SDMA), beamforming, non-orthogonal multiple access,
optical communication links, etc. [6] [7]
The proposals made in this position paper will not deal
with technical details in the communication technology, but
rather view the SIN as a distributed system which borrows its
analysis and solutions from the ﬁeld of distributed computing.
The author is not aware of other efforts to investigate trust
management and protection mechanisms speciﬁcally for a SIN.
Efforts on trust management are made in related areas, as
in Mobile and Distributed Systems [2], and in the area of
Internet of Things (IoT). IoT systems seem to show little
interest for traditional PKI, but rather look to the use of
Blockchains. In [8], Blockchains are proposed as the distribu-
tion method for tamper-proof trust variables, which are formed
through consensus processes and transitive trust. Given that
Blockchains have scalability problems, [9] proposes a variant
called Holochain, with better scalability properties since the
distribution patterns are limited.
Proposals based on Blockchain/Holochain for trust manage-
ment seem to overlook the importance of the trust chain which
binds the technological domain to the managerial domain
through cryptographic protocols, and the complexity of the
resulting key management. Which is why these efforts are not
used as a basis for this paper.
III. PUBLIC KEY CRYPTO AND INFRASTRUCTURE
The reader is assumed to be familiar with the fundamental
principles of public key crypto, digital signatures, crypto-
graphic hash functions and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
The PKI services can be divided in two categories:
1) Creation and deployment of key pairs and certiﬁcates
2) Assistance in the certiﬁcate validation process.
Operation (1) takes place for each End Entity (EE) after the
existing certiﬁcate expires, while operation (2) takes place at
short intervals or even every time a certiﬁcate is validated.
It is the task of certiﬁcate validation which demands the
highest connectivity and network capacity, which is why it
is of interest for operation in a SIN.
A. Certiﬁcate revocation
The decision that a certiﬁcate should no longer be validated
is called revocation, and is made by the Certiﬁcate Authority
(CA) and announced to the community in a variety of ways.
A common method is to offer an interactive service through
which EE can check the revocation status of a certiﬁcate by
using the Online Certiﬁcate Status Protocol (OCSP) protocol.
Another method is to disseminate a revocation list of certiﬁ-
cates that are revoked but not yet expired. Experience indicates
that approx. 10% of the certiﬁcate population is revoked and
represented on a revocation list [10] through entries of (typical
number) 37 bytes each.
The use of revocation lists has never been a good idea,
and although attempts have been made to distribute delta lists
and fragmented lists, the required network capacity for their
dissemination is massive [11]. Besides, revocation lists raise
lots of dilemmas in situations where the dissemination fails,
which is considered to be out of scope for this paper [12].
B. Authorization control through certiﬁcates
Certiﬁcates facilitate the authentication phase through bind-
ing a transaction or an object to an identiﬁer. It does not
indicate the authorization of the corresponding entity. Au-
thorization control involves a new set of data sources and
protocols for their distribution. Although standards have been
published for its interoperability, e.g., XACML [13], they are
not widely used. Most vendors offer their own proprietary
solution.
In order to avoid the extra cost associated with separate
authorization control, many systems choose to confuse autho-
rization with authentication, and assume any valid certiﬁcate to
be a token for authorization. This is a mistake, which greatly
increases the need for revocation, since any changes in the
authorizations of an entity requires a certiﬁcate to be revoked
and a new certiﬁcate issued.
In a constrained network[14], both authentication and au-
thorization control should be done using one set of data
objects and protocols. The most popular standard format
for certiﬁcates, the X.509, does not lend itself well to this
combination, for which reason a different data structure is
proposed: The Identity Statement (IdS).
IV. THE IDENTITY STATEMENT
For the purpose of authentication and authorization control
in a constrained network, the protocols in use should have as
few round-trips as possible with the smallest messages possi-
ble. For this purpose, the object class Identity Statement (IdS)
has been constructed. It has many similarities with an X.509
certiﬁcate, but is simpler, and a block of named variables
(name-value pairs) has been added to support Attribute Based
Authorization Control (ABAC) operations. Its elements are:
• Identiﬁer of subject, RFC-822 format address
• Public key
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• Validity period
• Authorization attributes
• Issuer’s Distinguished Name (X.500 form)
• Issuer’s signature
• Room for cross-CoI extensions (described later)
The public key in the IdS can be used both for signature
veriﬁcation (during authentication) and encryption, but not
for issuing new Identity Statements. There is no keyUsage-
element, which means that keys can serve any purpose. As in
a PKI, the trust chain depends on a small number of Trust
Anchors, called Identity Providers (IdP). Their X.500 DN
and digital signature are stored in each IdS and used for IdS
validation. The group of clients which have the same IdP as
their trust anchor is called a Community of Interest (CoI).
There is no revocation operation in this architecture. The
IdS is irrevocably valid until it expires, before which it is re-
issued unless it is invalidated in the mean time. The validity
time may be set so short that it matches the revocation latency
associated with revocation list (typically a small number of
hours). The dissemination of re-issued IdS takes opp much
less capacity than a similar arrangement based on revocation
lists.
A. Issuing Identity Statements
The authority which issues Identity Statements is the Iden-
tity Provider (IdP). The structure of the issuing service is
shown in Figure 2. The IdP keeps all EE information in
a database (possibly gets it from a traditional PKI) and
provides signed IdS at anyone’ request through a simple HTTP
interface. The IdS is a public object so no caller privileges is
needed. The public key of the IdP must be installed and trusted
by every EE in order for them to validate an IdS.
If the IdP receives an IdS issued by a different IdP, the IdP
will issue a Guest Identity Statement with the same content
and a selection of its authorization attributes, based on a trust
relation between the two IdPs. This is a way for guest clients
from a different CoI to invoke services in this domain. This
approach to cross-CoI validation is vastly more efﬁcient and
secure than the cross-certiﬁcate approach proposed by the
traditional PKI.
B. Dissemination of re-issued Identity Statements
An endpoint (CE or SE) must possess a valid IdS of the
corresponding party in order to validate an authentication
request, cf. Section IV-C. Normally, it would be the respon-
sibility of the requesting part to enclose a valid IdS with the
request message, but several other communication patterns are
possible. The validating party may store the IdS from earlier
transactions, or may request it directly from the IdP service
point.
Please keep in mind that all authentication operations should
be mutual, i.e., both parties authenticate to the other, and both
must have a valid IdS representing the other party at the time
of authentication.
Since IdS are never revoked, sound practice for the IdP
is to give them a short expiration time and renew them
CA
CA
IdP
IdP
client
service
client
service
Attribute
store
Attribute
store
Key store
PKI A
COI
COI
Figure 2. The functional components of trust management. The IdP serves
one single CoI. Keys are issued by a PKI, attributes by the IdP.
on demand. Anyone possessing an IdS will know the time
for its expiration and can plan a suitable moment for its
renewal. For this reason, the dissemination may be regarded
as a delay tolerant operation, which takes place in a relaxed
manner when the satellites are in a favorable position for the
operation. The satellite can receive the IdS when it is directly
communicating with a Ground Station (GS), and pass it on to
the CE later when it is within range. In this way, the delay
tolerant properties of the operation may allow for the satellite
to be used as a courier rather than consuming infrastructure
capacity.
For an IdS which represents the service endpoint in a
satellite, the problem is simple. As the expiration time for
the existing IdS is due, the satellite requests a new from the
next GS in range.
For CEs, the courier approach raises interesting questions:
(1) which satellite(s) should be chosen for the courier task, and
(2) when is the CE in operation and ready to receive the IdS?
The following observations apply for the analysis of possible
solutions:
1) The CE has only one connection point, which is a
satellite. The IdS may as well be stored in the satellite
as in the terrestrial endpoint. Besides, the satellite has
a shorter path to the IdP and higher communication
capacity. The IdS will be a part of the client state during
handover to trailing satellites before being discarded. A
complicating factor for this arrangement to work is that
the SE need to engage in the authentication protocol and
inject the IdS into the message stream when needed.
2) If the CE is authenticating with an Internet endpoint,
the other endpoint has the most network capacity to its
disposal. It may as well acquire the IdS for the CE by
itself, and cache it for subsequent invocations.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Validate cert
name
(asynchronous operation)
Client Xa
IdPa
P KIa
IdPb
Server Fb
(IdSx)A
(IdSx)A
(IdSx)B+(IdSb)A
(IdSx)B + (Message+Nonce)SX
(IdSf )B + (Response+Nonce) ExSf
Figure 3. Trust management protocols for IdS issue and service invocation
in a cross-CoI environment.
3) The IdS could be replicated on a subset of satellites,
so that the CE may connect to one of them within a
given time period (e.g., 60 minutes) to ﬁnd a renewed
IdS. With a handover frequency of 10 minutes (typical
number) at least every 6th satellite passing over the CE
should be able to offer the IdS. This fraction can be
lower if the location of the CE is known or guessed,
and the validity period of the IdS is less than a full
orbital period. One can also take advantage of the fact
that a southbound satellite pass will be northbound 12
hours later. There is a trade-off between the number of
satellites involved and the operating demands on the CE,
e.g., if the CE always has to be connected to the SIN.
As a fallback option, the endpoint may invoke the commu-
nication service to obtain an IdS from the IdP service point.
Under the proposed scheme for IdS dissemination, this service
is likely to be the choice when the CE computer is started
and used immediately, if it cannot wait for the next pass of a
courier satellite.
C. Invoking services with IdS
The protocol for invoking a service should provide mutual
trust establishment through a minimum number of messages.
In the simplest scenario, the requester/client will send its IdS
together with the request message and a nonce, signed by its
private key. The responder/server will validate the IdS, verify
the signature and execute the service. The response message
will include the server’s IdS and the service response and the
nonce, encrypted with the client’s public key and signed with
server’s private key.
Figure 3 illustrates a cross-CoI service invocation, which
involves IdS issued by two IdPs, a guest IdS for client X
issued by IdPb, a cross-CoI (IdSb)a for IdPb issued by IdPa
for validation of the server’s IdS by the client. Apart from
these extra data elements, the cross-CoI invocation remains
essentially similar to the base case, and there is no need for
revocation status from foreign CoIs, which would otherwise
complicate the validation of the guest IdS. The initial invoca-
tion of the IdP services and the enclosure of IdS in the service
invocation messages are not strictly necessary since they may
be cached in the parties from preceding operations.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper describes the trust management components of
an ongoing effort to outline the design of a Space Information
Network with application service capabilities (AaaS). Its main
focus is to preserve low latency through prudent protocols and
data structures, as well as room for any number of credential-
issuing authorities (called Identity Providers, IdP).
Why is the proposed trust management essential for the SIN
operation? Because it allows cross-CoI service invocations to
take place in a minimum of round trips and with minimal
message size, allowing the SIN to offer services with unprece-
dented low latency, which is the most important motivating
property for its design.
Other revocation free schemes could possibly work, like
replacing the short-lived IdS with a combination of X.509
certiﬁcates and an OCSP response message which attests the
validity of the certiﬁcate for a short period of time. This
approach does not, however, lend itself well to the inclusion
of authorization information in the trust protocols. Besides,
the validation of an X.509 certiﬁcate involves a large number
of poorly understood variables, which is often seen to create
errors, ambiguities and interoperability problems.
Issuing and dissemination of IdS remains an unsolved
problem though, which should take place in a delay tolerant
manner to exploit the frequent idle period of satellites as
they ﬂy over inhabited areas. A simulation model is under
construction for the study of possible solutions.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Fongen, “Application services in space information networks,” in
CYBER 2021.
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, Oct 2021, pp. 113–117.
[2] ——, “Federated identity management in a tactical multi-domain net-
work,” Int. Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol.
Vol.4, no 3&4, pp. 157–167, 2011.
[3] “Starlink web site,” https://www.starlink.com/, [Online; accessed 19-
Oct-2021].
[4] S. Briatore, N. Garzaniti, and A. Golkar, “Towards the internet for space:
Bringing cloud computing to space systems,” in 36th International
Communications Satellite Systems Conference (ICSSC 2018), 2018, pp.
1–5.
[5] S. Cao et al., “Space-based cloud-fog computing architecture and its
applications,” in 2019 IEEE World Congress on Services (SERVICES),
vol. 2642-939X, 2019, pp. 166–171.
[6] X. Zhang, L. Zhu, T. Li, Y. Xia, and W. Zhuang, “Multiple-user transmis-
sion in space information networks: Architecture and key techniques,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 17–23, 2019.
[7] Y. Su et al., “Broadband leo satellite communications: Architectures and
key technologies,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2, pp.
55–61, 2019.
[8] A. Lahbib, K. Toumi, A. Laouiti, A. Laube, and S. Martin, “Blockchain
based trust management mechanism for iot,” in 2019 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2019, pp. 1–8.
[9] R. T. Frahat, M. M. Monowar, and S. M. Buhari, “Secure and scalable
trust management model for iot p2p network,” in 2019 2nd International
Conference on Computer Applications Information Security (ICCAIS),
2019, pp. 1–6.
[10] S. Berkovits, S. Chokhani, J. Furlong, J. Geiter, and J. Guild, “Public
key infrastructure study: Final report,” Produced by MITRE Corporation
for NIST, April 1995.
[11] A. Fongen, “Optimization of a public key infrastructure,” in IEEE
MILCOM, Baltimore, MD, USA, Nov 2011, pp. 1440–1447.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[12] R. L. Rivest, “Can we eliminate certiﬁcate revocation lists?” in Financial
Cryptography, R. Hirchfeld, Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 178–183.
[13] “OASIS
eXtensible
Access
Control
Markup
Language,”
https://
www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc home.php?wg abbrev=xacml, [On-
line; accessed 19-Oct-2021].
[14] C. Bormann, M. Ersue, and A. Ker¨anen, “Terminology for Constrained-
Node
Networks,”
RFC
7228,
May
2014.
[Online].
Available:
https://rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7228.txt
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

