An Empirical Survey on how Much Security  
and Privacy Customers Want in Instant Messengers 
 
Thomas Paul 
 
Munich University of Applied Sciences 
Lothstrasse 64, Munich, Germany 
e-mail: thomas.paul91@gmail.com 
Hans-Joachim Hof 
MuSe – Munich IT Security Research Group 
Munich University of Applied Sciences 
Lothstraße 64, Munich, Germany 
e-mail: hof@hm.edu
 
Abstract— Instant messengers are popular communication 
tools used by many people for everyday communication, as 
well as for work related communication. Following the 
disclosure of a massive surveillance system by Edward 
Snowden, many users became aware of the risks of unsecure 
communication. 
Users 
increasingly 
ask 
for 
secure 
communication. However, unsecure instant messengers are still 
popular nowadays. This could be due to the fact, that, besides 
the large number of available instant messengers, no instant 
messenger fully satisfies the users preferences. To research the 
acceptance of security mechanisms in instant messengers, this 
paper presents an evaluation of user preferences for secure 
instant messengers. A user survey was conducted to rate the 
acceptance of security mechanisms typically used by instant 
messengers.  The survey clearly shows that users ask for 
security functionality.  The paper presents the features of an 
ideal instant messenger that fulfills all the user preferences 
identified by the survey. A market simulation shows that the 
ideal instant messenger has a high potential for commercial 
success.  
Keywords-Instant Messaging; instant messenger; security; 
usability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today, instant messengers like WhatsApp are important 
for communication between people, even outrunning the 
once popular SMS (Short Message Service) [8]. Instant 
messengers are communication clients for instant messaging 
networks. Instant messaging networks provide a service 
called instant messaging that allows transmitting real-time 
text messages to other users or groups of users. Most instant 
messaging networks allow users to also transmit pictures or 
arbitrary files. Following the disclosure of Edward 
Snowden, secure communication became popular in the 
press, as well as in user preferences. However, current 
instant messenger usage does not show a signification shift 
from unsecure instant messengers to secure instant 
messengers. This could be due to the fact that none of the 
existing secure instant messenger fulfills the preferences of 
the now security-aware users. To fill this gap, the work 
presented in this paper analyzes user preferences for secure 
instant messengers. A user survey was conducted to rate the 
acceptance of security mechanisms typically used by instant 
messengers. The results of the survey should help 
developers of future instant messengers to decide on 
security features to implement. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II discusses 
related work. Section III presents the design of the user 
survey. Section IV discusses in detail the findings of the 
user survey. Section V presents the features of an ideal 
instant messenger fulfilling all the user preferences 
identified by the survey. A market simulation is used to 
show the potential of this ideal instant messenger. Section 
VI summarizes the findings of the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are several studies on instant messenger usage, 
e.g., [8][11][12][13]. In [8], the popularity of SMS and 
instant messengers is analyzed. The authors of [11] research 
how the usage of WhatsApp differs from the usage of SMS. 
The authors of [12] present a study on how users use instant 
messaging in building and maintaining social relationships. 
In [13], the motivation of users for switching instant 
messengers is discussed. However, most studies focus on 
one distinct instant messenger and the usage of instant 
messaging. They do not focus on security preferences of 
users. Analyzing not only one but several instant 
messengers helps to identify the features most asked for by 
users in each messenger. When planning future instant 
messengers, this knowledge could help to increase the focus 
on the intended users. 
Other publications, e.g., [9][10], have a focus on security, 
but they analyze only existing security features of instant 
messengers and attacks on these instant messengers. In [9], 
security features of instant messengers and attacks on 
instant messaging are presented. The authors of [10] focus 
only on attacks on instant messaging. User preferences for 
secure instant messaging are out of scope of these papers. 
In contrast, the user survey presented in this paper 
focuses on preferences of users regarding security- and 
privacy-related features of instant messengers. The results 
of this paper are intended to give a hint on the ideal 
combination of features that should be included when 
implementing future instant messengers. The focus of this 
paper is on stand-alone instant messengers, instant 
messaging in social messaging platforms is not considered.   
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

III. 
SURVEY DESIGN 
The survey consists of four parts: 
1. Socio-demographic questions. 
2. General questions about instant messaging. 
3. Security-related questions. 
4. Choice Based Conjoint Analysis. 
Each part of the survey is discussed in detail in the 
following subsections. 
A. Demographic Questions 
The demographic questions include the typical questions 
about age and sex. Age groups where: <18, 18-24, 25-29, 
30-39,40-49,50-59, 60+.  
B. General Questions About Instant Messaging 
This part of the survey analyzes the degree of brand 
awareness and usage of popular instant messenger networks. 
The instant messengers considered in the user survey 
presented in this paper can be divided into two major 
groups: 
• 
Instant messengers without focus on security: 
Facebook Messenger, Hangouts, Hike, Kakao 
Talk.Kik, Line, Skype, Snapchat, Tango, Viber, 
and WhatsApp. 
• 
Security-conscious instant messengers with end-to-
end encryption: ChatSecure, iMessage, myEnigma, 
SIMSme, 
surespot, 
Telegram, 
TextSecure, 
Threema,  and Wire. 
The list with security-conscious instant messengers 
shows that there are already several secure alternatives for 
instant messaging. It is an interesting question if people are 
using these messengers and if not, why not? 
C. Security-related Questions 
In this section of the survey, participants are asked about 
their preferences for security features. The list of security 
features consists of the security features present in the 
security-conscious 
instant 
messengers 
(ChatSecure, 
iMessage, 
myEnigma, 
SIMSme, 
surespot, 
Telegram, 
TextSecure, Threema,  and wire). Users can express their 
preferences on a scale ranging from 1 (unimportant) to 5 
(very important).  
Topics of the questions in this section of the survey: 
• 
Importance of transparency of security features: 
does the user want to know what is going on 
concerning security or does he want security to 
“just happen behind the scenes”? Does users trust 
software developers and instant messaging network 
providers or do they want to have the possibility 
for external audits? 
• 
Importance of provider and server location: Is it 
important for users that instant messaging network 
providers are based in Europe and use only servers 
at European locations or do the users not care about 
server location, even if the servers are located in 
the USA with its low data privacy protection level? 
• 
Convenience versus Security: If security comes at 
the cost of a more complicated handling of the 
instant messenger, is this acceptable for users? 
• 
Trust in chat partners: Do users prefer to have 
control over the content they send to their chat 
partners? 
D. Choice Based Conjoint Analysis 
The Choice Based Conjoint Analysis (CBC) [3] is a 
popular analysis methodology in marketing. CBC is used to 
survey product preferences of users.  CBC can be used to 
find out, which features or which combination of features 
users prefer. This section gives a very short introduction 
into CBC, necessary for understanding of the results of the 
survey. Please refer to [2] for a thorough discussion of CBC. 
The core of CBC is to offer customers several concepts of a 
product and the customer selects the one product concept it 
likes most (or none). This approach is quite similar to how 
customers decide on real markets. Hence, the methodology 
is quite natural for the participants of the survey. The 
disadvantage of CBC is its inefficiency, resulting in surveys 
that need a lot of reading of different product concept 
descriptions by the participants. Figure 1 shows an example 
of concept choice from the user survey. The question (in 
German) is: "If you have to chose one of these instant 
messengers, which would you take?". Concepts are 
described by attributes. Attributes have two or more levels. 
For example, if a concept includes an attribute “price”, 
levels may be “1.99 €”, “2.50€”, and “2.98 €”. For the 
survey presented in this paper, concepts are instant 
messengers with different features (= attribute levels).  CBC 
Figure 1. Example concept selection from the survey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XIX 
 
 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

is only suitable for concepts that need a small number of 
attributes for description, [4] suggests having a maximum of 
six attributes. Hence, the selection of security- or privacy-
relevant features of an Instant Messenger was restricted to 
those features that are visible to a user. Security features 
with little or no user interaction are not considered. Existing 
Instant Messengers are analyzed to come up with realistic 
security- or privacy-relevant attributes.  
The following attributes were chosen for the survey: 
• 
Message history. 
• 
PIN (Personal identification number) protection of 
instant messenger. 
• 
Type of contact establishment. 
• 
Type of account login. 
These attributes and their levels are described in the 
following and can be seen in Figure 1. 
An instant messenger with a message history stores sent 
and received instant messages on a server. In general, a 
message history can be stored either on a device or on the 
servers of the instant messaging network. Storing a message 
history on servers of the instant messenger network poses a 
risk for user privacy as the servers may be infiltrated and the 
message history may be stolen or the instant messaging 
network provider accesses the message history, e.g., to 
customize advertisement for users. As users today often use 
multiple devices and change devices often, it is assumed 
that only a message history stored on the server of the 
Instant Messenger network provider is realistic.  
Hence, the only levels for attribute message history are  
• 
message history and  
• 
no message history. 
A PIN can be used to restrict access on an instant 
messenger. A PIN prevents attackers from getting access to 
the messenger if an attacker has physical access to the 
device. Also, a PIN can be used to derive a key for 
encryption of sensitive information of the instant messenger 
on the device. However, entering a PIN is a hassle for users, 
see [6][7] for a discussion of the usability problems of PINs 
and passwords. Hence, the survey distinguishes PIN usage 
based on the frequency of the usage (once after restart of 
device, every time the instant messenger is opened). 
The levels for attribute PIN protection are: 
• 
PIN must be entered when opening the instant 
messenger, 
• 
PIN must be entered once after restart of the instant 
messenger (typically when device is restarted), and 
• 
No PIN. 
Another security relevant feature is how users establish 
contact for the first time. The most secure way of contact 
establishment is meeting in person and exchanging 
fingerprints of keys used for communication. For example, 
the instant messenger Threema uses this approach. 
However, this approach is time-consuming and may be 
impossible in some cases. Another approach for contact 
establishment is to only allow contact establishment to 
parties that have mutual phone book entries (user A has 
stored the telephone number of user B in his phone book 
and user B stored the telephone number of user A in his 
phone book). This approach assumes that the instant 
messenger is used on a mobile phone. The disadvantage of 
this approach is that it requires transferring the phone book 
of the mobile phone an instant messenger is running on to 
the instant messaging network. This is a serious privacy 
issue, as phone books hold much information on the social 
environment of users. Also, if a phone book is transferred to 
an instant messaging network, much of the data transferred 
belongs to users that did not explicitly agree to this transfer. 
Another approach for contact establishment is to allow 
everybody that knows the phone number of a user to contact 
this user. The problem with this approach is that a possibly 
publically known value (phone number) is considered to be 
secret.  
The levels for attribute contact establishment are: 
• 
Meeting in person. 
• 
Mutual phone book entries. 
• 
Phone number known. 
Several instant messengers require an account login to 
protect access to the instant messaging network. Account 
login can be password based or it can use a QR-code that is 
scanned by the instant messenger on the device. Entering 
passwords is considered to be a hassle for users, see [6][7] 
for a discussion on the user-friendliness of passwords.  
Possible levels for attribute account login are: 
• 
Password-based account login 
• 
QR-Code based account login 
TABLE I. summarizes attributes and levels used for the 
survey presented in this paper. 
TABLE I.  
FEATURES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS FOR CHOICE-
BASED CONJOINT ANALYSIS 
Attribute 
Message 
history 
PIN 
protection 
Contact 
establishme
nt 
Account 
login 
Level 
Yes 
When 
opening 
App 
Meeting in 
person 
Password 
No 
Once after 
restart 
Mutual 
phone book 
entries 
QR-Code 
 
No PIN 
Phone 
number 
known 
 
 
Figure 2 shows an overview of the data analysis of the 
survey. A utility function is used to calculate the part-worth 
utility of the different levels of an attribute. A concatenation 
function is used to calculate the conjoint utility. 
Hence,  
 
                 (1) 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

, where Up is the conjoint utility of product p, Ψ the 
concatenation function, fi the utility function of attribute i, 
and xip the level of attribute i for product p. 
 
 
Conjoint 
u)lity 
A-ribute n1 
Level x11 
Level x12 
U)lity func)on 
part-worth u)lity v11 
part-worth u)lity v12 
A-ribute n2 
Level x21 
Level x22 
U)lity func)on 
part-worth u)lity v21 
part-worth u)lity v22 
part-worth u)lity v23 
 
Level x23 
A-ribute n3 
Level x31 
Level x32 
U)lity func)on 
part-worth u)lity v31 
part-worth u)lity v32 
part-worth u)lity v33 
 
Level x33 
A-ribute n4 
Level x41 
Level x42 
U)lity func)on 
part-worth u)lity v41 
part-worth u)lity v42 
Concatena)on func)on 
 
 
Figure 2. Data analysis 
 
The following utility function is used for this survey: 
 
                             (2) 
 
, where vip is the part-worth utility of attribute i for product 
p, Ki is the total number of levels for attribute i, βik is the 
part-worth utility of level k for attribute i, and xikp is a 
variable that is 1 if level k of attribute i is present in product 
p and 0 otherwise. 
Concatenation function (3) is used for this survey: 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
where Up is the conjoint utility of product p, vip is the part-
worth net value of attribute i of product p, and I is the total 
number of attributes. 
Inserting (2) in (3) leads to 
 
 
 
   (4) 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF THE USER SURVEY 
The survey in German language was sent to 200,000 
customers of the two participating German freemail 
providers GMX und Web.de. Hence, it is very likely that 
most participants of the survey are located in Germany. 
1720 users participated in the survey, 640 of them 
completed the survey. In the following, only the completed 
survey questionnaires are considered. Participants did not 
get any incentives for the participation in the survey. 
60% of the participants are male, 40% female. 85% of the 
participants are older then 30 years.  The participation in the 
survey grew with the age of the users. 58% of all 
participants use instant message clients.  
Instant messenger usage varies with age: while nearly all 
young participants use instant message clients, 64% of the 
people of age 60 or above do not use instant message 
clients. This is compliant to the results of [8] that state that 
older people prefer SMS to instant messengers. 
The survey found that the market of instant messengers 
is dominated by three big players: WhatsApp (81%), Skype 
(36%), and Facebook Messenger (29%). The figures show 
that users use more than one instant messenger. This is due 
to the fact that different instant messengers are used in 
different social groups a user belongs to. Threema, an 
instant messenger with focus on security, is only used by 
7% of all users.  The figures for WhatsApp and Threema are 
in the same order of magnitude as in a similar study in 2015 
about instant messenger distribution in Germany [1]. 
80% of all participants stated that it is very important or 
important to have information about the security features of 
an instant messenger client. This indicates that security is 
important for users. However, this contrasts to the heavy 
usage of WhatsApp, an instant messenger with little security 
features. 
52% of participants thought that it is important or very 
important that the source code of the instant messenger is 
open source. 24 % thought that it is unimportant or very 
unimportant to have open source software. These results 
show that participants distrust the providers of instant 
messenger software. 
70% of participants prefer servers of the instant 
messenger network to be located only in Europe. Only 8% 
thought that the location of a server is unimportant. This 
shows that users are clearly aware of the Internet scale 
spying activities of several governments. Also, this number 
shows that users become more and more sensitive to 
security and privacy issues in communication.  
One important security feature is hiding messages from 
unauthorized access. However, this security requirement 
clashes with a convenience feature: message preview on the 
lock screen. Users clearly vote for convenience when asked 
for a choice between convenience and security: 45% of 
participants want messages to show on the lock screen in 
contrast to 29% of participants that considered this feature 
to be unimportant or very unimportant. 
Another security feature popular, e.g., in Snapchat, is to 
make screen shots impossible such that received messages 
cannot be recorded. 45% of participants regarded it 
important that communication partners cannot take 
screenshots of the instant message conversation. 29% 
thought that this feature is unimportant or very unimportant. 
It is interesting that a similar question of the survey gets the 
opposite result: when asked, if received images should only 
be visible in the messenger not outside, 42% disagreed, only 
34% agreed. 
The CBC analysis using the attributes message history, 
PIN protection, contact establishment, and account login 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

was used to compare different instant messenger concepts, 
see Section III.D for details on attributes used and their 
respective levels. The analysis of the importance of the 
attributes showed, that for the participants, PIN protection 
and contact establishment are the most important attributes. 
The participants prefer to have a PIN protection of the 
instant messenger, but they want to enter the PIN only once 
after restart. Again, users decide for a lower level of security 
if the choice is security or convenience. However, the 
survey also shows that users consider PIN protection 
important, hence they decided for a more convenient but 
less secure instant messenger concept but they did not 
choose the most unsecure instant messenger concept (no 
PIN). 
The participants prefer to allow only those persons to 
contact them that are in their phone book. Again, the users 
ignore privacy issues (transfer of phone book to instant 
messaging network) if the choice is privacy or convenience. 
The participants voted to have a message history in an 
instant messenger. 
The participants prefer to use traditional passwords for 
account logon. They do not want to use the more convenient 
login using a QR code. It is assumed that this is the case 
because users are not used to QR codes. 
V. 
MARKET SIMULATION 
A market simulation is used to show the potential market 
shares that an instant messenger that is based on the results 
of the survey can get. Part-worth utilities from the CBC are 
used for a market simulation using the Sawtooth Simulator 
(http://www.sawtoothsoftware.com/). 
The 
following 
concepts of instant messengers are used for the market 
simulation: 
• 
WhatsApp Configuration: A configuration similar 
to the popular WhatsApp instant messenger. 
• 
Threema Configuration A: A configuration similar 
to the secure instant messenger Threema. As 
Threema offers multiple features, two Threema 
configurations were used. 
• 
Threema 
Configuration 
B: 
See 
Threema 
Configuration A.  
• 
Best Configuration: A configuration using only 
those features with best part-worth utility.  
• 
Worst Configuration: A configuration using only 
those features with worst part-worth utility. 
See  TABLE II. for details of the levels selected for the 
configurations above.  
Figure 3 shows the results of the market simulation: 68% 
of the customers would choose the best configuration instant 
messenger. Only 18% respective 16% would vote for 
Threema B/A, 8,26% for WhatsApp. However, it should be 
noted, that instant messenger usage follows the network 
effect [5]. The network effect states that a network is more 
valuable for a user if it has many participants. Hence, well 
established Instant Messenger networks like WhatsApp will 
always be very popular for new users and new messengers 
have problems getting a critical mass of users. However, the 
market simulations shows great potential for a new instant 
messenger designed based on the results of the survey 
presented in this paper. 
TABLE II.  
WHATSAPP CONFIGURATION FOR MARKET SIMULATION 
Attribute 
Message 
history 
PIN 
protectio
n 
Contact 
establishme
nt 
Account 
login 
WhatsApp 
No 
No PIN 
Phone 
number 
known 
Password 
Threema A 
No 
Once 
after 
restart 
Mutual 
phone book 
entries 
Password 
Threema B 
No 
When 
opening 
App 
Meeting in 
person 
QR-Code 
Best 
Yes 
Once 
after 
restart 
Mutual 
phone book 
entries 
Password 
Worst 
No 
No PIN 
Meeting in 
person 
QR-Code 
 
 
 
 
Kapitel 6 Ergebnisse der Umfrage 
 
 
- 55 - 
Um die Messenger Konfiguration mit dem bestmöglichen Gesamtnutzen zu erhalten, wurden die 
Ausprägungen mit dem größten Teilnutzenwerten ausgewählt. Man erhält schließlich einen fiktiven 
IM mit den folgenden Ausprägungen: 
 
Bestmöglichste Konfiguration 
Nachrichtenhistorie 
Ja 
PIN Schutz 
Einmalig bei Neustart des Handys 
Kontaktaufnahme 
Jeder, der im Telefonbuch gelistet ist 
Account Login 
Passwort 
Tabelle 8: Ausprägungen bestmöglichste Konfiguration 
 
Für eine Konfiguration mit dem schlechtmöglichsten Gesamtnutzen ergeben sich folgende 
Ausprägungen: 
 
Schlechtmöglichste Konfiguration 
Nachrichtenhistorie 
Nein 
PIN Schutz 
Nie Nötig 
Kontaktaufnahme 
Nur mit persönlicher Identifikation im 
Vorfeld 
Account Login 
QR-Code 
Tabelle 9: Ausprägungen schlechtmöglichste Konfiguration 
 
Nach Durchlauf des Simulationsmodells unter Berücksichtigung der Teilnutzenwerte, ergeben sich 
die Auswahlwahrscheinlichkeiten der fünf vorgestellten Konfigurationen auf einem fiktiven IM Markt 
mit 640 (286 GMX + 354 WEB.DE) potenziellen Interessenten. Demnach würden sich auf dem IM 
Markt 402 Nutzer für die bestmögliche Konfiguration entscheiden. Die beiden Threema 
Konfigurationen A und B sind mit 87 und 93 Stimmen weit abgeschlagen. Das an WhatsApp 
orientierte Messenger Konzept erhält 39 potenzielle Nutzer. Mit 19 Interessenten stößt die 
schlechtmöglichste Konfiguration auf eine sehr geringe Nutzerakzeptanz. 
 
 
Abbildung 28: Marktsimulation 
8,26%
11,03%
10,20%
68,00%
2,51%
4,28%
15,83%
18,00%
58,66%
3,23%
0,00%
10,00%
20,00%
30,00%
40,00%
50,00%
60,00%
70,00%
80,00%
WhatsApp
Threema A
Threema B
Bestmöglich
Schlechtmöglich
Marktsimulation
GMX
WEB.DE
 
Figure 3. Results of the market simulation 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents the results of a survey on user 
preferences for instant messengers with a special focus on 
security and privacy features. The survey holds some 
interesting insights into user preferences in secure instant 
messengers, e.g., that instant messenger users have a desire 
for security and privacy protecting instant messengers. 
However, they are not willing to accept inconveniences to 
have a higher level of security. Security features are 
accepted if they require only little or no user effort. If users 
have the choice between convenience and security, they 
decide for convenience. The insights of this paper are 
suitable for improving the development of secure instant 
messengers in the future. The most popular unsecure 
messenger used is WhatsApp, the most popular secure 
messenger is Threema. However, the survey showed that 
both messengers do not fit well to the preferences of users. 
The results of the survey were used to design a new instant 
messenger with the most promising features. A market 
simulation shows that this instant messenger has a great 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

potential. If network effects were neglected, this instant 
messenger would gain 68% of market share in contrast to 
8% for a WhatsApp-like instant messenger and 15%-18% 
for a Threema-like messenger.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors want to thank Adrian Klie and the 1&1 
Internet SE (part of the United Internet Group) for their 
support of this work. The survey would not have been 
possible without their help. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Deutsches Institut für Vetrauen und Sicherheit im Internet 
(DIVSI), “Allgemeine Geschäftsbedingungen (AGB) of 
communication 
providers” 
[Online], 
Available 
from:  
https://www.divsi.de/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/2015-10-
22_DIVSI_AGB-Umfrage_Charts.pdf, 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2016]. 
[2] Swatooth Software Inc., “The CBC System for Choice-Based 
Conjoint Analysis – Version 8” [Online],  Sawtooth Software 
Technical Paper Series, Available from: 
https://sawtoothsoftware.com/download/techpap/cbctech.pdf,  
[retrieved: June, 2016], February 2013. 
[3] J. Louviere and G. G. Woodworth, "Design and Analysis of 
Simulated Consumer Choice or Allocation Experiments: An 
Approach Based on Aggregate Data",  Journal of Marketing 
Research , vol. 20, no 4, American Marketing Association,  
DOI:10.2307/3151440, November 1983, pp. 350-367. 
[4] P. E. Green and V. Srinivasan, “Conjoint Analysis in 
Marketing Research: New Developments and Directions”, 
Journal of Marketing, vol. 54, no 4, American Marketing 
Association, DOI: 10.2307/1251756 ,  October 1990, pp. 3-19. 
[5] M. L. Katz and C. Shapiro, “Systems Competition and 
Network Effects”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 
8, no. 2, American Economic Association,  ISSN 08953309, 
Spring 1994, pp. 93-115. 
[6] H.-J. Hof, “Towards Enhanced Usability of IT Security 
Mechanisms – How to Design Usable IT Security 
Mechanisms Using the Example of Email Encryption“, 
International Journal On Advances in Security, vol. 6, no. 
1&2, ISSN 1942-2636, 2013, pp. 78-87. 
[7] H.-J. Hof, “User-Centric IT Security – How to Design Usable 
Security Mechanisms”, The Fifth International Conference on 
Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, 
Technologies, and Services (CENTRIC 2012,  2012), pp. 7-
12. 
[8] Institut für Demoskopie Allensbach, “WhatsApp on the Rise”,  
Allensbacher Kurzbericht – 17.01.2014, [Online], Available 
from:   http://www.ifd-allensbach.de/uploads/tx_reportsndocs/ 
PD_2014_01.pdf [retrieved: June, 2016]. 
[9] M. Mannan and P.C. van Oorschot, “Secure Public Instant 
Messaging: A Survey”, Proceedings of the 2nd Annual 
Conference 
on 
Privacy, 
Security 
and 
Trust(PST'04), 
Fredericton, NB, Canada, 2004, pp. 69-77. 
[10] N. Leavitt, “Instant messaging: a new target for hackers”, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 7, ISSN 0018-9162, 2005, pp. 20-23. 
[11] K. Church and R. de Oliveira, “What’s up with whatsapp?: 
comparing 
mobile 
instant 
messaging 
behaviors 
with 
traditional SMS”, Proceedings of the 15th international 
conference on Human-computer interaction with mobile 
devices and services”, ACM New York, ISBN 978-1-4503-
2273-7, 2013, pp. 352-361. 
[12] W. Wang, J.J. P.-A. Hsieh, and B. Song, “Understanding User 
Satisfaction With Instant Messaging: An Empirical Survey 
Study”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 28, no. 3, 2012, pp. 153-162, 
[13] A. C. Y. Hou, “Switching Motivations on Instant Messaging: 
A Study Based on Two Factor Theory”, Multidisciplinary 
Social Networks Research, Series Communications in 
Computer and Information Science, vol. 540, 2015, pp. 3-15. 
 
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

