Board Games as Security Awareness Improvement Tools 
 
Eszter Diána Oroszi 
National University of Public Service 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: oroszi.eszter@silentsignal.hu 
 
 
Abstract—Improving security awareness level of users is 
getting more important in all organizations. Experience shows 
that traditional training methods and campaign elements are 
not enough these days. This paper will show new gamified 
possibilities, and within that, it will introduce a security 
awareness board game, future works and partial results of a 
related research performed by author. 
Keywords-security awareness; improvement; gamfication; 
board game; serious game. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Information security is becoming more important in all 
organizations, and we can say that human factor is one of the 
most vulnerable elements at the workplace, the so-called 
weakest link in the chain of security [1]. Employees of 
companies could be targets of human-based attack types 
called Social Engineering, which means that attackers try to 
manipulate, and/or deceive users for example to compromise 
confidential data, and cause harm or loss to the organization. 
To reduce this risk, it is very important to improve the 
security awareness level of users. 
Security awareness improvement actions could be 
trainings (for example, classroom or online presentations, 
workshops, e-Learning materials, etc.), or campaign 
elements (for example, posters, puzzles, quizzes, etc.). 
According to NIST 800-50 [2], the purpose of these actions 
is to inform and educate employees about the security 
policies and rules of the organization and the necessity of 
security aware behavior, improve skills and competences of 
users to work securely, and increase security awareness level 
[2]. Besides occasional or periodical trainings and 
educational events, it is important to maintain users’ 
attention, and constantly remind employees of information 
security rules and best practices. To do this, organizing a 
security awareness campaign, or whole year improvement 
program could be a possible method, which can help 
employees remember the most important security rules and 
habits during their daily work, and which can show 
information security news, share actual knowledge elements 
for the audience. These events could be even a so-called 
awareness week, or cybersecurity month, like Cyber 
October, when the employees take part in trainings, 
presentations, answer questionnaires, participate in games; or 
it can be a general annual program with posters in the office, 
screensavers highlighting threats targeting the human factor, 
regular 
newsletters, 
and 
games 
improving 
security 
awareness. 
According to the author’s experiences, traditional 
security awareness training and campaign elements are 
quickly forgettable, and usually most of users think that these 
well-known messages are boring and contain unnecessary 
information. Finally, a significant problem regarding these is 
that they do not answer the most important questions: Why 
do we need information security? What could happen, if a 
user does not follow the rules? Which are our roles and 
responsibilities in security? 
A useful and effective awareness program should answer 
the questions mentioned above and present the importance of 
security-aware behavior of employees. According to Rocha 
Flores and Ekstedt [3], using personalization in security 
related trainings and specialized content of educational 
material can make the security awareness improvement 
program more relevant and understandable for the 
participants, and combining the traditional methods with 
practical exercises will more likely lead to improved security 
behavior. The author's experience also supports the above-
described statements: security awareness trainings are more 
effective, when the presentation is illustrated with real 
examples, and contain photos about results of Social 
Engineering audits. Another effective method is using 
gamified elements during the training [4]. Based on these, 
we must improve security awareness programs, and try to 
use unique and personalized campaign elements that involve 
employees into the information security. These kinds of 
actions could be active programs using gamification, games 
for formal prizes like “The most security aware employee of 
the month”, or a photo competition about information 
security. The next parts of the paper will show how can we 
use gamification for security awareness improvement 
actions. 
In Section II, the author presents gamified security 
awareness campaign elements, and in Section III, the focus is 
on board games as educational materials. Section IV contains 
the concept of a security awareness board game designed by 
the author. Section V shows the conclusions and the future 
work of the author. 
II. GAMIFIED ELEMENTS IN SECURITY AWARENESS 
Gamification is getting more popular of a method in 
companies to motivate employees, improve performance, 
enhance experiences of trainings. A possible definition of 
this concept is the following: “Gamification is the use of 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

game 
elements 
and 
game 
thinking 
in 
non-game 
environments to increase target behavior and engagement” 
[5]. 
According to Burke [6], the most important purpose of 
gamification is to increase motivation and improve 
engagement. Besides that, a key element of these methods is 
that “we most often want everyone to win”, but it could have 
a collaborative-competitive approach, too – in this case, 
participants competing as teams, rather than individuals. 
Typical gamified improvement elements could be 
badges, leaderboards, points or scores, levels, and challenges 
[7]. Applying these methods, participants could easily 
identify their progress and results and could motivate each 
other, too. Results could be recorded on Intranet sites of the 
organization, in the e-Learning solution, security awareness 
mobile application, or other training systems/framework. 
The essence of them is that users get points for participating 
in workshops, trainings, solving quizzes and tests, 
identifying, and participating in other campaign elements, 
games. 
All previous mentioned elements have positive feedback, 
and it is an important aspect, when using gamification. 
Besides that, gamified methods provide the users with a 
sense of autonomy about the training, it is perceived as a fun 
experience, not as a mandatory task [8]. According to the 
author’s experience, users really prefer positive feedback and 
“stories” in information security, for example, they are 
excitedly waiting for the results of phishing tests, and they 
would like to get better and better results, or they are proud, 
if someone recognizes a real or test-attack, or solves a 
security awareness game. 
The first gamified method of the author was a security 
awareness escape room, which was designed in 2014, based 
on her experience of Social Engineering audits and security 
awareness trainings, but feedbacks of campaigns were also 
built into this special exit game. Besides the type of exercise, 
the most significant difference between a traditional exit 
room and an information security-based one is the scenario, 
or story of the game. In a traditional escape game, players 
are usually locked into the room of a non-realistic character 
(pirate, scientist, killer, etc.), but in case of the security 
awareness one, the escape room is mostly the office of a 
fictional 
assistant, 
boss, 
project 
manager, 
system 
administrator or other employee, who could be the target of 
any attacker [9]. A normal exit game, usually with two to six 
players can be solved in 60 minutes, in a security awareness 
escape room the time could be limited to 15 or 30 minutes, 
so shorter timeslots do not set back daily work, and 
managers can support the participation of their subordinates 
better. In this game the players are not locked in the room 
like in general cases, and the goal is not finding the key or 
code to unlock the door. To “escape” the room, and complete 
the mission, participants need to log into the computer of the 
targeted person and open a chosen file – if they can open it 
and read its content, they won, and the game ends. 
Feedbacks of security awareness escape rooms are very 
positive; participants really like these programs, and consider 
them not only exciting, but also useful. Based on these 
positive 
experiences, 
another 
game-based 
learning 
opportunity could be an applicable idea: board games. 
III. BOARD GAMES IN INFORMATION SECURITY 
Board games as training materials are also new, gamified 
methods in several areas of education. The baseline of 
popularity is the same, as in case of escape rooms: tabletop 
games, puzzles, or card games are also well-liked nowadays, 
strategical-cooperative ones (for example, Pandemic, King 
of Tokio, Catan, Activity, etc.) have a serious target 
audience. Based on that, these games could be used for 
educational 
purposes, 
even 
in 
security 
awareness 
improvement.  
Adam Shostack collected, and shortly introduced a few 
information security related board games on his website [10]. 
Some of them are more for fun, and include a little bit of 
security awareness topics and knowledge, but there are 
serious games, which are designed for use in corporate 
environment with less aim for enjoyment. These games show 
perfectly, what could be the purpose and role of the human 
factor in information security. To win the game, the players 
need to prevent attacks and defend against hackers, improve 
security countermeasures, design and develop securely, or 
they can even see the impact of a security incident on their 
assets. Increasing motivation, engagement and providing 
freedom are advantages that are particularly highlighted by 
these types of gamification elements. These serious games 
are not first and foremost designed for children, students or 
even individuals, rather for employees of organizations, 
average users, specialists, professionals and managers. For 
example, Cook et al. [11] introduced a board game called 
Simulated Critical Infrastructure Protection Scenarios 
(SCIPS), which is designed for decision makers of critical 
infrastructure, for showing consequences of cyber-attacks, 
and highlighting the importance of information security 
investments and controls.  
Another security awareness board game is Riskio, which 
is a tabletop game for 3-5 players, even without technical 
knowledge. This game itself is not sold commercially, rather 
it could be played with the directions of an instructor, who is 
an information security expert [12]. In contrast, Control-Alt-
Hack is a commercially available tabletop card game about 
white hat hacking, for 3-6 participants. According to the 
storyline of the game, players are ethical hackers performing 
audits and working for a security consulting company. Like 
classical board games, this one also has characters, different 
decks, and it is played in rounds, which are divided into 7 
phases. To win the game, player must become the CEO of 
his own company [13]. Open source, free downloadable 
games could also be found on the Internet. For example, 
[d0x3d!] is a customizable, cooperative board game, 
focusing mainly on network security, so it is a special kind of 
security awareness games [14], or OWASP Cornucopia is a 
unique kind of security awareness card games, because it is 
designed only for a special user group, development teams, 
and the topic is secure development [15]. 
Although the main purpose of most games is to learn by 
playing, the above-mentioned games (according to the 
author’s 
opinion, 
especially 
Riskio 
and 
OWASP 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Cornucopia) could be useful in a corporate environment, too. 
Using these gamified methods, participation in security 
awareness trainings could be raised, and user satisfaction 
with information security could become better. Potential 
limitations of these games include being commercially 
available only on a limited basis, hard to find, according to 
the author’s opinion, the main focus is not “to be a playful 
board game”, and reaching target audience could be difficult. 
The author’s assumption is that a well-advertised, 
commercially available security awareness related board 
game could be popular, and could help to improve security 
awareness level of both individuals and employees in an 
effective way. Availability as a classic board game could be 
more attractive than educational materials, and the audience 
could buy their own game, or they can try and use them as 
shared resource at the workplace, educational events (for 
example, family day, festival), board game cafes, etc. 
IV. CONCEPT OF A SECURITY AWARENESS BOARD GAME 
DESIGNED BY THE AUTHOR 
Based on Social Engineering audit and security 
awareness training experiences, the author of this paper also 
designed a board game with the purpose of improving 
security awareness. The board game is designed for an office 
environment, but development of a home edition, including 
for children is also in progress. The game focuses on general 
information security recommendations and awareness 
knowledge; thus, it is not limited to organizational rules and 
policies – special organizational editions could be 
implemented, but the main purpose of the basic game is to 
improve general security awareness knowledge of users, 
both at the workplace, and at home. Updates (for example, 
new threats, attack types, countermeasures) could be released 
as accessories, packages of additional cards, decks, 
characters, places, etc. 
During the development of this board game, the author’s 
goals were the following: 
• 
Applying strategic-cooperative approach. 
• 
Enables cooperative and competitive playing modes. 
• 
Fit for organizational environment and private life. 
• 
The game should highlight exploitable human traits 
(Solution: Character cards). 
• 
The game should introduce assets to be protected 
(Solution: Asset tokens). 
• 
The game should teach security awareness and 
useful 
countermeasures 
(Solution: 
Security 
awareness knowledge cards). 
• 
The game should show threats and attacks affected 
by human factor (Solution: Action cards). 
• 
Could be played with instructor at the workplace. 
• 
Could be played alone at home (without instructor). 
• 
Supports demo mode (applying time limit). 
• 
Be realistic, but still a game (players sometimes need 
luck). 
• 
Be commercially available, like traditional board 
games. 
• 
The game should be expandable with accessories. 
The game is designed for 6 players and have both 
cooperative and competitive modes: using the “security 
awareness meters”, players can see the summarized results of 
the whole team, but in case of a competition, they can 
measure their own progress in the character cards. The parts 
of the game are introduced below and could be seen in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Elements of board game designed by the author 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A. Game board 
The game board illustrates an office with lobby, open 
space workplaces, server room, director’s office, meeting 
room, kitchen, corridors, and toilet. Characters can step on 
fields located within these areas. 
B. Character cards  
The players can choose from 6 characters (director, 
secretary, lawyer, HR specialist, developer, and system 
administrator). Each character has different human traits and 
habits as vulnerabilities, which will become important when 
attacked, and they all have assets (notebook, token, 
password, knowledge, documents, files), which must be 
protected during the game. These elements are shown, or 
should be placed on the character cards. 
C. Security awareness knowledge cards  
Each character has a deck of security awareness 
knowledge cards. Players can pick three fixed, and three 
variable options to protect their assets, and the variable cards 
can be exchanged after every round of the game, based on 
predicted actions, or according to the places, where the 
character is. 
D. Mission cards  
In the current version, there are four missions in the 
game, which contain different goals and attack types (for 
example, 
defending 
passwords, 
securing 
top 
secret 
document, etc.), and have different difficulty, too. Players 
have to focus on the affected assets and protect them from 
the attacks. After a successful attack, the affected asset must 
be moved from the Character card to the Mission card. If all 
the targeted assets are on the Mission card, the players lose 
the game. 
E. Action cards  
Attacks, or even positive (for example, security 
awareness training for bonus points) or general (like 
movement to another location) events happen by drawing 
Action cards. The action card deck is distributed among the 
players. These cards must be drawn by everyone in every 
round, and it will show, what happens. Attacks can be 
prevented by one of the relevant Security awareness 
knowledge cards shown in the Action card, which can be 
found on the Character card of the player (both fixed and 
variable cards could be used).  
F. Timeline 
The timeline is showing the current round, symbolizing a 
workday divided into half hour slots. Fields of the timeline 
show subgoals, for example, some characters have to move 
to the meeting room, or there are timeslots, when unknown 
visitors arrive at the office, who could also become potential 
attackers, activated by Action cards. If players reach the last 
time slot (16:00), the game ends, and they win the game. 
(Timelines of demo games are shorter and divided into 8 
hours.) 
G. Security awareness meter  
Security awareness meter can be found both for the team, 
and on the character cards. If a player prevents the attack, he 
or she, and the team can both step forward on Security 
awareness meter(s), in case of successful attack, they have to 
step one field back. At the end of the game, players can see 
their results, how security-aware they are. 
 
During the game, players have to move their characters 
every round, and to do this, they have to roll the dice. 
Direction of movement can be arbitrary, but certain points of 
the timeline show that certain characters have to be at a place 
at that time (for example, the developer has to be in the 
kitchen at 12:00). 
The players win, if they are at the end of the timeline and 
completed the mission (have the needed assets), and the 
game is ended without success, if the characters fail the 
mission during the workday (if they cannot protect the assets 
according to mission). 
This game is currently in end-user testing phase, and part 
of a security awareness research ending in 2022, but some 
partial results are shared in the next section. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Gamification is nowadays a popular weapon to increase 
user motivation and engagement, and it is also a possible 
new method in improving security awareness level of 
employees. Besides traditional gamified actions (for 
example, 
gathering 
points, 
scores, 
leaderboards, 
achievements, levels, badges, etc.), games could be used also 
as educational materials. The paper introduced results of 
some conference papers and other related works, which are 
confirming the effectiveness and usefulness of gamified 
methods. Based on these statements, it is recommended to 
use gamified elements in security awareness improvement 
actions, like information security escape rooms or board 
games, which were presented in this paper.  
Besides the popularity of these new methods, measuring 
their effectiveness is also important. As future work, the 
author has ongoing research, which is going to assess the 
effectiveness of different methods for improving security 
awareness. The author will compare six possible program 
elements, which are the following:  
• 
In-person security awareness training,  
• 
online security awareness training,  
• 
using e-Learning materials,  
• 
security awareness escape room, 
• 
security awareness board game, 
• 
security awareness campaign elements (posters, 
gifts, messages, etc.). 
Each program element has the same timeframe (30 
minutes) and content (ten chosen areas of knowledge), which 
makes them comparable with each other. To measure 
effectiveness, before and immediately after the participation 
in the improvement action, participants have to fill out an 
information security awareness survey, and one month later a 
post course questionnaire (containing same questions) will 
be performed. All of these surveys ask users to describe 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

important security awareness rules, recommendations. As a 
result of the research, the author can identify, which are the 
most important new security awareness knowledge elements 
coming from the improvement action, which are the deepest 
knowledge elements (one month later), and how effective the 
investigated methods work. Participants of the research are 
10 organizations, each of them with 30 employees, who are 
divided into six groups according to the tested methods. 
(Each user may participate in only one program element.) 
The author’s hypothesis in this research is that gamified 
elements will be more effective than traditional ones. 
Although the research is still in progress, partial results show 
that 75 percent of participants prefer gamified elements 
instead of traditional methods and in-person events are more 
effective than online based solutions. Based on the 
experiences to date, the highest amount of new knowledge 
elements was written after the security awareness board 
game – presumably, the reason could be that both Security 
awareness knowledge cards and Action cards contain useful 
information. According to the partial results of a 
questionnaire about the board game, 93.3 percent of the 
testers declared that they would like to play the game with 
their colleagues, 80 percent of the responders would like to 
use it also at home. 66.7 percent of players stated that they 
would like to use the game without the help of an instructor. 
These results suggest that there is a demand for such 
gamified security awareness improvement tools, like board 
games. Effectiveness of the gamified methods could be 
evaluated after performing the last surveys at the end of the 
research, probably finalizing in Q1, 2022. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Silent Signal LLC. that 
contributed to the development of the presented board game 
and supports ongoing research about evaluating effectiveness 
of security awareness improvement methods. Special thanks 
for friends and colleagues, who participated in testing the 
author’s security awareness board game and contributed to 
the development with useful feedbacks and suggestions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. D. Mitnick, and W. L. Simon, The Art of Deception: 
Contolling the Human Element of Security. Wiley, 2003, 
ISBN: 978-0764542800 
[2] M. Wilson, and J. Hash, NIST 800-50 Building an 
Information Technology Security Awareness and Training 
Program, 2003 
[3] W. Rocha Flores, and M. Ekstedt, Shaping intention to resist 
social engineering through transformational leadership, 
information security culture and awareness. Computers and 
Security, 59, pp. 26-44, 2016 
[4] E. D. Oroszi, Security awareness escape room - a possible 
new method in improving security awareness of users. 
[Conference paper]. Cyber Science Cyber Situational 
Awareness for Predictive Insight and Deep Learning, C-
MRiC.ORG., Oxford, pp. 170-173, 2019 
[5] P. Van den Boer, Introduction to Gamification. Whitepaper. 
2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://cdu.edu.au/olt/ltresources/downloads/whitepaper-
introductiontogamification-130726103056-phpapp02.pdf 
[retrieved: January, 2019] 
[6] B. Burke, Gamify: How Gamification Motivates People to Do 
Extraordinary Things. Gartner, 2014, ISBN: 978-1937134853 
[7] Anadea, How Gamification in the Workplace Impacts 
Employee 
Productivity, 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://medium.com/swlh/how-gamification-in-the-
workplace-impacts-employee-productivity-a4e8add048e6 
[retrieved: October, 2021] 
[8] E. G. B. Gjertsen, E. A. Gjære, M. Bartnes, and W. Rocha 
Flores, Gamification of Information Security Awareness and 
Training. [Conference paper] 3rd International Conference on 
Information Systems Security and Privacy, pp. 59-70, 2017 
[9] E. D. Oroszi, Security awareness escape room - a possible 
new method in improving security awareness of users. 
[Conference paper]. Cyber Science Cyber Situational 
Awareness for Predictive Insight and Deep Learning, C-
MRiC.ORG., pp. 170-173, Oxford, 2019 
[10] Online 
source, 
available 
from 
https://adam.shostack.org/games.html, 2021.08.08 
[11] A. Cook, R. Smith, L. Maglaras  H. Janicke, Using 
Gamification to Raise Awareness of Cyber Threats to Critical 
National Infrastructure [Conference paper]. 4th International 
Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research 
(ICS-CSR 2016), Belfast, pp. 84-94, 2016 
[12] Online source, available from: https://www.riskio.co.uk, 
[retrieved: October, 2021] 
[13] Online 
source, 
available 
from: 
https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/ 
128408/control-alt-hack, [retrieved: October, 2021] 
[14] Online 
source, 
available 
from: 
https://d0x3d.com/d0x3d/welcome.html, [retrieved: October, 
2021] 
[15] Online source, available from: https://owasp.org/www-
project-cornucopia/, [retrieved: October, 2021] 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

