Digital Forensics Investigation of the Tesla
Autopilot File System
Kevin Gomez Buquerin
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt and
Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen N¨urnberg
CARISSMA Institute of Electric, Connected, and
Secure Mobility (C-ECOS)
Germany
email: extern.kevinklaus.gomezbuquerin@thi.de
Hans-Joachim Hof
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt
CARISSMA Institute of Electric, Connected, and
Secure Mobility (C-ECOS)
Germany
email: hans-joachim.hof@thi.de
Abstract—Tesla vehicles offer a wide range of services, includ-
ing an autopilot. As a central vehicle component, the autopilot
has been the focus of much media and research attention. Several
articles have highlighted flaws in the autopilot service. These
flaws make the autopilot service relevant for Automotive Digital
Forensics (ADF) investigations since vehicle automation is likely
to cause accidents. This paper presents an ADF investigation
of the file system of a Tesla autopilot hardware version 2.0. We
identified metadata characteristics, including general information
(such as Linux user accounts, extensions, and timestamps) and
vehicle-specific characteristics (including surveillance and safety-
related information that is of great use in investigations of modern
vehicles). The paper evaluates the forensic reliability of memory
acquisition and the usability of the identified features.
Index Terms—automotive, vehicle, digital forensics, automotive
digital forensics, tesla, autopilot, metadata, vehicle forensics
I. INTRODUCTION
The total number of Tesla deliveries has steadily increased
in recent years. In the first quarter of 2021, Tesla delivered
184,800 vehicles [21], in the second quarter of 2021, 201,250
[22], in the third quarter, 241,300 [23] and in the fourth quarter
of 2021, 308,840 [24]. These figures show an increase of
66,99% in one year. The company’s electric vehicles offer
various services, including the autopilot. According to an in-
vestigation by Isidore and Valdes-Dapena [25], bugs regularly
appear in Tesla’s autopilot. As a result, its vehicles and autopi-
lot are likely to be part of ADF investigations. Understanding
the Tesla car and its features, including the autopilot and file
system, is key to a successful ADF investigation. Buchholz
and Spafford show that the file system is essential in Digital
Forensics (DF) and ADF investigations [26]. This leads to the
following research question, “What are DF- and ADF-specific
characteristics that can be captured in the file system of a
modern vehicle?” with the hypothesis “The file system of the
Tesla autopilot contains metadata relevant to answer forensic
questions in ADF investigations.” Our contributions are:
• Identification of metadata characteristics of a Tesla au-
topilot hardware version 2.0.
• Identification of general DF characteristics of a vehicle-
specific file system.
• Identification of vehicle-specific characteristics from a
Tesla autopilot snapshot.
• Evaluation of the forensic soundness of the data acquisi-
tion method from the Tesla autopilot Electronic Control
Unit (ECU).
This paper is structured as follows – Section II highlights
related work in Tesla analysis and ADF investigations. The
research question is further analyzed in Section III by consid-
ering the characteristics and metadata of the Tesla autopilot
and their relevance to ADF. The implementation of a forensic
analysis of the Tesla autopilot is presented in Section IV.
Section V summarizes the results of the investigation. The
evaluation in terms of forensic soundness, usability, limita-
tions, and assumptions is presented in Section VI. Section VII
concludes the paper and gives an outlook on future work.
II. RELATED WORK
We are not the first to look at Tesla vehicles. In this
Section, we highlight different research focusing on security
analysis of Tesla vehicles, its components, and services. Such
investigations hold valuable information that can be used in DF
investigations. Furthermore, we highlight ADF investigations
on Tesla vehicles in existing research and how our approach
and research goals differ.
In [17], Tencent’s Keen Security Labs present a security
analysis of a Tesla vehicle. They reverse-engineered the in-
vehicle Controller Area Network (CAN) bus and show prob-
lems that lead to wireless exploitation of such vehicles. A sim-
ilar problem was presented in [16], where the authors remotely
compromised the gateway of the Body Control Module (BCM)
of Tesla vehicles. ADF investigations can benefit from such
security analysis. Such information helps determine where logs
and other valuable information are stored to answer forensic
questions.
Tristan Rice published a multi-part blog post about a
security analysis of a Tesla Model 3, starting with [20]. The
author reverse-engineered various services (e.g., the autopilot
and software update system), the internal structure, security
configurations (e.g., firewalls and iptables), and the internal
API. Such descriptions enable forensic scientists to identify
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

locations with characteristics relevant to DF investigations.
This knowledge is valuable for security analysis and benefits
ADF investigations.
In [19], Gomez et al. focus on the architecture, commu-
nication data, and snapshot capabilities of a Tesla autopilot
hardware version 2.0, and the authors evaluate how these fea-
tures affect the handling of personal data. Our work analyzes
the same autopilot version but focuses on the relevance of the
file system for ADF investigations.
Ebbers et al. published an article analyzing several IOS and
Android apps for different vehicles [18]. They sent Subject
Access Requests (SARs) to Original Equipment Manufacturers
(OEMs) to get all the information OEMs have about each
user. The authors found that data for smartphone apps may be
encrypted or stored in plain text on smartphones. Some OEMs
- such as Tesla - can transmit various vehicle data that could
be relevant to DF investigations. Others OEMs - such as Ford
and Mercedes [18] - are pretty limited in data availability.
The highlighted articles focus on security issues and data
handling in Tesla vehicles. To the best of our knowledge, no
article has been published on the Tesla autopilot file system
and its relevance of DF investigations.
III. INVESTIGATION OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
TESLA AUTOPILOT
Carrier defines digital investigations as “a process by which
we develop and test hypotheses that answer questions about
digital events” [15]. Thus, DF investigators need to reconstruct
digital events based on the data they collect and analyze. As
highlighted by Gomez et al. in [14], this is also true for
ADF, but with a focus on automotive systems. In addition,
the authors mention the importance of forensic questions of
interest. The questions are in focus throughout this article and
are:
• Who performed or is responsible for a digital event?
• What digital event was performed?
• When did the digital event take place?
• Where did the digital event take place?
• How did the digital event take place?
• Why did the digital event take place?
A. Tesla’s autopilot from the perspective of digital forensics
The Tesla autopilot is an advanced driver assistance system.
It supports the driver with various services such as cruise
control, lane assistant, navigation, and automatic distance
assistant. Tesla introduced autopilot in hardware version 1
in 2014, followed by hardware version 2.0 and 2.5 in 2016
[12]. The latest version is 3, which was introduced in 2019
and installed in all new Tesla vehicles since then [11]. We
will focus on hardware version 2.0 due to its availability in
the investigated vehicle. In addition, snapshots of the Tesla
autopilot in hardware version 3 are usually encrypted. Based
on a study by MIT, hardware version 2.0 is still installed in
Tesla vehicles on the road [1] [2].
As mentioned by Rice in [20], the autopilot introduces sev-
eral services and features. Examples include the service itself
and the Hermes service, enabling communication between the
OEM backend and Tesla vehicles. Hermes is also used to
provide updates to features and components in the vehicle.
Tesla vehicles store the files of the autopilot in encrypted form
[10]. This causes problems with extracting the autopilot from
in-vehicle systems during ADF investigations. Older versions
of the autopilot were not encrypted, as described in an article
by Keen Security Labs [9]. During the ADF investigation, the
analyst must decrypt any encrypted autopilot. To do so, the
analyst needs either the corresponding decryption key or an
exploit for the autopilot.
B. Metadata in digital forensic investigations of file systems
Buchholz and Spafford define characteristics related to
metadata based on the forensic questions who, where, when,
what, why, and how [26]. They emphasize the importance of
metadata in file systems to answer these forensic questions.
As described by Carrier in [15], metadata is directly linked to
the describing object. Thus, its metadata also changes when
the object is modified, deleted, or otherwise changed. This
fact makes metadata an important consideration in DF studies.
Compared to deleting files (e.g., log files) or modifying
text files, manipulating metadata is more challenging for an
attacker.
As a result, DF investigators must validate the trustworthi-
ness of the collected information to trust the metadata. In DF,
trustworthiness is referred to as forensic soundness [8], which
corresponds to the degree of the following attributes, as shown
by [7]:
• Correctness: information that was actually stored in mem-
ory when the snapshot was taken.
• Atomicity: There should be no signs of concurrent system
activity.
• Integrity: Captured memory areas will not be modified
after the capture timestamp t.
The goal of DF investigations is to achieve a high level
of forensic soundness to ensure the trustworthiness of the
captured metadata.
IV. DIGITAL FORENSIC FEATURES OF A TESLA AUTOPILOT
HARDWARE VERSION 2.0
This paper focuses on the Tesla autopilot, i.e., hardware
version 2.0. We analyzed the collected data using two ap-
proaches to enable comparability and minimize analysis errors
by forensic tools: (1) developing a Python tool for analysis
and (2) using Magnet AXIOM, a sophisticated DF tool. This
approach also allows us to determine general characteristics
of the Tesla autopilot relevant to future studies.
We conducted the ADF investigation following the process
model proposed by [14]. The authors highlight four steps:
1) Forensic readiness: Determine if relevant data sources
and tools are available to conduct an investigation.
2) Data collection: Obtain necessary information.
3) Data analysis: Analyze the data collected.
4) Documentation: Prepare a report presenting the results.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Forensic readiness is given for Tesla autopilot analyses.
Snapshots can be created using various methods, e.g., chip-
off or live acquisition. Tools for analysis are available with
a custom Python tool and Magnet AXIOM. We discuss data
acquisition and analysis in the following. This paper is the
documentation of the results of the ADF investigation.
A. Acquisition of the Tesla autopilot
We acquired a Tesla autopilot (hardware version 2.0) from a
2017 Tesla Model S. We performed a chip-off of the installed
memory device on the autopilot ECU. Chip-offs are a DF
technique that has proven successful in ADF investigations, as
[6] demonstrated in the analysis of a Volkswagen infotainment
system.
Data on the extracted chip was acquired using a memory
adapter that translates the pin-out to Universal Serial Bus
(USB). Using a write blocker, we could ensure the data’s
integrity during the acquisition process. Write blockers are
used in investigations to prevent changes to the data on the
target evidence.
The result of the acquisition process was a snapshot of the
Tesla autopilot. We created a duplicate and continued working
on the duplicate only.
B. Python tool for Tesla autopilot analysis
The next step is to analyze the collected data. As suggested
by [14], the data should be initially reviewed. We expected
the snapshot to be encrypted. However, we were able to read
the contents of the snapshot. In addition, we found that the
snapshot was stored as SquashFS (a common read-only file
system for Linux). This confirmed the security analysis results
presented in [9].
We mounted the file system and identified several folders,
all related to the classic Linux file system structure. Examples
include bin, etc, home, and lib. We have also identified vehicle-
specific folders such as the opt folder. It contains binaries for
the autopilot and the Hermes service used for communication
between the Tesla backend and Tesla vehicles. Another inter-
esting folder for ADF investigations is the lib folder that stores
all libraries used. Those can be valuable during penetration
testing and identification of vulnerable libraries.
To automate the analysis process, we implemented a custom
Python tool - in form of a Jupyter Notebook - to collect
various metadata from the mounted file system. The tool uses
“os.walk()” to recursively collect all directories and files. In
addition, the implementation determines the timestamp of the
last modification and the extension of each file. Finally, we
create graphs to present the results.
The tool collected 4216 unique files and 447 directories
from the mounted file system. We used the framework python-
magic [5] to determine the file type. For 291 files (6.91%),
the framework was unable to determine the type. We assume
that the reason are corrupted magic bytes of the files (e.g.,
from custom file-types) and dot files from Linux. However,
we were not able to confirm our assumption. The same is
true for timestamps. The timestamp for 275 files and folders
(6.52%) could not be determined for the same reasons.
As shown in Figure 1 and Table I, the most commonly used
extension is .so, followed by .0 (linked file on a Linux system),
.crt, .pem and .conf. The extensions with numbers (e.g., .1 or
.2) are user-defined extensions probably used to arrange files
within a directory.
TABLE I
NUMBER OF FILE EXTENSIONS WITHIN A TESLA AUTOPILOT
Extension
Count
.so
356
.0
221
.crt
140
.pem
133
.conf
103
.mo
100
.sl
46
.1
41
.2
33
.img
32
.sh
28
.txt
26
.map
26
.hlp
25
.bin
24
Extension
Count
.4
19
.rules
18
.56
15
.hwdb
14
.6
14
.5
11
.10
9
.wav
9
.pdf
8
.3
7
.profile
7
.00
7
.13
6
.16
6
We created the line graph shown in Figure 2 from the col-
lected timestamps. Several peaks in the timestamps are clearly
visible. Table II lists the ten most frequently timestamps.
TABLE II
THE TIMESTAMP RESULTS WERE USED TO CREATE A LINE GRAPH.
Timestamp
Occurrences
Fri Jul 19 05:16:47 2019
1234
Fri Jul 19 05:51:13 2019
587
Fri Jul 19 05:51:12 2019
332
Fri Jul 19 05:28:04 2019
208
Fri Jul 19 05:28:03 2019
192
Fri Jul 19 05:51:06 2019
158
Fri Jul 19 05:23:04 2019
112
Fri Jul 19 05:51:18 2019
108
Fri Jul 19 05:29:59 2019
105
Fri Jul 19 04:22:50 2019
74
C. Analysis of the Tesla autopilot using Magnet AXIOM
To validate our results from Section IV-B and compare the
findings of another tool, we analyzed SquashFS using Magnet
AXIOM. The forensics tool identifies various indicators and
presents them in a final report. Magnet AXIOM identified so-
called people. In the case of a Tesla autopilot, these relate to
Linux user accounts. Magnet AXIM identified a total of 103
accounts that contain usernames and IDs. These include com-
mon user accounts such as root, daemon, and bin. In addition,
automotive and autopilot-specific usernames were also identi-
fied, including temperature monitor, visualizer, legacyvehicle,
drivermonitor, gps, and hermes.
The autopilot contains various media files. In particular,
these are audio files used in the infotainment system. Examples
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 1. File types in the Tesla autopilot
are .wav files for steering wheel warnings or forward collision
warnings.
Another category highlighted by Magnet AXIOM is doc-
uments. For the autopilot, these include a .csv sample file, 8
.pdf user manuals, and 26 .txt files, i.e., READMEs.
Magnet AXIOM has identified 32 .img files. These files are
the firmware images of the various services implemented in
the Tesla autopilot hardware version 2.0. All the .img files
contain the string “HW2”, indicating that these files refer to
hardware version 2.0.
For the operating system information, Magnet AXIOM
correctly detected the use of buildroot. The operating system
version is specified as “2016.05-g977a322”. This is the string
that is included in the buildroot configuration.
V. RESULTS OF THE FORENSIC ANALYSIS
We implemented an ADF investigation on the Tesla autopi-
lot file system and performed two analyses using a custom
Python tool and Magnet AXIOM.
A. Answering forensic questions using the collected metadata
The metadata found is able to answer most of the forensic
questions highlighted in Section III. Table III summarizes the
results related to the forensic questions. The questions about
“Who performed or is responsible for a digital event?” can be
traced to the user accounts highlighted by Magnet AXIOM.
In addition, “who” can be answered cron-jobs too. The next
question relates to “Where did the digital event take place?”
and is to be answered with the file and folder structure within
the file system. “When did the digital event take place?” uses
the timestamp collected by the custom Python tool as well
as logs located in different location within the file-system.
Some log files are located in the etc folder. However, these are
general system logs and not application logs. Together with the
configuration files (i.e., the .conf and .profile extensions), we
can partially answer the question “How did a digital event take
place?”. The collected metadata cannot answer the question
“Why did a digital event take place?”.
If different log-files or other event management systems
store information such as the user accounts, cron-jobs, and
time-stamps, such data can be correlated with the results we
highlighted. Hence, this information can be used to prove who
or what is responsible for a digital event.
TABLE III
RESULTS OF THE ANALYSIS IN RELATION TO THE FORENSIC QUESTIONS
Forensic questions
Corresponding identified metadata
Who
User accounts and cron-jobs
Where
Files and folders structure
When
Timestamps of the files and log-files
What
Log files within the etc folder
How
Configuration files (.conf and .profile extension
Why
Can not be answered using the collected metadata
B. Specific characteristics of digital forensics for the automo-
tive sector
In Section IV, several general metadata characteristics were
identified. Some of which are specific to the automotive sector.
These were also listed but not elaborated on.
The analysis revealed several metadata features that are spe-
cific to ADF. One example is the distribution of timestamps.
Vehicles, unlike smartphones or personal computers, are cyber-
physical systems. Therefore, they interact with the physical
outside world. This leads to safety requirements and regula-
tions. Consequently, updates must undergo in-depths testing
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 2. Timestamp of the files within the Tesla autopilot
and certification prior to roll-out. An update must ensure
that it does not affect safety-critical systems such as brakes
and airbags. This could be a reason for the distribution of
timestamps. Tesla could update its autopilot in larger releases
compared to small update cycles as known from common IT
systems. This allows the manufacturer to verify and certify the
update for use in vehicles in the field. Unfortunately, we cannot
verify this assumption based on the available information.
As can be seen in Table I, .so is the most common extension.
Thus, the Tesla autopilot uses a lot of shared libraries. With
the use of shared libraries, the behavior of different services
becomes comparable. Shared libraries store similar logs and
perform related digital events. Hence, using shared libraries is
a valuable autopilot feature for DF and penetration testing. In
penetration testing, a vulnerability in a shared library can be
used to exploit multiple services that use the .so file.
Magnet AXIOM identified several user accounts. Most are
common to Linux Operating System (OS). However, some are
specific to automotive. Two user accounts are named cantx
and canrx. Both refer to the onboard CAN bus protocol. In
addition, several user accounts in the file system snapshot refer
to cyber-physical systems, e.g., temperature monitor, roades-
timator, drivermonitor, and rainlightsensing. Monitoring and
safety-related user accounts are also part of the autopilot.
The dash cam, camera, backup camera, vision, and gps are
examples. Further research on these services for ADF-specific
data classes [4] could be valuable.
As a result, several vehicle-specific DF features could be
identified within the metadata of the file system of a Tesla
autopilot snapshot. Therefore, we can confirm our hypothesis
that the file system of the Tesla autopilot contains metadata
relevant to answering forensic questions in ADF investigations.
VI. EVALUATION
This Section discusses the forensic soundness of the data
acquisition, the usability of the identified characteristics, as
well as limits and assumptions of the investigation.
A. Forensic soundness
Forensic soundness is the degree of correctness, atomicity,
and integrity in memory acquisitions [7]. The definitions of
these three attributes were revised by Ottmann et al. in [8] to
allow for literal usability. Snapshots that satisfy integrity also
satisfy atomicity and correctness [8]. SquashFS is a read-only
file system, and we used a write blocker during collection.
Since we performed a chip-off, the memory is frozen at time t
when we removed the chip from the ECU. Thus, the integrity
of the acquired snapshot is guaranteed.
B. Usability in automotive digital forensic investigations
We have published our custom Python tool on GitHub
[3]. Therefore, the results can be replicated on other Tesla
autopilot snapshots. The identified metadata characteristics
are valuable for future research. This is especially true for
the vehicle-specific characteristics mentioned in Section V-B.
Future studies and research can use the information obtained
in this article.
C. Limits and assumptions
We assume that the timestamps were not tampered while the
autopilot was running. Furthermore, we assume that the system
clock is correct. Otherwise, the timestamp analysis could not
be conducted in the presented way [26]. The highlighted
ADF-specific characteristics are specific to the analyzed Tesla
autopilot. However, due to the reuse of hardware and software
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

in modern vehicles, those characteristics will be helpful in
future investigations.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article, we investigated the properties of metadata in
modern vehicles. We focused on a Tesla autopilot hardware
version 2.0 ADF investigation included the collection of data
within the autopilot ECU using a chip-off. Analysis of the
collected data was performed using two approaches. First, with
a self-written Python tool. Second, with Magnet AXIOM, a
sophisticated DF tool.
The analysis captured files and directories, file extensions,
timestamps, user accounts, media data (e.g., audio), documents
in the form of .cvs, .txt, and .pdf files, image files, and general
file system information, e.g., that the image was created with
buildroot. The most popular extensions were .so, .0, and .crt.
We found that the most commonly used timestamp was July
19, 2019.
Vehicle-specific metadata was also identified during the in-
vestigation. This includes cyber-physical system-specific user
accounts such as temperature monitor, visualizer, legacyve-
hicle, drivermonitor, gps, and hermes. In addition, security-
related user accounts were captured. Examples include
dash cam, camera, backup camera, vision, and gps.
The investigation revealed several DF features that allow
answering forensic questions in ADF: who, where, when, what,
and how. Questions regarding “why” cannot be answered with
the collected metadata.
The results highlighted in this paper are valuable for future
studies of the Tesla autopilot ECU and modern vehicles in
general. Future work will focus on the file system of other
components of the vehicle ecosystem and on refining the
analysis methods. In addition, future work will focus on newer
hardware versions of the Tesla autopilot.
REFERENCES
[1] Massachusetts Institute of Technology, “Advanced Vehicle Technol-
ogy (AVT) Consortium,”, online, https://agelab.mit.edu/avt, (accessed:
20.09.2022)
[2] L. Fridman, “Tesla Vehicle Deliveries and Autopilot Mileage Statis-
tics,” online, https://lexfridman.com/tesla-autopilot-miles-and-vehicles/,
(accessed: 20.09.2022)
[3] K. Gomez Buquerin, “Tesla autopilot Jupyter Notebook GitHub repos-
itory,” online https://github.com/k-gomez/telsa-ap-analysis, (accessed:
20.09.2022)
[4] K. Gomez Buquerin, C. Corbett, and H.-J. Hof, “Structured method-
ology and survey to evaluate data completeness in automotive digital
forensics,” 19th escar Europe : The World’s Leading Automotive Cyber
Security Conference (Conferencepublication), pp. 52-67, 2021
[5] A. Hupp, “Python-magic GitHub repository,” online, https://github.com/
ahupp/python-magic, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[6] D. Jacobs, K.-K. Raymond Choo, M.-T. Kechadi, and N.-A. Le-Khac,
“Volkswagen Car Entertainment System Forensics,” 2017 IEEE Trust-
com/BigDataSE/ICESS, pp. 699-705, 2017
[7] S. V¨omel and F. Freiling, “Correctness, atomicity, and integrity: Defin-
ing criteria for forensically-sound memory acquisition,” Digital Investi-
gation, Vol. 9, No. 2, Elsevier BV, pp. 125-137, 2012
[8] J. Ottmann, F. Breitinger, and F. Freiling, “Defining Atomicity (and
Integrity) for Snapshots of Storage in ForensicComputing,” Proceedings
of the Digital Forensics Research Conference Europe (DFRWS EU),
2022
[9] Keen Security Labs, “Experimental Security Research of Tesla Autopi-
lot,” online, https://keenlab.tencent.com/en/whitepapers/Experimental
Security Research of Tesla Autopilot.pdf, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[10] S. Dent, “The Dutch government claims it can decrypt Tesla’s hidden
driving data,” engadget, online, https://www.engadget.com/a-dutch-
government-lab-has-decoded-teslas-driving-data-for-the-first-time-
085709633.html, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[11] T. Simonite, “Tesla’s New Chip Holds the Key to ’Full Self-Driving’,”
Wired, online, https://www.wired.com/story/teslas-new-chip-holds-key-
full-self-driving/, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[12] V. Tabora, “Tesla Enhanced Autopilot Overview — L2 Self Driving
HW2,”
Medium,
online,
https://medium.com/self-driving-cars/tesla-
enhanced-autopilot-overview-l2-self-driving-hw2-54f09fed11f1,
(accessed: 20.09.2022)
[13] B. Erwin, “The Ultimate Guide to Tesla Autopilot,” Current Automotive,
online, https://www.currentautomotive.com/the-ultimate-guide-to-tesla-
autopilot/, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[14] K. Gomez Buquerin, C. Corbett, and H.-J. Hof, “A generalized approach
to automotive forensics,” Forensic Science International: Digital Inves-
tigation, Vol. 36, p. 301111, 2021
[15] B. D. Carrier, “File System Forensic Analysis,” Addison-Wesley, 2005
[16] Keen Security Labs, “Over-the-air: How we remotely compromised the
Gateway, BCM, and Autopilot ECUs of Tesla Cars,” Black Hat Security
Conference, 2018
[17] Keen Security Labs, “Free-fall: Hacking Tesla from Wireless to CAN
Bus,” Black Hat Security Conference, 2017
[18] S. Ebbers, F. Ising, C. Saatjohann, and S. Schinzel, “Grand Theft App:
Digital Forensics of Vehicle Assistant Apps,” CoRR, 2021
[19] K. Gomez Buquerin, D. Bayerl, and H.-J. Hof, “ ¨Uberwachung in
modernen Fahrzeugen,” Datenschutz und Datensicherheit - DuD , Vol.
45, No. 6, Springer Science and Business Media LLC, pp. 399-403,
2021
[20] T. Rice, “Hacking my Tesla Model 3 - Security Overview,” online, https:
//fn.lc/post/tesla-model-3/, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[21] Tesla,
“Tesla
Q1
2021
Vehicle
Production
&
Deliveries,”
on-
line, https://ir.tesla.com/press-release/tesla-q1-2021-vehicle-production-
deliveries, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[22] Tesla,
“Tesla
Q2
2021
Vehicle
Production
&
Deliveries,”
on-
line, https://ir.tesla.com/press-release/tesla-q2-2021-vehicle-production-
deliveries, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[23] Tesla,
“Tesla
Q3
2021
Vehicle
Production
&
Deliveries,”
on-
line, https://ir.tesla.com/press-release/tesla-q3-2021-vehicle-production-
deliveries, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[24] Tesla,
“Tesla
Q4
2021
Vehicle
Production
&
Deliveries,”
on-
line, https://ir.tesla.com/press-release/tesla-q4-2021-vehicle-production-
deliveries, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[25] C.
Isidore
and
P.
Valdes-Dapena,
“Tesla
is
under
investigation
because
its
cars
keep
hitting
emergency
vehicles,”
online,
https://edition.cnn.com/2021/08/16/business/tesla-autopilot-federal-
safety-probe/index.html, (accessed: 20.09.2022)
[26] F. Buchholz and E. Spafford, “On the role of file system metadata in
digital forensics,” Digital Investigation, Vol. 1, No. 4, Elsevier BV, pp.
298-309, 2004
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

