Reﬂecting on the Use of Soniﬁcation for Network Monitoring
Louise Axon, Sadie Creese, Michael Goldsmith, Jason R. C. Nurse
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
Parks Road, Oxford, UK
Email: {louise.axon, sadie.creese, michael.goldsmith, jason.nurse}@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract—In Security Operations Centres (SOCs), computer net-
works are generally monitored using a combination of anomaly
detection techniques, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and
data presented in visual and text-based forms. In the last two
decades signiﬁcant progress has been made in developing novel
soniﬁcation systems to further support network monitoring tasks.
A range of systems has been proposed in which soniﬁed network
data is presented for incorporation into the network monitoring
process. Unfortunately, many of these have not been sufﬁciently
validated and there is a lack of uptake in SOCs. In this paper, we
describe and reﬂect critically on the shortcomings of traditional
network-monitoring methods and identify the key role that soniﬁ-
cation, if implemented correctly, could play in improving current
monitoring capabilities. The core contribution of this position
paper is in the outline of a research agenda for soniﬁcation for
network monitoring, based on a review of prior research. In
particular, we identify requirements for an aesthetic approach
that is suitable for continuous real-time network monitoring;
formalisation of an approach to designing soniﬁcations in this
space; and reﬁnement and validation through comprehensive user
testing.
Keywords–Soniﬁcation; Network Security; Anomaly Detection;
Network Monitoring; Research Agenda.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The monitoring capabilities of the Security Operations
Centres (SOCs) within and on behalf of organisations are
vital to enterprise cybersecurity. SOCs are run by security
analysts who monitor and aim to maintain network and systems
security. In the face of a constantly evolving set of threats and
attack vectors, and changing business operations, there is a
requirement for effective monitoring tools in SOCs.
One of the key challenges that SOCs face in monitoring
large networks is the huge volume of data that can be present
on the network. This is both the data created by the day-to-day
operations of the enterprise, and data created by security tools.
For real-time monitoring, tools that present this data in a form
that can be processed quickly are essential. Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS) and visualisations are general examples of
classes of tools that are widely used to convey information
pertaining to network security in a form that can be easily
understood by analysts. The anomaly detection techniques that
usually underlie such tools have certain limitations, and can
produce false positive and negative results [1] [2]. Detecting
attacks, and recognising which risks must be prioritised over
other attacks and malign activities is difﬁcult, and the degree
of inaccuracy of detection systems can make it even more so.
Over the last two decades, the incorporation of soniﬁcation
of network data into the monitoring activity of SOCs has
been considered. Soniﬁcation is the presentation of data in a
sonic (generally non-speech) form. Some of this prior work
has provided sound evidence of the role soniﬁcation could
play in improving SOC monitoring capabilities. It has already
been shown, for example, that using soniﬁcation techniques
enables users to detect false positives from IDS more quickly
[3]. Based on the state of the art, there are, however, clear
requirements for further research and testing to validate the
usefulness of soniﬁcation for efﬁcient network monitoring, and
to develop appropriate and effective soniﬁcations to enhance
network monitoring capabilities.
In this paper, we review the major developments in soni-
ﬁcation and multimodal systems for network monitoring over
the last two decades. In particular, we consider approaches to
design and user testing, since we have identiﬁed these as two
areas in which further research is needed. A key contribution of
this paper is a consolidation of existing work, and an analysis
of the approaches taken thus far to sonifying network moni-
toring tasks. We also derive and outline a research agenda for
advancing the ﬁeld; speciﬁcally, we aim to highlight directions
in which work is needed in order to validate and improve
soniﬁcation techniques for network monitoring tasks in SOCs.
We identify a requirement for comprehensive assessment of
the extent to which, and ways in which, soniﬁcation techniques
can be useful for network monitoring tasks in SOCs through
extensive, in-context user-speciﬁc testing. We also identify
a requirement for the development of aesthetic soniﬁcations
appropriate for use in continuous network monitoring tasks,
and a requirement for a formalised approach to designing
soniﬁcations for network monitoring.
This paper is structured in four further sections to achieve
the research aims set out above. In Section II, we present
traditional approaches to network monitoring and detail their
shortcomings. In Section III, we review prior work in using
soniﬁcation for network monitoring, and highlight outstanding
challenges in the ﬁeld. Section IV presents a research agenda
for soniﬁcation for real-time network monitoring. In Section
V, we give our conclusions and future work.
II.
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO NETWORK
MONITORING
Network monitoring is generally conducted by security
analysts, who observe activity on the network – usually using
a variety of tools – in order to detect security breaches. Ac-
cording to the UK government’s information security breaches
survey for companies across the UK in 2015, 90% of large
organisations reported that they had suffered a security breach,
the median number of security breaches for a large organisation
was 14, and the average cost to a large organisation for its
worst security breach of the year was £1.46m–£3.14m [4].
In the face of such frequent and potentially costly breaches,
network monitoring and attack detection capabilities are of
extremely high importance.
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A variety of tools are used in network monitoring: IDS,
Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), visualisations, textual pre-
sentations, and ﬁrewalls are some of the tools with which
analysts conduct their monitoring tasks. The subject of our
research paper is primarily detection, rather than prevention
capabilities. We therefore focus on two key approaches to the
detection phase – IDS and visualisation – and on the anomaly
detection techniques that often underlie these.
Anomaly detection techniques describe methods for the
detection of changes in systems that may be of interest from
a monitoring perspective. In anomaly detection, the state of
the network is monitored and compared with a speciﬁed
“normal” baseline. Anomalous activity is that which exceeds
an acceptable threshold difference from this baseline. Anomaly
detection often informs the output of IDS and visualisations.
There are several reports reﬂecting on the state of the art
in anomaly detection techniques: [1] [5] [6]. In general, we
can divide anomaly detection methods into three categories
[1] [7]: detection methods based on statistics, in which values
are compared against a deﬁned acceptable range for deviation
[8] [9]; detection methods based on Knowledge Systems, in
which the current activity of the system is compared against a
rule-based “normal” activity [10]; and detection methods based
on Machine Learning, automated methods in which systems
learn about activities and detect whether these are anomalous
through supervised or unsupervised learning [5] [11].
Network monitoring is largely based on alerts given by
IDS. Many IDS have been based on Denning’s model [12].
In general, there are two types of IDS. Statistical anomaly-
based IDS monitor network trafﬁc, and compare it against
an established baseline (based on bandwidth, protocols, ports,
devices, and connections that are “normal”). Signature-based
IDS compare packets monitored on the network against a
database of signatures/attributes from known malicious threats
[1]. Leading SOCs typically craft their own signatures, deﬁned
by analysts in the form of rules. Recent advances automate the
collection and analysis of data from a range of sources such as
logs and IDS alerts using novel Machine Learning and Data
Mining approaches.
Much of the presentation of network monitoring data is
conveyed through visualisation systems. There are a number of
recent surveys of the state of the art in visualisation techniques
for security monitoring. Conti et al. in [13] and Zhang et
al. in [14] present reviews as of 2007 and 2012 respectively,
reporting research into improving graphical layout and user
interaction techniques [15] [16]. Visualisations generally work
by mapping network data parameters to visual parameters, such
that analysts can observe the changes in the visualisation pre-
sented and from this deduce changes in, and information about,
the network. The design of effective visualisation involves
identifying mappings that represent the data in an intuitive
way that can be understood by security and network analysts,
in SOCs for example, without inducing cognitive overload,
and can convey as effectively as possible any information
pertaining to the security of the computer network.
There are certain drawbacks to current approaches to the
monitoring and analysis of security data. Anomaly detection
techniques can be unreliable or inaccurate, and may produce
false positives and false negatives [1] [2]. A shortcoming of
existing visualisation-based network monitoring systems is the
requirement that operators dedicate their full attention to the
display in order to ensure that no information is missed –
for real-time monitoring especially – which can restrict their
ability to perform other tasks. Furthermore, the number of
visual dimensions and properties onto which data can be
mapped is limited [17].
Based on these shortcomings in existing monitoring tech-
niques, we identify ways in which monitoring capability in
SOCs might be improved. While many promising advances
have been made recently in novel data analytics approaches in
particular, we highlighted that network monitoring systems do
not always produce reliable outputs. It is, therefore, important
that the human operator has situational awareness and an
understanding of the network state, in order that he can
interpret the alerts given by the detection systems used, and
accurately decide their validity. Such awareness could also
enable analysts to detect patterns, recognise anomalous activity
and prioritise risks differently to their systems. Techniques that
provide analysts with a continuous awareness of the state of the
network require further investigation. Research is also needed
into novel methods for improving the presentation of network
data, the main technique for which is currently visualisation.
In particular, it is important to design representations of large
volumes of network data that are as easy as possible for
analysts to use, understand and act on.
III.
NETWORK MONITORING USING SONIFICATION
We believe that soniﬁcation could address the requirements
with which we conclude Section II in a number of ways. Pre-
senting network data as a continuous soniﬁcation may improve
analysts’ awareness of the network state, and furthermore may
enable the analyst to detect patterns in the data, acting as a
human anomaly detector of sorts. These are both areas for
investigation and are detailed as research questions in Section
IV. Soniﬁcation could also offer a solution to the shortcomings
of visualisation techniques for network monitoring, as another
human interface alongside the visualisation, using a different
sense. Firstly, sound can be presented for peripheral listening
– a secondary task – and, if designed appropriately, engage the
listener’s attention as required, allowing operators to perform
other tasks in the meantime; secondly, using sound offers
another set of dimensions in addition to visual dimensions to
which data can be mapped.
In this section, we present background on soniﬁcation
generally. Following this, we review prior work in the ap-
plication of soniﬁcation to network security monitoring, and
in multimodal systems (combining visuals and sound) for
network monitoring.
A. Soniﬁcation: A Background
Soniﬁcation is used in numerous ﬁelds, such as ﬁnancial
markets, medicine (Electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring
[18], image analysis [19]) and astronomy. User testing has
validated that the presentation of soniﬁed data can improve
certain capabilities in a number of applications: improved accu-
racy in monitoring the movement of volatile market indices by
ﬁnancial traders [20], and improved capabilities for exploratory
analysis of EEG data [21], for example.
A variety of techniques and guidelines have been developed
for the design and implementation of soniﬁcation [22] [23] [24]
[25]. Throughout soniﬁcation literature there are three main
approaches recognised: earcons/event-based soniﬁcation (dis-
crete sounds representing a deﬁned event), parameter mapping
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

soniﬁcation (in which changes in some data dimensions are
represented by changes in acoustic dimensions), and model-
based soniﬁcation (in which the user interacts with a model
and receives some acoustic response derived from the data).
The current state of the art in soniﬁcation for network
and server monitoring is summarised in Hildebrandt [17], in
which systems for soniﬁcation of computer security data are
identiﬁed, in various stages of maturity. It is concluded that
there is a lack of formal user and usability testing, even
in those systems that are already fully developed [26] [27]
[28]. Our work differs from Hildebrandt in two key ways.
Firstly, while Hildebrandt’s survey gives an overview of the
design approaches taken in some existing soniﬁcation systems,
our survey provides much greater detail on the soniﬁcation
design of existing systems in terms of soniﬁcation techniques,
sound mapping types, the network data and attack types
represented and the network monitoring scope. Secondly, we
make recommendations in our research agenda for advancing
soniﬁcation system design for the network monitoring context
through aesthetics and formalisation, as well as deﬁning the
research questions to be answered through user testing.
Figure 1. A summary of the existing relationship between traditional
monitoring techniques and their potential relationship with soniﬁcation
systems in SOCs.
Figure 1 shows the existing relationship between raw data,
anomaly detection techniques, IDS and visualisations in SOC
monitoring, and the position we envisage soniﬁcation might
take in this setup.
B. Applications of Soniﬁcation to Network Monitoring
PEEP, a “network auralizer” for monitoring networks with
sound, is presented in [26]. PEEP is designed to enable
system administrators to detect network anomalies – both
in security and general performance – by comparing sounds
with the sound of the “normally functioning” network. The
focus of PEEP is on the use of “natural” sounds – birdsong,
for example – in sonifying network events. Recordings are
mapped to network conditions (excessive trafﬁc and email
spam, for instance), and are played back to reﬂect these
conditions. Abnormal events are presented through a change
in the “natural” sounds. PEEP represents both network events
(when an event occurs it is represented by a single natural
sound) and network state (state is represented through sounds
played continuously, which change when there is a change in
some aspects of the state, such as average network load). There
is, however, no validation of the performance of PEEP and its
usefulness for monitoring networks.
The Stetho network soniﬁcation system is given in [29].
Stetho soniﬁes network events by reading the output of the
Linux tcpdump command, checking for matches using regular
expressions, and generating corresponding Musical Instrument
Digital Interface (MIDI) events, with the aim that the system
creates sounds that are “comfortable as music”. The aim of
Stetho is to convey the status of network trafﬁc, without a
speciﬁc focus on anomaly detection. The research includes
an evaluation experiment in which the Stetho system is used
– users’ ability to interpret the trafﬁc load from the sounds
generated by Stetho is examined. The experiment shows that
this monitoring information can be recognised by users from
the sounds created by Stetho; however, only four users are
involved in the evaluation experiment.
Network Monitoring with Sound (NeMoS) is a network
soniﬁcation system in which the user assigns network events,
and the system then associates these events with MIDI tracks
[30]. The system is designed to allow monitoring of different
parts of a potentially large network system at once, with a
single musical ﬂow representing the whole state of the part of
the system the system manager is interested in. The focus is not
on network security but on monitoring network performance
in general; printer status and system load, for example, can be
represented through two different sound channels.
More recently, Ballora et al. look to create a soundscape
representation of network state which aids anomaly detection
by assigning sounds to signal certain types and levels of net-
work activity such as unusual port requests [31] (“soundscape”
deﬁnition given by Schafer [32]). The concept is a system
capable of combining multiple network parameters through
data fusion to create this soundscape. The fusion approach
is based on the JDL Data Fusion Process Model [33], with
characteristics of the data assigned to multiple parameters
of the sound. The authors aim, ﬁrstly, to map anomalous
events to sound and, secondly, to represent the IP (Internet
Protocol) space as a soundscape in which patterns can emerge
for experienced listeners. No validation is carried out as to the
usefulness of the system in network anomaly detection tasks.
Vickers et al. use a soundscape approach to sonify meta
properties of network trafﬁc data [34]. The aim of the system
is to alert the system administrator of abnormal network
behaviour with regard to both performance and security; it
is suggested, for example, that a distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attack might be recognisable by the system’s rep-
resentation of an increase in certain types of trafﬁc. There
is, however, no evaluation of users’ ability to recognise such
information using the system. Vickers et al. then extend that
work to further explore the potential for using soniﬁcation
for network situational awareness [35]. For this context, i.e.,
continuous monitoring for network situational awareness – it is
argued that solutions based on soundscape have an advantage
over other soniﬁcation designs in this context, and that there
is a need for soniﬁcations that are not annoying or fatiguing
and that complement the user’s existing sonic environment.
A soundscape approach is also adopted in the InteNtion
system [27] for network soniﬁcation. Here, network trafﬁc
analysis output is converted to MIDI and sent to synthesisers
for dynamic mixing; the output is a soundscape composed
by the network activity generally rather than the detection of
suspicious activity speciﬁcally. It is argued that the system
could be used to help administrators detect attacks; however
this is not validated through user testing. DeButts is a student
project available online in which network data is soniﬁed
with the aim of aiding security analysts to detect anomalous
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

incidents in network access logs [36].
Garc´ıa-Ruiz et al. investigate the application of soniﬁcation
as a teaching and learning tool for network intrusion detection
[37] [38]. This work includes an exploratory piece in which
information is gathered regarding the subjects’ preferred au-
ditory representations of attacks. Soniﬁcation prototypes are
given for the mapping of log-registered attacks into sound. The
ﬁrst uses animal sounds – auditory icons – for ﬁve different
types of attack (“guess”, “rcp”, “rsh”, “rlogin”, “port-scan”);
the second uses piano notes at ﬁve different frequencies as
earcons to represent the ﬁve types of attack. Informal testing
was carried out for these two prototypes, and suggested that
the earcons were more easily identiﬁable, while the subjects
could recall the attack types more easily using the auditory
icons. While this is a useful start to comparing approaches
to soniﬁcation design for network data, the mappings tested
are limited, and further research is required into mappings
involving other sound and data types.
Systems have been proposed to sonify the output of existing
IDS, and to act as additions to the function of these systems.
The CyberSeer [39] system uses sound to aid the presentation
of network security information with the aim of improving
network monitoring capability. Sound is used as an additional
variable to data visualisation techniques to produce an audio-
visual display that conveys information about network trafﬁc
log data and IDS events. The requirement for user testing to
establish the most effective audio mappings is recognised, but
no testing is carried out.
Gopinath’s thesis uses JListen to sonify a range of events in
Snort Network Intrusion Detection System to signal malicious
attacks [3] (Snort is a widely used open-source network intru-
sion detection system for UNIX derivatives and Windows). The
aim is to explore the usefulness of soniﬁcation in improving
the accuracy of IDS; usability studies indicate that soniﬁcation
may increase user awareness in intrusion detection. Experi-
ments are carried out to test three hypotheses on the usability
and efﬁcacy of sonifying Snort. The ﬁndings are: musical
knowledge has no signiﬁcant effect on the ability of subjects
to use the system to ﬁnd intrusions; soniﬁcation decreases the
time taken to detect false positives; immediate monitoring of
hosts is possible with a soniﬁed system. As noted in Hilde-
brandt [17], however, the comparison is somewhat biased since
the control group without auditory support had to conduct the
tasks by reading log ﬁles, without access to the visualisation-
based tools to which those tested with auditory support had
access.
Multimodal systems, that combine visualisation and soni-
ﬁcation for network monitoring, have also been explored.
Varner and Knight present such a system in [40]. Visualisation
is used to convey the status of network nodes; soniﬁcation
then conveys additional details on network nodes selected
by the user. This multimodal approach is useful because it
combines advantages of the two modalities – the spatial nature
of visualisation, and the temporal nature of soniﬁcation –
to produce an effective and usable system. Garc´ıa-Ruiz et
al. describe the beneﬁts and pitfalls of using multimodal
human-computer interfaces for analysing intrusion detection in
[41]. A soniﬁcation method is proposed for network intrusion
detection systems (NIDS) as part of a multimodal interface, to
enable analysts to cope with the large amounts of information
contained in network logs.
Qi et al. present another multimodal system for detecting
intrusions and attacks on networks in [42]; distinctive sounds
are generated for a set of attack scenarios consisting of denial-
of-service (DoS) and port scanning. The same approach is
adopted by Brown et al. [43]: the bit-rates and packet-rates of
a delay queue are soniﬁed in a system for intrusion detection.
The sounds generated by the system, which maps bit rate and
packet rate to sound, are tested (not tested on users, but listened
to by the authors) for DoS and port scanning attack scenarios.
It is concluded that the sounds generated could enable humans
to recognise and distinguish between the two types of attack.
However, user testing is needed to validate this conclusion and
investigate the extent to which this approach is effective.
NetSon [28] is a system for real time soniﬁcation and
visualisation of network trafﬁc, with a focus on large-scale
organisations. In this work, there are no user studies, but the
system is being used at Fraunhofer IIS, a research institution,
who provide a live web stream of their installation [44]. Mi-
crosoft have a multimodal system, Specimen Box, for real-time
retrospective detection and analysis of botnet activity. It has not
yet been presented in a scientiﬁc publication, but description
and videos of the functioning system are presented online [45].
The system has not been subject to formal evaluation, but is
used in operations at the Microsoft Cybercrime Centre.
Mancuso et al. conduct user testing to assess the usefulness
of soniﬁcation of network data for military cyber operations
[46]. The aim of the testing, in which participants were tasked
with detecting cyber attacks using either a visual display
only, or both visual and soniﬁed displays, was to assess the
extent to which soniﬁcation can improve the performance
and manage the workload of, and decrease the stress felt by,
operators conducting cyber monitoring operations on military
networks. The testing results show that the soniﬁcations did
not affect the performance, workload or stress. However, only
one method of sonifying the data was tested, in which each
possible source and destination IP address was represented by
a different instrument and note, and the loudness increased
if a threshold packet size was exceeded. The results do not,
therefore, show that soniﬁcation does not affect performance,
stress and workload in this context, but demonstrate only that
this particular method of sonifying the data is ineffective.
C. Outstanding Challenges
In Table I, we summarise the soniﬁcation systems previ-
ously developed (solutions for which full systems or prototypes
have been developed) for network monitoring; from this we
have identiﬁed three key areas in which research is lacking:
user testing, soniﬁcation aesthetics, and formalisation of an
approach to designing soniﬁcation systems for network moni-
toring.
In general, a weakness in the articles in which user studies
are conducted is the small number of users involved. Table
I shows that little user testing has been carried out, and of
that which has, none has speciﬁcally targeted security analysts,
and none has been conducted in a SOC environment. Table I
shows also that there has been little (and no comprehensive)
evaluation of the usefulness of existing soniﬁcation systems
for network security monitoring tasks. Extensive user testing is
required in this ﬁeld to validate the usefulness of the approach
and of proposed systems, and to reﬁne the soniﬁcation design.
The systems listed vary in the data they represent. Some
map raw network data to sound, some map the output of IDS
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE I. REVIEW OF APPROACHES TO AND USER TESTING IN EXISTING SONIFICATION SYSTEMS FOR NETWORK MONITORING,
ORDERED BY YEAR.
systems, while some aim to map attacks to sounds; however,
there is no comparison of the efﬁcacy of these approaches,
or of the usefulness of sonic representations of different
attack types. The soniﬁcation design approaches (event-based,
parameter mapping, and soundscape-based) also vary, as do
the sound types (natural sounds, sounds that are musically in-
formed) but there is as yet no comprehensive investigation into,
or comparison of, the usefulness of these methods. Based on
this, we propose that comparative research into the soniﬁcation
aesthetics most appropriate to the network monitoring context
is crucial, in order to inform soniﬁcation design. We further
identify a requirement for the development of a formalised
approach to designing soniﬁcations in this ﬁeld, to underpin
developments and enable comparison. Next, we outline our
detailed research agenda to address these issues.
IV.
RESEARCH AGENDA
We present our research agenda in three parts: comprehen-
sive user studies, improved aesthetics, and formalisation.
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A. Comprehensive User Studies
Section III indicates that of the proposals made for soniﬁca-
tion systems for network monitoring, very few have conducted
any user testing, and none have conducted such testing to the
extent required for an appropriate understanding of the use
of such systems and their suitability for actual deployment in
security monitoring situations. As such, we outline a require-
ment for signiﬁcantly more in-context user testing of soniﬁca-
tions for network monitoring tasks, carried out with security
analysts in SOCs, to inform the design and investigate the
advantages and disadvantages of the approach. It is important
that soniﬁcation systems are tested in the SOC environment,
in order to investigate how well they incorporate with the
particular characteristics of SOCs – a variety of systems
running simultaneously, collaborative working practice, high
levels of attention required from workers.
We will conduct user testing to investigate the hypothesis
that soniﬁcation can improve the network monitoring capabil-
ities of security analysts. This hypothesis is proposed in light
of prior work in other ﬁelds in which it is proven that certain
capabilities can be improved by the presentation of soniﬁed
data, as outlined in Section III, and of the limited experimental
evidence that shows that soniﬁcation can be useful for tasks
involving network data speciﬁcally [3] [29].
For the validation of soniﬁcation as a solution to improving
network monitoring capabilities, there are certain key research
questions that need to be answered through user testing.
1) To what extent, and in what ways, can the use of
soniﬁcation improve the monitoring capabilities of
security analysts in a SOC environment? User testing
is required to establish, ﬁrstly, the extent to which the
presentation of soniﬁed network data can improve the
analyst’s understanding and awareness of the network, as
mentioned in Section II. Secondly, the extent to which this
awareness can improve the ability of analysts to interact
with, and decide the accuracy of the output of, their
existing monitoring systems. Further investigation is also
needed to establish whether the presentation of network
data through soniﬁcation can enable analysts to “hear”
patterns and anomalies in the data, and in this way detect
anomalies more accurately than systems in any cases.
Given the strong human capability for pattern recognition
in audio representations [47] [48], and for contextualising
information, it is plausible that a system that presents
patterns in network data may enable the analyst to detect
anomalies with greater accuracy than the traditional rule-
based systems.
2) Are there certain types of attack and threat that sonify
more effectively than others, and what implications
does this have for the design of soniﬁcation systems
for network monitoring? It is important that user testing
is carried out to establish the cases in which soniﬁed
network data is most useful for network monitoring tasks.
For example, it may be the case that certain types of
attacks are better-represented through soniﬁcation than
others, and that some attacks sound anomalous in a way
that is particularly easy for analysts to use while others do
not sonify well. Findings on this subject should inform
soniﬁcation system design by distinguishing the attacks
and threats in relation to which soniﬁcation performs best,
and the areas in which the technique therefore has the
potential to be most effective.
Answers to these questions will provide a greater un-
derstanding of the role soniﬁcation can play in improving
monitoring capabilities in SOCs, the limits of the approach,
and the extent to which it can be reliable as a monitoring
technique. In conducting this testing, we expect to draw from
existing research on conducting user studies in general, and in
a security context [49] [50].
B. Improved Aesthetics
While there has been some work in aesthetic soniﬁcation,
as shown in Section III, it has not been heavily applied
in the context of network monitoring. Prior work indicates
that soniﬁcation aesthetic impacts on its effectiveness. In an
experiment comparing soniﬁcations of guidance systems, for
example, it was shown that soniﬁcation strategies based on
pitch and tempo enabled higher precision than strategies based
on loudness and brightness [51]. It was also shown in [52] that
particular soniﬁcation designs resulted in better participant per-
formance in identifying features of Surface Electromyography
data for a range of different tasks involved. The aesthetics of
the design are an important factor in producing soniﬁcations
that are suitable for continuous presentation in this context. In
particular, the sounds should be unfatiguing and should achieve
a balance in which they are unobtrusive to the performance of
other tasks while drawing sufﬁcient attention when necessary
to be suitable for SOC monitoring. While there are other
techniques that may be useful, we propose an approach to
this design that draws on techniques and theories of musical
composition. We can draw on work in aesthetic soniﬁcation
by Vickers [47], and on work in musiﬁcation, i.e., the design
of soniﬁcations that are musical. Some key questions to be
answered regarding soniﬁcation aesthetics for network security
monitoring are given below.
1) Can the development of aesthetic soniﬁcations based
on techniques of musical composition alleviate the
fatiguing nature of soniﬁcations previously reported,
and, secondly, are such soniﬁcations more appropriate
for continuous network monitoring tasks? A drawback
to soniﬁcation for network monitoring is the fatigue or
annoyance that listeners can experience as a result of
long-term exposure to soniﬁcation [35] [47]. The question
of how this can be prevented if soniﬁcations are to be
developed that are appropriate for continuous network
monitoring, and the suitability of a soniﬁcation approach
based on techniques of musical composition for the
network monitoring context requires investigation.
2) To what extent does musical experience affect the
ability of security analysts to use musically-informed
soniﬁcation systems in network monitoring tasks? The
effect of users’ musical experience on their ability to un-
derstand and make use of the soniﬁcation systems design
will require investigation. Here, musical experience refers
to the level of prior theoretical and aural musical training
attained by the user. For this SOC monitoring context,
analysts’ use of the systems should not be impaired by a
lack of musical experience.
Besides aesthetics, aspects of human perception must in-
ﬂuence the design: the prior associations sounds may hold for
users and the way in which this affects interpretation; the effect
of musical experience on perception. It is important that the
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

design takes into account factors in perception such as cross-
ﬁeld interference (in which different parameters of sound –
pitch and tempo, for example – interact in a way that affects
perception of either) and does not induce cognitive overload
for the user.
C. Formalisation
To address the requirements above we need an underpinning
framework which enables us to architect and experiment with
soniﬁcations in a ﬂexible way, utilising heterogeneous models
alongside each other in order to compare performance. No such
framework currently exists, and we therefore identify that there
is a need for a formal grammar for designing soniﬁcation for
network monitoring. We propose the mathematical deﬁnition
of a grammar for the representation of network data through
parameter-mapping soniﬁcation that is derived from the results
of user testing in a network monitoring context, techniques of
musical composition, and the science of auditory perception.
A formal grammar for designing soniﬁcations for use in the
network monitoring context could tailor aspects of soniﬁcation
design such as cross-ﬁeld interference to produce soniﬁcations
that are appropriate for network monitoring tasks. A simple
example is a simultaneous change in two network parameters:
a statistically signiﬁcant increase in trafﬁc load, and messages
received from an IP address that is known to be malicious
(these two changes would generally be found by the statistical
anomaly-based IDS and signature-based IDS, respectively,
described in Section II). This could be the result of a DoS
attack, and the soniﬁcation system should therefore attract
the attention of the analyst. Cross-ﬁeld interference could be
leveraged in this case (with a mapping to higher pitch and
increased tempo – two sound parameters which interact such
that each appears more increased that it really is – for the
two data parameters respectively) to ensure that the attack is
highlighted by the soniﬁcation.
In order for the representation to be unfatiguing, we pro-
pose that a rule-based approach to aesthetic sound generation
may be appropriate. In particular, a deﬁned formal grammar for
representing network data as sound could be applied to a vari-
ety of genres of music to generate a set of different-sounding
soniﬁcations of the same network data. We hypothesise that
with this approach, users could be allowed to move between a
set of musical genres at choice, all of which would sonify the
network data according to the same grammar, and this could
reduce the fatigue caused by the sounds. Below, we give the
key questions to be investigated on formalising soniﬁcation
systems for network monitoring.
1) To what extent can a deﬁned formal grammar produce
soniﬁcation systems that improve network monitoring
capabilities in SOCs? We believe that a combination of
factors, including human sound perception, soniﬁcation
aesthetics and intuitiveness of mappings, will affect and,
if addressed correctly, improve the usability of the soni-
ﬁcations designed. A formal grammar can, if designed
correctly, combine the solutions to these requirements
in a thorough and considered manner and we therefore
hypothesise that such an approach may produce highly
usable and useful soniﬁcation systems for network mon-
itoring. The extent to which this is the case requires
investigation through user testing of the systems produced
according to the grammar.
2) Is a rule-based approach to generating a set of
different-sounding soniﬁcations of the network data,
which enables users to change between musical prefer-
ences, appropriate for a network security monitoring
context? This question is in two main parts. Firstly, does
the presentation of a choice of different-sounding soniﬁ-
cations alleviate the fatigue induced by continuous soni-
ﬁcations, as reported in prior work? Secondly, does such
a presentation affect the usefulness of the soniﬁcation for
network monitoring tasks in any way? For example, it
is viable that the presentation of a number of different-
sounding soniﬁcations may cause more confusion for
users than the presentation of a single soniﬁcation, and
that this may detract from the usability of the systems
designed. If this is found to be the case, then methods for
mitigating this effect, or other approaches to designing
unfatiguing continuous soniﬁcation systems, will need to
be investigated.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We conclude that there is a growing requirement for
the validation of using soniﬁcation in SOCs as a means of
improving certain monitoring capabilities. The current state of
the art provides evidence of the potential of soniﬁcation in
advancing network security monitoring capabilities. Systems
proposed and in use have been shown to be as effective as,
or more effective than, other network monitoring techniques
insofar as a limited amount of testing has been performed [17].
We recognise a requirement for development of the ﬁeld
in three main directions. Firstly, the performance of extensive
user testing to validate claims about and show the extent of the
suitability of soniﬁcation for network monitoring. Secondly,
the need for aesthetics of the soniﬁcation design for continuous
network monitoring, and the development of methods for
generating soniﬁcations that are unfatiguing, unobtrusive, and
yet convey the data to an appropriate extent. Lastly, the
formalisation of a design approach – a formal grammar that is
deﬁned by the requirements: representation of data, perception
of sound, and aesthetics.
As future work, we intend to research the potential for
soniﬁcation to match, or improve on, the performance of
current monitoring systems in the SOC context. We will also
deﬁne a formal grammar for the design of soniﬁcation for
network monitoring, based on the results of user testing of
mappings; in particular, this grammar will enable the design
of rule-based aesthetic soniﬁcation for this context by drawing
on music theory.
REFERENCES
[1]
P.
Garcia-Teodoro,
J.
Diaz-Verdejo,
G.
Maci´a-Fern´andez,
and
E. V´azquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques,
systems and challenges,” computers & security, vol. 28, no. 1, 2009,
pp. 18–28.
[2]
S. Axelsson, “The base-rate fallacy and its implications for the difﬁculty
of intrusion detection,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security.
ACM, 1999, pp. 1–7.
[3]
M. Gopinath, “Auralization of intrusion detection system using Jlisten,”
Development, vol. 22, 2004, p. 3.
[4]
PWC, “2015 Information Security Breaches Survey,” 2015, PWC in
association with Infosecurity Europe.
[5]
A. Lazarevic, L. Ert¨oz, V. Kumar, A. Ozgur, and J. Srivastava, “A
comparative study of anomaly detection schemes in network intrusion
detection.” in Proceedings of SIAM International Conference on Data
Mining, 2003, pp. 25–36.
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[6]
V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 41, no. 3, 2009, p. 15.
[7]
V. Kumar, J. Srivastava, and A. Lazarevic, Managing cyber threats:
issues, approaches, and challenges.
Springer Science & Business
Media, 2006, vol. 5.
[8]
D. E. Denning and P. G. Neumann, “Requirements and model for
ides—a real-time intrusion detection expert system,” Document A005,
SRI International, vol. 333, 1985.
[9]
N. Ye, S. Emran, Q. Chen, and S. Vilbert, “Multivariate statistical analy-
sis of audit trails for host-based intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions
on Computers, vol. 51, no. 7, 2002, pp. 810–820.
[10]
D. Anderson, T. F. Lunt, H. Javitz, A. Tamaru, and A. Valdes, De-
tecting unusual program behavior using the statistical component of
the Next-generation Intrusion Detection Expert System (NIDES).
SRI
International, Computer Science Laboratory, 1995.
[11]
C. Tsai, Y. Hsu, C. Lin, and W. Lin, “Intrusion detection by machine
learning: A review,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no. 10,
2009, pp. 11 994–12 000.
[12]
D. Denning, “An intrusion-detection model,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, no. 2, 1987, pp. 222–232.
[13]
G. Conti, Security data visualization: graphical techniques for network
analysis.
No Starch Press, 2007.
[14]
Y. Zhang, Y. Xiao, M. Chen, J. Zhang, and H. Deng, “A survey
of security visualization for computer network logs,” Security and
Communication Networks, vol. 5, no. 4, 2012, pp. 404–421.
[15]
R. F. Erbacher, K. L. Walker, and D. A. Frincke, “Intrusion and misuse
detection in large-scale systems,” Computer Graphics and Applications,
IEEE, vol. 22, no. 1, 2002, pp. 38–47.
[16]
B. Shneiderman, “Dynamic queries for visual information seeking,”
IEEE Software, vol. 11, no. 6, 1994, pp. 70–77.
[17]
S. Rinderle-Ma and T. Hildebrandt, “Server sounds and network noises,”
in Cognitive Infocommunications (CogInfoCom), 2015 6th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 45–50.
[18]
Z. Halim, R. Baig, and S. Bashir, “Soniﬁcation: a novel approach
towards data mining,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Emerging Technologies, 2006.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 548–553.
[19]
T. Hinterberger and G. Baier, “Parametric orchestral soniﬁcation of EEG
in real time,” IEEE MultiMedia, no. 2, 2005, pp. 70–79.
[20]
P. Janata and E. Childs, “Marketbuzz: Soniﬁcation of real-time ﬁnancial
data,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Auditory
Display, 2004.
[21]
T. Hermann, “Soniﬁcation for Exploratory Data Analysis,” Ph.D. dis-
sertation, 2002, Bielefeld University.
[22]
G. Kramer, Auditory display: Soniﬁcation, audiﬁcation, and auditory
interfaces.
Perseus Publishing, 1993.
[23]
A. de Campo, “Toward a data soniﬁcation design space map,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Auditory Display, 2007,
pp. 342–347.
[24]
S. Barrass and C. Frauenberger, “A communal map of design in auditory
display,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Auditory
Display, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[25]
S. Barrass et al., “Auditory information design,” Made available in
DSpace on 2011-01-04T02: 37: 33Z (GMT), 1997.
[26]
M. Gilﬁx and A. Couch, “Peep (the network auralizer): Monitoring your
network with sound.” in Proceedings of the Large Installation System
Administration Conference, 2000, pp. 109–117.
[27]
R. Giot and Y. Courbe, “Intention–interactive network soniﬁcation,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Auditory Display.
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2012, pp. 235–236.
[28]
D. Worrall, “Realtime soniﬁcation and visualisation of network meta-
data,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Auditory
Display, 2015, pp. 337–339.
[29]
M.
Kimoto
and
H.
Ohno,
“Design
and
implementation
of
stetho—network
soniﬁcation
system,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
International Computer Music Conference, 2002, pp. 273–279.
[30]
D. Malandrino, D. Mea, A. Negro, G. Palmieri, and V. Scarano,
“Nemos: Network monitoring with sound,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Auditory Display, 2003, pp. 251–254.
[31]
M. Ballora, N. Giacobe, and D. Hall, “Songs of cyberspace: an update
on soniﬁcations of network trafﬁc to support situational awareness,” in
SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing.
International Society for Optics
and Photonics, 2011, pp. 80 640P–80 640P.
[32]
R. Schafer, The soundscape: Our sonic environment and the tuning of
the world.
Inner Traditions/Bear & Co, 1993.
[33]
O. Kessler et al., “[functional description of the data fusion process],”
1991, Ofﬁce of Naval Technology Naval Air Development Center,
Warminster PA.
[34]
P. Vickers, C. Laing, and T. Fairfax, “Soniﬁcation of a network’s self-
organized criticality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.4705, 2014.
[35]
P. Vickers, C. Laing, M. Debashi, and T. Fairfax, “Soniﬁcation aesthetics
and listening for network situational awareness,” in Proceedings of the
Conference on Soniﬁcation of Health and Environmental Data, 2014.
[36]
B. deButts, “Network access log visualization & soniﬁcation,” Master’s
thesis, Tufts University, Medford, MA, US, 2014.
[37]
M. Garcia-Ruiz, M. Vargas Martin, B. Kapralos, J. Tashiro, and
R. Acosta-Diaz, “Best practices for applying soniﬁcation to support
teaching and learning of network intrusion detection,” in Proceedings
of the World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and
Telecommunications, 2010, pp. 752–757.
[38]
S. El Seoud, M. Garcia-Ruiz, A. Edwards, R. Aquino-Santos, and
M. Martin, “Auditory display as a tool for teaching network intrusion
detection,” International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning
(iJET), vol. 3, no. 2, 2008, pp. 59–62.
[39]
C. Papadopoulos, C. Kyriakakis, A. Sawchuk, and X. He, “Cyberseer:
3d audio-visual immersion for network security and management,” in
Proceedings of the ACM workshop on Visualization and data mining
for computer security.
ACM, 2004, pp. 90–98.
[40]
P. Varner and J. Knight, “Monitoring and visualization of emergent
behavior in large scale intrusion tolerant distributed systems,” Technical
report, Pennsylvania State University, 2002.
[41]
M. Garc´ıa-Ruiz, M. Martin, and M. Green, “Towards a multimodal
human-computer interface to analyze intrusion detection in computer
networks,” in Proceedings of the First Human-Computer Interaction
Workshop (MexIHC), Puebla, Mexico, 2006.
[42]
L. Qi, M. Martin, B. Kapralos, M. Green, and M. Garc´ıa-Ruiz, “To-
ward sound-assisted intrusion detection systems,” in On the Move to
Meaningful Internet Systems 2007: CoopIS, DOA, ODBASE, GADA,
and IS.
Springer, 2007, pp. 1634–1645.
[43]
A. Brown, M. Martin, B. Kapralos, M. Green, and M. Garcia-Ruiz,
“Poster: Towards music-assisted intrusion detection,” 2009, poster pre-
sented at IEEE Workshop on Statistical Signal Processing.
[44]
“Fraunhofer IIS Netson,” 2016, URL: http://www.iis.fraunhofer.de/en/
muv/2015/netson.html [accessed: 21/03/2016].
[45]
“Specimen Box, The Ofﬁce for Creative Research,” 2014, URL:
http://ocr.nyc/user-focused-tools/2014/06/01/specimen-box/ [accessed:
21/03/2016].
[46]
V. F. Mancuso et al., “Augmenting cyber defender performance and
workload through soniﬁed displays,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3,
2015, pp. 5214–5221.
[47]
T. Hermann, A. Hunt, and J. Neuhoff, The soniﬁcation handbook.
Logos Verlag Berlin, GE, 2011.
[48]
E. Yeung, “Pattern recognition by audio representation of multivariate
analytical data,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 52, no. 7, 1980, pp. 1120–
1123.
[49]
J. Rubin and D. Chisnell, Handbook of usability testing: how to plan,
design and conduct effective tests.
John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[50]
J. R. C. Nurse, S. Creese, M. Goldsmith, and K. Lamberts, “Guidelines
for usable cybersecurity: Past and present,” in Proceedings of the Third
International Workshop on Cyberspace Safety and Security (CSS).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 21–26.
[51]
G. Parseihian, C. Gondre, M. Aramaki, S. Ystad, and R. K. Martinet,
“Comparison and evaluation of soniﬁcation strategies for guidance
tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 18, no. 4, 2016, pp.
674–686.
[52]
S. C. Peres, D. Verona, T. Nisar, and P. Ritchey, “Towards a systematic
approach to real-time soniﬁcation design for surface electromyography,”
Displays, 2016.
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

