Analysing Trends and Success Factors of International Cybersecurity
Capacity-Building Initiatives
Faisal Hameed, Ioannis Agraﬁotis, Carolin Weisser, Michael Goldsmith, Sadie Creese
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
email:{ﬁrstname.lastname}@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract—The global community has been engaged extensively in
assessing and addressing gaps in cybersecurity commitments and
capabilities across nations and regions. As a result, a signiﬁcant
number of Cybersecurity Capacity Building (CCB) initiatives
were launched to overcome cyber-risks and realise digital div-
idends. However, these efforts are facing various challenges such
as lack of strategy, and duplication. Although extensive research
has been carried out on CCB, no single study exists which focuses
on analysing CCB initiatives. This gap presents an opportunity
for investigating current trends in CCB efforts and identifying
the principles for successful CCB initiatives. In this paper, we
aim to bridge this gap by collecting and analysing 165 publicly
available initiatives. We classify the initiatives based on Oxford’s
widely accepted Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model (CMM)
and perform a descriptive statistical analysis. We further reﬂect
on these initiatives, drawing on well-established success factors
from the literature of capacity-building. Towards this end, we
also conduct qualitative analysis based on CMM reports for
two countries which have experienced socio-economic challenges,
Mexico and Brazil, to understand which factors are essential
in successful CCB initiatives. We conclude the paper with some
interesting results on regional trends, key players, and ingredients
of success factors.
Keywords–Cybersecurity; Capacity Building Initiatives; Capac-
ity Maturity Model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There has been an extensive engagement from the global
community in combating cyber-risks, for numerous reasons.
These efforts are in response to the increasing proliferation of
cyber-threats and cyber-harm [1]–[4]. Such activities are ad-
versely affecting the cyber-landscape that forms the foundation
of today’s interconnected societies. Thus, the desire to maintain
cyber-hygiene and to protect against the proliferation of cyber-
threats across nations is increasing rapidly [5]–[7]. Addition-
ally, these efforts to protect investments in digitalising nations
[8] [9] aim towards their economic and social development
[10] [11]. Traditionally, CCB is also perceived as a pursuit of
foreign-policy objectives such as advocating speciﬁc models
of Internet governance, i.e., open and liberal vs closed and
restrictive [5]. Moreover, foreign governments’ involvements
can promote their local companies to gain the competitive
advantage of being inﬂuencers and decision-makers of these
projects, which create opportunities and innovation [5]. Finally,
donors are interested in capacity-building in order to promote
and advance adoption of speciﬁc technical standards by recip-
ient nations [5].
As such, there is a substantial investment being made
by the international community aimed at helping nations to
develop their capacity in cybersecurity [12]. However, vari-
ous challenges emerged as nations and institutions rushed to
implement instruments to combat cyber-risks. Key challenges
includes duplication of initiatives [13], lack of strategy [8], and
the widening of the ‘cyber-capacity gap’ between favored and
neglected countries [12].
Thus, the research question to be addressed is What are the
lessons learnt from the current cybersecurity capacity-building
activities and what aspects of these initiatives are crucial to
their success? This paper has a twofold objective: ﬁrstly, to
analyse trends in regional and international capacity-building
in cybersecurity, the nature of the work and the partnerships
that exist to support it. That analysis of the initiatives will
be guided by the University of Oxford Global Cyber Security
Capacity Centre (GCSCC) CMM [14]. There are no efforts so
far in linking initiatives with benchmarking models, and thus
this effort from the GCSCC is presented. There is also no clear
consensus on which capacity measures or initiatives work well
[8]. Thus, the second objective is to provide the principles for
successful cybersecurity initiatives based on a rigorous analysis
of a small number of them reﬂected on Brazil and Mexico
within the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region to
bring practical context. The LAC region was selected as it was
available in both the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) Global Cybersecurity Index (GCI) and the CMM review
by the Organization of American States (OAS). Within that
region, Brazil and Mexico have been selected explicitly as both
experienced signiﬁcant regression and progression changes in
cybersecurity maturity respectively, as identiﬁed by their GCI
scores between the GCI 2014 and 2017 reports.
We deﬁne the term initiative in a capacity-building context
to be any effort, activity, project, control, programme or in-
strument geared toward progressing capacity-building through
assessing, implementing, supporting or developing the aims
and objectives of that initiative. We adopt the deﬁnition of
Cybersecurity Capacity Building (CCB) as “A way to empower
individuals, communities and governments to achieve their
developmental goals by reducing digital security risks stem-
ming from access and use of Information and Communication
Technologies” [8]. This deﬁnition incorporates consideration
of the element of risk, which is an essential component of
CCB.
The paper adopts mixed qualitative and quantitative ap-
proaches. We identify successful and unsuccessful factors
of CCB initiatives, and we conduct a systematic review of
current CCB initiatives. We accumulate 165 CCB initiatives
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

and collect data related to critical success factors. We map
these initiatives to the dimensions of Oxford’s CMM and
perform descriptive statistical analysis aiming at understanding
trends in initiatives and areas which are neglected by the in-
ternational community. We then engage in qualitative research
to understand which factors are key in successful initiatives.
To this end, we conduct a comparative analysis of CMM
assessment and cybersecurity capacity-building initiatives to
bring context and the overall understanding of trends in Brazil
and Mexico. Our overall results present current trends among
CCB initiatives, their distribution across regions, and key
success factors to CCB.
In what follows, Section II provides a review of the
literature underpinning the critical ingredients of unsuccessful
and successful CCB. Section III investigates the assessments
and indices relevant to the study and selects CMM and GCI
as the guiding benchmarking instruments. It also provides
preliminary insights into global trends in the ﬁeld and analyses
trends in capacity-building initiatives. Section IV compares and
contrasts Brazil and Mexico cybersecurity capacity commit-
ments, CMM comparison, relevant initiatives and the effects
of externalities. Section V covers conclusion, limitations and
future work.
II.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
To frame the research question, data collection and analy-
sis, we conducted a literature survey answering the following
questions: what are the known challenges in delivering effec-
tive CCB? What are the key ingredients of a successful CCB
programme?
A. Overview of challenges identiﬁed with current CCB efforts
(factors of unsuccessful initiatives)
One prominent challenge is that there is a lack of ex-
plicit linkage between developmental work in Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) and cybersecurity. This
lack of linkage is due to the lack of convincing empirically
based evidence to demonstrate that improving cybersecurity
in ICT projects would directly beneﬁt development capacity
initiatives [15]. Additionally, the development community does
not perceive cybersecurity to be as mission-critical as terrorism
or the migration crisis are [12]. Conversely, many cyberse-
curity strategies lack development-linked goals and activities
[12]. Lack of such linkages discourages the community from
integrating cybersecurity as a core element of their ICT devel-
opment, and de-incentivises contributing efﬁciently to much-
needed initiatives. Despite these challenges, there are initial
steps in deﬁning a CCB model that can be linked to the devel-
opment agenda. This model is still struggling to operationalise
a development-speciﬁc capacity-building approach that is both
value-based [16], context-speciﬁc and brought in as a broader
governance issue rather than tied to the technical silo [12].
There are other efforts that aim to bridge the gap by linking
between ICT development and cybersecurity. Dutton et al. [17]
examined various datasets related to national cybersecurity
capacity for over 120 countries, and identiﬁed a strong positive
correlation between increased ICT development, more mature
cybersecurity posture and safer online environments for end-
users [17]. The analysis is an initial step in the right direction
regarding grounded evidence-based empirical proof, while
admittedly lacking strong statistical proofs of their results [17].
Finally, the GCI 2017 report correlates ICT development and
cybersecurity as it compares the GCI index with the ITU
ICT for Development Index (IDI), without however providing
strong statistical proofs of their results [18]. There is a gen-
eral sense that improving cybersecurity would contribute to
improving ICT yet there are a few outliers in which a country
invests heavily in cybersecurity but does not invest in ICT, as in
the case of Rwanda. Conversely, countries might invest heavily
in ICT while neglecting cybersecurity. In summary, meaningful
direct correlation between ICT development and cybersecurity
would be a challenge, since multiple factors impact countries’
cybersecurity readiness and commitment, such as geopolitical
and socio-economical issues, as we highlight in the comparison
of Mexico and Brazil below.
Another challenge is the double paradox of CCB maturity
in which the development community requires rich empirical
and conceptual foundations while also perceives CCB to have
a mismatch with the core mission of the development com-
munity. However, when the development community decides
to get involved with CCB, they often lack security expertise
[12]. In contrast, the security experts in law enforcement and
cybersecurity lack methodological toolkits and know-how to
engage appropriately with the development community [12].
There is also the ’dual-use challenge’ of cybersecurity,
as cybersecurity capabilities and technologies can potentially
be used adversely to increase surveillance and social control
and to empower repressive governments as well as cyber-
warfare, espionage and cybercrime [8]. Hence, CCB can also
be considered a double-edged sword. As such, it is paramount
to take a risk-aware approach when providing CCB capabilities
to nations and regions [8]. Reﬂection on authoritarian regimes
which have dubious human-rights records highlights the risk
of abuse of capacity-building for repressive purposes. For that
reason, some international partners such as the Global Forum
on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) require their members to adhere
to UN charters and laws which respect human rights such as
freedom of expression and right to privacy [12].
Another critical challenge is discrimination between coun-
tries, a concept coined as ’cyber security gap’. Certain coun-
tries, known as ’darling countries’, receive more attention in
developmental beneﬁts than marginalised or ’orphan’ coun-
tries. Such discrepancies are observed in CCB according
to the Ofﬁcial Development Assistance (ODA) distribution
[12]. Typically, countries which are ready to cooperate, which
explicitly express interest in joining efforts, which have an
established rule of law, and which possess like-minded policy
orientation are more likely to be considered for capacity-
building assistance [12].
A further challenge is the absence of any widely accepted
cybersecurity taxonomy, which results in a lack of mutual
understanding of cybersecurity terminology. This confusion
in the community is evident in the existence of more than
400 cyber and information-security related deﬁnitions within
the Global Cyber Deﬁnitions Database [19] [20]. There are
discrepancies in understanding the meaning of cybersecurity
and capacity-building from various policy communities which
result in fragmentation, leading to short-sighted and ad-hoc
initiatives which are unsustainable [12]. It is essential to have
a common level of understanding of the meaning of cyber-
security capacity-building, especially between crucial actors
supporting any initiative. Established and accepted deﬁnitions
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

serve to maintain a consistent approach to analysing and com-
paring initiatives, as well as to benchmarking these initiatives
with assessments and indices.
Pawlak et al. [13] highlight speciﬁc factors shaping the
politics of CCB due to the increased involvement of the
international and regional communities: siloed mentality, the
fragmentation of the CCB community and the duplication of
work motivated by either institutional interests or potential
business opportunities. Another factor shaping the politics of
CCB is the persistence of mission-speciﬁc perspectives on
capacity building within a policy area. These factors have
resulted in adverse effects on donors, such as duplication
of work, and inefﬁciencies amongst beneﬁciaries, confusion
on objectives and conditions and motivations [13]. Another
speciﬁc CCB challenge is the lack of policy coordination
arising from lack of formal intergovernmental negotiations in
their approval process. CCB initiatives that are not based on
methods of assessment may cause harm as decisions by donors
about engagement are not based strictly on the calculation
of where the recipient country’s most signiﬁcant needs are
or whether the intervention is appropriate to their level of
maturity. Placing CCB within developmental traditions of
increasing good governance, the rule of law and a human-
rights-based approach would be a way forward.
Incomparable or clashing ideologies is yet another speciﬁc
challenge that CCB encounters. This challenge is evident
from lack of involvement in cybersecurity capacity-building
from countries such as China and Russia due to their polit-
ical and policy approaches. The absence of these countries
demonstrates that it is not only the technical dimension that
raises challenges, but also the political and socio-economical
aspects of cybersecurity [12]. However, the formation of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) is an example of
how countries within that region are perceiving CCB and
conforming to the rapid advancements of technology, while
retaining their views and understanding of CCB within that
region and internationally [21].
Pawlak et al. [12] summarise signs of unsuccessful de-
velopmental initiatives as lack of coordination, budgetary
constraints, overly ambitious targets, unrealistic timescales,
and political self-interest [12]. Additionally, Hohmann et al.
[8] summarise traits of unsuccessful CCB initiatives as lack
of integration between key CCB players, few lessons-learned
and best-practices available, a piecemeal approach to CCB by
donor countries, competing agencies on the same initiatives,
unclear mandates from donors, and lack of experts; also, a lack
of clear consensus on which capacity measures work well and
of adequate metrics to monitor and evaluate CCB projects are
two further traits of unsuccessful CCB [8]. Finally, Muller
highlights that there is often a lack of valid information due to
the security context, as countries are unwilling to share valid
information or follow up assessments to demonstrate progress
[22].
B. Key ingredients of successful CCB programmes
A majority of the successful ingredients come as a negation
of the challenges given in Section II.A above. An initiative
is deemed successful if it achieves its aims and objectives
and displays the characteristics summarised in the follow-
ing: donors are major CCB inﬂuencers and thus what they
deem successful is considered crucial. The UK Foreign and
Commonwealth Ofﬁce (FCO) CCB Programme summarises its
requirements for supporting and funding any CCB program as
follows: “When projects are part of the country’s strategy; have
strong host-government support; take a holistic approach that
considers host government digital and cyber policies, national
strategies, regulation, private sector interests, civil society,
technical capability, development context and human rights;
take account of what other donors are doing or planning; have
co-funding from another country or organisation; and build on
previous capacity building projects or partnerships [23].”
A more generic viewpoint at the CCB ecosystem as ap-
posed to individual initiatives is proposed by Pawlak [12]:
•
Cyber knowledge brokers at all levels of cross ﬁl-
tration and breaking silos to increase education and
awareness.
•
Principles-based CCB models and principle-based ap-
proach solutions.
•
Closing the ’cyber capacity gap’ Darling vs orphaned
countries.
•
Continuous mapping of CCB activities to identify
substantial overlaps or gaps.
•
Regional champions who are mature and willing to
engage.
•
Imminent needs to security translated into Computer
Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs), forensics
capabilities and strategies.
•
Avoiding securitisation of development initiatives in
fears of adverse effects on civil liberties.
Although these proposed solutions are critical components of
successful CCB, they are intangible at an initiative level. It
is a challenge to quantify and analyse the initiatives gathered
against closing the ’cyber capacity gap’ or identifying cyber-
knowledge brokers at an individual initiative level, for exam-
ple.
As an alternative view to Pawlak, Hohmann et al. [8]
provides an initiative-speciﬁc viewpoint with ﬁve principles
for advancing CCB initiatives. These are:
•
National and international coordination (in activities)
and cooperation (in measurements.) At national level
coordination translates into an explicit national CCB
approach with set strategy prioritisation, streamline
institutional setup and stakeholders (academic, civil
society, government, public and private) coordination.
At an international level, cooperation would be in the
form of sharing and leveraging the results of maturity
models and indices to guide CCB efforts. Coordina-
tion can be enabled by strengthening multilateral and
international coordination such as the efforts of the
GFCE.
•
The second principle would be integration of cyber-
security and development expertise as they work to-
gether and out of silos. Establishing common language
and increased joint projects is also part of integration.
•
Recipient countries need to take ownership and leader-
ship from setting their own strategies to providing and
backing capable institutions. The CCB programmes
must be tailored to the country’s speciﬁc requirements.
•
Sustainability, in the sense of experts exchanging and
beneﬁting from traditional capacity-building activities
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

that support sustainable long-term success and contin-
uation of the projects with deﬁned vision, goals and
strategy-level components included.
•
Continued and mutual learning by evaluating and
learning how effective the initiatives are, and by de-
veloping clear capacity-measure frameworks for mea-
surements and assessments, with useful metrics; also
by encouraging openness over the results of assess-
ments and conducting regular (annual) re-assessments,
to follow up assessments in order to demonstrate
progress and determine best practices available.
Moving forward, the focus in our analysis will be on success
factors that are measurable at the initiative level. This will
help guide the descriptive statistical analysis of the initiatives
in Section IV to produce meaningful insights. As such, we are
adopting the Hohmann et al. [8] ﬁve principles for advancing
CCB, which incorporates the FCO mandates. We also adopt
adequate funding and sufﬁcient duration as the sixth and
seventh success factors. These were taken from the budgetary-
constraints and unrealistic-timescales points highlighted by
Pawlak et al. [12] in the summarised signs of unsuccessful de-
velopmental initiatives and the FCO requirements [23] above.
The following are therefore the selected key success factors of
CCB initiatives:
1)
Coordination & Cooperation.
2)
Integration.
3)
Ownership
4)
Sustainability
5)
Learning
6)
Funding
7)
Duration
III.
ANALYSING TRENDS IN CYBERSECURITY
CAPACITY-BUILDING INITIATIVES
A. Methodology
The paper adopts mixed qualitative and quantitative ap-
proaches. An initial literature review of existing research
has been performed to underpin the key successful and un-
successful factors of CCB initiatives and thus to identify
critical metrics on initiatives, as a basis for the comparative
analysis. To identify trends and gaps in CCB, we have collected
information related to publicly available CCB initiatives. We
have performed web searches to elicit current regional and
international initiatives. To conduct the systematic review, a
search for initiatives using phrases that focus on cyber-harm,
cybersecurity and cyber-risk was performed, as these are cru-
cial themes in combination with capacity-building initiatives,
instruments, activities and efforts. Initiatives that exclusively
focus on e-governance or privacy, as opposed to cybersecurity,
as their core objective were excluded. The scope was limited
to publicly available information in English. We accumulated
165 CCB initiatives in total and collected data related to the
key success factors. The results were published on the Global
Cybersecurity Capacity Portal [24]. Established in 2015, the
portal is an output of the GCSCC in cooperation with the
GFCE. The portal is a central point of reference of current
regional and international capacity-building efforts globally in
the critical areas of cybersecurity.
We then investigated various available regional and interna-
tional CCB benchmarks, assessments and indices. The process
was guided by the ITU 2017 Index of Cybersecurity Indices to
determine which assessment and index to use to judge progres-
sion in cybersecurity. As a result, we have selected the CMM
and GCI. A direct mapping between the initiatives and their
respective dimensions and factors was performed to determine
the linkage between the initiatives and their impacts on regions
and nations. After the mapping, we then performed descriptive
statistical analysis aimed at understanding trends in initiatives
and areas which are neglected by the international community.
We then engaged in qualitative research to understand which
factors are key in successful initiatives.
A comparative analysis of the selected indexes for all coun-
tries within the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region
between 2014 and 2017 was performed to select countries that
have progressed, remained static or regressed most regarding
their cybersecurity capacity commitment.
To this end, we conduct a comparative analysis of CMM
assessment and CCB initiatives to bring context and the overall
understanding of the trends in Brazil and Mexico.
B. Selection criteria for cybersecurity maturity models and
indexes
Various cybersecurity indices and maturity models have
sprung up within the international community, academia and
the private sector to capture the cyber-readiness and maturity
progression. The ITU has developed the Index of Cyberse-
curity Indices [25] to form a reference that evaluates and
presents various prominent organisational, regional and global
efforts at producing maturity models and Indices. The 2017
Index of Cybersecurity Indices was instrumental in guiding our
investigation of the effectiveness of CCB initiatives and the rel-
evance of various cybersecurity Indices and assessments. The
Index evaluates 14 prominent indices for assessing countries
and organisations, as well as other scopes of assessment. See
Figure 1. Our focus is on regions and nations, thus indices that
focus on organisations (e.g. IBM X-Force [3] were excluded.
As we are interested in answering the research question “What
are the lessons learnt from current cybercapacity-building
Figure 1. Overview of Cybersecurity Indices [25]
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

activities and what aspects of these initiatives are crucial to
their success?” it is essential for our comparison to identify
the countries or regions with the highest levels of progression
(or regression) in their cybersecurity maturity and readiness
journey. This assumes that initiatives would be most visible
in terms of lessons learnt and key success factors when the
progress of the country is demonstrable by the indices within
the period. As such, we would be looking only at indices
that provide metrics, whether scores or ranking, and also
indices used for multiple iterations of evaluating countries.
This further focuses the scope down to six indices and maturity
models. Our preliminary research at this stage was across all
nations and states before zooming in on a particular region.
That eliminates sub-regional indices such as the Asia-Paciﬁc
Cybersecurity Dashboard [26] and the Cyber Maturity in the
Asia Paciﬁc Region model [27]. Since we are evaluating
initiatives from various viewoints, our criteria include indices
and models that incorporate at least four aspects of the ﬁve ar-
eas: Technical, Economical, Legal, Cooperation, and Capacity-
Building. Based on the given criteria, the remaining applicable
instruments for measurements were the GCI index [18] and the
CMM assessment model [14].
The LAC region was selected as it was represented in
both the GCI and the CMM review and it had a reasonably
signiﬁcant number of initiatives as well. Within that region,
Brazil and Mexico have been selected, since both experienced
signiﬁcant changes (progression or regression) in their GCI
scores between the GCI 2014 and 2017 reports. The Cyber
Readiness Index 2.0 [28] would not be used in our analysis as
it did not produce a report covering LAC region at the time
of this research.
C. The Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for Nations
(CMM)
The GCSCC Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for
Nations supports comprehensive analysis of detailed appraisal
of a country or region [14]. The analysis is based on self-
assessments through partners or interviews and workshops with
key stakeholders and representatives from donors, recipient
countries and relevant organisations [14]. The CMM bench-
marks a country’s cybersecurity capacity across ﬁve distinct
dimensions of cybersecurity capacity. The CMM has been
developed and used to benchmark countries since 2015, with
over 60 nations reviewed so far. The resulting CMM review
report is in the form of an overview of the maturity level for
the country in each dimension as well comprehensive detailed
assessments with speciﬁc recommendations advising the state
on ways to elevate its capacity to a higher maturity stage [14].
There are ﬁve dimensions of cybersecurity identiﬁed in the
model:
1)
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy.
2)
Cyber Culture and Society.
3)
Cybersecurity Education, Training and Skills.
4)
Legal and Regulatory Frameworks.
5)
Standards, Organisations, and Technologies.
Each dimension is divided further into factors. Maturity levels
are divided into ﬁve stages: start-up, formative, established,
strategic, and dynamic.
D. The ITU Global Cybersecurity Index (GCI)
The index spans different mechanisms for evaluating cyber-
maturity to derive rankings and scores that enable comparisons
between nations and regions. It is being led by the ITU as
part of its Global Cybersecurity Agenda (GCA) [29]. The GCI
examines levels of commitment on ﬁve distinct pillars [18]: 1.
Legal. 2. Technical. 3. Organizational. 4. Capacity building,
and 5. Cooperation.
In addition to the overall ranking, the index includes
regional rankings and an individual score for each country.
This focus enables us to compare the country or region in
question. The index is primarily based on surveying ITU’s
members and publicly available information. The identiﬁed
weakness, however, is that the index is more policy and organ-
isationally oriented more technical, and that distilling a single
number to capture maturity necessarily equates incomparable
considerations. The index assesses countries’ commitments
with regards to cybersecurity as opposed to actual readiness.
While there are in some cases a direct one-to-one mapping
between the CMM Dimensions and the GCI Pillars, such as in
the areas of strategy, legal and technical, there are GCI pillars
such as Capacity Building and Cooperation that cut across all
CMM Dimensions. See Table I.
TABLE I. MAPPING CMM DIMENSIONS WITH GCI PILLARS
GCSCC CMM Dimensions
ITU GCI Pillars
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy
Organizational
Cyber Culture and Society
–
Cybersecurity Education, Training and Skills
Capacity building
Cooperation
Legal and Regulatory Frameworks
Legal
Standards, Organizations, and Technologies
Technical
E. An overview of the Global Cybersecurity Capacity Portal.
Initiatives were collected and hosted on the Portal which
contains a dedicated informational web-page per initiative. To
bring more understanding and context to the initiatives, as well
as to form the basis of the comparative analysis, an off-line
dataset (spreadsheet) of the initiatives was created manually
to help gain insights from these efforts, such as an analysis of
stakeholders and linkage between the initiatives and the CMM
model. The dataset includes the Title of the initiative; the name
of the sponsoring or initiating Organisation; the Target Region;
Target Country; the GFCE Theme; Key Topic; Dimension and
Factors; and Others Topics; vital Partners; affected or Target
Groups, planned Budget, main Aims and objectives, Outputs,
underlying Activities, Period or duration of the effort, and
ﬁnally Contact details. Mapping initiatives to dimensions and
factors of the CMM can be demonstrated by the Dimension
and Factors columns identiﬁed in the following colour scheme.
See Figure 2:
•
Red: Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy
•
Blue: Cyber-Culture and Society
•
Green: Cybersecurity Education, Training and Skills
•
Yellow: Legal and Regulatory Frameworks
•
Purple: Standards, Organisations, and Technologies
The purple is not illustrated in the following example as this
particular initiative did not have mapping with the Standards,
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Organisations, and Technologies CMM dimension. The unique
numbers within the Dimensions and Factors columns are
mapped directly to the CMM (e.g., 4.3 refers to Dimension 4
Factor number 3). A complete mapping between the initiatives
in scope and the CMM has been performed.
Figure 2. Initiatives example
IV.
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE
INITIATIVES
A. Regional analysis
As of July 2018, we had gathered 165 distinguished ini-
tiatives. Initiatives are either global in nature or within one of
seven geographical regions. We are adopting the World Bank
geographical regions [30]. Figure 3 displays the target regions,
respective counts, and percentages of initiatives per region. An
initiative that spans countries in multiple regions is counted in
all those regions.
Global (49)
19%
NA (19)
7%
LAC (37)
14%
MENA (27)
10%
SSA (45)
17%
ECA (38)
15%
EAP (28)
11%
SA (18)
7%
Figure 3. Global initiatives, and those for North America (NA), Latin
America and the Caribbean (LAC), The Middle East and North Africa
(MENA), Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), Europe and Central Asia (ECA), East
Asia and Paciﬁc (EAP) and South Asia (SA)
B. Organisational analysis
105 organisations, countries or entities are initiating or
leading initiatives across all regions and globally. Table II
represents the Top 10 most active Organisations that are either
initiating or leading initiatives. It is important to highlight that
the top 10 active organisations account for 75% of initiatives.
This is followed by a demonstration of the top Partners in
supporting CCB across all initiatives within the portal. See
Table III.
TABLE II. ORGANISATIONAL ANALYSIS
Organisation
# of initiatives
UK Foreign & Commonwealth Ofﬁce
27
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
15
e-Governance Academy (eGA)
12
Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE)
9
United Nations Development Programme
6
Council of Europe (CoE)
5
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
5
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
4
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
3
DiploFoundation (Diplo)
3
TABLE III. PARTNER ANALYSIS
Partners
# of initiatives
ITU Oman Regional Cybersecurity Centre
8
European Union (EU)
6
Organization of American States (OAS)
5
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
4
European Cybercrime Centre – EC3 (Europol)
4
FIRST
4
Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre (GCSCC) – University of Oxford
4
INTERPOL (INT)
4
National Crime Agency
4
Netherlands
4
Norway
4
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Ofﬁce
4
United States of America
4
C. Initiatives mapped to the CMM and GCI
When surveying the current trends over the gathered CCB
initiatives, it visibly demonstrates that about half of the ini-
tiatives 47% are geared towards the ﬁrst dimension of the
CMM model, Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy; followed by
the fourth dimension: Legal and Regulatory Frameworks 33%.
The third dimension: Cybersecurity Education, Training and
Skills concerns 14% of the initiatives, followed by the ﬁfth
dimension: Standards, Organisations, and Technologies with
7%, and ﬁnally the lowest number of initiatives are focused
on the second dimension Cyber Culture and Society 7%. See
Figure 4 which summarises the analysis.
Our results are in close alignment with the observations
in ITU GCI 2017 report. The mapping between the initiatives
and the CMM indicates that the current trends are focusing on
building the foundational aspects of CCB, such as devising
or enhancing national Cybersecurity strategies, establishing
effective CSIRT programmes, or creating robust regulatory
frameworks. Since only 38% of the surveyed countries have a
published cybersecurity strategy, in which only 11% of it has
a dedicated standalone tailored strategy [18], implementing or
enhancing cybersecurity strategy is of paramount importance
at this stage of global CCB. Similarly, efforts focusing on
the development of legal and regulatory frameworks (33% of
initiatives) endeavour to bridge the gap identiﬁed in ITU GCI
report, where it was identiﬁed that 57% of legal actors lack
specialist cybersecurity training [18].
Furthermore, there is also a close alignment between the
initiatives that relate to incident management and gaps in
CSIRTs that the 2017 GCI report has acknowledged. CSIRT
enhancement is part of the Cybersecurity Policy, and Strategy
CMM dimension with one third of the initiatives of that
dimension focused on Incident Response, and 16 initiatives
focused on Crisis Management. This is in line with the
GCI ﬁnding that 79% of existing CSIRTs require metrics or
measurements criteria to be used for effective management of
incidents. There are, however, apparent gaps and imbalances
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

since initiatives are oblivious to other dimensions such as
Standards, Organisations, and Technologies and Cyber Culture
and Society, which are vital in ensuring a balanced, capable,
resilient, and dynamic cyberspace.
D1 (98)
47
D2 (5)
3
D3 (30)
14
D4 (69)
33
D5 (7)
3
Figure 4. Percentage of initiatives per CMM Dimension: D1 Cybersecurity
Policy and Strategy, D2 Cyber Culture and Society, D3 Cybersecurity
Education, Training and Skills, D4 Legal and Regulatory Frameworks, D5
Standards, Organisations, and Technologies
D. Analysing initiatives based on key success factors
A direct mapping between key success factors identiﬁed
in Section II.B and the initiatives gathered is a challenge,
as such a mapping is subject to interpretation and subjective
judgments. However, the following is an effort at translating
what it is observed in the CCB initiatives against key success
factors.
The ﬁrst success factor is national and international co-
ordination (in activities) and cooperation (in measurements).
When applied properly, this factor should tackle challenges
such as duplication of effort, lack of policy coordination,
cyber-capacity gap and lack of strategy, as well as agencies
competing on the same initiatives.
Coordination can be perceived by determining whether the
initiating or sponsoring actor of an initiative is engaged with
a partner or a set of partners. An actor could in itself be a
consortium of multilateral entities, such as the ITU or the OAS.
Thus, it has been observed that 84% of the initiatives have one
or more partners supporting the effort. Although the remaining
16% do not have an explicit partnership, they are based on
bilateral or multilateral entities, such as the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). These observations imply
that the overwhelming majority of initiatives conform with the
coordination factor of successful initiatives.
Cooperation is achieved when nations collaborate in cy-
bersecurity assessments. It has been determined that there are
twelve initiatives in which the aims and objectives contain
some form of assessment. There are a further twenty-two initia-
tives where assessment or self-assessment is part of either their
essential or other topics covered. All these are indications of
high-level activity in cooperation between entities concerning
measurement. This remains a challenge to quantify, however,
as there are potential overlaps between the objectives of the
initiatives.
The second identiﬁed factor is intended Integration of
cybersecurity and development expertise. This is interpreted
by the involvement and engagement of key stakeholders from
across various levels of the targeted society. There were 10% of
initiatives that included members of academic institutions, civil
society, defence, non-proﬁts, the private sector and governmen-
tal institutions. Further detailed analysis of each initiative is
required to gain a deeper level of understanding of the true
state of integration (or lack thereof) between the development
sector and cybersecurity efforts.
Ownership by the recipient country or entity is the third
success factor. Leveraging assessments, whether against the
CMM or other models, represents an initial step in reﬁning
capacity-building to eliminate existing discrepancies between
donors’ objectives and beneﬁciaries’ priorities. From the per-
spective of the initiatives gathered, investigating whether the
target country or region is also part of the organisation leading
the initiative or the partners supporting it was determines
effective ownership. Many initiatives are global, however, and
involve many countries and regions. Unfortunately, it was not
possible to extract sufﬁcient information to determine whether
this factor is appropriately incorporated into the design of a
given initiative.
The fourth factor of a successful initiative is sustainability
of efforts, as evidenced by experts exchanging and beneﬁting
from traditional capacity-building activities that support sus-
tainable long-term success and continuation of the projects,
as opposed to short-term one-off training activities. Successful
initiatives tend to be based on an increase in the pool of experts
in the recipient countries and in building on proven successful
methodologies. Also, utilising cross-sectoral approaches to en-
gage and involve the public and private sectors and academia,
and getting them to work together, is another key ingredient.
There were 10% of cross-sectoral initiatives identiﬁed based
on this analysis.
The ﬁfth factor is continued and mutual learning by
developing clear capacity measurements while encouraging
openness. This factor addresses the lessons learnt from de-
signing and implementing CCB initiatives. Continued and
mutual learning should also address the cybersecurity-context
challenge, in which resistance by countries to information-
sharing exists. There are only four initiatives which contain
educational aspects, but there are a further twelve initiatives
where education or learning elements are part of the aims
and objectives. Finally, only two partners in all initiatives
were associated with education. However, analysing continued
learning within initiatives requires more in-depth data from
each initiative, which is lacking.
Adequate funding is the sixth factor. It is challenging to
obtain data on the funding aspects of initiatives. Currently,
there are only three initiatives that indicate the initial budget
of that initiative. As such, currently, the funding element is not
being evaluated.
The seventh and ﬁnal factor of successful initiatives is their
duration. As capacity-building initiatives take time to develop
and produce real impact, it can possibly be assumed that the
longer the initiative remains, the more precise its measurement
can be. Hence this factor is not necessarily a direct factor of
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

a successful initiative. Caveatting that there are initiatives that
are naturally limited in time, such as targeted workshops. 70%
of the initiatives have their project duration identiﬁed among
which 14% have a very short term.
V.
REFLECTIONS ON THE LATIN AMERICA AND THE
CARIBBEAN (LAC) REGION
To provide further insights on the key factors that render
an initiative successful, we engage in qualitative research and
analyse reports detailing the cybersecurity capacity maturity
of countries in the LAC region. The LAC region was selected
as it was represented in both the GCI and the OAS reviews.
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the OAS
have partnered together and carried out a CMM review of
the thirty-two countries in LAC, based on the GCSCC CMM
[24], [31]. The report reﬂects a dim view on the security
posture and readiness of the region as only ﬁve countries
have strategies, eight are planning or developing capabilities
for Critical Infrastructure Protection, and 30% of citizens are
not aware of cybersecurity risk [31]. Within that region, Brazil
and Mexico have been speciﬁcally selected as they experienced
signiﬁcant regression and progression respectively in their GCI
scores between 2014 and 2017.
The LAC region is a heterogeneous pool of countries
with different economic developments, historical backgrounds,
languages and different challenges. According to the World
Bank 2017 annual report and regional perspective, the LAC
region experienced an economic slowdown during the last
six years including two recessions [30]. This slowdown has
adversely reversed the gains realised due to hard earned social
reforms at the beginning of the 21st century. As a result, GDP
growth for LAC was 2.3% in 2000, 4.7% in 2010 and currently
down -1.8%. However, the region is slowly gaining growth and
recovering economically [30].
Cybercrime is proliferating within the Latin America and
the Caribbean region due to multiple factors including the rapid
digitisation of economies without considerations of appropri-
ate cybersecurity controls; the foundational establishment of
criminal networks; and the socio-economic and geopolitical
situations affecting the region [32]. The cost of Cybercrime in
Mexico was estimated to be $3 billion, while Brazil $8 billion
in 2013 [33].
A. Descriptive statistical analysis of the initiatives in LAC
The distribution of the CCB initiatives within the LAC
region reﬂects similar distributions among the global regions.
See Table IV.
TABLE IV. CMM DIMENSIONS AND THE CORRESPONDING NUMBER OF
INITIATIVES FOR LAC.
D#
GCSCC Dimensions
# of initiatives
D1
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy
31
D2
Cyber Culture and Society
1
D3
Cybersecurity Education, Training and Skills
3
D4
Legal and Regulatory Frameworks
11
D5
Standards, Organisations, and Technologies
1
Each country was measured and assessed by the GCI
between 2014 and 2017 on various GCI pillars with a sub-
sequent total score presented. Tables V and VI display the top
3 countries of the LAC region based on the GCI scores in
2014 and 2017, respectively. Mexico’s 2014 results are also
presented to highlight the progress achieved. According to the
results, Brazil has descended from the highest rank of the
LAC region regarding cybersecurity commitment in the year
2014 down to the third rank in 2017. Conversely, Mexico has
ascended from the 7th rank to the ﬁrst rank.
TABLE V. TOP 3 LAC AND MEXICO GCI INDEX 2014 RESULTS.
Regional Rank
Country
GCI Score
Global Rank
1
Brazil
0.7059
5
2
Uruguay
0.6176
8
3
Colombia
0.5882
9
7
Mexico
0.3235
18
TABLE VI. TOP 3 LAC GCI INDEX 2017 RESULTS
Regional Rank
Country
GCI Score
Global Rank
1
Mexico
0.6600
28
2
Uruguay
0.6470
29
3
Brazil
0.5930
38
The differences between countries’ scores from 2014 and
2017 were computed to demonstrate progression, staticness or
apparent regression concerning their commitments to cyber-
security. The differences demonstrate dramatic changes in the
GCI scores, with Mexico being the highest positive change
of 0.337, in stark contrast to Brazil (-0.113) as illustrated in
Figure 5.
Figure 5. LAC Delta results between 2014 and 2017 GCI reports
According to the GCI 2017 report “The GCI 2014 and
GCI 2017 are not directly comparable due to a change in
methodology. While the 2014 index used a simple average
methodology, the 2017 index employed a weighting factor for
each pillar.” [18]. However, both reports are based on the 5
pillars mentioned in Section III.D. The difference is that the
2017 index is ﬁner grained with 157 scale points while the
2014 one has 34. The pillars are further broken down into 17
indicators in the 2014 GCI report. Each indicator is weighted
against three levels of none (0), partial (1) and full compliance
(2) with a full mark of 17 x 2 = 34. The ranking is calculated
based on the following notations [34]:
χqc Value of the individual indicator q for country c, with
q=1,..., Q and c=1,..., M.
Iqc Normalized value of individual indicator q for country c.
CIc Value of the composite indicator for country c.
GCI2014 : CIc = Iqc
34
Iqc = Rank(χqc)
The 2017 GCI is ﬁner grained having 25 indicators with
157 binary none (0) or full compliance (1) questions distributed
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

among the indicators and therefore the pillars based on weight-
ing factor from experts [18].
GCI2017 : CIc = Iqc
157
Brazil, for example, scored CIc: 24 out of 34 in 2014 with
GCI2014 score of 0.7059 out of 1 as in Table V. In contrast,
Brazil in GCI 2017 scored CIc: 93 out of 157 which is 0.5930
GCI out of 1 as shown in Table VI. Although GCI 2017 is
ﬁner grained as each mark is weighted (0.6%) in contrast to
the (2.9%) of 2014, both GCIs benchmark countries between 0
and 1 or at a percentage scale. This deviation in granularity has
been considered when performing the analysis and the averages
of the GCI 2014 and 2017 scores between the two indices as
we compute each country’s delta with itself before comparing
with others. As we use the delta as indicators that guides us
in selecting Mexico and Brazil as countries of interest. The
country’s rank would be another indicator that we consider
which is aligned with the delta comparison as well.
B. Comparative analysis between Mexico and Brazil
Figure 6 depicts security risks on (human, physical, and
ﬁnancial) areas including crime, riots, terrorism, military con-
ﬂicts, and other threats. It also shows political risks which
indicate the probability of political instability in a given
country. In 2018, Mexico is Low in political risk and mixed
between High, Medium and Low in security risks depending
on the area of the country, whereas Brazil is Medium in both
security and political risk according to the company Control
Risks [35].
Figure 6. Americas Geopolitical socio-economical Risk Map 2018. [35].
According to the OAS reviews, both Brazil and Mexico
have similar maturity levels across many dimensions; Brazil
is further advanced in cyberdefence consideration, cybersecu-
rity mindset, cybersecurity training, procedural laws, incident
response and cybersecurity marketplace. In contrast, Mexico
is more advanced in on-line privacy, responsible reporting and
disclosure, identiﬁcation of incidents, and critical infrastructure
response planning. Both countries are rated in the OAS report
between Formative (2) and Established (3) levels of maturity,
with Brazil averaging at 2.55 and Mexico at 2.40.
Mexico has been demonstrating strength in the legal pillar
of the GCI index as it invests substantial efforts in cyber
legislation covering criminality, data protection, data privacy
and electronic transactions [18]. As it aims to join the Budapest
treaty on Cybercrime [36], Mexico has undergone tremendous
amendments to substantive and procedural laws [31]. It also
has hosted the 2016 Meridian Process [37] which produced
The GFCE-MERIDIAN Good Practice Guide on Critical In-
formation Infrastructure Protection for Governmental Policy
Makers [38].
We have analysed the eight distinctive initiatives targeting
Mexico and mapped the initiatives with the applicable key
success factors. Table VII demonstrates that most of the
initiatives have multiple success factors.
TABLE VII. INITIATIVES IN MEXICO WITH KEY SUCCESS FACTORS
Initiatives in Mexico
Success factors
Cybersecurity
in
the
OAS
Member
States.
Coordination & Cooperation, Integra-
tion, Ownership, Sustainability, Learn-
ing, Funding, Duration
Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA). Countermeasures Against Cy-
berCrime.
Coordination & Cooperation, Integra-
tion, Funding
Mexican Financial Sector, FCO, Control
Risks: Cybersecurity Health check.
Coordination & Cooperation, Owner-
ship, Learning
Cybercrime Workshops, OAS, Federal
Police: Mexican National Cybersecurity
Week.
Coordination & Cooperation, Integra-
tion, Ownership
Cybercrime@Octopus, Council of Eu-
rope (CoE).
Coordination & Cooperation, Learning,
Funding, Duration
Data Privacy Pathﬁnder APEC
Coordination & Cooperation, Integra-
tion
Latin American e-Commerce Legisla-
tion Harmonisation
UN, Finland, ACS
Coordination & Cooperation, Owner-
ship
Strengthening Cyber Skills in the Fed-
eral Police, FCO, BSI
Coordination & Cooperation, Integra-
tion, Ownership
In addition to these eight initiatives, Mexico is also part of
the regional LAC initiatives, of which 24% cover Legal and
Regulatory Frameworks.
In stark contrast to Mexico, Brazil had only ﬁve initiatives
tailored to the needs of the country. These initiatives have
commenced across a number of dimensions, focusing on the
leadership role of the armed forces, or the establishment of
the Cybersecurity strategy of the Federal Public Adminis-
tration, or the coordination between the various CSIRTs, or
the investments in education and awareness programs as well
as establishing higher education centres of excellence [31].
However, Brazil was ranked the most dangerous country for
Financial attacks in 2014 and has been the source and victim
of cybercrime [39].
We have analysed the ﬁve distinctive initiatives targeting
Brazil and mapped the initiatives with the applicable key
success factors. Table VIII demonstrates fewer success factors
linked to the initiatives at hand.
Brazil is one of the leading economies in LAC and has
been investing heavily in ICT development. According to the
World Bank national accounts data and the OECD national
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE VIII. INITIATIVES IN BRAZIL WITH KEY SUCCESS FACTORS
Initiatives in Brazil
Success factors
Fostering Cybersecurity Through Train-
ing the Judiciary on Digital and Cyber
Issues. CFO, ITS
Coordination & Cooperation, Owner-
ship
Introducing Estonian ICT Solutions for
Delegations from Developing Countries.
eGA
Coordination & Cooperation, Owner-
ship, Learning, Funding, Duration
Tackling Cyber-Enabled Crime: Brazil-
ian National Counter-Corruption and
Anti-Money Laundering. FCO, NCA
Coordination & Cooperation, Learning
Cybersecurity and Cybercrime Work-
shop.
Learning
RNP-NSF for Research and Develop-
ment Projects in Cybersecurity
Coordination & Cooperation, Owner-
ship, Funding, Duration
Figure 7. Economic (GDP) progress of Brazil and Mexico (1990-2016) ) [40]
accounts data ﬁles, Brazil GDP in the year 2011 was 2.616
Trillion (USD) this has signiﬁcantly fallen to a low 1.796
Trillion (USD) in the year 2016 losing 31% of GDP in this
ﬁve-year period. See Figure 7. This slow economic progress
might have contributed to the lack of progress in Brazil’s
cybersecurity maturity. Likewise, Mexico has also experienced
economic slowdown but not as drastic as Brazil, and the
number of targeted initiatives has facilitated the country’s
maturity growth.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The global community has been engaged extensively in as-
sessing and addressing gaps in the cybersecurity commitments
and capabilities of nations and regions. As a result, a signiﬁcant
number of Cybersecurity Capacity-Building (CCB) initiatives
have been launched to overcome cyber-risks. These efforts
face various challenges, however, such as lack of strategy
and duplication of initiatives. To our knowledge, no study has
explored the areas where cybersecurity initiatives focus and the
possible gaps. In this paper, we have tried to close this gap
by collecting and analysing all publicly available initiatives.
We have further reﬂected on these initiatives with respect to
well-established success factors in the literature on capacity-
building. Towards this end, we have also engaged in qualitative
research and analysed reports for two countries, Mexico and
Brazil, trying to understand which of these factors may have
been inﬂuential in designing and implementing successful
cybersecurity initiatives.
Our results suggest that the distribution of CCB initiatives
across the regions has been divided evenly, except that North
America has received the least, only 7% of initiatives. This
is because the gathered initiatives are focused on developing
countries. The current focus, as observed from analysing the
trends, is on building the foundational aspects of capacity
such as devising or enhancing national Cybersecurity strate-
gies, establishing effective CSIRT programmes, or creating
reliable regulatory frameworks. These ﬁndings are in line
with the observations of the ITU 2017 Global Cybersecurity
Index. There are, however, evident gaps and imbalances with
other CMM dimensions such as Standards, Organisations, and
Technologies and Cyber Culture and Society which are vital
in ensuring a balanced, capable, resilient, and dynamic cy-
berspace. As the top 10 active organisations account for (75%)
of initiatives it demonstrates that few critical organisations are
leading initiatives.
The comparison of Brazil and Mexico using the GCI scores
demonstrates that Mexico was more committed to cybersecu-
rity than Brazil during the 2014 and 2017 period, while it
received a bigger number of initiatives. Our analysis suggests
that the socio-economic and geopolitical challenges Brazil
experienced over the recent years could be a key factor in
why Brazil has apparently regressed or at least not progressed
enough concerning cybersecurity maturity in contrast to the
key success factors associated with the initiatives conducted
by Mexico as highlighted in Section V.B.
The scope of this paper was limited to publicly available
information in English. Moreover initiatives are primarily
focused on developing and middle-income countries, since
data was gathered mainly from sponsors and publicly available
initiatives. Additionally, due to the security context dilemma,
understandably various nations and entities would be hesitant
to provide insights on their current and effective initiatives.
As such the information is limited in scope and does not
cover the majority of initiatives available. We may conclude
that transparency in providing CCB information is essential
in demonstrating effectiveness. Finally, lack of key attribute
data such as the amount and commitment of funding for
most initiatives adversely affected the analysis. Our scope
was focused on the gathered initiatives, which limited our
analysis to success factors at the initiative level as opposed
the general CCB programmes and ecosystems. Generic success
factors such as closing the ’cyber capacity gap’ or identifying
cyber-knowledge brokers requires alternative methodologies
which would include interviews and focus groups of relevant
stakeholders to gain deep insights.
In the future, we intend to perform a comparison of the
existing efforts in capacity-building with the economic and
technology metrics that exist for a set of countries or a speciﬁc
region. There is a niche space in exploring what data should be
collected from governments and organisation to better reﬂect
capacity-maturity development. We aim to identify gaps in
the funding of capacity-building and misallocation of these
funds to less critical factors. Once the appropriate datasets are
identiﬁed, relationships that exist between capacity-building
activities may be revealed, hopefully leading to optimisation of
the development of countries towards a more secure cybersecu-
rity posture. A deeper analysis over the generic success factors,
based on interviews and focus groups of relevant stakeholders,
will provide us with more thorough and encompassing insights.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Special words of appreciations to Dr. Maria Bada for her
valuable feedback and insights during the review phase of
the project. Numerous words of appreciations to the Global
Cyber Security Capacity Centre (GCSCC) for their invaluable
guidance and feedback as well as providing materials from the
GFCE portal. This work is supported by the UK Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and the
Saudi Ministry of Education.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Lewis, “Economic Impact of Cybercrime. No Slowing Down
Report,” McAfee, Center for Strategic and International Studies
(CSIS), Tech. Rep., 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mcafee.
com/us/resources/reports/restricted/economic-impact-cybercrime.pdf
[2]
I.
Agraﬁotis
et
al.,
“Cyber
Harm:
Concepts,
Taxonomy
and
Measurement,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 8 2016, p. 23. [Online].
Available: http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2828646
[3]
M.
Alvarez
et
al.,
“IBM
X-Force
Threat
Intelligence
Index
2017,”
IBM
X-Forcec
Threat
Research,
NY,
Tech.
Rep.,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/
3527813/IBM-XForce-Index-2017-FINAL.pdf
[4]
ISACA
Information
Systems
Audit
and
Control
As-
sociation,
“State
of
Cyber
Security
2017
Resources
and
Threats,”
ISACA,
Tech.
Rep.,
2017.
[On-
line]. Available: https://cybersecurity.isaca.org/static-assets/documents/
State-of-Cybersecurity-part-2-infographic res eng 0517.pdf
[5]
P. Pawlak, “Capacity Building in Cyberspace as an Instrument of
Foreign Policy,” Global Policy, vol. 7, no. 1, 2 2016, pp. 83–92.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/1758-5899.12298
[6]
World Economic Forum, “Risk and Responsibility in a Hyperconnected
World:
Pathways
to
Global
Cyber
Resilience,”
2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.weforum.org/reports/risk-and-responsibility-/
hyperconnected-world-/pathways-global-cyber-resilience
[7]
H. Tiirmaa-Klaar, “Building national cyber resilience and protecting
critical information infrastructure,” Journal of Cyber Policy, vol. 1,
no. 1, 1 2016, pp. 94–106. [Online]. Available: http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/23738871.2016.1165716
[8]
M. Hohmann, A. Pirang, and T. Benner, “Advancing Cybersecurity
Capacity Building,” Global Public Policy Institute (GPPI), 2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.gppi.net/ﬁleadmin/user upload/
media/pub/2017/Hohmann
Pirang
Benner
2017
Advancing
Cybersecurity Capacity Building.pdf
[9]
The World Bank Group, “World Development Report 2016: Digital
Dividends.” The World Bank Group, Washington DC, Tech. Rep.,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
896971468194972881/pdf/102725-PUB-Replacement-PUBLIC.pdf
[10]
R. Heeks, “New Priorities for ICT4D Policy, Practice and WSIS in
a Post-2015 World,” Centre for Development Informatics, 2014, pp.
1–59. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk
[11]
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
Digital
Security
Risk
Management
for
Economic
and
Social
Prosperity, 1st ed., Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), Ed.
OECD Publishing, 10 2015. [Online].
Available:
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/
digital-security-risk-management-for-economic-and-social-prosperity
9789264245471-en
[12]
P. Pawlak and P.-N. Barmpaliou, “Politics of cybersecurity capacity
building: conundrum and opportunity,” Journal of Cyber Policy,
vol.
2,
no.
1,
2017,
pp.
123–144.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23738871.2017.1294610
[13]
P.
Pawlak,
N.
Robinson,
M.
G.
Porcedda,
E.
Kvochko,
and
E.
Calandro,
“Riding
the
digital
wave
The
impact
of
cyber
capacity
building
on
human
development,”
EU
Institute
for
Security
Studies,
Paris,
Tech.
Rep.
December,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.iss.europa.eu/publications/detail/
article/riding-the-digital-wave-the-impact-of-cyber-capacity-building/
-on-human-development/
[14]
Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre, “Cybersecurity Capacity
Maturity Model for Nations (CMM). Revised Edition,” University
of
Oxford,
Oxford,
Tech.
Rep.
CMM,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/cybersecurity-capacity/content/
cybersecurity-capacity-maturity-model-nations-cmm-revised-edition
[15]
P.
Pawlak,
“Cyber
Capacity
Building
in
Ten
Points
Ten
major take-away points,” European Union Institute for Security
Studies,
vol.
7,
no.
1,
2014,
p.
8392.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.iss.europa.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/EUISSFiles/EUISS
Conference-Capacity building in ten points-0414.pdf
[16]
M. Schaake and M. Vermeulen, “Towards a values-based European
foreign policy to cybersecurity,” Journal of Cyber Policy, vol. 1, no. 1,
1 2016, pp. 75–84. [Online]. Available: http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/full/10.1080/23738871.2016.1157617
[17]
W. H. Dutton, S. Creese, R. Shillair, M. Bada, and T. Roberts,
“Cyber
Security
Capacity:
Does
it
Matter?”
in
Annual
Meeting
of
the
Telecommunication
Policy
Research
Conference
(TPRC),
2017,
pp.
1–26.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.
researchgate.net/proﬁle/Ruth Shillair/publication/319645577 Cyber
Security Capacity Does it Matter/links/59b7cdf4458515c212b505a3/
Cyber-Security-Capacity-Does-it-Matter.pdf
[18]
International Telecommunication Union, “Global Cybersecurity Index,”
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Geneva, Switzerland,
Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/
Cybersecurity/Pages/GCI.aspx
[19]
T. Maurer and R. Morgus, “Compilation of Existing Cybersecurity
and
Information
Security
Related
Deﬁnitions,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
policy-papers/compilation-of-existing-cybersecurity-and/
-information-security-related-deﬁnitions/
[20]
V.
Radunovic,
“Towards
A
Secure
Cyberspace
Via
Regional
Co-operation,” Geneva, Switzerland, Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://www.diplomacy.edu/sites/default/ﬁles/Diplo-Towards a
secure cyberspace-GGE.pdf
[21]
The
Shanghai
Cooperation
Organisation,
“About
The
Shanghai
Cooperation
Organisation
SCO.”
[Online].
Available:
http://eng.
sectsco.org/about sco/
[22]
L. P. Muller, “Cyber Security Capacity Building in Developing
Countries:
Challenges
and
Opportunities,”
Norwegian
Institute
of
International
Affairs,
Oslo,
Norway,
Tech.
Rep.,
2015.
[Online]. Available: https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/bitstream/id/331398/
NUPI+Report+03-15-Muller.pdf
[23]
UK
Foreign
&
Commonwealth
Ofﬁce
(FCO),
“Cyber
Security
Capacity
Building
Programme
2018
to
2021,”
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
fco-cyber-security-capacity-building-programme-2018-to-2021
[24]
The Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre (GCSCC), “Cybersecurity
Capacity Portal,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/
cybersecurity-capacity/explore/gfce
[25]
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), “Index Of Cybersecurity
Indices.”
International
Telecommunication
Union
(ITU),
Geneva,
Switzerland, Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/
en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Documents/2017 Index of Indices.pdf
[26]
BSA
and
The
Software
Alliance,
“Asia-Paciﬁc
Cybersecurity
Dashboard,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//cybersecurity.bsa.org/2015/apac/
[27]
Fergus
et
al.
Hanson,
“Cyber
Maturity
in
the
Asia
Paciﬁc
Region,”
Australian
Strategic
Policy
Institute
(ASPI),
Tech.
Rep.,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.aspi.org.au/report/
cyber-maturity-asia-paciﬁc-region-2017
[28]
M. Hathaway, C. Demchak, J. Kerben, J. Mcardle, and F. Spidalieri,
“Cyber Readiness Index 2.0,” Potomac Institute for Policy Studies,
Virginia USA, Tech. Rep. November, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.potomacinstitute.org/images/CRIndex2.0.pdf
[29]
International Telecommunication Union, “Global Cybersecurity Agenda
(GCA),”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.itu.int/en/action/
cybersecurity/Pages/gca.aspx
[30]
The World Bank Group, “The World Bank Group Annual Report Re-
gional Perspective. LAC region. 2017,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.worldbank.org/en/about/annual-report/region-perspectives#a
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[31]
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the Organization
of
American
States
(OAS),
“Observatory
Of
Cybersecurity
In
Latin
America
And
The
Caribbean,”
2016.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://observatoriociberseguridad.com/graph/countries//selected/
/0/dimensions/1-2-3-4-5
[32]
N. Kshetri, Cybercrime and Cybersecurity in the Global South.
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013, vol. 53, no. 9. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137021946 7
[33]
Symantec and Organisation of American States (OAS), “Cyber Security
Trends In LAC,” Symantec, Organisation of American States (OAS),
Tech.
Rep.,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.thegfce.com/
initiatives/c/cyber-security-initiative-in-oas-member-states/documents/
publications/2014/06/01/latin-america-and-caribbean-cyber-security-trends
[34]
International Telecommunication Union and ABI Research, “Global
Cybersecurity Index 2014 & Cyberwellness Proﬁles,” International
Telecommunication Union ABI Research, Geneva, Switzerland, Tech.
Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available: www.itu.int
[35]
Control Risks, “RiskMap Americas Region,” Control Risks, Tech. Rep.,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.controlrisks.com/riskmap-2018/
maps
[36]
Council
of
Europe
(CoE),
“Convention
on
Cybercrime,”
pp.
1–22,
2001.
[Online].
Available:
https://rm.coe.int/
CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCTMContent?
documentId=0900001680081561
[37]
“The Meridian Process,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.
meridianprocess.org/
[38]
GFCE
and
Meridian,
“Good
Practice
Guide
on
Critical
Information Infrastructure Protection for governmental policy-makers,”
2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.meridianprocess.org/siteassets/
meridian/gfce-meridian-gpg-to-ciip.pdf
[39]
F. Assolini, “Beaches, carnivals and cybercrime: a look inside the
Brazilian underground,” Kaspersky Lab, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[40]
The
World
Bank
Group
WBG,
“WBG
World
Bank
national
accounts data and the OECD national accounts data ﬁles.” 2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.
MKTP.CD?end=2016&locations=BR-MX&start=1990&view=chart
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-661-3
SECURWARE 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

