Mutual Authentication Scheme for Lightweight IoT Devices 
 
Seungyong Yoon, Jeongnyeo Kim 
Information Security Research Division 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Rep. of Korea 
e-mail: syyoon@etri.re.kr, jnkim@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Since the Internet of Things (IoT) network is a 
resource-limited 
and 
heterogeneous 
interconnection 
environment, lightweight security technology is required that 
takes into consideration various environmental features, such 
as computing power, memory capacity, battery power, and 
communication bandwidth. In this paper, we analyze the 
problems of the existing Datagram Transport Layer Security 
(DTLS) authentication protocol and simplify the handshaking 
procedure of this authentication process so that it is applicable 
to lightweight IoT devices with very limited resources. 
Keywords-IoT; security; authentication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The IoT environment is a Low power and Lossy Network 
(LLN) environment to which it is difficult to apply the 
existing 
IP-based 
security 
protocol 
considering 
the 
communicational capability. Therefore, a hardened security 
protocol considering computing power and limited resources 
is needed. It is necessary to minimize the number and size of 
transmitted 
messages 
and 
to 
apply 
a 
lightweight 
cryptographic algorithm, for example, Elliptic Curve 
Cryptography (ECC) [1] and Lightweight Encryption 
Algorithm (LEA) [2], without performance degradation. The 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) classifies resource-
constrained IoT devices into three classes [3]. Since class 0 
and class 1 devices have a lot of restrictions on Random 
Access Memory (RAM) and Flash, it is difficult to apply 
cryptographic modules and messages used in security 
protocols such as existing DTLS. Therefore, in this paper, we 
analyze the requirements of DTLS authentication protocol 
and propose a mutual authentication scheme for lightweight 
IoT devices to solve it. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) has proposed the 
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) [4] based on the 
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) and the DTLS in IoT 
environments. DTLS is proposed as a security protocol that 
provides data confidentiality, integrity, and authentication 
function to application services using UDP protocol, but it 
has many limitations to be applied to lightweight IoT devices. 
This is described in detail in Section III. Therefore, various 
lightweight techniques have been studied to overcome the 
limitations of DTLS [5]-[7]. 
III. 
ANALYSIS OF DTLS AUTHENTICATION PROTOCOL  
DTLS is a security protocol that provides data 
confidentiality, integrity, and authentication function to 
application services using the UDP protocol. It was 
presented as a protocol that can add security to IoT based on 
UDP protocol. However, DTLS has the following 
limitations: 
 
Due to the complexity of the handshake procedure 
and the large number of messages transmitted, there 
is a limit to use on lightweight IoT devices. 
 
The handshake message of DTLS has fate-sharing 
characteristic, so if one packet is lost, the entire 
message must be retransmitted. Retransmission 
causes increase in throughput and performance 
degradation. 
 
Fragmentation - The Maximum Transmission Unit 
(MTU) size of the 802.15.4 Media Access Control 
(MAC) layer used in the IoT environment is 127 
bytes, which causes performance degradation by 
transmission delay and reassembly process due to 
fragmentation in lightweight IoT devices. 
IV. 
THE PROPOSED MUTUAL AUTHENTICATION SCHEME  
The mutual authentication scheme for the lightweight IoT 
devices proposed in this paper has the following 
characteristics. First, the mutual authentication function is 
performed between the security management server (shortly, 
server) and the lightweight IoT device, including the 
authentication process as well as the session key exchange 
process used for the encrypted communication channel. 
Peer-to-peer authentication is out of scope in this paper, for 
example, between two IoT devices. In the mutual 
authentication process, the gateway is included in the 
authentication. The proposed scheme basically begins with 
assuming that it has a pre-shared secret key between the 
server and the IoT device or between the server and the 
gateway. The server stores and manages the identifier (ID) of 
the IoT device and the gateway, and the pre-shared key in the 
Database (DB). After the mutual authentication process, the 
session key exchange used in the encrypted communication 
channel for data transmission is usually performed. However, 
the lightweight IoT device having limited computing power 
or resources does not participate in the session key 
generation process, both session key generation and key 
distribution functions are performed on the server. The 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

proposed scheme reduces the amount of messages 
transmitted by simplifying the handshaking process for 
mutual authentication and session key distribution, solving 
the problems of the DTLS protocol. In addition, it provides 
an encrypted communication channel by creating and 
exchanging new session keys each time a new session is 
established through a lightweight mutual authentication 
scheme, thereby further enhancing the security of the 
lightweight 
IoT 
device. 
The 
lightweight 
mutual 
authentication scheme proposed in this paper can be roughly 
divided into two cases. The first case does not include a 
gateway. This is the case where mutual authentication is 
performed directly between the server and the IoT device, 
and there is no gateway in the IoT network environment. The 
second case involves a gateway, where the gateway acts as 
an intermediary between the server and the IoT device and 
participates in authentication. Table 1 defines the parameters 
used in the lightweight mutual authentication scheme. 
TABLE I.  
LIGHTWEIGHT MUTUAL AUTHENTICATION PARAMETER 
Parameter 
Definition 
Server 
Security management server (Authentication server) 
Gateway 
IoT gateway 
IoT Device 
IoT Device 
IDd 
IoT device identifier 
IDg 
IoT gateway identifier 
Kd 
The pre-shared secret key between server and IoT device 
Kg 
The pre-shared secret key between server and gateway 
SK 
The session key between server and IoT device 
eK() 
Symmetric encryption function 
dK() 
Symmetric decryption function 
Rg 
Random number generated by gateway 
Rd 
Random number generated by IoT device 
Rs 
Random number generated by server 
|| 
Concatenation operation 
 
In this paper, in the case of mutual authentication without 
a gateway, the authentication procedure is relatively simple. 
Figure 1 shows the mutual authentication process between 
the server and the IoT device in this case.  
 
Figure 1.  The case of mutual authentication without a gateway. 
Figure 2 shows the mutual authentication process 
between the server and the IoT device including the gateway 
as an intermediary. When communicating via gateways in an 
IoT network environment, gateway impersonation attacks are 
possible, so a gateway authentication must be included to 
ensure that it is a trusted gateway. The attacker has 
communication information between the device and the 
server, and can perform a replay attack on a target after a 
predetermined time. This attack can be prevented because a 
new random number is generated and authenticated for every 
session for communication. 
 
Figure 2.  The case of mutual authentication with a gateway. 
In addition, since the encrypted communication is 
performed using the exchanged session key during the 
authentication process, it is safe even if the attacker makes a 
spoofing or sniffing attack. Since it is authenticated 
including the gateway, it is possible to prevent gateway 
impersonation attack and man-in-the-middle attack. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we propose a mutual authentication scheme 
that can be used for lightweight IoT devices with high 
computing power and resource constraints. It simplifies the 
handshaking process for mutual authentication and reduces 
the amount of messages transmitted, making it suitable for 
use in lightweight IoT devices. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by 
the 
Korea 
government 
(MSIT) 
(2015-0-00508, 
Development 
of 
Operating 
System 
Security 
Core 
Technology for the Smart Lightweight IoT Devices). 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Miller, “Use of elliptic curves in cryptography”, Proc. 
LNCS CRYPTO, 1985, pp. 417-426. 
[2] D. Hong, et al., “LEA: a 128-bit block cipher for fast 
encryption on common processors”, Proc. LNCS WISA, Aug. 
2013, pp. 3-27. 
[3] C. Bormann, M. Ersue, and A. Keranen, “Terminology for 
Constrained-Node Networks”, IETF, RFC 7228, 2015. 
[4] Z. Shelby, K. Hartke, and C. Bormann, “The constrained 
application protocol (CoAP)”, IETF, RFC 7252, 2014. 
[5] R. Hummen, J. Ziegeldorf, H. Shafagh, S. Raza, and 
K.Wehrle, “Towards viable certificated-based authentication 
for the Internet of Things”, Proc. ACM HotWiSec, Apr. 2013, 
pp. 37-42. 
[6] S. Raza, D. Trabalza, and T. Voigt, “6LoWPAN compressed 
DTLS for CoAP”, Proc. IEEE DCOSS, May 2012, pp. 287-
289. 
[7] S. Raza, et al., “Securing communication in 6LoWPAN with 
compressed IPsec”, Proc. IEEE DCOSS, Jun. 2011, pp. 1-8.
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

