Towards Cybersecurity Act: A Survey on IoT
Evaluation Frameworks
Maxime Puys, Jean-Pierre Krimm and Rapha¨el Collado
Universit´e Grenoble Alpes, CEA, LETI, DSYS, Grenoble F-38000, France
Email: firstname.name@cea.fr
Abstract—On the 7th of June 2019, the Cybersecurity Act was
adopted by the European Union. Its objectives are twofold: the
adoption of the permanent mandate of ENISA and the deﬁnition
of a European cybersecurity certiﬁcation framework, which
is essential for strengthening the security of Europe’s digital
market. Delivered certiﬁcates according to this scheme will be
mutually recognized among European countries. The regulation
deﬁnes three certiﬁcation levels with increasing requirements.
Among them, the “basic level” which typically targets non-
critical, consumer objects (e.g.,smart-home or “gadget” IoT). Yet,
various evaluation and certiﬁcation schemes related to the IoT
already exist prior to the adoption of the Cybersecurity Act. Thus,
discussions are being carried on at the moment of redaction in
order to either choose an existing scheme or to design a uniﬁed
scheme based on existing ones. In this paper, we focus on the
basic level, and assemble a survey on existing evaluation and
certiﬁcation schemes for consumer IoT and compare them based
on various criteria. Then, we propose a uniﬁed evaluation scheme
for the basic level driven by Bureau Veritas, based on existing
schemes.
Keywords–Cybersecurity Act; Internet of Things; IoT; certiﬁcation;
evaluation scheme; smart-home.
I.
INTRODUCTION
On the 7th of June 2019, the Cybersecurity Act has
ofﬁcially been adopted by the European Union. Its objectives
are twofold: the adoption of the permanent mandate of the
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), the Eu-
ropean Union Agency for Cybersecurity, and the deﬁnition
of a European cybersecurity certiﬁcation framework, which
is essential for strengthening the security of Europe’s digital
market. Delivered certiﬁcates according to this scheme will be
mutually recognized among European countries. Cybersecurity
certiﬁcation is the attestation of the conformance and robust-
ness of a product made by a third party evaluator, according to
a scheme describing the security needs of the users, and taking
into account technological developments. The adoption of the
Cybersecurity Act will both encourage the use of certiﬁcation
and recognition of certiﬁcates issued by one Member State
throughout the EU, thereby contributing to the security of the
single market. The regulation deﬁnes three certiﬁcation levels
with increasing requirements:
•
The basic level which typically targets non-critical,
consumer objects (e.g.,smart-home or “gadget” IoT);
•
The substantial level that targets the median risk
(e.g.,cloud computing or non-critical industrial IoT);
•
The high level that targets critical solutions where
there is a risk of attacks by actors with signiﬁcant
skills and resources (e.g.,vehicles, critical industry or
medical devices, etc.).
Yet, various evaluation and certiﬁcation schemes related to
the IoT already exist prior to the adoption of the Cybersecurity
Act, with companies proposing evaluation services according
to these schemes. Thus, discussions are being carried on at
the moment of redaction in order to either choose an existing
scheme or to design a uniﬁed scheme based on existing ones.
a) Contributions:: In this paper, Bureau Veritas (BV)
and CEA-Leti teamed up to focus on the “basic” level,
targeting consumer IoT such as cameras, toys, or other “smart-
devices”. We assemble a survey on existing evaluation and cer-
tiﬁcation schemes for consumer IoT and compare them based
on various criteria. Then, we propose a uniﬁed evaluation
scheme for the basic level driven by Bureau Veritas, based
on existing schemes. The objectives of this uniﬁed scheme
are twofold: (i) be a candidate for ofﬁcial certiﬁcation scheme
for the basic level; and (ii) maintain compliance with existing
schemes to allow certiﬁcation companies to maintain their
services independently of the chosen scheme.
b) Outline:: The rest of the paper is organized as
follows. Section II will present and compare existing schemes.
Section III will then deﬁne our uniﬁed evaluation scheme.
Finally, Section IV will introduce related works on IoT certi-
ﬁcation surveys and Section V will conclude.
II.
COMPARISON OF EXISTING EVALUATION
FRAMEWORKS
In this section, we propose to analyze and compare existing
referential frameworks dealing with cybersecurity of consumer
directed IoT devices. These evaluation schemes are candidates
to become the one chosen within the Cybersecurity Act.
However, it appears that theses documents have been redacted
with sometimes quite different purposes and target speciﬁc
audience. Moreover, their structure can vary signiﬁcantly. We
ﬁrst propose to compare them on various criteria, such as:
a) Type of document: This describes the main purpose
of the document, such as evaluation/certiﬁcation or good prac-
tices. Evaluation and certiﬁcation seek to ensure the compli-
ance of the device with a predeﬁned list of requirements. They
are usually performed by a third party when the development
is ﬁnished and prior to a public release. Depending on the type
of evaluation, they can include compliance against functional
requirements to ensure the device only does what it claims to
do; but also robustness evaluation assessing the strength and
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

the robustness of a device against cybersecurity threats. On
the other hand, good practices aim at being applied during the
development.
b) Targeted audience: This deﬁnes who the document
is destined to. This criterion is generally linked to the type of
document described above. That is, a certiﬁcation scheme is
usually for “conformity assessment bodies” (CAB). They are
third parties conducting the evaluation of a product. However,
an evaluation scheme may be applied by developers during
development within continuous integration. Good practices are
generally directed to developers, testers, Chief Information
Security Ofﬁcers (CISO), or Chief Technical Ofﬁcers (CTO).
c) Structure of the document: A complete cybersecurity
certiﬁcation process is generally deﬁned as presented in Fig-
ure 1. From a set of assets to protect, hypotheses (for instance
on the environment), threats originating from threats origins,
security objectives are obtained. Theses objectives can be seen
as generic counter-measures regarding threats. For instance,
if a threat is “Conﬁguration alteration”, a matching security
objective could be “Secure authentication on administration
interface”. Then security objectives are derived on security
requirements, which are more technical and related to the
target of evaluation. Regarding to the objective “Secure authen-
tication on administration interface”, a requirement could be
“Use two-factor authentication”. Finally, security requirements
are derived in technical requirements which are completely
related to the programming language or framework used by
the product. In parallel, security requirements are derived into
tests procedures, detailing how CAB must conduct evaluation.
This criterion deﬁnes which part of this structure are covered
by the scheme.
Assets
Threats Origins
Hypotheses
Threats
Security Objectives
Security Requirements
Test Procedures
Technical Requirements
Figure 1. Structure of certiﬁcation schemes
d) Split in different security levels: This criterion de-
ﬁnes if the scheme proposes different security levels providing
increasing security level and adding more security require-
ments to cope with. These security levels are internal to
the framework and should not be mistaken with the basic,
substantial and high of the Cybersecurity Act.
e) Technical perimeter: This explains how widely the
scheme covers in terms of technical cybersecurity topics (net-
work, system, cryptography, etc).
f) Level of accuracy of the requirements: This shows
how precise are the requirements provided by the scheme. That
is, if they stay quite generic or become quite technical.
g) Support from the community/industry: This criterion
details how much the scheme is supported by either the
scientiﬁc community or industry. This is a subjective criterion
based on the variety of authors and members if the scheme
belongs to an alliance.
We focus on ﬁve IoT evaluation schemes, known to be the
best contenders for the basic level of the Cybersecurity Act,
namely: ETSI, CTIA, OWASP, Eurosmart, IoT-SF. We ﬁrst
describe brieﬂy every one, then we propose a summary table
given the criteria we deﬁned earlier.
h) ETSI-EN-303-645 (version 2.1.0, 2020-04): ETSI
is a European standards organization based in France. In
May 2018, they release the ﬁrst version of TS-103-645, later
ofﬁcialized as EN-303-645 [1], a list of good practices in order
to increase the cybersecurity of consumer IoT devices. This
document is based on a “Code of Practice for Consumer IoT
Security” proposed by the UK government. Destined to ven-
dors, it is organized as a list a security objectives mixed with
requirements. No separation in levels is provided. It covers
a wide perimeter, going from passwords to communications,
with system integrity and personal data. Requirements stay at
a generic level. ETSI involves more than 850 members, drawn
from 65 countries, including major universities.
i) CTIA Cybersecurity Certiﬁcation Test Plan for IoT
Devices (version 1.0.1, 2018-10): CTIA represents the United
States wireless communications industry. In August 2018, they
released the initial version of their certiﬁcation plan for IoT
devices [2]. Clearly destined to CAB, it is separated in three
levels with increasing security features. It is not obvious if all
three levels would ﬁt in the “basic” Cybersecurity Act, given
the fact that level three implies advanced security features such
as two-factor authentication or secure boot. It is structured as
a list of generic requirements along with test procedures, test
prerequisites and test cases. The technical perimeter is wide.
j) OWASP IoT Top Ten (version 2018): The Open
Web Application Security Project (OWASP) is a nonproﬁt
foundation that works to improve the security of software. In
2018, OWASP released their Internet of Things Top 10 [3],
a list of good practice. Destined to vendors, it is a list
of 10 security objectives representing the 10 main kinds of
vulnerabilities targeting IoT devices. It is not divided into
levels but covers a wide range of topics. This list stays at a
very low level of accuracy, only proposing security objectives.
However, OWASP is widely known to propose a very technical
set of coding rules to avoid most of the vulnerabilities. Yet, the
IoT Top 10 document does not refer directly to them. OWASP
has many members both from academic and industry across
the world.
k) Eurosmart IoT Device Certiﬁcation Scheme (version
2019-05-16): Eurosmart is a European organization based
in Brussels. Their members are mainly working in hard-
ware security (semiconductor and secure-elements) or in high-
security software and include major companies and research
laboratories. In April 2019, they released an initial version
of their certiﬁcation scheme [4] designed for CAB, however,
the writing process still seems ongoing. According to pub-
lished documents, they aim to cover the whole certiﬁcation
procedures from assets to CAB tests. Yet at the moment of
redaction, they cover risk analysis (from assets to security
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE I. SUMMARY OF EXISTING SCHEMES
Schemes
ETSI
CTIA
OWASP
Eurosmart
IoT-SF
Type
Good
practices
Certiﬁcation
Good
practices
Certiﬁcation
Mixed
Audience
Vendors
CAB
Vendors
CAB
Vendors
Structure
Objectives
Require-
ments
Requirements
Tests
Objectives
Complete
(ongoing)
Objectives
Require-
ments
Levels
None
Three
None
None
Five
Perimeter
Wide
Wide
Wide
Wide
Wide
Accuracy
Generic
Generic
Low
Generic
Generic
Technical
Support
World-wide
World-wide
industry
(mainly US)
World-wide
Sector-
Speciﬁc
(mainly EU)
World-wide
(mainly
UK)
TABLE II. MAPPING FOR FIRST BASIC LEVEL
ID
Topic
ETSI
CTIA
OWASP
1
Password management
4.1
3.2
1
2
Keeping software up to date
4.3
3.5, 3.6
4, 5
3
Securely storing sensitive data
4.4
7
4
Minimizing exposed attack surface
4.6
5.17
2, 3, 10
5
Ensuring the initial state is secure
5, 9
6
Analyzing admin. and user guides
4.2, 4.12
4.1
8
7
Third-party components management
5
(8)
Unique reference of the device
(9)
Resistance to known vulnerabilities
10
objectives) and generic security requirements. They include
a wide technical perimeter and stay a a generic level. They
do not provide multiple levels of certiﬁcation and according
to the scheme itself, it is destined to the “substantial” level of
the Cybersecurity Act.
l) IoT
Security
Foundation
Security
Compliance
Framework (version 2, 2018-12): The IoT Security Foundation
(IoT-SF) is composed of major companies, including almost
all microchips integrators alongside major mobile network
companies. Yet, smaller members and universities are mainly
from UK. In 2016, they released the ﬁrst version of their IoT
security compliance framework [5]. Coming with a spreadsheet
checklist alongside, it stands between certiﬁcation and good
practices as being stated as a “self-checking” framework.
Destined to vendors, it is organized as a mixed list of security
objectives and requirements. Five levels are introduced, based
on a risk analysis to be performed on the device to assess.
Depending on the importance of each security property (con-
ﬁdentiality, integrity, availability), the device is assigned to a
minimum level. It covers a very wide perimeter, with merely
all technical aspects related to security covered alongside with
business, life-cycle management and governance. Interestingly,
depending on the topic, requirements either stay at a generic
level, or become quite technical.
Table I summarizes the criteria for all existing schemes.
III.
A UNIFIED IOT EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
As seen in Section II, two categories of documents are
present in the current state-of-the-art. On one side, there are
certiﬁcation documents destined to CAB, while on the other
side, there are good practice or self-assessment documents
destined to vendors. It is currently (mid 2020) unclear which
is preferred for the Cybersecurity Act evaluation framework,
given the fact that evaluation modalities are still discussed.
More precisely in the context of the basic level, it is not
precised if the evaluation should be performed by CAB or
vendors them-selves. According to ENISA and the European
Commission during the FIC 2020 conference (Lille, 2020-01-
28), such questions are likely to depend on the type of IoT
device to test. In other words, there will be different evaluation
schemes with different modalities for the basic level.
In this context, we propose a uniﬁed evaluation framework
based on existing documents presented in Section II and driven
by Bureau Veritas. Rather than providing yet another set of
rules to implement, we propose a uniﬁed view detailing how
existing frameworks could be mapped with each other. Thus,
rather than implementing only one existing scheme, vendors
and CAB can already include a global view of most of them
in their process, without risking to bet on one not chosen in
the end. The mapping we propose covers ETSI, CTIA, and
OWASP. This choice is motivated as they seem to be the three
main contenders for the ﬁnal basic level of Cybersecurity Act
framework, according to ongoing discussions.
A. Presentation of the Framework
The idea is to make the set-union of all topics covered in
the different frameworks while pin-pointing the cross reference
of related security objectives in each framework. For instance,
for a common topic related to password security, we would
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE III. MAPPING FOR SECOND BASIC LEVEL
ID
Topic
ETSI
CTIA
OWASP
1
Password management
4.1
3.2
1
2
Keeping software up to date
4.3
4.5, 4.6
4, 5
3
Securely storing sensitive data
4.4
7
4
Minimizing exposed attack surface
4.6
5.17
2, 3, 10
5
Ensuring the initial state is secure
5, 9
6
Analyzing admin. and user guides
4.2, 4.12
4.1
8
7
Third-party components management
5
(8)
Unique reference of the device
(9)
Resistance to known vulnerabilities
10
10
Authentication and access-control
4.3, 4.4
11
Protection of data in transit
4.5
4.8
7
12
Data input validity
4.13
note all related security objectives of each document. We
divided this mapping into three levels based on – what we
consider – realistic evaluation time (either performed by ven-
dors or by CABs). The ﬁrst level is intended to be completed
within ﬁve business days. The second and third levels are
respectively designed for nine and ﬁfteen days. Depending on
a risk analysis or marketing requirements, the device may be
evaluated according to one of the three levels. The mapping
for every level is provided in Tables II, III and IV.
We chose categories in Table II as they are the most simple
and consensual. OWASP, designed to be as simple as possible,
has almost all of his security objectives covered within the ﬁrst
level. Topics 1, 2 and 3 are essentially straightforward. Topic
4 refers to any software accessible from outside of the device
(either from internet or from the LAN). This includes open
ports, API, running servers, etc. This also includes hardware
debug ports. Topic 5 refers to the guided installation of the
device by the end user. The idea is to verify that default
conﬁguration and/or installation wizards put the device in a
secure state. Topic 6 deals with how clear are the guides
provided with the device in order to inform the end user and/or
the administrator on security, privacy, and conﬁguration. Topic
7 aims at verifying how third party components (software,
libraries, stacks, etc) are manages (at least if they are clearly
identiﬁed). Topics 8 and 9 (in brackets) are not directly
mentioned by any of ETSI, CTIA and OWASP. Authors added
these based on their experience of security. Topic 8 requires
that the device can be clearly identiﬁed with a version number
or equivalent while topic 9 follows topic 7 and implies that
the certiﬁed version on the device is not affected by any
known vulnerability (CVE). Topic 9 also applies for hardware
vulnerabilities such as Meltdown [6], Zombieload [7] and more
recently LVI attack [8]. No security is required for data in
transit at this level which may be controversial. The idea
behind is that this level should be limited to devices either
that do not communicate, or do not communicate any sensitive
data. Any device transferring sensitive data should be de facto
put in level two or three.
The second basic level presented in Table III updates
topic 2 to second level in CTIA and adds a few new topics
(changes regarding Table II are shown in bold). Topic 10
ensures especially that no unauthenticated changes can be
made and that administrator accounts must differ from user
accounts. Topic 11 deals with protection of transferred data.
It mainly states that messages shall be encrypted and signed
and that keys must be managed securely. Finally, topic 12
requires that user inputs are checked to avoid code execution
and under/overﬂows.
The third basic level presented in Table IV updates topic
2 to third level in CTIA and adds a few new topics (changes
regarding Table III are shown in bold). Topic 13 deals with
personal data and can roughly be summarized by compliance
with EU’s GDPR. Topic 14 requires the device to have a secure
boot chain while topic 15 is related to the protection of data
stored on the device. This topic differs from topic 3 “Securely
storing sensitive data” in the sense that here, all the memory
is protected, either by physical means such as scrambling or
by ﬁle system encryption.
B. Discussions
As one can see in Tables II, III and IV regarding CTIA,
our mapping can either follow CTIA levels (e.g., for topic 2.
Keep software up to date); or have a ﬁxed CTIA level in all
tables (e.g., for topic 1. Password management). Depending on
the topics, CTIA level following ours means we consider they
are adapted to a certiﬁcation at the basic level. On the other
hand, a ﬁxed CTIA level means that either lower CTIA levels
are not challenging enough; or that higher CTIA levels are
too demanding. Also, as the evaluation duration is currently
not ﬁxed within the Cybersecurity Act, proposing three levels
has multiple beneﬁts. First, it will help EU working groups to
decide about how much requirements a device shall respect,
without exceeding what will be considered as the maximal
certiﬁcation duration. Second, depending on speciﬁc classes of
product, the Cybersecurity Act may ofﬁcially require tougher
evaluations. Finally, it will allow CAB to design private
schemes around Cybersecurity Act, for demanding companies.
a) Coverage:: In the mapping presented above, we tried
to maximize coverage, while choosing topics relatively close
from one framework to others. Moreover, we tried to only
select security objectives that can reasonably be asked to a de-
vice at the Cybersecurity Act basic level. Doing so, we obtain
a coverage of existing framework as presented in Table V. As
OWASP is simple and straightforward, it gets high coverage.
ETSI is a quite balanced framework and gets a comfortable
coverage at level 3. Finally, regarding CTIA, our ﬁrst level
already includes requirements from CTIA’s level 2 and 3. Thus,
we computed the coverage of all our levels against CTIA’s
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE IV. MAPPING FOR THIRD BASIC LEVEL
ID
Topic
ETSI
CTIA
OWASP
1
Password management
4.1
3.2
1
2
Keeping software up to date
4.3
5.5, 5.6
4, 5
3
Securely storing sensitive data
4.4
7
4
Minimizing exposed attack surface
4.6
5.17
2, 3, 10
5
Ensuring the initial state is secure
5, 9
6
Analyzing admin. and user guides
4.2, 4.12
4.1
8
7
Third-party components management
5
(8)
Unique reference of the device
(9)
Resistance to known vulnerabilities
10
10
Authentication and access-control
4.3, 4.4
11
Protection of data in transit
4.5
4.8
7
12
Data input validity
4.13
13
Personal data management
4.8, 4.11
6
14
Secure boot
4.7
5.11
15
Protection of data at rest
4.4
5.15
6
level 3. It appears that this level is actually quite challenging
for devices targeting a Cybersecurity Act basic level. For
instance, topics such as “5.12 – Threat monitoring” or “5.16 –
Tamper evidence” seem more destined to a Cybersecurity Act
substantial or even high level of certiﬁcation. This explains
that we purposely exclude such topics and got a low coverage
of CTIA.
TABLE V. COVERAGE OF EXISTING FRAMEWORKS
Level
ETSI
CTIA
OWASP
1
46%
29%
90%
2
62%
47%
90%
3
85%
59%
100%
IV.
RELATED WORKS
There are some works on consumer IoT security certiﬁ-
cation. In may 2018, Cihon et al. [9] wrote a report on how
to increase adoption of the proposed European cybersecurity
certiﬁcation framework. This document was written prior to
the adoption of the Cybersecurity Act but studies the politi-
cal, societal and economic aspects resulting from a common
policy. In June 2018, Brass et al. [10] published a survey on
cybersecurity standards for IoT. This work is really complete
and provides a very precise overview of all IoT certiﬁcation
schemes existing at the time. Their survey is not directly
related to the Cybersecurity Act and thus does not focus on the
main candidates (including US regulations). Moreover, it lists
existing standards rather than comparing them. Yet it sheds a
light on most crucial aspects and challenges of certiﬁcation of
IoT devices and show the trade offs between maximizing the
security of product and have legislations actually applicable.
It is worth noting that given the rapid pace of the domain,
frameworks such as Eurosmart and CTIA were not published
at that time and thus are not included in the comparison.
In July 2019, the US NIST institute released the ﬁrst
version of NISTIR 8259 [11]. This internal report aims at
giving manufacturers voluntary recommendations regarding
cybersecurity of their devices. No mention seem to be made
about regulation in this document. However in September
2019, the US Chamber of Commerce released a public let-
ter [12] to the authors of NISTIR 8259. They state that
they support the NIST report and mention that they believe
policymakers in the U.S. and internationally need to align
their IoT security with NISTIR 8259. Still in September 2019,
the ENISA Advisory Group proposed an opinion paper [13]
related to the security of consumer IoT. As an important note,
this group is made of stakeholders including industry and
academia and does not necessarily convey the view of ENISA.
They recall the key elements of cybersecurity for such market
and what ENISA can bring as a cybersecurity agency. While
this article does not explicitly compares existing evaluation
frameworks, it lays the foundations of which requirements
could actually be selected for the basic level. In particular,
authors emphasize the importance of certiﬁcation schemes
at European level but in contrast state that it should not
impede the pace of innovation. In November 2019, Softic [14]
proposed an analysis of the impact European certiﬁcation of
IoT on devices, consumers and business. Sadly, this thesis
seem now inaccessible following the demand of the author.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we discussed about the upcoming common
cybersecurity certiﬁcation framework for Europe in the context
of the Cybersecurity Act. We proposed a survey of existing
evaluation and certiﬁcation schemes for consumer IoT and
compared them based on various criteria. This allowed to (i)
place them in the context of a global certiﬁcation process, (ii)
see how they are designed to and, (iii) what are the technical
content they tackle and at which level of precision. We then
proposed a uniﬁed evaluation scheme for the basic level of the
Cybersecurity Act, based on existing schemes. This uniﬁed
scheme lead by Bureau Veritas has two main objectives: (i)
be a candidate for ofﬁcial certiﬁcation scheme for the basic
level; and (ii) maintain compliance with existing schemes
to allow certiﬁcation companies to maintain their services
independently of the chosen scheme. Future works include
speaking in depth with both ENISA, association and groups
authoring existing framework in order to have their opinion
on the uniﬁed mapping and to allow interested stakeholders
to discuss with Bureau Veritas. Some use cases on various
products with different purpose and security level could help
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

seeing if the mapping brings enough security to components
and does not miss critical properties.
REFERENCES
[1]
ETSI, “Etsi en-303-645,” Tech. Rep., May 2018.
[2]
CTIA, “Cybersecurity certiﬁcation test plan for iot devices,” Tech. Rep.,
Aug. 2018.
[3]
OWASP IoT Security Team, “Internet of things: Top 10,” OWASP, Tech.
Rep., 2018.
[4]
Eurosmart, “Iot device certiﬁcation scheme,” Tech. Rep., Apr. 2019.
[5]
R. Atoui, J. Bennett, S. Cook, P. Galwas, P. Gupta, J. Haine, H. Trevor,
C. Hills, R. Marshall, M. John et al., “Iot security compliance frame-
work,” IoT Security Foundation, 2016.
[6]
M. Lipp, M. Schwarz, D. Gruss, T. Prescher, W. Haas, A. Fogh,
J. Horn, S. Mangard, P. Kocher, D. Genkin, Y. Yarom, and M. Hamburg,
“Meltdown: Reading kernel memory from user space,” in 27th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18), 2018.
[7]
M. Schwarz, M. Lipp, D. Moghimi, J. Van Bulck, J. Stecklina,
T. Prescher, and D. Gruss, “ZombieLoad: Cross-privilege-boundary data
sampling,” in CCS, 2019.
[8]
J. Van Bulck, D. Moghimi, M. Schwarz, M. Lipp, M. Minkin,
D. Genkin, Y. Yuval, B. Sunar, D. Gruss, and F. Piessens, “LVI:
Hijacking Transient Execution through Microarchitectural Load Value
Injection,” in 41th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P’20),
2020.
[9]
P. Cihon, G. M. Guitierrez, S. Kee, M. Kleinaltenkamp, and T. Voigt,
“Why certify? increasing adoption of the proposed eu cybersecurity
certiﬁcation framework,” Master’s thesis, Cambridge Judge Business
School, May 2018.
[10]
I. Brass, L. Tanczer, M. Carr, M. Elsden, and J. Blackstock, “Standar-
dising a moving target: The development and evolution of iot security
standards,” June 2018.
[11]
M. Fagan, K. Megas, K. Scarfone, and M. Smith, “Core cybersecurity
feature baseline for securable iot devices: A starting point for iot device
manufacturers,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, Tech.
Rep., July 2019.
[12]
K. Megas and M. Fagan, “Subject: Draft NISTIR 8259, core cyberse-
curity feature baseline for securable iot devices: A starting point for iot
device manufacturers,” Sept. 2019.
[13]
E. A. Group, “Opinion: Consumers and iot security,” Tech. Rep., Sept.
2019.
[14]
D. Softic, “Cybersecurity and certiﬁcation: The impact of the european
cybersecurity certiﬁcation framework on the security and safety of iot
devices, consumers and businesses,” Master’s thesis, University of Oslo,
Nov. 2019.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

