Zero Stars: Analysis of Cybersecurity Risk of Small COTS UAVs
Dillon Pettit
Graduate Cyber Operations
Air Force Institute of Technology
Dayton, Ohio, USA
email: Dillon.Pettit@aﬁt.edu
Rich Dill
Dept of Computer Engineering
Air Force Institute of Technology
Dayton, Ohio, USA
email: Richard.Dill@aﬁt.edu
Scott Graham
Dept of Computer Engineering
Air Force Institute of Technology
Dayton, Ohio, USA
email: Scott.Graham@aﬁt.edu
Abstract—Commercial off the shelf small Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV) market has grown immensely in popularity within
the hobbyist and military inventories. The same core mission set
from the hobbyists directly relates to global military strategy
in the modern age, with priority on short range, low cost,
real time aerial imaging and limited modular payloads. These
small devices have the added perks of a small cross section,
low heat signature, and a variety of transmitters to send real-
time data over short distances. As with all new advances within
the technological ﬁelds, security is a second-thought to reaching
the market as soon as viable. New research is showing growing
exploits and vulnerabilities, from individual small UAVs guidance
and autopilot controls to the mobile ground station devices
which may be as simple as a cellphone application. Research
calls producers to ﬁx and engineer the small UAVs to protect
consumers, but consumers are left in the dark to the protections
installed when buying new or used vehicles. At current date,
there is no marketed or accredited risk index for small UAVs,
but current research in similar realms of traditional Information
Technologies, Cyber-Physical Systems, and Cyber Insurance give
insight to signiﬁcant factors required for future small UAV risk
assessment and prioritize lessons learned. In this research, three
ﬁelds of risk frameworks are analyzed to determine applicability
to UAV security risk and key components that must be analyzed
by a proper UAV framework. This analysis demonstrates that
no adjoining ﬁeld’s framework can be directly applied without
signiﬁcant loss of ﬁdelity and that further research is required
to index risks of UAVs.
Keywords—UAV; cybersecurity; quantitative; risk assessment;
COTS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity is the Herculean task to prevent all adversarial
attacks over Information Technology (IT) devices and errors
that release or lose information deemed valuable to an orga-
nization or individual. As computer devices have exploded in
variety and distribution around the globe, the protection task
has grown and absolute security has become accepted to be
a myth, though due diligence has been seen to reduce and
delay incidents. IT devices have diverged into a multitude of
subcategories, including Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) and
further subsection Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (sUAVs).
While many techniques used to map and defend IT may be
extended to sUAVs, CPSs in general have signiﬁcant differ-
ences in internal architecture, external networking, and overall
mission sets that effect how effective and important common
techniques are to cybersecurity. One aspect of cybersecurity is
risk categorization of individual devices and the conglomera-
tion on a network, which relies on common rating measures
for comparison. IT devices still struggle with communication
of security characteristics, though certain brands have made
strides to separate themselves from the market share. As new
vulnerabilities and exploitations accumulate for sUAVs, the
industry will ﬁnd the consumer base increasing in desire for
quick and equal rating to make purchasing decisions based on
their planned mission set.
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been historically
built for military applications and continued by hobbyist
enthusiasm. By deﬁnition, UAV includes any device that can
sustain ﬂight autonomously, which separates it from similar
sub-cultures of Remotely Piloted Vehicles (RPVs) and drones
[1]. UAVs are usually able to either maintain a hover or move
completely via computer navigation, whereas RPVs require
control instructions throughout ﬂight and drones have limited
mission and sophistication [1]. The ﬁrst UAV is most likely to
be considered a kite or balloon that could maintain ﬂight when
tied off and have some control input from the ground. Cameras
were ﬁrst attached to kites in 1887 by Douglas Archibald as a
form of reconnaissance and William Eddy used the same con-
traption during the Spanish-American War for reconnaissance
[1]. As UAV operations and innovations continued through the
Vietnam War, Desert Storm, and especially the global war on
Terror, the size, mission, and shape of UAVs have evolved to
support military needs. Criminal uses have also grown with
UAV prevalence with ingenious modiﬁcations matching latest
exploits [2]. The market share of small UAVs is made up
of 70% DJI brand, followed by 7% Parrot, 7% Yuneec [3],
showing a strangle hold of Chinese controlled manufacturers
for consumers to take note.
UAVs take a multitude of forms and designs based on
mission and user base, from hand-held copters to jet-powered
light aircraft. For sUAV, all follow the general component
break out as seen in Figure 1, with four common components
on the device and a ground station of some sort. The Basic
System is a generalized term for the Operating System (OS),
which is usually coded by brand per vehicle and allows
near real time control. The weapon component has been
seen within military operations, though the vast majority of
sUAVs are used for military or hobbyist reconnaissance with
the sensor component. As deﬁned for UAV, some form of
autonomous control will be built into the vehicle’s navigation.
The ground station is split into the Operators component and
Communication links, though, with sUAVs, these are typically
contained within the same device, a tablet or laptop.
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Fig. 1. Components of Typical UAV [4].
The exact deﬁnitions between sizing tiers have not been
standardized between countries though, practically speaking,
they consist in some format of very small, small, medium, and
large. Very small UAVs exist at a miniaturization of aerody-
namics that result in very low Reynolds numbers, meaning the
wing interacts with the air more similarly to a ﬁn through water
due to viscosity, and are usually less than 20 inches in any
dimension. Small UAVs tend to be a range of popular model
aircraft used by hobbyists and have at least one dimension
greater than 20 inches. While shorter in range, their size allows
for access or angle of attack by altitude not normally available
to individuals. Medium and Large UAVs are too large for an
individual to carry and may even use full runways like light
aircraft, which allows for heavier payloads and greater mission
duration. sUAVs ﬂy by the same aerodynamics as manned
aircraft using lift and drag, plus control for pitch, roll, and
yaw. Their internal architecture, however, differs greatly by
removing the human pilot directly from the vehicle. Instead of
a pilot and sensors, sUAVs are controlled by varying autonomy
of their autopilot. Autopilots vary greatly by manufacturer,
with the most common DJI autopilots closed-source and their
speciﬁc rules hidden [2].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II explores current common rating systems for traditional
IT, Supervisory Control and Data Collection (SCADA), and
Insurance markets with a focus on aspects that do translate
to the sUAV inventory. Section III builds out from the con-
glomeration of related rating indexes the important aspects that
are required for a sUAV speciﬁc cybersecurity rating. Section
IV analyzes each of the ﬁelds for their applicability to small
UAVs risk assessment for potential adaptation. We conclude
our work in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
No current physical or cyber security accreditation exists for
UAVs. Accreditation similar to the European and American
automobile safety assessments, which use a number of stars
to describe and compare the intrinsic safety quality for the
vehicle, would meet the demand. Since no current process
exists to calculate risk, quantitative or qualitative, for sUAVs,
there are no star ratings present on the market to be assigned to
any sUAV, much less compare models. Adding to the issue,
aerial vehicles were engineered for operational effectiveness
ﬁrst then marketed with minimal consideration for adversarial
interference. Cyber incidents with and against UAVs have
been limited with the most well-known consisting of the
Iranian incident [4] and current research into hacking UAV
controls. While the debate is still out on whether the United
States RQ-170 was captured by Electronic Warfare (EW) or
cyber means [4], the incident highlights the vulnerability of
UAVs in a combat zone and the need for security in future
models to maintain integrity for mission success. With 15,000
UAVs being sold in the United States every month as of
2015 [5], the availability and use of exploitations on these
devices is expected to also rise as effort to reward ratio grows.
Research into the vulnerability of sUAVs has also increased
with a multitude of research showing speciﬁc risk in areas of
Denial of Service (DoS) [6], Global Positioning System (GPS)
spooﬁng [7], and control hijacking [8]. No security speciﬁc
components have been added to UAVs in response, other than
patches and more secure software or additional navigational
components for the autopilot to internally cross-check location.
A. Traditional Risk Assessment
UAVs are most simply ﬂying computer systems. Traditional
risk assessments have been around since the early 2000s
[9] and have almost solely focused on business devices and
networks. While Network Security Risk Model (NSRM) [10]
and Information Security Risk Analysis Method (ISRAM) [9]
are some of the oldest quantitative risk assessment models,
Common Vulnerability Scoring System V3 (CVSSv3) is the
most utilized today [11].
CVSSv3 is an “open framework for communicating the
characteristics and severity of software vulnerabilities [12].”
The score is based on three different metrics of a Base ranging
from 0.0 to 10.0, tempered by Temporal and Environmental
metrics. CVSSv3 is owned and managed by FIRST Inc. and
is a heavy provider to the National Vulnerability Database
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

(NVD). CVSS ﬁrst gained large-scale usage under their ver-
sion 2 score which determined only a base score through
metrics for Access Vector, Access Complexity, Authentica-
tion, Conﬁdentiality Impact, Integrity Impact, and Availability
Impact. Each metric was given a rating from up to three
varying responses of severity. CVSSv2 was criticized heavily
for vulnerability scoring diversity compared to experimental,
lack of interdependence scoring of networks, and lack of
correlation between proposed mitigations and actual score
improvements [11]. CVSSv3 added mandatory components
for Privileges Required, User interaction, and Scope, plus the
temporal and environmental metrics to inﬂuence the overall
score. The current version has grown in use for vulnerability
scoring, but still struggles with high false positive rates, poor
predictability of future incidents, high sensitivity in regards
to Availability Impact compared to all other impacts, and is
heavily inﬂuenced by software type [13]. Built from CVSSv3,
NVD has been found to lack in predicting mean time to
next vulnerability due to the Common Vulnerability and Ex-
ploitations (CVEs) recording poor and inconsistent data by
vendor and an increasing trend across vendors of zero-days
[14]. CVSSv3 is the starting point for determining known
vulnerabilities present within a UAV, but the embedded nature
of a component, the wide brand difference within a single
UAV, and unique mission sets of UAVs mean CVSSv3 is not
very likely to give a good perspective at actual risk.
B. Industrial CPS and SCADA
At the other end of the spectrum for security indexing,
sUAVs could be related to larger CPSs which have recently
seen a surge in research to secure their unique networks.
Industrial CPS and SCADA have been utilized to gradually re-
duce required human interaction in safety-compromised work
areas and in largely distributed networks. Physical sensors
that used to require eyes to read, determine system state,
and adjust actuators to keep processes within safety limits
and manufacturing effectiveness, now are read by network
adapters, ran through Programmable Logic Controller (PLC)
that determine state, then send signals to actuators to ﬁnish the
feedback loop. Human-Machine Interface (HMI) screens give
real-time display of system state to allow minimum human
interaction to keep our modern society running smoothly.
SCADA systems are owned by corporations to produce or
deliver their products to consumers, and therefore the networks
are not the products directly as seen by home computers or
even work stations which are most commonly modelled by IT
networks. As CPS stations are utilitarian and usually connected
to physical sensors for input, protection schemes need to adjust
for their physical process monitoring, closed control loops,
attack sophistication, and legacy technology [16]. The ﬁrst
two categories deﬁne differences in attack vectors for cyber to
cyber or cyber to physical exploitation. Regular IT exploitation
follows a typical path that ends at an IT node with information
or is valuable in itself, but industrial CPS exploitation usually
requires exploitation to continue further to inﬂuence physical
processes to either ruin or shut down systems [17]. This leads
to attack sophistication differences between IT and SCADA
risk, since physical process manipulation via PLCs require
intense understanding of systems that are only present in the
operational world. While the attack vectors require unique
background, the computer systems monitoring and running
the physical processes are commonly characterized by legacy
equipment with many known vulnerabilities. IT cybersecurity
practices push for upgrade cycles on a regular basis to keep
with manufactures’ patching, however industrial systems do
not upgrade nearly as often and require much larger investment
capital to change out systems that are considered permanent
ﬁxtures.
Research into adding cybersecurity to CPS systems skyrock-
eted after the discovery of the sophisticated Stuxnet virus in a
nuclear plant. The nuclear plant in question has been studied,
with its cybersecurity posture matching industry standards and
much of the IT standards [18]. Risk assessments building
from this impetus and for more than just nuclear realm have
been trying to grasp the new methods to exploit processes.
Most standardized methods merely cover the cyber to cyber
and physical to physical exploitation, which arguably cover
the easiest and most common historical attacks [19]. Stuxnet
introduced publicly the possibilities of cyber to physical ex-
ploitation while little is known of possible physical to cyber
vectors. To cover the cyber to physical risk, the most common
technique is through Bayesian networks with attach trees and
Markov chains [20]. A major drive to Bayesian networks is
the complex states that physical processes may enter, which
differ on Mean Time to Shut Down (MTTSD). While the
probabilities to reach across the IT network to the PLCs
follow well-documented methods and means through NVD or
CVSSv3, detection and vectors at the PLCs require expert
weighting and most likely proprietary input [19]. This method
for a rating has been worked out for the nuclear industry in
the form of Cyber Security Risk Index (CSRI) where all the
possible physical sensor states have been propagated and the
penetration testing is impossible for other methods of rating
risk [21]. Detection before shut down is limited within indus-
trial CPS to IT Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) that are
built to overcome the unique aspects within industrial networks
[16]. Even with research progressing to better characterize
the risk statically and dynamically present in industrial CPS,
there are no open-source rating systems in circulation, though
cybersecurity companies specializing in control systems are
starting to use them to better deﬁne current risk and prioritize
defensive actions. While a SCADA risk index has potential
for use within the UAV community, the lack of open-source
index, smaller scale, and shorter lifespan of systems reduce
direct applicability to sUAVs.
C. Cybersecurity Insurance
As a growing variation of quantitative cyber risk, insurance
policies have been diverting some of the risk of exploitation
since 1997 when the Internet use globally was only 1.7% of the
population [22]. Insurance companies function on a strategy
of taking premiums upfront to cover the risk of failure in the
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Fig. 2. Five phases of the Cyber Risk Scoring and Mitigation (CRISM) tool [15].
future and spread out the cost for the user, whether for disaster,
health care, or cyber attack. The Internet has since exploded in
size with the total cyber market estimated at $3 to 3.5 billion
in 2017 [23], with cyber crimes costing the global economy an
estimated $450 billion in 2016 [24]. The companies that issued
the total cyber insurance premiums totaling $1.35 billion in
2016 [25] did so based more on an abstract perception of
risk due to a lack of historical data to determine probability
and actual monetary damage for previous attacks, especially
when the damage is information theft or leakage [26]. The
most common and simple equation for insurance is based on
historical average of cost per incident times the probability
of incident in the near future [15], which requires the very
information that is lacking or obscured for cyber incidents.
To reconcile this discrepancy in information, several research
models have been developed to validate insurance investment
and fewer have published methods of quantitative risk indexes.
Cyber insurance is possible and good for security as long as the
premiums imposed are tied directly to self-protection strategies
employed by the organization [27]. For quantifying this risk
versus protections, the largest issue is not previous historical
data which will continue to grow over time, but mapping all
possible attack vectors in the insured system which requires
knowledge of all locations of valuable information and em-
ployee accesses and habits [28].
The most promising methods to grasp the state of a network
are presented by the Cyber Risk Scoring and Mitigation tool
(CRISM) which operates as a specially designed IDS [15].
This method used in cyber insurance is designed for IT
networks where the CVSSv3 and NVD provide comprehensive
insight to network vulnerabilities and usage probabilities,
though was inspired by driver insurance programs where users
installed a device to provide additional information to the
insurance company for lower premiums. The ability to add an
IDS to a Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) UAV is most
likely impossible due to size or tampering with warranty,
therefore CRISM can not be directly applied to UAV risk
indexing. However, their analytic model is very promising
in its ﬂexibility to include varying components. As shown in
Figure 2, CRISM has ﬁve phases.
1) Mapping: The ﬁrst step is static analysis of the system to
determine all components and links with all currently reported
vulnerabilities. This mapping phase consists of determining
the data and control links (if different) at a physical and
protocol layer, operating system of both ground station and
UAV, avionic and embedded systems controlling the UAV,
and environment that the UAV lives in for connections and
external (not necessarily adversary) radio waves.
2) Vulnerabilities: With all of the mapping laid out stati-
cally, the vulnerabilities that are known across all components
are then expounded. At the communication links, vulnerabil-
ities can consist of protocol ﬂaws, susceptibility to jamming,
and leakage of information. At the OS component, vulnerabil-
ities are better laid out via CVSSv3 and NVD such that the
software and hardware vulnerabilities are better reported. The
navigation vulnerabilities are based on the probability of false
signals being accepted and the combination of sensors relied
on reduces risk. Sensors such as Inertial Navigational System
(INS) that are much more difﬁcult to spoof than GPS reduce
the cyber risk of system, but only if properly checked by the
autopilot and the programmed failure state.
3) Attack Vectors: With the mapping and tabulation of
known vulnerabilities, attack vectors can be determined by
common methods through the entire system and the probability
of attacks can be estimated. Attack vectors can be initialized
only at input ports, whether on ground station or UAV. Vectors
are trimmed by forward progress and ability to cause an effect
on the mission.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

4) Bayesian Network (BN) Graphs: Bayesian networks are
then utilized to build out each vector across nodes to determine
probability of forward progress and exploitation probability
either through probabilities chosen by the organization or
experts in the ﬁeld.
5) Scoring: Lastly, scoring is completed by tabulating the
probabilities of exploitation and its effect to the mission.
CVSSv3 does present a usable index for consumers and
manufactures, however, it is a vulnerability severity assessment
and not a direct correlation to risk indexing.
III. METHODOLOGY
Three areas of comparison between these ﬁelds of risk as-
sessment that are generally recognized as core to determining
viability are as follows: usability, cost, and ease-to-understand
results [29]. Of these, usability will be further examined by
traits of required expertise, ﬂexibility to modiﬁcations, and
coverage of device and network risk, which compose speciﬁc
UAV risk components. These criteria should provide a more
detailed view into the described ﬁelds before determining
applicability.
Each of the ﬁelds speciﬁcally utilize their designated risk
assessments simply for the reason that they work for their
devices. These tools meet an understood baseline that they
are effective, but fall short when sUAVs are the subject. Any
assessment that meets, but does not have the potential to
exceed this baseline, is rated “Yellow” per category. Within
categories, it is possible for the ﬁeld’s tool to fall below this
baseline and miss key components for a sUAV risk assessment
tool, which would then be rated “Red”. In the opposite manner,
some ﬁelds that properly account for sUAV characteristics and
calculate risk indices on par with with that ﬁeld’s speciﬁc
devices are to be labelled “Green”. A “Green” rating is not to
insinuate that all sUAV risk is completely accounted for, but
that the tool reaches its own performance baseline with UAVs
also.
IV. ANALYSIS
As seen from the build out of other markets’ rating systems,
the validity of the rating is based on how holistic the system
is examined. The layout of components and a cybersecurity
risk index for sUAVs requires additional consideration for
adjacent devices and networks plus the environment that the
device is operating in since sUAVs are mobile. With swarm
research as a far end of connectivity of a sUAV, these ﬂying
computers use wireless communications that broadcast over
the open air to connect to their ground station and to other
UAVs. A rating needs to include some factor of the security
of these other devices and the connection protocol that allows
communications, especially if another ground station or UAV
can gain operational control. The environment aspect is made
of the inherit radio waves that may or may not interfere with
communications and control of the UAV. The data link itself
may be secure, but consideration for the country, locale, or
altitude may change collision rate or noise on the channel
and thus effect security. Table I shows analyzed applicability
of each cybersecurity ﬁeld to sUAV characteristics, if directly
applied.
TABLE I
INDEX APPLICABILITY TO SMALL UAVS.
Expertise
Flexibility
Coverage
Cost
Readability
Traditional
Yellow
Red
Yellow
Yellow
Green
ICS
Yellow
Red
Green
Yellow
Red
Insurance
Yellow
Green
Yellow
Red
Green
CVSSv3 is built for traditional IT systems, especially for
common computer components and software that the com-
munity can test and submit vulnerabilities. The sUAV ﬁeld
uses more embedded systems that either run on proprietary
hardware or software, and the devices operate much more
frequently on ad hoc networks where a simple modiﬁer for
environment and temporal scores is imprecise and lacking.
Industrial Control System (ICS) and SCADA vulnerability
tests take into account the physical aspects inﬂuenced by
and can effect cyber devices as seen in sUAV, however
the static and unique natures of SCADA systems show an
underestimation for new exploits and most quantitative indices
are close held by organizations selling services. Additionally,
the unique ﬂuidity of networking and device modiﬁcation
would require near continuous recalculation of risk or initial
calculation for every conﬁguration. The insurance-spawned
CRISM shows theoretical promise, especially within its an-
alytic approach, though the IDS portion needs adaptation to
the UAV ﬁeld before the tool would be truely useful. Since
the market share is dominated by proprietary minded brands,
the IDS in question may need to be network only, which will
reduce its effectiveness but still provide live insight into the
inherit risk. Many of the holes of CVSSv3 also carry over
to the insurance ﬁeld since the tool borrows heavily from
the same IT databases for vulnerability assessment. While
CVSSv3 and SCADA indices have more operational data
backing approaches, CRISM requires additional research, data
comparison, and marketing before being viable main-stream,
which is where a sUAV risk index will be of greatest use to
the consumers.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Small UAVs do not have a quantitative risk assessment that
meets the baseline of accuracy for their unique characteristics.
Current risk assessments focus on either the standard desktop
conﬁgurations of hardware and software as with the traditional
CVSSv3 or the network with ICS and insurance’s CRISM. Of
the three ﬁelds, the CRISM tool shows promise for attaining
ﬁdelity on sUAVs, but would need signiﬁcant work to adapt
to the ad hoc wireless networking and UAV speciﬁc protocols.
Connected, CVSSv3 requires signiﬁcant addition of UAV
vulnerability signatures to be useful.
Future work in the ﬁeld of sUAV risk assessment requires
the building of a quantitative equation for the ﬂying devices
or the adaptation from a parallel assessment, as discussed
at length in this research. Analytical scoring of a sampling
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

of UAVs then would provide validity to the assessment. It
is unknown at this time if an analytic only scoring would
provide the best results by providing ease of use in light
of highly proprietary brands deﬁning the market. A CRISM-
like adaptation needs validation through either live testing on
single and networked UAVs or at least hardware in the loop
simulation. Hardware in the loop is vital to simulation with
UAVs due to the physical responses of the system to cyber
effects. Without considering the physical response, many of
the detection methods of cyber to cyber and cyber to physical
attacks are lost.
Scoring, at this point, is more for internal comparison,
but the future expectation is to provide a medium for the
manufacture or market to convey the risks inherent in dif-
ferent hardware and software conﬁgurations to consumers. By
providing a single metric based on mission, the buyer may
be better informed based on their individual level of risk
acceptance, which may be then offset by insurance premiums.
Until a risk assessment becomes accredited, consumers will be
reliant on manufacturer advertisement and personal expertise
to compare the risk being introduced to their mission sets.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or
position of the Air Force, the Department of Defense, or the
U.S. Government. PA Case Number: 88ABW-2019-2852.
REFERENCES
[1] P. G. Fahlstrom and T. J. Gleason, “History and overview,” in Intro-
duction to UAV Systems, 4th ed.
West Sussex, United Kingdom: John
Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2012, pp. 3–31.
[2] A. Roder, K.-K. R. Choo, and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle Forensic Investigation Process: Dji Phantom 3 Drone As A
Case Study,” Digital Investigations, pp. 1–14, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.08649
[3] Z. Valentak, “Drone market share analysis
predictions for 2018: Dji
dominates, parrot and yuneec slowly catching up,” Drones Globe,
2017, [Retrieved September 2019]. [Online]. Available: http://www.
dronesglobe. com/news/drone-market-share-analysis-predictions-2018
[4] K. Hartmann and K. Giles, “UAV exploitation: A new domain for cyber
power,” International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict, CYCON, vol. 2016-
Augus, pp. 205–221, 2016.
[5] A. Karp, “Congress to hold uav safety hearing oct. 7,” 2015, [Retrieved:
September 2019]. [Online]. Available: http://atwonline.com/government-
affairs/congress-hold-uav-safety-hearing-oct-7
[6] T. Vuong, A. Filippoupolitis, G. Loukas, and D. Gan, “Physical indica-
tors of cyber attacks against a rescue robot,” 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops,
pp. 338–343, 2014.
[7] D. P. Shepard, J. A. Bhatti, T. E. Humphreys, and A. A. Fansler,
“Evaluation of Smart Grid and Civilian UAV Vulnerability to GPS
Spooﬁng Attacks,” Ion Gnss 2012, pp. 3591–3605, 2012.
[8] T. Reed, J. Geis, and S. Dietrich, “SkyNET: a 3G-enabled mobile attack
drone and stealth botmaster,” Proceedings of the 5th USENIX conference
on Offensive technologies (WOOT11), p. 4, 2011.
[9] B. Karabacak and I. Sogukpina, “Isram: Information security risk
analysis method,” Computers Security, vol. 24.2, pp. 147–159, 2005.
[10] M. H. Henry and Y. Y. Haimes., “Comprehensive network security risk
model for process control networks,” Risk Analysis: An International
Journal, vol. 29.2, pp. 223–248, 2009.
[11] K. Scarfone and P. Mell, “An analysis of CVSS version 2 vulnerability
scoring,” in 2009 3rd International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement, ESEM 2009, 2009, pp. 516–525.
[12] FiRST, “Common Vulnerability Scoring System V3,” 2015, [Retrieved:
September 2019]. [Online]. Available: https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/cvss-
v30-speciﬁcation-v1.8.pdf
[13] A. A. Younis and Y. K. Malaiya, “Comparing and Evaluating CVSS
Base Metrics and Microsoft Rating System,” in Proceedings - 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security,
QRS 2015.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2015,
pp. 252–261.
[14] S. Zhang, X. Ou, and D. Caragea, “Predicting Cyber Risks through
National Vulnerability Database,” Information Security Journal, vol. 24,
no. 4-6, pp. 194–206, 2015.
[15] S. Shetty, M. McShane, L. Zhang, J. P. Kesan, C. A. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat,
and L. L. Njilla, “Reducing Informational Disadvantages to Improve
Cyber Risk Management,” Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance: Issues
and Practice, 2018.
[16] R. Mitchell and I.-R. Chen, “A survey of intrusion detection techniques
for cyber-physical systems,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 46, no. 4,
pp. 1–29, 2014.
[17] A. J. Chaves, “Increasing Cyber Resiliency of Industrial Control Sys-
tems,” Thesis and Dissertations, vol. 1563, 2017.
[18] A. Matrosov, E. Rodionov, D. Harley, and J. Malcho, “Stuxnet under
the microscope,” ESET, 2010.
[19] K. Huang, C. Zhou, Y. C. Tian, S. Yang, and Y. Qin, “Assessing the
physical impact of cyberattacks on industrial cyber-physical systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 8153–
8162, 2018.
[20] S. Haque, M. Keffeler, and T. Atkison, “An Evolutionary Approach of
Attack Graphs and Attack Trees: A Survey of Attack Modeling,” in
International Conference on Security and Management, 2017, pp. 224–
229.
[21] J. Shin, H. Son, and G. Heo, “Cyber Security Risk Evaluation of a
Nuclear I&C Using BN and ET,” Nuclear Engineering and Technology,
vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 517–524, 2017.
[22] B.
Brown,
“The
ever-evolving
nature
of
cyber
coverage,”
2014,
[Retrieved:
September
2019].
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.insurancejournal.com/magazines/mag-
features/2014/09/22/340633.htm
[23] C. Stanley, “Cyber market estimate,” 2017, interview: 2017-06-26.
[24] L.
Graham,
“Cybercrime
costs
the
global
economy
$450
billion:
Ceo,”
2017,
[Retrieved:
September
2019].
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/02/07/cybercrime-costs-
the-global-economy-450-billion-ceo.html
[25] InsuranceJournal.com,
“Cyber
insurance
premium
volume
grew
35%
to
$1.3
billion
in
2016,”
2017,
[Retrieved:
September
2019].
[Online].
Available:
https://www.insurancejournal.com/news/national/2017/06/23/455508.htm
[26] J.
Yin,
“Cyber
insurance:
Why
is
the
market
still
largely
untapped?”
2015,
[Retrieved:
September
2019].
[Online].
Avail-
able: http://www.aei.org/publication/cyber-insurance-why-is-the-market-
still-largely-untapped
[27] J. Bolot and M. Lelarge, “Cyber Insurance as an Incentive for Internet
Security,” Tech. Rep.
[28] A. Panou, C. Xenakis, and C. Ntantogian, “RiSKi: A Framework for
Modeling Cyber Threats to Estimate Risk for Data Breach Insurance,”
Association for Computing Machinery, 2017.
[29] I. Stine, M. Rice, S. Dunlap, and J. Pecarina, “A cyber risk
scoring system for medical devices,” International Journal of Critical
Infrastructure Protection, vol. 19, pp. 32–46, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2017.04.001
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-746-7
SECURWARE 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

