Different Aproaches to Security Incidents and Proposal of Severity Assessment of 
Security Incident 
Lukas Kralik, Roman Senkerik, Petr Stipek 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
e-mail: kralik@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents comprehensive theoretical 
background for future work, which will be aimed on multi-
criterial evaluation and assessment of security incidents and 
proposal of methodology focused on audits of security incident 
management. This paper describes and comments three 
different points of view on security incident according to 
international standards or law (Cyber Security law in Czech 
Republic). The paper is mainly intended for Czech companies 
since it is based on project about Cyber Security Level in 
Czech Companies. Some criteria for assessment and evaluation 
of severity of security incident are proposed at the end of this 
contribution. 
Keywords-cyber security; security; incident; assessment of 
severity; ISMS; information security; incident management. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
An issue of security incidents and their resolving is 
inseparably connected with the field of ICT. It is necessary 
to look for more and more effective ways to prevent security 
incidents due to the increasing heterogeneity, complexity and 
pressure of confidence, integrity, availability or non-
repudiation. It does not matter what it is monitored, it is 
important to be always prepared to act appropriately. Each 
security incident is bound with time pressure, which requires 
automated and clearly defined steps. A severity assessment 
of a security incident is absolutely necessary since it strongly 
affects a readiness for next incident.  
This paper is divided into 4 sections which deal with 
theoretical aspects on the field of security incident. Section 2 
describes basic terms and elements for resolving the security 
incident. Also there is a brief explanation of a security 
incident resolving in few steps. The next section is devoted 
to the definition of a security incident. This paper will serve 
as theoretical background for project about cyber security 
level in Czech companies. For that reason, there are 3 
different definitions on the basis of used standards in Czech 
companies. The last section is the shortest but it is the most 
important. This section shows a conceptual proposal of 
severity assessment of the security incident. An objective of 
future work is to extend this proposal for multi-criterial 
evaluation. On the basis of this evaluation, it will be possible 
to assess occurred security incidents. 
 
II. 
SECURITY INCIDENT – BASIC TERMS 
A security incident is an event in information system, 
which caused disruption of confidence, integrity, availability 
or non-repudiation of information due to the failure of 
security measures or violation of security policy [1]-[5]. 
A suspected violation of a security policy or an attempt 
to overcome security measures is very often regarded for a 
security incident. A security incident usually has the 
following course: Incident Detection - Analysis of the 
Incident - Response to the Incident. Detection may be either 
automatic based on the information from some monitoring 
system, or manual, i.e., the incident is reported by someone. 
The company, which wants to deal with the security 
incidents and effectively solve them, should have an 
appropriate security standard and also it must properly 
present such standard to employees.  The next step is 
formation of a team, which will be responsible for receiving 
reports, evidence and solving of incidents, etc. In many 
cases, this team is called Information Security Incident 
Response Team (ISIRT). The amount of ISIRT members 
depends on the total number and frequency of security 
incidents and of course on the size of company. For a proper 
function, ISIRT must have an adequate equipment, means 
and mainly authority [5][8]-[11]. 
The question is than as to how to determine the severity 
of the incident. There are many possible ways and 
approaches. The severity of the incident can be determined 
based on a value of an impact. In other words, the incident 
had financial or non-financial impact to the company. 
Another solution is to determine the severity of the incident 
according to the number and expertise of people who have to 
deal with the incident (more details are given in Section 3). It 
can be assumed that different number of people or teams 
with diverse levels of knowledge will participate in solution 
of various incidents [7]-[9]. 
 
A. Security standard 
Each security standard must contain three basic elements. 
The first one is a definition of the security incident. The 
security incident must be clearly and understandable 
described with appropriate examples. These examples should 
be placed in attachment.  
The next is information about security incident report. 
Contact should involve address on the intranet, e-mail, phone 
and office or workplace address because it is necessary to 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

take into account the simple fact that the network 
infrastructure may not work. 
And the last one is a structure of a security incident 
report - form for reporting incidents [5][10]. 
 
B. Security incident log 
Creation of security incident log is necessary for 
successful resolving of particular incident. Information listed 
in this log includes: 
 
When the incident has occurred - due to the fact 
that the incident may be related to other events, it is 
always advisable to ascertain the exact time. 
 
Where the incident has occurred - the exact place 
and its description will enable the investigative 
team to respond quickly. 
 
Who committed the incident - the identity of the 
intruder can sometimes be difficult to identify, but 
we should try to get about him as much relevant 
information as possible. 
 
How the incident has occurred - sometimes we do 
not have enough information, but we should try to 
build a probable scenario describing the incident. 
 
What was the target of an attack - we should also 
distinguish whether the system was directly 
attacked or used to preparation for another attack. 
 
Which security attribute was compromised - 
integrity, confidentiality, availability and/or non-
repudiation. 
 
What was the nature of the incident - if the incident 
was 
intentional 
or 
unintentional. 
And 
if 
unintentional, thus if there was negligence or lack 
of knowledge of security policy. 
 
What measures have been overcome - whether the 
measures at the physical, logical, organizational, 
personnel or technical security. 
 
What asset has impaired - hardware, software 
(operating 
system, 
applications, 
databases), 
network, data, etc. 
 
What is a probability that the incident will be 
repeated again - rather low, medium, high or 
certain [5][10]. 
 
C. Equipment of ISIRT 
The team should have developed procedures for dealing 
with specific types of incidents, and these procedures should 
be still updated with new types of incidents occurring. Also 
they should have prepared a communication plan to make it 
clear who has to inform whom, or who decide on further 
action etc. 
A basic equipment of this team is a common room (war 
room), where it will be possible to meet and agree on the 
next steps in the event of an incident. 
Last but not least, they need access to an adequate 
software and hardware resources - for example, the team will 
need to make a copy of configuration, logs or possibly an 
entire partition of the infected system. 
 
D. Simplified procedure for investigation of incident 
The whole procedure has 7 steps. The biggest problem in 
practice is in step 3. A top management usually requires 
immediate recovery of operations, thus there may be no time 
for ensuring clues and finding causes. However, ignoring 
this step makes environment/conditions for another step No. 
6 more difficult. There should be proposed appropriate 
measures to prevent recurrence of incident. Choosing a 
suitable measure is so difficult, thus the company has no 
other option than hope that the incident will not occur again 
[3] 
1. Identify where a security incident has occurred; 
2. As quickly as possible prevent further damage; 
3. Analyze cause of security incident and ensure clues 
for further analysis; 
4. Remove a cause and restore functionality; 
5. Assess damage; 
6. Design and implement appropriate measures to 
prevent a recurrence of this incident; 
7. Inform others (employees, top management...) with 
results of the investigation [2][8][9]. 
 
III. 
DEFINITION OF THE SECURITY INCIDENT 
Many companies deal with incidents, but what kind of 
incident? Is it a computer, cyber or information incident? 
The usage of this term without any “additional specifying 
word/phrase” is quite problematic. There are 3 main and 
different points of view on definition of the security incident 
[1][3]-[5]. 
The definition of a security incident according to: 
1. Cyber Security Law 
2. NIST 800-61 (Computer Security Incident Handling 
Guide) 
3. ISO/IEC 27001 - part of the growing ISO/IEC 27000 
family 
of 
standards; 
information 
security 
management system (ISMS) 
In Czech Republic, a new law about cyber security came 
in 1.1.2015. The main objective of this new law is to increase 
an overall security of cyberspace and set up a mechanism for 
active collaboration between business sector and public 
authorities. This implies new duties for companies. On these 
facts it was prepared this paper, whose main goal is to 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

provide basic overview about this field and mainly help with 
an implementation of an incident management in companies. 
In the implementation phase it is placed emphasis on a 
determining a severity of the security incident. 
 
A. Security incident according to Cyber Security Law 
In §8, section 2, the cyber security incident is defined: 
“Cyber security incident is a cyber security event, which 
represents violation of information security in information 
systems or violation of security services and electronic 
communications networks.”[5] 
For understanding of this definition it is necessary to look 
into section 1, as to how security event is defined. There is: 
“Cyber security event is an event that can cause violation of 
information security in information systems or violation of 
security services and electronic communications networks.” 
[5] 
Information according to §2 d) means to ensure the 
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information. 
Cyberspace is defining as a digital environment enabling the 
creation, processing and exchange of information, consisting 
of information systems and services and electronic 
communications network. [5] 
 
B. Security Incident according to NIST 800-61 
A computer security incident is defined in NIST 
handbook 800-61 (Computer Security Incident Handling 
Guide, chapter 2.1) as: „A computer security incident is a 
violation or imminent threat of violation of computer 
security policies, acceptable use policies, or standard 
security practices. “ [1]. 
Even here, the term event appeared and it is specified as: 
“An event is any observable occurrence in a system or 
network.” and “Adverse events are events with a negative 
consequence…” [1]. 
 
Figure 1.  Principle of MITM attack 
In the aforementioned handbook, it is possible to find 
attack vectors, which are removable media and e-mail (this 
way the malicious code can spread); Distributed Denial of 
Service (DDoS) attacks (Figure. 1), password guessing, 
finding vulnerabilities on web sites, impersonation, 
spoofing, Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack (See Figure. 
2), fake access points, violation organization's security 
policy, loss or stolen devices or media etc. [7][10][12]. 
 
Figure 2.  Principle of DDoS attack [6] 
 
C. Security Incident according to ISO/IEC 27001 
In chapter 3.6 of this standard, the security incident has 
following description: “One or more unwanted or 
unexpected security events for which there is a high 
probability of compromise of the organization's activities 
and threats to information security.” Security event is 
defined in previous chapter 3.5. Security event is 
identifiable state of the system, service or network, pointing 
to a possible violation of security policy or failure of 
security measures. It may also be a different situation had 
not occurred before, which may be important in issue of 
information security [2]-[4]. 
 
D. Comparison of definitions 
Each security incident should be caused by force majeure 
or violation of security policies. For the purpose of the 
project there were used 3 different definitions. Comparison 
between these definitions is described in following table 
(table 1) where: 
“?” – the source of security incident is not clear if the 
definition is including it; 
“0” – the source of security incident is not included in the 
definition; 
“1” – the source of security incident is included in the 
definition. 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE I.  
SOURCES OF SECURITY INCIDENTS INCLUDED IN 
DEFINITION 
  
Force 
Majeure 
Violation of Security 
Policies 
intentionally 
unintentional 
Cyber security 
law 
? 
? 
? 
NIST 800-61 
0 
1 
1 
ISO/IEC 27001 
1 
1 
1 
 
The main standard for Czech companies is the cyber 
security law. The definition according to this law is quite 
wide, but it is not completely clear if cyber security incident 
represents also the violation of security by force majeure. 
Into this category it is classified for example interrupting of 
critical network infrastructure or servers due to flooding. 
Further, there should be a violation of security policy and 
standards that operator of critical infrastructure certainly 
published and it is mandatory for operator’s employees. 
The definition according to NIST 800-61 strictly claims 
that there has been a violation of security policies. 
Simultaneously there are no references to force majeure and 
the definition is clearly distanced from security violation due 
to natural disasters, blackout, etc. 
Probably the best definition of security incident is 
presented in ISO/IEC 27001. It possible to notice that failure 
of security measures is also mentioned in addition to 
violation of security policies. Failure may be an unexpected 
event that could significantly compromise the security of 
information. However, it is questionable whether to be 
considered as a security incident, virus detected at the 
workstation (PC) and removed by antivirus, unplanned 
downtime of the system, utilization of an employer’s mean 
for private purpose or retention and disposal of confidential 
documents on the table. 
 
IV. 
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY OF INCIDENT 
To correctly determine the severity of the incident it is 
very often a problem. In addition, the severity may vary 
throughout the life cycle of the incident. For example, at the 
beginning of the investigation of the incident, it may seem 
that this is a security incident with a negligible impact on the 
company and later on during the investigation it may prove 
that the original assumption was wrong. 
If companies already have established a process that 
could be used with some exaggeration as an incident 
management and the severity of each incident is determined 
in this process, then their approach is very different. It is 
understandable that different companies use various number 
of degrees to reflect the severity of the incident and also 
individual levels have other names. However, it is striking 
that for determining the degree of severity, the companies 
do not have defined clear rules. 
If company conducted a risk analysis then it can be 
relatively easy to determine the severity of incident based on 
the value of the asset whose confidentiality, integrity or 
availability has been or may be compromised. However, as 
already mentioned in section II, there are more possibilities. 
A proposal of criteria for determining the severity of the 
incident follows: 
The severity should be defined by 4 levels: 
 
low 
 
middle 
 
high 
 
critical 
Depending on the amount of affected users: 
 
one or few users 
 
whole department 
 
whole branch 
 
whole company 
According to a level that will deal with the incident: 
 
technical (IT) support 
 
lower management 
 
middle management 
 
top management 
Who should be familiar with the incident: 
 
one or a few employees of the company 
 
all employees 
 
own employees and persons outside the company 
 
own employees and the public 
By level of expertise: 
 
first level of support 
 
system administrator 
 
security expert 
 
security company 
Regardless of the size and scope of company, these four 
levels for assessment of the severity of the incident should 
be enough for most companies. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Security incidents and their solutions are an essential part 
of life of IS/ICT manager as well as of ordinary users. 
Absolute security of an information system is not 
guaranteed by implementation of any security policy. 
Although the implementation of various security functions 
and measures are part of ensuring security, vulnerabilities 
remain in the information system and these vulnerabilities 
represent risks. The existence of these vulnerabilities is the 
possibility of the security incident with direct or indirect 
impact on everyday operations of companies. Therefore, it 
is essential that each company pay attention to the definition 
and the implementation of security management system, its 
control and audit. At the same time companies should also 
deal with efficient and professional management of security 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

incidents. Incidents can be controlled intuitively or in 
structured way - professionally. Only a professional 
approach allows gaining benefits from security incidents - 
experience, skills and knowledge from solutions of previous 
security incidents. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by grant No. IGA/FAI/2015/039  
and IGA/CebiaTech/2015/036 from Internal Grant Agency 
of Thomas Bata University in Zlin; further by financial 
support of research project NPU I No. MSMT-7778/2014 
by the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic and also 
by the European Regional Development Fund under the 
Project CEBIA-Tech No. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089. 
REFERENCES 
[1] NIST, “Special Publication 800-61 – Computer Security 
Incident Handling Guide, Revision 2: 800-861“, 2012. 
[2] International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC 
27000-Information 
technology-Security 
techniques-
Information security management systems-Overview and 
vocabulary. 
[3] International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC TR 
18044:2004- Information technology - Security techniques - 
Information security incident management. 
[4] International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC 
27001 - Technology-Security Techniques - Information 
Security Management Systems-Requirements. 
[5] Czech. Law nr. 181/2014 sb. Cyber Security Law. 2014. 
[6] P. Doucek “IS/ICT Security Incidents and theire Solutions,” 
System Integration vol. 3, Prague 2005,  pp. 77-85. 
[7] C. Patrikakis, M. Masikos, and O. Zouraraki, “Distributed 
Denial 
of 
Service 
Attacks,” 
In: Internet 
Protocol 
Journal [online]. Volume 7, Number 4, San Jose, USA: Cisco 
Systems, 
Inc, 
2004, 
ISSN 
1944-1134, 
online: http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac123/ac147/archive
d_issues/ipj_7-4/dos_attacks.html, [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[8] L. Lukas,  M. Cahlik,  and L. Kralik, “Protection of Data 
Centers – Physical Protection, ”Recent Advances in 
Information Science, Proceedings of the 3rd European 
Conference of Computer Science (ECCS '12). Paris, France 
WSEAS Press, 2012, 171-176. ISBN 978-1-61804-140-1, 
ISSN 1790-5109 
[9] L. Wan-Soo and J. Sang-Soo, “A Study on Information 
Management Model for Small and Medium Enterprises,” 
Recent Advances in E-Activities, Information Security and 
Privacy, Spain, WSEAS Press, 2009, ISSN: 1790-5117. 
ISBN: 978-960-474-143-4 
[10] K. Prislan and I. Bernik, “Risk Management with ISO 27000 
Standards in Information Security,” In Advances in E-
Activities, Information Security and Privacy, Venezuela  
WSEAS Press 2010, ISBN: 978-960-474-258-5 
[11] L. Kralik and R. Senkerik, “Proposal for Security 
Management System,” Recent Advances in Electrical 
Engineering and Educational Technologies. Proceedings of 
the 2nd International Conference on Systems, Control and 
Informatics (SCI 2014), Athens, 2014. p. 77-80. ISBN 978-1-
61804-254-5 
[12] S. Fenz and A. Ekelhart. “Formalizing Information Security 
Knowledge" 
Book 
Formalizing 
Information 
Security 
Knowledge' (ACM, 2009, Edn.): 183-194 
 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

