You Are Who You Know 
Leveraging webs-of-trust for authentication in identity federations 
 
Bob Hulsebosch, Arnout van Velzen,  
Maarten Wegdam & Martijn Oostdijk 
InnoValor 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
e-mail: bob.hulsebosch@innovalor.nl 
Remco Poortinga-van Wijnen, Joost van Dijk 
 
SURFnet 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
e-mail: remco.poortinga@surfnet.nl
 
 
 
Abstract—Digital identity assurance emerges from two aspects: 
the strength of the authentication solution, or how you identify 
yourself towards an online service, and quality of the identity 
proofing and registration process, or how the authentication 
solution was issued to you. A reliable registration process, 
however, is often expensive. For example, it may require the 
establishment of a registration desk, which is not very user 
friendly as it demands much effort on the part of the user. This 
paper investigates the feasibility of using webs-of-trust for 
reliable identity proofing in digital authentication. Webs-of-
trust entail communities of people that trust each other, i.e. 
utilizing social contacts to confirm people’s identities. A 
functional decomposition of an attestation service and protocol 
for web-of-trust enhanced authentication are provided. A 
prototype for an attestation service was developed as a proof-
of-concept, leveraging LinkedIn as a web-of-trust, and 
evaluated by users. Finally, characteristics of using web-of-
trust for authentication assurance are discussed and a 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) 
analysis was conducted. Key findings are that while webs-of-
trust provide an interesting alternative mechanism for identity 
proofing that may have merit in use cases where no more 
efficient 
registration 
processes 
are 
available, 
its 
implementation is complex and mainly challenged by usability. 
Keywords-authentication; web-of-trust; level of assurance; 
attestation service; identity proofing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Authentication refers to an online process where an 
entity's identity is verified, typically by providing evidence 
that it holds a specific digital credential. The strength, or 
degree or reliability, of the authentication solution is usually 
expressed in terms of Levels of Assurance (LoA). Two 
factors are essential in the determination of the LoA [1][2]: 
1. The quality of the registration process, i.e., of the 
identity proofing, registration, and the delivery of 
credentials that are bound to the registered identity. 
2. The strength of the authentication process to establish 
that a user is who he/she claims to be, which in turn 
mainly depends upon the strength of the authentication 
credential. 
There is an increasing need for two-factor authentication 
solutions with cost efficient identity registration. The use of 
second factor authentication credentials is growing but lack 
reliable registration processes by which to link a physical 
person to his/her digital identity information and to his/her 
authentication credentials during enrolment weaken the 
overall authentication strength. If this is done poorly, there is 
little or no assurance that the person using that credential is 
who he/she claims to be.  
Different registration processes and mechanisms apply to 
identity vetting, proofing, credentialing and linking, and 
result in different assurance levels. An applicant may appear 
in person to register or may register remotely. In person 
registration provides reliable identity proofing, but is 
expensive (typically from €10 upwards) and not very user 
friendly (e.g., going to a registration office). Remote 
registration generally relies on the availability of trusted 
sources to cross-reference and validate the provided 
assertions such as name, home address, age, e-mail address, 
and photo. Remote registration is relatively cheap, but is 
vulnerable to threats and technically complex. This often 
leads to weak binding between the user, his authentication 
credential, and his digital identity. Consequently, the 
authentication LoA will be low.  
An innovative approach to achieve a higher registration 
LoA, without the cost and overhead of physical registration, 
is based on the concept of web-of-trust. Using webs-of-trust 
the authenticity of the binding between an authentication 
solution and its owner is established via third party user 
attestations. For instance, if person A claims that user B is 
using a particular digital identity, it could provide extra 
confidence for the service provider to allow access to 
resources that require a certain level of authentication 
assurance. When Person C also confirms that this digital 
identity is used by person B, this further increases trust in the 
digital identity of B. This mechanism can be considered 
“crowdsourcing of trust”. The relations between person A, B, 
and C, i.e. they share the same social or professional context, 
could be used to further enhance the level of the 
authentication assurance.  
Particularly in the context of research groups or virtual 
organizations in which users commonly know each other, 
such web-of-trust-based authentication LoA enhancement 
could be executed in an efficient manner. Moreover this 
approach also promises to capitalize on authentication 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

functionality provided by social networks such as LinkedIn, 
Facebook and Google in higher education and research 
environments. 
The 
registration 
LoA 
part 
of 
the 
authentication solutions provided by these networks is 
relatively weak (LoA 1) despite the fact that an increasing 
number of them are using two-factor authentication (LoA 2 
or higher). Web-of-trust based LoA enhancement could help 
increasing the registration LoA part of these providers and 
thus could help in increasing the overall LoA. 
The objective of this study is to determine the feasibility 
of using webs-of-trust to enhance the level of the 
authentication assurance, i.e., having your social connections 
vouch for your identity. In a way, this implies crowdsourcing 
assurance for identity verification. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II 
provides some background on webs-of-trust. Section III 
describes the functional decomposition for an attestation 
service that enables web-of-trust-based authentication. A 
protocol for leveraging web-of-trust for authentication and 
its implementation are described in Section IV. A user 
evaluation of the prototype that was developed based on this 
protocol as a proof-of-concept is described in Section V. A 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) 
analysis is given in Section VI. Related work is briefly 
touched upon in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII draws 
conclusions and provides an outlook for future research. 
II. 
WEB-OF-TRUST 
The web-of-trust concept is based on the idea of 
decentralized trust and social networks. It is used in Pretty 
Good Privacy (PGP) [3] as an alternative to the centralized 
trust model that is the basis of a public key infrastructure. In 
a web-of-trust, each user of the system can choose for 
himself whom he elects to trust, and who not. Instead of 
trusting a single entity to validate identities, you validate the 
identities of the people you know and export this information 
to a public database. Then, you rely on friends to vouch for 
the people they know, and those friends to vouch for still 
more people, and so on until you create a trust chain between 
any two arbitrary identities. This approach avoids the 
inherent problems of central authorities, but in practice it is 
rarely used due to usability issues of tools involved and a 
lack of user incentive.  
A successful web-of-trust should likely be built much 
like an online social network to obtain the shared experience 
information for certification, which is a model that hundreds 
of millions of people all over the world are already 
comfortable with using. As such, the web-of-trust model can 
be used to establish the authenticity of the binding between 
an authentication solution and its owner via third party user 
attests. Instead of building a whole new web-of-trust, 
existing trust infrastructures such as PGP, FoaF [4], identity 
federations, social or professional networks should be readily 
reused to enhance the registration component of the overall 
LoA.  
LinkedIn is the world’s largest business social 
networking site. One purpose of the site is to allow registered 
users to maintain a list of contact details of people with 
whom they have some level of relationship, called 
Connections. Users may invite anyone (whether a site user or 
not) to become a connection. LinkedIn provides an interface 
to obtain basic profile information of users. Information 
about the connected users in the LinkedIn network of a user 
can be collected as well. The availability of the information 
depends on the privacy policy of the connected user. As 
such, LinkedIn provides sufficient information to determine 
a reliable set of users that may enhance the level of assurance 
in someone’s identity. The same holds for similar social 
networks such as Google+, Orkut, and Facebook. 
Potentially, the web-of-trust approach combines the best 
of remote and physical registration practices. There is no 
need for a physical registration desk as other users in the 
web-of-trust take over the responsibility to identify users. 
Confidants in the web-of-trust may use physical presence, 
phone or email practices for this purpose. However, the 
attestations from the web-of-trust somehow need to be 
related to the claimant’s digital identity. This needs to be 
catered for by some kind of attestation service.  
III. 
FUNCTIONAL DECOMPOSITION 
Three user-roles can be distinguished in a web-of-trust 
based authentication scenario:  
1. An Asker that wants to use the Attestation Service to 
enhance assurance of his identity. 
2. A Helper that attests for the Asker’s identity. 
3. A Moderator that wants to have someone’s identity (i.e., 
an Asker) attested.  
A functional decomposition results in a number of 
building blocks that are required to realize web-of-trust 
based authentication. These are shown in Figure 1. 
 
Attestation Service
LinkedIn
Service 
Provider
Linking
LoA determination
Helper selection
Helper code
Asker
Helper
Moder
ator
Authentication
Trusted list
Attestation mgnt
Attribute
validation
 
Figure 1.  Functional decomposition. 
The need for an Attestation Service that facilitates and 
coordinates the web-of-trust based enhancement of the 
authentication solution is obvious. Specific functionalities of 
such an Attestation Service are: 
 Authentication of the users (Asker, Helper, Moderator). 
Authentication could be done in federated manner, via 
social logon, or locally. Ideally, the Asker as a strong 
authentication credential with a low LoA due to 
unreliable registration of the credential to the user’s 
identity.  
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 Helper selection: who are the best Helpers to attest for 
the Asker’s identity? Candidate Helper selection should 
be such that it mitigates risks related to herd behavior and 
fake accounts. Ideally, Helpers come from multiple 
webs-of-trust and have varying relationships with the 
Asker (e.g., friend/colleague, recent/longtime, etc.).  
 Helper code. The Attestation Service needs to be sure 
that the selected Helpers are indeed the ones that login to 
vouch for the Asker’s identity. One way to achieve this is 
by generating a random code that is passed to Helpers 
that they then have to enter to verify their attests are bona 
fide. 
 Linking of social networks to an Asker or Moderator, i.e., 
giving the Attestation Service access to the LinkedIn 
social graph data. This enables the Attestation Service to 
select meaningful Helpers from the social network. 
Commonly, users should be able to link their social 
network accounts to the Attestation Service.  
 LoA determination based on Helper attestations. Aspects 
that could be taken into account are: the number of 
Helpers, the LoA of Helpers, and the number of invited 
Helpers that did not vouch. The outcome of the LoA is 
communicated to the Asker and the service provider.  
 Trusted list: establishing a list of trusted Helpers from 
which Helpers will be primarily selected against the 
social graph of the Asker. In case of the moderator-
scenario, the list consists of the Helpers from the 
Moderator’s social network. 
 Attestation management, i.e., keeping track of the 
attestations given by Helpers, giving feedback to the 
Moderator or the Asker, asking Helpers to become 
trusted Helpers.  
 Attribute validation could be optional functionality of the 
Attestation Service. The Attestation Service may ask the 
web-of-trust to verify self-asserted personal attributes of 
the user such as a telephone number, age, or address.  
IV. 
PROTOCOL AND IMPLEMENTATON 
A. Protocol 
The following protocol for web-of-trust enhanced 
authentication has been implemented in the proof-of-
concept: 
Step 0: Building Trust List, Moderation: A list of trusted 
potential Helpers may need to be created. A Moderator may 
make an attestation request for a particular Asker. 
Step 1: Registration of Asker. Asker registers at the 
Attestation Service by logging in with his/her federated 
identity and requests enhancement of authentication. The 
response of the identity provider contains identity 
information of Asker. The information at least contains a 
LoA attribute and value and Asker’s federated user identity 
identifier. Asker is asked to link his/her federated institution 
account to, e.g., his/her LinkedIn account by logging in with 
his/her LinkedIn credentials.  
Step 2: Web-of-trust scoping. The Attestation Service 
determines who is able to vet for Asker’s identity by 
imposing its trust requirements on the available web-of-trust 
of Asker. Once the web-of-trust has been determined (in this 
case LinkedIn) the Attestation Service can start selecting 
suitable Helpers. Subsequently, Asker is given a vouching 
code and is asked to contact the Helpers by phone or 
physically and pass them the code. The use of e-mail is 
prohibited or deprecated; Asker has to affirm that he/she will 
adhere to this policy. Asking too many Helpers will burden 
the Asker as he/she has to contact them.  
Step 3: Passing of vouching code. Asker calls or meets 
Helpers and tells them the vouching code. During the phone 
call or meeting, the Helpers implicitly authenticate the Asker 
(e.g., via voice or face recognition).  
Step 4: Helper vouching. The Helper logs in to the 
Attestation 
Service 
with 
his/her 
federated 
identity 
credentials. The authentication solutions he/she is using must 
have an equal or higher assurance level than Asker’s current 
level. After successful authentication, the Helper states 
which Asker he/she wants to vouch for, and the Attestation 
Service asks the Helper to enter the vouching code. The 
Attestation Service then validates if the Helper is indeed one 
of the selected Helpers. If this is the case it asks the Helper to 
confirm that he/she vouches for Asker’s identity. Optionally 
the Attestation Service may show Asker’s personal attributes 
and asks Helper to validate them. Afterward the Helper logs 
out. Helper validation can be done in several ways. For 
instance, the Attestation Service might compare the attributes 
provided by the identity provider during authentication with 
those of the selected Helpers from Asker’s social network. 
They should overlap. Another approach is to send the Helper 
an email with a specific code. The Helper must enter the 
code together with the vouching code.  
Step 5: LoA determination. The Attestation Service 
updates the LoA of Asker based on the number of Helper 
attestations and their LoA. Mapping web-of-trust-based 
LoAs to existing frameworks for LoAs like ISO29115 [1] or 
STORK [2] is not possible; these frameworks do not take 
web-of-trust mechanisms into account. Consequently, we 
defined our own web-of-trust-based LoA-framework consists 
of three levels:  
1. WoT LoA1: equal to LoA1 of STORK or ISO29115.  
2. WoT LoA2: requires a 
a. 
minimum of 5 Helpers with LoA1 / WoT LoA1, or 
b. minimum of 3 helpers with LoA2 / WoT LoA2 
3. WoT LoA3: requires a 
a. 
minimum of 8 helpers with LoA2 / WoT LoA2, or 
b. minimum of 5 helpers with LoA3 / LoA4 / WoT 
LoA3 
Also, the number of invited Helpers that did not vouch 
should be taken into account. These may be considered as 
‘negative vets’. They have a negative effect on the new LoA. 
A simple algorithm is to multiply the new WoT LoA with 
the percentage of positive vets. Note that this is an initial 
definition of the LoAs, just to get an impression of what it 
means to step-up to a higher level. The Asker is notified by 
the Attestation Service about the new LoA, i.e., attestation 
status. 
Step 6: LoA communication. Next, Asker can go to a 
service provider and authenticate himself/herself using 
his/her federated identity. Multiple solutions are possible for 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

the communication of the LoA. One possible solution is that 
the identity provider authenticates Asker at e.g. LoA 1 and 
communicates this to the service provider. The service 
provider decides that this is not sufficient and makes a LoA 
attribute validation request at the Attestation Service. The 
Attestation Service returns a LoA 2 attribute. This convinces 
the service provider to allow Asker access to the service. 
Another solution is that the Attestation Service becomes the 
(new) identity provider for the Asker, authenticates him/her 
and communicates the LoA to the service provider. This 
implies that the Asker must be able to select the Attestation 
Service as her preferred identity provider.  
The different steps are illustrated in Figure 2. The 
protocol is inspired by the work of Brainard on using 
vouching 
by 
which 
helpers 
leverage 
their 
strong 
authentication in order to assist another user, the asker, to 
perform emergency authentication in case of loss of a second 
authentication token [5]. 
 
 
 
Helper
Attest. 
Service
Service
Provider
Asker
Helper
4. Helper Vouching
6. LoA
3. Vouching Code
1. Registration
6. Login + Access
2. WoT
5. New LoA
 
Figure 2.  Web-of-trust protocol flow. 
 
B. Implementation scenario 
A proof-of-concept Attestation Service has been 
developed. It models a web service for step-up authentication 
for access to a shared research environment. The Attestation 
Service allows users to login with a local username and 
password combination. This can easily by extended to other 
federated authentication or social login solutions. In case of 
federated authentication, the attributes that are provided by 
the identity provider during authentication at the Attestation 
Service could be used for validation purposes. Furthermore, 
the Attestation Service offers the user the opportunity to get 
attested and link the identity provider account to her 
LinkedIn account.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Asker wanting to be attested by Helpers. 
The latter provides the Attestation Service the ability to 
randomly select 5 Helpers from the LinkedIn web-of-trust of 
the Asker or to select the Helpers from its own list of trusted 
Helpers. Helpers can put themselves on this trust list by 
sharing their LinkedIn contacts. Upon submitting an 
attestation request, the Asker is presented a vouching code 
that is alphanumeric and consists of five characters, with the 
instruction to approach the five Helpers (but not by e-mail). 
Helpers should login to the Attestation Service with their 
federated account and fill in the vouching code in order to 
verify the Asker’s identity. When all five Helpers have 
vouched, the hypothetical LoA of the Asker is stepped-up 
from 1 to 2, granting the Asker access to the concept shared 
research environment. A Moderator may also request an 
attestation for an Asker, view the progress of attestations or 
set his own LinkedIn contacts as the trust list to select 
Helpers from. 
To give an impression of the proof-of-concept several 
screenshots are shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4. 
 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 4.  Helper attesting Asker. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
To test the concept of web-of-trust the proof of concept 
was evaluated by two separate user groups via role-playing 
scenarios. In addition to specific questions, remarks of the 
participants as well as non-verbal communication were noted 
by the observers for evaluation of the prototype. 
The outcomes of these two user evaluation tests show 
that usability is a critical factor for the success of web-of-
trust enhanced authentication. Also, the concept is relatively 
difficult to explain to users. Furthermore, not everyone 
actively uses social media, e.g., exemplified by not knowing 
username and password. This could lead to frustration on the 
part of all three roles (Asker, Helper, and Moderator). The 
users experienced barriers to contact Helpers and motivating 
them to provide an attestation. Moreover, it is likely that 
situations will occur wherein Askers are unable to reach 
Helpers, e.g., because they do not possess sufficient contact 
details. Similarly, non-response handling of Helpers could be 
problematic, since a Helper response cannot be guaranteed. 
The reliance on others may obstruct or delay authentication 
and access. So, in order to achieve successful and timely 
attestation, the whole attestation process should be strictly 
guided 
by 
the 
Attestation 
Service. 
For 
instance, 
communication between Helper, Moderator, Asker and 
Attestation Service could be automated or manually 
performed through a host of channels, albeit each with their 
own considerations and trade-offs in terms of responsiveness 
and ‘social pressure’.  
According to the evaluation results, there are also trade-
offs inherent to Helper selection; not always suitable Helpers 
were selected. Helper selection is dependent on the 
information provided by the web-of-trust and the quality of 
the reasoning algorithm for selecting them. A better selection 
may be possible if more information is available from the 
social network used as a source, e.g., the number of likes and 
comments (cross-) posted on Facebook or the duration of a 
LinkedIn connection. This information is typically not 
available to applications outside of the social network itself. 
Moreover, users may be uncomfortable making the 
information available to the Attestation Service, as was 
witnessed by the comments during the prototype evaluation.  
Which social network is most appropriate to get 
attestations from depends on the type of service to be 
accessed by the Asker. A work-related service would favor 
the use of a professional social network such as LinkedIn to 
get attestations from; a leisure or e-commerce type of service 
might benefit from attestations from the Facebook web-of-
trust.  
The challenges of automatically selecting the ‘right’ 
social network and (then) the ‘best’ Helpers can be 
circumvented by restricting the context and work flows for 
this approach to only Moderator-initiated attestation. The 
selection of network and Helpers can then conceivably be 
done by the Moderator, although that does raise the question 
what additional benefit this approach has if the moderator 
already has enough information and knowledge to do that 
selection in the first place (i.e., is attestation really still 
needed in that situation?). Conceivably removing the social 
network from the equation altogether and allowing the 
Moderator to appoint ‘delegated Registration Authorities’ 
may work better in those situations. 
VI. 
SWOT ANALYSIS 
This section discusses the strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities and threats (SWOT) of web-of-trust based 
authentication approaches, followed by a feasibility analysis 
to determine whether threats can be mitigated and 
opportunities leveraged by using the strengths and 
eliminating the weaknesses. 
A. Strengths 
1) Cost efficient 
The web-of-trust approach combines the best of remote 
and physical registration practices. There is no need for an 
expensive physical registration desk as other users in the 
web-of-trust take over the identification task, which reduces 
costs of enrolling strong authentication.  
2) Less intrusive for the user 
Potentially it reduces the intrusiveness for the user as it 
replaces the cumbersome physical registration overhead by 
more natural Asker-Helper interactions. Askers, however, 
may be reluctant to ask a Helper they haven’t seen or spoken 
for quite some time to attest for their identity.  
3) Easy integration in existing federation infrastructures 
The Attestation Service can be easily integrated in an 
existing identity federation infrastructure. It can leverage the 
existing federated trust fabric for selecting reliable helpers. 
The Attestation Service can be positioned as an attribute 
provider for federated service providers. It can make 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

assertions about the LoA level of the user. Moreover, 
contrary to other approaches - such as PGP or FOAF - there 
is no need for specific client software at the user side.  
B. Weaknesses 
1) Reliability 
ENISA has summarized the possible threats to 
reputation-based 
systems. 
Examples 
of 
threats 
are 
whitewashing attacks, Sybil attacks, impersonation and 
reputation theft, bootstrap issues related to newcomers, 
extortion, denial-of-reputation, ballot stuffing and bad 
mouthing, collusion, repudiation of data and transaction, 
recommender dishonesty, privacy threats for voters and 
reputation owners, social threats such as discrimination or 
risk of herd behavior, attacking of the underlying 
infrastructure and the exploitation of features of metrics used 
by the system to calculate the identity assurance [6]. Most of 
these threats are also applicable to web-of-trust based 
authentication. Though the proposed approach does not 
mitigate all of these threats, their impact is largely influenced 
by the quality of the Attestation Service’s reasoning 
algorithm. Moreover, using social networks as a web-of-trust 
for identity attestations makes it more difficult to spoof the 
system by creating false identities or colluding in groups. 
It is relatively easy for an Asker to create multiple 
LinkedIn, Facebook or Google+ accounts under fake 
identities and establish via these accounts a web-of-trust of 
LinkedIn connections or Facebook or Google+ friends (i.e. 
Sybil attack). This threat is largely mitigated by the fact that 
the Attestation Service determines the Helpers. Additionally, 
it can be required for Helpers to have a higher LoA than the 
Asker; this makes it more difficult to create false Helpers.  
False identities can be detected by a relatively poor social 
ranking. Either they remain disconnected or are connected to 
a relatively isolated group of ‘old friends’. Large-scale 
analysis of social networks can uncover at least some forms 
of group collusion. For example, web pages colluding to 
alter their search engine ranking by linking to one another 
can be identified and removed if they all have a similar 
number of links [7]. Alternately, collusion could alter the 
relative abundance of motifs (small sub-graphs), arousing 
suspicion if it differs significantly from that of social 
networks in general [8].  
Similarly, herd behavior due to social pressure can be 
circumvented in a similar manner by selecting Helpers from 
different webs of trust. Reliable selection functionality may 
prevent the situation of a group of attackers that collaborate 
to boost their identity assurance via false attestations.  
Services exist that analyze many sources including social 
networks such as Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn and Twitter 
to verify cyber identities in real-time. These services are able 
to detect fake accounts and corresponding identities. An 
example is Trulioo that offers a service that analyses 
Facebook profiles and determines whether they’re likely to 
be spoof accounts [9].  
However, not all risks can be mitigated completely. 
Given this weakness, the web-of-trust approach may not be 
suitable to achieve the highest LoA (i.e., 4), but certainly has 
the potential to achieve LoA 3.  
2) Liability 
Another weakness is related to liability. The Attestation 
Service becomes the authority regarding the authentication 
LoA of the user. Its owner can, however, not easily be made 
liable for its LoA claims. The relying service provider has to 
trust the web-of-trust based LoA claims of the Attestation 
Service. The fact that both the Attestation Service provider 
and the relying service provider are in the same federation 
may help establishing this trust. Additionally a mechanism 
could be devised that allows service providers to somehow 
specify trust anchors it ‘knows’ (e.g., specific persons within 
institutions) along with their representation in various web-
of-trust networks, an approach that fits well if the service 
providers involved are provided by, or specific to, a virtual 
organization or collaboration. 
3) LoA determination 
A web-of-trust based authentication assurance is built 
from the accumulation of assertions of opinion/judgment by 
others. It is emergent or generative and is more a matter of 
judgment than fact. It is an establishment of reputation, as 
rendered by the attestation service based on a knowable and 
refutable set of attestations. For example, the trustworthiness 
that a user’s identity is associated to an account is a construct 
of one or more judgments of other users about this 
association. Rarely do these sources agree, often because 
they base their judgment on varying data/experience. There 
is currently no clear agreement about how to convert the 
attestations into authentication LoAs. Likely parameters have 
been determined (number of attestations, the LoA of the 
helpers, etc.). Evaluation of the model and application in 
real-life settings has to turn out what suitable parameters are. 
Inspiration may be obtained from the work of Jøsang [10] 
and Neisse [11].  
In the protocol description, we mentioned that the web-
of-trust approach does not fit in the existing LoA 
frameworks defined by ISO/IEC 29115 and STORK QAA. 
These frameworks assume there is a central authority that 
issues the authentication solution and takes care of its 
binding to a user identity after some form of identity 
verification. In the web-of-trust based model, the verification 
role of this central authority becomes less important, i.e., this 
is done via claims of other users. Adoption of the web-of-
trust model in these frameworks is one approach but could 
take a long time. Another approach is to register our web-of-
trust based assurance profiles at the global IANA registry 
that has been setup for this purpose [12]. The registry is 
intended to be used as an aid to discovering LoA definitions 
in protocols that use a LoA concept, including Security 
Assertion Markup Language (SAML) 2.0 and OpenID 
Connect. The drawback of a registry approach is that it 
doesn’t provide the registered LoA schemes with any formal 
status, i.e., it doesn’t make them standards that are accepted 
on a global scale. On the other hand, conforming to 
standardized frameworks such as ISO/IEC 29115 or STORK 
QAA provides such a formal status and will make the 
attestation service more useful in a broader context.    
4) Trustworthy exchange of vouching code 
The approach implicitly assumes that the Helpers 
somehow identify and authenticate the Askers via physical 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

contact 
or 
another 
means 
that 
mediates 
physical 
communication like a mobile phone call or video session. It 
doesn’t prevent the Asker to send an e-mail to the Helper 
with the vouching code. This weakness can be mitigated by 
explicitly asking the Helper to confirm that he had physical 
or mobile phone contact with the Asker for passing the 
vouching code. Another option would be to use a customized 
mobile app that facilitates the exchange of the vouching code 
to another mobile phone, i.e., the code is only exchanged if 
the mobile phones are shaken together. This option proves 
togetherness but excludes the use of remote communication 
channels such as the mobile phone or a video session. 
Consequently this narrows down the number of possibilities 
for exchanging the vouching code in a trustworthy manner.   
5) Bootstrapping 
Bootstrapping always remains an issue in web-of-trust 
approaches. The Attestation Service must have sufficient 
access to social networks or other webs of trust to reliable 
determine suitable Helpers. Though social networks and 
interfaces to them are readily available, they need to be made 
available to the Attestation Service. By making the 
Attestation Service part of an existing federation and by 
seducing users to link LinkedIn, Facebook or Google+ 
accounts to their federated account the bootstrapping 
problem can be tackled.  
6) Usability 
Usability is a potential weakness. Particularly in terms of 
comprehensibility: will the user understand why he/she has 
to login to the attestation service and pass vouching codes to 
helpers in order to increase the LoA of their authentication? 
Users may abort the vouching process because they do not 
understand why it is needed and consequently may lose 
confidence in the system. Lack of usability may come at the 
cost of adoption.  
Also, some effort of the Helpers is required. However, 
Helpers will often have sufficient incentives to attest, e.g., 
because they need to collaborate with the Asker or want to 
share something that requires a high LoA. Since the 
assumption is that the Helpers in some way know and are 
connected to the Asker via one or more Webs of trust, 
allowing the Asker to include a reason for vouching in the 
request may provide further incentive for the Helpers to 
vouch for the Asker. For instance, the Asker needs to access 
a Virtual Organization database that is administered by the 
Helper. These incentives should cater for a reasonably quick 
enhancement of the user’s authentication LoA.   
C. Opportunities 
1) Useful webs of trust are readily available 
Existing webs of trust such as LinkedIn, Facebook, PGP 
or identity federations are readily available and their 
exploitation 
provides 
sufficient 
trustworthiness 
for 
authentication LoA enhancement purposes.  
2) Attribute validation 
Many commercial service providers offer discounts for 
e.g. students or members of a certain community. For these 
services it is critical to reliably validate the fact if a user is 
indeed a student or community member, as this is the basis 
for the discount provided. Other attributes are convenient, 
but could also be provided by the person directly. As the 
discounts for students and members are often considerable, 
these services are highly valuable for users. Attributes such 
as group membership and age are often used for 
authorization purposes and must be reliable too.  
The Attestation Service can fulfil this need by acting as 
an attribute validation service. It can ask the Helpers to 
validate the attributes it has obtained from the Asker’s 
identity provider. Additionally it can ask the Asker to self-
assert several attributes (e.g. mobile phone number or 
gender) and ask the Helpers to validate the assertions. These 
Helper evaluations will increase the assurance level of the 
attribute. Similarly to authentication LoAs, this also 
introduces the need for attribute LoAs. Defining an attribute 
LoA framework is beyond the scope of this work. An initial 
attempt is made in the STORK2.0 project [13]. The attribute 
LoA solution allows the Attestation Service to provide the 
attributes during authentication, i.e., the service provider is 
informed about the assurance of the attribute.  
Attributes such as student, mobile phone number, e-mail 
address, group membership and last name are likely to 
change in time. The reliability of the attestations made by 
helpers regarding these attributes is time-dependent and has 
to decrease in time. Consequently, the validation of attributes 
by helpers should be done one a frequent basis.  
The identity providers in existing federations make 
explicit assertions about the user’s identity, e.g., that he/she 
is a student at the University of Amsterdam. The attestations 
of other users easily fit into the “claims” architecture of the 
federated identity infrastructures, and service providers can 
readily judge the validity of a particular claim based on the 
authority ascribed to the identity provider in the context of a 
federated trust framework and the domain. For example, the 
University of Amsterdam identity provider is arguably 
definitive regarding the claim that the user is a student, but it 
is not authoritative for the student’s financial status. A 
project manager is authoritative for the researcher’s project 
membership and a government population register for the 
age of a student. So, for validation of attributes it is 
extremely important to know who is authoritative to do so. In 
a web-of-trust model this can be compensated by using large 
numbers of attestations: if a large number of helpers attest 
that a user is of a certain age then this will probably the case. 
Using large numbers of attestation may also result in large 
numbers of negative attestations. This may for instance be 
the case for the validation of membership of a small project 
team. Only the team members may give positive feedback, 
whereas the many more other helpers from outside the team 
may give negative feedback. The context should be taken 
into account to optimize the validation feedback from the 
web-of-trust.  
D. Threats 
1) Loss of privacy 
The web-of-trust approach requires intensive linking 
social network accounts and mining of social network 
graphs. The Attestation Service potentially obtains insight in 
the social network of the user and of its connections. Without 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

proper security measures this may provide a huge privacy 
threat that will make users reluctant to use the system.  
Alternatively, for those concerned that a third party may 
eventually abuse or be compelled to reveal the social 
network, decentralized secure computation could produce 
the aggregate values without a single party having access to 
the full social network, though such techniques incur 
substantial computational cost. NodeRank is a decentralized 
algorithm similar to PageRank that can assign reputations 
using a social network [14]. Alternately, one can propagate 
reputation ratings along the social network, where each 
agent receives information about potential targets through 
referral chains [15][16]. Cryptographic techniques can 
further improve decentralized algorithms by allowing 
precise control over the distribution of information among 
participants without requiring a trusted intermediary. 
E. Summary 
Most weakness can be mitigated by the opportunities and 
threats by strengths. However, two challenges remain to be 
addressed: usability and liability. The latter can be tackled by 
integrating the attestation service into the existing trust fabric 
of the federation (i.e., it becomes a federated service) and 
possibly by limiting (specific) attestations to a certain 
context (e.g., membership of a specific organization). The 
usability challenge strongly depends on how things are 
presented to the user. This will be the main aspect of the 
evaluation activity later on in the project.  
Looking at web-of-trust LoA enhancement from a 
business perspective the following question immediately 
pops into mind: is there a business case for an attestation 
service? Since there is an increasing need for stronger 
authentication solutions and physical registration is costly, 
one would say so. Typically authentication solution service 
providers could benefit from an attestation service, 
particularly if standardized frameworks such as ISO/IEC 
29115 adopt the approach. An additional value of the 
attestation service is the opportunity to use it for attribute 
validation by the web-of-trust. There also is an increasing 
need for reliable attributes, maybe even more than strong 
authentication. The sum of all digitally available information 
about an individual offers enormous potential value [17]. 
Applications leveraging personal data can boost efficiency, 
focus research and marketing, and spur the creation of 
personalized 
products 
and 
services. 
An 
important 
requirement is that the identity attributes are reliable. The 
attestation service has the ability to meet this requirement 
VII. RELATED WORK 
The idea of using a web-of-trust is not new and many 
other reputation systems involve the relationships of 
participants in the computation of the reputation. Models 
exist that combine transitive trust (as in certificates or PGP 
keys) with a reputation rating: If a participant A trusts 
participant B (with a certain rating) and participant B trusts 
participant C (with a certain rating), then participant A trusts 
participant C (with a rating as a function of the other two 
ratings) [18]. 
Another way to assign reputation based on social 
network structure considers each link in the network as an 
implicit recommendation for a person. Alternatively, weights 
can be added to the links by allowing users to privately rate 
their 
contacts 
based 
on 
characteristics 
such 
as 
trustworthiness. One can then apply a PageRank-like 
algorithm to assign reputations to individuals [19]. Because 
PageRank is based on the global structure of the network, it 
is more difficult to spoof than local network properties, as it 
is not sufficient to have just anyone recommend a user, but 
they need to have high reputation themselves. 
Brondsema and Schamp have created a system called 
Konfidi that combines a trust network with the PGP Web-of-
Trust [20]. The system implements a metric and mechanism 
for inferring the trust on the networks formed. The generated 
network creates trust pathways in between email sender and 
receiver that can be crawled and using trust mechanisms and 
metrics, trust values are inferred. This approach has to be 
extended with LoA-determination functionality to make it 
suitable for authentication LoA statements. 
Calculating trust from social network aggregation is not 
new [21][22]. These approaches are solely based on the 
number of claims about a user and do not take into account 
other trust aspects such as the duration of the connection, 
presence of the connection in multiple social networks or 
overlapping attributes like skills and context (e.g. colleague, 
friend or group membership). 
An interesting example is Lenddo [20]. Lenddo is an 
online platform that utilizes connections, relations and 
reputation from multiple social media sites such as Facebook 
to build a credit rating. At Lenddo, everything revolves 
around the LenddoScore. This number, ranging from 0 to 
1,000, 
is 
a 
universal 
measurement 
of 
the 
user’s 
trustworthiness, with 1,000 being the highest value. Using a 
proprietary and evolving algorithm, the rating is graphically 
plotted across categories like Social Data, Trusted 
Connections, and Financial Performance. This score is what 
helps the user to obtain approval for loans and services. 
Lenddo uses social data to ensure that the user is who he says 
he is. Lenddo also analyzes the user’s connections and how 
strong they are; Lenddo only takes into account the strongest 
interactions. In many cases this means family, close friends, 
and coworkers. 
These models focus primarily on the calculation of trust 
and reputation, whereas this work focusses on the translation 
of crowdsourced trust about an identity into authentication 
assurance. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Web-of-trust provides an interesting identity proving 
mechanism that can be used in registration for authentication 
to attain LoA 2 or 3. Ideally, it should be used in situations 
where the authentication means has a higher assurance level 
than its enrollment process (including identity registration 
and proofing). This could be due to the fact that physical 
registration was not possible or too expensive. For example, 
in case of an international collaboration where distance, 
language or poor electronic communication are barriers to 
proofing. The main issue of utilizing web-of-trust for 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

authentication purposes is related to usability, so it is advised 
to maximize usability in any implementation thereof.  
Altogether, this means the applicability of web-of-trust 
authentication, with regard to necessary level of assurance, 
alternative registration processes and usability, is use case 
sensitive. For example, Facebook already has a functionality 
where users are asked to confirm a photo as their friend, 
since this concerns an easy extension for a social networking 
website. The concept of introducing your friends is intuitive, 
however its implementation for digital authentication is less 
straightforward. 
Future work in the area of web-of-trust for identity 
management may consist of the following research activities: 
 Further optimization of the algorithms and metrics for 
determining the authentication LoA based on claims from 
the web(s) of trust.  
 Pilot studies to collect user feedback in order to evaluate 
the approach. 
 Further optimization of the algorithms and metrics for 
determining suitable helper candidates from the web-of-
trust. This activity involves complex data mining and 
analytics. 
 Exploration of the use of web-of-trust for other identity-
related aspects beyond authentication. Possible aspects 
are the use of web-of-trust for attribute validation (e.g., is 
the user indeed a student or older than 18 years?), for 
authorization purposes, or for linking different user 
accounts (e.g., the communication of a shared attribute 
that enables linking).  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is sponsored by the Géant3plus Open Calls 
program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ISO/IEC 29115:2013 Entity authentication assurance 
framework, available from www.iso.org. 
[2] 
B. Hulsebosch, G. Lenzini, H Eertink, STORK Quality 
Authenticator Scheme, Deliverable D2.3, March 2009, 
available from www.eid-stork.eu. 
[3] 
More information about PGP is available at www.pgpi.org. 
[4] 
More information about the Friend of a Friend (FoaF) is 
available online at www.foaf-project.org. 
[5] 
J. Brainard, A. Juels, R.L. Rivest, M. Szydlo, M. Yung, 
“Fourth Factor Authentication: Somebody You Know,” in 
ACM 
CCS, 
2006, 
USA, 
pp. 
168–178, 
doi:10.1145/1180405.1180427. 
[6] 
E. Carrara, G. Hogben, “Reputation-based Systems: a 
security analysis,” ENISA position paper, October 2007. 
[7] 
M. R. Henzinger, R. Motwani, C. Silverstein, “Challenges in 
web search engines,” Newsletter ACM SIGIR Forum, Vol 
36, Issue 2, Fall 2002, pp. 11-22.  
[8] 
R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. 
Chklovskii, U. Alon, “Network Motifs: Simple Building 
Blocks of Complex Networks,” Science, vol. 298, pp. 824-
827, 2002, doi:10.1126/science.298.5594.824. 
[9] 
More information about Trulioo is available online at 
www.trulioo.com. 
[10] 
A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, C. Boyd, “A survey of trust and 
reputation systems for online service provision,” Decis. 
Support Syst., vol. 43, March 2007, pp. 618-644, 
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2005.05.019.  
[11] 
R. Neisse, “Trust and privacy management support for 
context-aware service platforms,” PhD thesis, University of 
Twente. CTIT Ph.D. Thesis Series No. 11-216 ISBN 978-
90-365-3336-2, 2012. 
[12] 
The LoA Registry, more information available online at 
http://levelofassurance.org/process.html. 
[13] 
STORK2.0 project, more information is available online at 
www.eid-stork2.eu.  
[14] 
P. Li, X. Qiu, NodeRank: An Algorithm to Assess State 
Enumeration Attack Graphs, 8th international conference on 
Wireless 
Communications, 
Networking 
and 
Mobile 
Computing 
(WiCOM), 
pp. 
1-5, 
doi: 
10.1109/WiCOM.2012.64785852012. 
[15] 
B. Yu, M. P. Singh, “A social mechanism of reputation 
management 
in 
electronic 
communities,” 
Proc. 
4th 
International Workshop on Cooperative Information Agents 
IV, Springer-Verlag London, 2000, pp 154-165, ISBN:3-
540-67703-8. 
[16] 
G. Zacharia, A. Moukas, P. Maes, “Collaborative reputation 
mechanisms in electronic marketplaces,” Proc. 32nd Hawaii 
Intl. Conf. on System Sciences (HICSS), 1999, vol. 8, p. 
8026, ISBN:0-7695-0001-3. 
[17] 
Boston Consultancy Group, The Value of our Digital 
Identity, 
2012, 
available 
online 
at 
www.libertyglobal.com/PDF/public-policy/The-Value-of-
Our-Digital-Identity.pdf. 
[18] 
F. Kerschbaum, J. Haller, Y. Karabulut, P. Robinson, 
“PathTrust: A Trust-Based Reputation Service for Virtual 
Organization Formation,” Proc. 4th Int. Conference on Trust 
Management (iTrust), vol. 3986 LNCS, 2006, pp. 193–205. 
[19] 
L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, T. Winograd, “The pagerank 
citation ranking: Bringing order to the web,” Technical 
report, Stanford Digital Library Technologies Project, 1998. 
[20] 
D. Brondsema, A. Schamp, “Konfidi: Trust Networks Using 
PGP and RDF,” Proc. Of the WWW’06 Workshop on 
Models of Trust for the Web (MTW'06), Edinburgh, 
Scotland, UK, May 22, 2006. 
[21] 
S. Noh, “Calculating trust using aggregation rules in social 
networks”, Proc. 4th international conference on Autonomic 
and Trusted Computing, Hong Kong, China, pp 361-371, 
2007, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73547-2_38. 
[22] 
H.R. Singh, A. Neelima, L.S. Singh, S.Ib. Singh, “A Model 
of Computing Trust in Web Based Social Network Using 
New 
Aggregation 
and 
Concatenation 
Operators,” 
International Journal of Computer Science and Network, 
Volume 2, Issue 4, August 2013, IJCSN International 
Journal of Computer Science and Network, Volume 2, Issue 
4, August 2013, ISSN:2277-5420. 
[23] 
Lenddo, 
more 
information 
available 
online 
at 
www.lenddo.com/pages/faq. 
 
 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

