Possibilities of Technical Security of Elementary Schools 
 
Rudolf Drga 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
e-mail: rdrga@fai.utb.cz 
Hana Charvatova 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
e-mail: charvatova@fai.utb.cz
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the technical security of 
elementary schools as one of the possible targets for terrorist 
attacks or unstable individuals. It explores the organizational 
structure of large and small schools, their regime precautions, 
the current level of technical support and possible options for 
improvement, both in the field of communication, and 
especially in the full utilization of existing security systems. 
Keywords-Elementary 
school; 
technical 
security; 
organizational structure. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, elementary schools represent one of the 
possible soft targets for terrorist attacks or unstable 
individuals who themselves want to attract media attention. 
With regards to the mentioned second group of terrorists, 
some countries have a set of specific rules indicated by law, 
which prohibit broadcasting of such cases in public media. 
This constitutes a failure of attacker’s goal (see. Anders 
Behring Breivik, a Norwegian far-right terrorist who 
committed the 2011 Norway attacks [1]. He is an idol for 
similar individuals, where media worldwide has broadcasted 
the case.) 
For the evaluation of schools, it is necessary to divide 
them according to their size. We use the number of attending 
students as the most important parameter, as it affects the 
internal organization of the school.  A clear division is 
shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
DIVISION OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS ACCORDING TO 
SIZE 
Size of 
school 
Number of 
students 
Basic activities 
Other 
activities 
small 
up to 100 
Elementary school 1st to 5th 
grade, kindergarten, after-school 
club 
irregular 
activities 
medium 
100-400 
Elementary school 1st to 9th 
grade, kindergarten, after-school 
club, school canteen 
regular 
activities 
- reduced 
range 
large 
over 400 
Elementary school 1st to 9th 
grade, kindergarten, after-school 
club, school canteen 
large 
regular 
activities 
 
A small school, mainly located in a village, has up to 100 
students. Its basic activities are teaching students of grade 1 
to 4 or 5, running kindergarten and after-school clubs. 
Various other activities, which do not have regular character, 
such as competitions, carnivals, etc., are organized on its 
premises or on the public ones. 
A medium school teaches approximately 100 to 400 
students. It is located in the catchment villages or small 
towns. Their activities include teaching of students of grade 
1 to 9. Furthermore, there is one kindergarten, after-school 
clubs and other activities are run on a limited scale. 
A large school has over 400 students, teaches grades 1 to 
9, runs kindergarten, after-school clubs and the school 
canteen is open even to the public. Regular large-scale 
activities and events are organized by people who are not 
employees of the institutions, but have access to the 
premises.  
II. 
SMALL SCHOOL 
The organizational structure of a small school is shown in 
Figure 1. Its organizational structure is relatively simple and 
the possibility of penetration of potential perpetrators is 
relatively low in compliance with basic safety precautions. 
The regular daily schedule starts in the morning by bringing 
students to school. They are mostly accompanied by parents, 
siblings, grandparents or friends in order to be there by a 
certain time. 
There is always a janitor at the entrance to the building. 
He guards the entrance and checks all the people coming to 
the school premise. He knows most of them personally and 
can thus let them into the cloakroom where students can 
change their shoes and leave some coats in the winter time. 
This is important at the beginning of the school year when 
new 1st grade students do not know the school rules and need 
the support of their loved ones. When the arrival time is 
over, the janitor makes sure there is nobody around the 
cloakroom and locks the entrance door. Furthermore, 
students will sit at their desks in classrooms and have their 
classes. The teacher checks the number of students. In case 
someone is missing, he checks if the child is excused. If not, 
he sends SMS to parents asking about the absence of the 
student and the child should be traced.  
The situation is relatively simple, because parents and 
acquaintances are identifiable and know each other 
personally, so the penetration of strangers is rarely possible. 
Furthermore, the control of the number of students is easy. 
School employees are: a director, teachers, cooks and 
cleaners. With all those employees the work and 
psychological characteristics can be easily verified. School 
staff represents a small team. Interpersonal issues can arise 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

rather than an attack on the children by a staff member. The 
director is fully responsible for employees and internal 
organizational management. Other entities who cooperate 
with a small school are municipal offices and suppliers of 
services and materials to the kitchen. A special door with 
bell is used for the entrance of third parties. Every such 
person is then met by a school employee and thus a safe 
movement of a stranger in the school building is ensured.  
 
Figure 1.  Organizational structure of small school. 
The following Figure 2 shows an example of technical 
security of the small school object. The school is situated in a 
building with adjacent land for outdoor activities of students. 
The yellow line indicates perimeter protection, blue line 
protective shield of building and the red line the entrances 
for students and the suppliers of goods or services. After 
students and staff leave the building, arming of the building 
is set by the janitor. This starts the sheath and the inner 
protection of the building for the protection of property 
inside the building.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Technical security of small schools. 
As explained above, the current security status of small 
school is very good due to good regime precautions. For 
communication with inputs, basic bells without a direct call 
to the recipient are used. So it is time consuming to handle 
the arrival of a stranger. Therefore, an internal communicator 
for the elementary school is proposed. It would have direct 
key presses for specific employee. Using a video phone has a 
great advantage in the visual inspection of anyone entering. 
After verifying a person, we can remotely let her/him inside 
the building if she/he belongs to the circle of known people. 
On the other hand, if the person is unknown, we can provide 
a guide or meet her/him personally. The problem of current 
video communicators is that they do not offer a great variety 
of target recipients, optional by simple function keys. 
Another advantage would be if communication devices 
would be portable (mobile) and the staff would always have 
them with them. The second option would be a stable device 
in every classroom and different places all over school 
premises. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Addressed internal communication to specific individuals using 
videophones.  
For monitoring of students on their way to and from 
school, a simple and fast tool for sending SMS and e-mail 
placed on a server (Figure 4) where every teacher would 
have their client access would be suitable. The advantage of 
this solution is that the information concerning the exchange 
of information with those responsible people for the students 
would have been clearly concentrated in one place, which 
would allow sharing among teachers, and also parents, after 
the definition and implementation of access rights. Even 
these small schools now have their websites to provide 
information to the public about the activities of teaching, but 
also for various events. 
 
Figure 4.  Tool for sending SMS and Email. 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

I&HAS (Intruder and Hold Up System) is used as a 
default system in small schools. Only after all students and 
employees leave the building, it works and guards in full 
mode. In the event that there would be arming the perimeter 
(yellow line) or shell (blue line) to protect the building 
envelope, the daily regime I&HAS is not used. In this case, 
the system protects the lives of persons who are inside the 
building. 
Another feature that can extend this system is usage of 
emergency buttons. Mainly, teachers or school staff 
members who come into contact with the public and 
students would have them. The lowest level of distress 
would mean calling the school director, a higher degree 
would mean calling the emergency squad ARC (alarm 
receiving centre) and the highest grade then calling the state 
police. This is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Modernization of technical security small school. 
III. 
LARGE SCHOOL 
The situation in the large school in comparison with a 
small school is completely different, as shown in Figure 6. 
Teachers do not know personally all the students, neither 
their families and friends. The arrival procedures of students 
to school are similar, but a janitor or supervising teacher is 
not able to memorize hundreds of students and identify 
among them a new student. The most difficult situation is in 
the beginning of the year when new parents accompany first-
graders to the cloakroom and help them with changing 
clothes. After the arrival of students to school, the janitor 
locks the main door. Any stranger that comes to the school 
building from the outside either rings the bell to the janitor or 
the school office. 
In the case when a student does not come to school, the 
absence is written to the class register and must be settled 
within the next day, not immediately. Also, an excuse of the 
student is realized through the school office and it is not 
processed until the next day. So, that there is always a delay. 
Other school services in areas such as catering, schools 
have secured such a manner that external boarders have their 
own entrance to the dining room with a simple access 
system, where they are using an identification element - the 
card – that opens the entrance door. Under normal 
circumstances, these people have no access to the rooms 
outside of dining area. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Organization structure of large schoool. 
Technical support of school is done mechanically by 
securing the building envelope on the ground and indoor 
space with I&HAS, as shown in Figure 7. The electronic 
security system is only used at the time when all the students 
and staff leave all objects, without connection to ARC, with 
only alarm reporting to the director and his assistants. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Technical security of large school. 
In order to improve an internal communication and to 
increase the visibility of strangers in all objects, systems 
should be installed, as is shown in Figure 8. In the areas of 
movement of people and potentially the possible intrusion of 
unknown and dangerous people, access points with a 
capacity of passages appropriate to the specific use must be 
installed. In addition to the record of the people who passed 
through the gates, it is appropriate to supplement those 
places on internal communicators that allows direct 
connection between the visitor and the specific person. In 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

large schools, the main entrance is directly connected to the 
director’s. For suppliers of raw materials, it should be 
directly linked to the kitchen. For the access of external 
diners to the dining room, just an access point using a 
proximity card and a video recording of individual passages 
is needed. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Access system with CCTV surveillance. 
For the main entrance, which is used for the arrival and 
departure of students from school, it is necessary to use such 
a system approach, which has high passages. If we want to 
have maximum security, they must be installed turnstiles that 
cannot be skipped, or otherwise scour and students are 
identified individually, not in groups. In this case, there 
would have to be turnstiles installed in parallel in a number 
of 5-10 pieces to increase the capacity of passages, or the 
students would have come at a precise time and walk in 
groups, which is, with the number of more than 400 students, 
a fairly challenging task. In this case, an access server that 
accurately records the comings and goings of individual 
students can be installed and problems with attendance or 
truancy can be better traced. Another advantage would be 
that the class teacher would have a day by day overview of 
students who did not arrive to school and are unexcused. 
Figure 9 shows a wider usage of I&HAS. The basis is the 
use of the system in day and night mode. In night mode, the 
system would work the same way as it works now, when 
students and staff are not at schools. In day mode, at least the 
emergency buttons should be available to all teachers. In 
case of emergency they would call to the director's office, at 
a higher level of distress then ARC and, in the case of a 
critical event then directly to the police. 
Other function would be full roofing of the building shell 
(Figure 7 - blue line) except the access points. Last usable 
functions are guarding of the perimeter (Figure 7 - yellow 
line) in day mode. This is in practice very difficult to 
implement as the regular maintenance necessary to the 
surrounding vegetation is costly, especially on the banks of 
the river flowing around. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Modernization of technical security of large school. 
 
As it is evident from the previous procedure, security 
systems I&HAS, ACCESS (Access System) and CCTV 
(Close Circuit Television) cooperate here. Therefore,  the 
best solution is the realization of an integrated security 
system. For the realization we can use systems which are 
commercially available, where it is necessary to respect the 
extensiveness of the system. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Currently, it can be stated that Czech society is very 
calm. Compared to other European countries or the world, 
the local crime rate is low. There is as well an important fact, 
that guns and weapons are not owned in large quantities, as 
is very common for example in the USA. 
The disadvantage of our society is that we are naive and 
not trained to security risks. The citizen does not know how 
to take care of their own safety and security in their 
neighbourhood. They expect everything from government 
and state security forces. 
Currently, great emphasis is placed on prevention against 
various threats. The goal should be education for active, 
mature multicultural society, as the current word is 
globalized. 
It is possible to use standard regime precautions and 
regular technical support against the attacks of criminals. 
Against the threat of terrorists and unpredictable individuals, 
costly technical support (X-rays, metal detectors, drug 
detectors) and demanding regime precautions could be used. 
Generally, the particular security level of an elementary 
school should be tailored to the criminality level of the 
specific location. 
 
 
 
 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] The Guardian: Anders Breivik. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik 
[2] L. Lukas, M. Adamek, R. Drga, A. Velas, T. Lovecek, J. 
Reitspis et al., “Security Technologies, Systems and 
Management I.” (in Czech). Zlín: VeRBuM, 2011. ISBN 978-
80-87500-05-7. 
[3] L. Lukas, M. Adamek, F. Brabec, Z. Dvorak, M. Kelemen, Z. 
Malanik et al., „Security Technologies, Systems and 
Management II.” (in Czech). Zlín: VeRBuM, 2012. ISBN 
978-80-87500-19-4. 
[4] L. Lukas, M. Adamek, F. Brabec, R. Drga, M. Hromada, V. 
Laucky et al., “Security Technologies, Systems and 
Management III.” (in Czech). Zlín: VeRBuM, 2013. ISBN 
978-80-87500-35-4. 
[5] L. Lukas, R. Drga, M. Hromada, J. Kamenik, S. Lichorobiec, 
J. Sevcik et al., “Security Technologies, Systems and 
Management IV.” (in Czech). Zlín: VeRBuM, 2014. ISBN 
978-80-87500-57-6. 
 
 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

