Active Shield with Electrically Configurable Interconnections 
 
Umut Guvenc 
National Research Institute of Electronics and Cryptology 
BILGEM TUBITAK 
Kocaeli, Turkey 
e-mail: umut.guvenc@tubitak.gov.tr 
 
 
Abstract—An active shielding method is hereby introduced, 
providing security to security critical integrated circuits 
against some physical attacks such as probing, manipulation 
and modification. Active shields satisfy a physical clearance by 
preventing the reachability of the circuitry while they, 
themselves, are subject to modification in most cases. The 
proposed active shield, which is also subject to a patent 
application, provides the ability to detect any physical 
modification made on the shield itself by utilizing electrically 
configurable interconnections between shielding metal lines. 
By changing the selected interconnection configuration of the 
shielding lines, the proposed active shield provides a self 
detection ability as a countermeasure against the vulnerability 
to physical modification made on the active shield itself. 
Keywords-active shield; secure IC; cryptography; physical 
attack countermeasure 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In security critical integrated circuits, some security 
countermeasures are implemented to provide safety of the 
critical information against some analysis and attack 
techniques. Some of these attack techniques aimed to obtain 
the information in an unauthorized way are known as 
physical attacks since they require actual physical access to 
the inner layers of the integrated circuit. Upon this attack 
concept, one should try to obtain the secret information via 
probing, manipulation or modification. These attack 
techniques include probing the critical information by 
making connections to the metal lines of the integrated 
circuit, faulting the integrated circuit by forcing from these 
outside connections and changing the connections of the 
internal metal lines permanently by using Focused Ion Beam 
(FIB) [1]. Active shield [2] is a countermeasure against these 
kinds of attacks, to be applied to the security critical 
integrated circuits which are physically accessible. 
In active shield method, the whole surface of the 
integrated circuit is covered by metal lines on the top metal 
layer. These metal lines are supplied with a predefined or 
random test data from a transmitter and observed with a 
number of receivers located at certain points of the integrated 
circuit. The receivers are also supplied with the same test 
data internally thus they can compare the data on the 
shielding metals and the actual test data. According to the 
result of the comparison, these receiver circuitries verify the 
integrity of the top layer metal lines. Since any physical 
attack will disturb the integrity of these shielding lines by 
making them open or short circuit, the receiver circuitries do 
not receive the correct test data pattern from the shield, thus 
detect the physical attack. 
It is believed that [3], [4], [5], [6] and [7] provide 
sufficient information on the background of the active shield 
method. In [3], a way of implementing the active shield 
method without requiring an additional metal layer is 
introduced, and in [4] [5], improvements are aimed to reduce 
the power consumption due to active shield. Derouet [6] 
introduced some improvements mainly on the detection 
circuitry part of the active shield method, not on the 
protection of the top metal layer shield itself. 
Although being used in integrated circuits to detect any 
physical attack, active shield itself has still vulnerability 
against physical modification. Since the top layer metal lines 
of the active shield have fixed interconnections, it is possible 
to make shortcut connections between the lines and remove 
the parts covering the whole integrated circuit or a part of it, 
to perform the actual attack without being detected by the 
active shield. Some improvements can be made to decrease 
the vulnerability of the active shield to physical 
modification, like randomization of the connections of the 
top layer metal lines and increasing the number of receiver 
circuitries, however it is not possible to prevent the 
vulnerability completely. 
In [7], a novel countermeasure against physical 
modification on the active shield is introduced. A capacitive 
measurement between the top layer metal lines of the active 
shield is performed along with the verification of the test 
data, to check whether the top layer metal lines are integral 
in their actual shapes. However, since the mentioned 
capacitive measurement between the top layer metal lines 
cannot be performed precisely, it is still possible for an 
attacker to perform partial physical modifications on the 
active shield while still satisfying sufficient capacitive 
coupling between the top layer metal lines. 
In this work, an active shield aimed to prevent the 
vulnerability caused by the fixed interconnections of the 
shielding metal lines, by introducing a method using 
electrically configurable interconnections is proposed. Using 
electrically configurable interconnections provides the 
opportunity to select from more than one interconnection 
scheme during the operation of the integrated circuit. This 
dynamic configurability introduces a precise self-integrity 
checking mechanism to the active shield method. Thus, it is 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

prevented to bypass and remove the metal lines of the active 
shield by making fixed shortcut connections between them. 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
A regular active shield implementation is shown in Fig. 
1. In this implementation, the whole surface of the integrated 
circuit is covered by parallel shielding metals which are 
connected randomly yet fixed interconnections to each other 
to form the bit lines carrying the test data. The transmitter, 
receivers and the internal data paths between them are 
supposed to be hidden in the other circuitry thus cannot be 
recognized. The receiver circuitries verify the integrity of the 
shield by comparing the data received from the shielding 
lines with the actual data received internally. However, one 
should attempt to uncover the security critical circuit by 
making some external shortcut connections between the lines 
of the active shield as illustrated in Fig. 2. In such a case, the 
active shield would still claim that the shield is integral. By 
increasing the number of bit lines and the number of 
receivers, forming shortcut connections can become harder; 
however, the vulnerability is not prevented completely. 
 
Figure 1.  A regular active shield implementation with fixed 
interconnections. 
 
Figure 2.  Illustration of bypassing the regular active shield. 
In Fig. 3, an implementation of the proposed active shield 
is shown. The top layer metal lines are arranged in the same 
manner to cover the whole surface of the integrated circuit. 
Interconnections between the parallel metal lines are realized 
by using electrically switching circuits selecting from 
different random interconnection configurations. In the 
embodiment shown in Fig. 3, two different interconnection 
configurations are realized with switching circuits, which are 
in fact sufficient for the purpose of the active shield. The 
transmitter transmits a test data along with a select signal 
used to determine which interconnection configuration is 
selected. The receivers receive the test data from the bit lines 
and reorder the bits of the data received according to the 
select signal produced by the transmitter. The receivers also 
receive the same test data from the transmitter through 
internal data buses. The receivers verify the integrity of top 
metal lines of the active shield by comparing the test data 
received from the bit lines with the actual test data received 
from the internal data buses. Generally, the internal data 
buses carrying the actual test data the select signal, and the 
transmitter and the receivers themselves are arranged as a 
part of the integrated circuit such as distributed within the 
whole layout and not easily recognizable for the sake of 
security. Thanks to the electrically controllable switching 
circuits 
used 
to 
construct 
different 
interconnection 
configurations, the proposed active shield verifies the test 
data received from the bit lines with the actual test data for 
detection of the physical attacks focused on the integrated 
circuit, while providing the ability to detect any fixed 
modification made to bypass the shielding pattern and 
remove at least a part of it. In order to satisfy the latter 
purpose, the transmitter changes the selected interconnection 
configuration during the operation of the integrated circuit by 
changing the select signal regularly or randomly. Thus, any 
fixed physical modification on the upper layer conductive 
lines leads to an error in the verification of the test data. 
 
Figure 3.  Proposed active shield implementation with electrically 
configurable interconnections. 
Fig. 4 illustrates a bypassing attack on the proposed 
active shield. In the illustration, shielding metal lines are 
partly removed from the top of the security critical circuit by 
making 
fixed 
shortcut 
connections. 
These 
shortcut 
connections between the transmitter and one of the receivers 
are arranged to preserve the integrity of the bit lines 
according to the first interconnection configuration. 
Although the fixed shortcut connections satisfy the correct 
transmission of the test data when the first interconnection 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

configuration is selected, they do not satisfy the correct 
transmission of the test data when the second interconnection 
configuration is selected. Since the transmitter changes the 
select signal during the operation of the integrated circuit, the 
receivers would test the integrity of the shielding metal lines 
for all of the interconnection configurations and detect the 
attack. Thus, the vulnerability of the active shield to physical 
modification is prevented. 
 
Figure 4.  Illustration of bypass connections made on the proposed active 
shield and the detection of the modification. 
Fig. 5 shows an exemplary embodiment of the 
electrically controllable switching circuits. Four two-input 
multiplexers are used to construct a part of the two different 
interconnection configurations of four bit lines as an 
example. The select signal determines in which order the 
inputs of the multiplexers are connected to the outputs. 
 
Figure 5.  Exemplary embodiment of the electrically controllable 
switching circuits. 
As seen in Fig. 5, electrically controllable switching 
circuits can be realized easily within a digital design, since 
they consist of basic multiplexer standard cells. The 
realization and the placement of multiplicity of these 
circuitries can be done by even automatic place and route 
approach or some scripting in the layout generation step.  
III. 
CONCLUSION 
A novel active shielding method is proposed, which has 
the ability to detect any bypassing attempt made by fixed 
physical modifications. Electrically controllable switching 
circuits are used to construct dynamically selectable different 
interconnections schemes between shielding metal lines.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The proposed active shield method is subject to a patent 
application numbered as 2011/11432 by Turkish Patent 
Institute. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Witteman, “Advances in smartcard security”, Information 
Security Bulletin 7.2002: 11-22. 
[2] S. Briais, et al. “Random Active Shield”, Fault Diagnosis and 
Tolerance in Cryptography (FDTC), 2012 Workshop on. 
IEEE, 2012. 
[3] A. Beit-Grogger and J. Riegebauer, “Integrated circuit having 
an active shield”, US Patent 92848 A1, published in May 5, 
2005. 
[4] G. Cutrignelli and R. Malzahn, “Circuit Arrangement, data 
processing device comprising such circuit arrangement as 
well as method for identifying an attack on such circuit 
arrangement”, US Patent 24890 A1, published in January 22, 
2009. 
[5] J. Ziomek, “Method to reduce power in active shield circuits 
that use complementary traces”, US Patent 150574 A1, 
published in January 26, 2008. 
[6] O. Derouet, “Integrated circuits including reverse engineering 
detection using differences in signals”, US Patent 244749 A1, 
published in October 2, 2008. 
[7] P. Laackmann and H. Taddiken, “Apparatus for protecting an 
integrated circuit formed in a substrate and method for 
protecting the circuit against reverse engineering”, US Patent 
132777 A1, published in July 17, 2003. 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

