Possibilities of the Search Engine Shodan in Relation to SCADA
Jan Vávra, Martin Hromada
The Department of Security Engineering
Tomas Bata University in Zlín
Zlín, Czech Republic
e-mail: {jvavra, hromada}@ fai.utb.cz
Abstract— Recently isolated Industrial Control System (ICS)
became accessible and interconnected with Information and
Communication Technology (ICT).
Nowadays, the ICS is
considered as the target of a considerable number of cyber-
attacks. Moreover, the contemporary development of the ICS
indicates its growing availability over the Internet. There are a
few methodologies how to find Internet-connected devices.
However, there is one well-known search engine for Internet-
connected devices. The Shodan is a widely used tool that pro-
vides an enormous capability for targeting Internet-connected
devices. In this article, we examine the current state of the ICS
availability via the Internet. Therefore, we evaluate the possi-
bility of exposing the vulnerable ICS systems in order to speci-
fy their relations to SCADA cyber security. Finally, we identify
974 vulnerable SCADA devices via the Shodan.
Keywords-Shodan;
Cyber
Security;
Industrial
Control
System;
Vulnerability;
Supervisory
Control
and
Data
Acquisition.
I.
INTRODUCTION
An enormous number of the cyber-attacks relating to the
ICS and its main subgroup Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) systems have the eminent influence
on the SCADA cyber security. Moreover, the disruption of
the SCADA services could have a significant impact on the
population, environment or the state itself.
The SCADA was designed as an isolated system. How-
ever, the recently isolated system has become more intercon-
nected with external technologies like Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT). The evolution of the
SCADA has led to a production of new vulnerabilities,
which are significant threats to SCADA. Furthermore, Pollet
[8] predicted an increasing dependency of the SCADA sys-
tems on IT; therefore, the percentage of industrial companies
utilizing cyber security solutions will rapidly grow.
There is a considerable number of search engines for In-
ternet-connected devices. Patton et al. [9] have investigated
some of the emerging vulnerabilities that exist. Moreover,
they give us examples on how dangerous Shodan[3] can be
even with a small subset of devices. Markowsky et al. [10]
demonstrated how simple can the Internet of Things (IoT) be
reachable via Shodan. In addition, Bodenheim et al. [11]
investigated the capabilities of the Shodan in relation to
SCADA. The authors conclude that Shodan should be cate-
gorized as a threat to Internet-facing SCADA.
The Shodan project is highly interested in searching for
SCADA devices. Therefore, the ICS radar was created in
order to present the results to the public. However, the previ-
ous research has not fully addressed all cyber security as-
pects, especially vulnerable SCADA devices. Moreover, the
cyber security of SCADA communication protocols is dis-
cussed in the article.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II
presents basic information about SCADA systems. The
search engine for Internet-connected devices Shodan is ana-
lyzed in Section III. Section IV gives an overview of Indus-
trial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team. In
Section V, the industrial communication protocols are de-
scribed. The next Sections (VI and VII) include methods and
results. Finally, Section VIII provides the discussion of the
article.
II.
SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA ACQUISITION
SYSTEM
SCADA is a main subgroup of the ICS. Moreover, it can
be described as data gathering, remote and centralized sys-
tem. It is also used for monitoring, management and control
of industrial processes. Therefore, the public and private
organizations use them as a means to improve efficiency of
the industrial system. Moreover, the SCADA is an internal
part of the Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) [12].
Nowadays, the CII has enormous influence in almost every
sector of the critical infrastructure (transportation systems,
power plants, dams, water treatment, oil production, chemi-
cals, gas distribution, etc.). Therefore, every cyber-attack on
the CII systems must be considered as a critical threat,
which can result in a fatal impact on the environment, popu-
lation or a country [12].
The SCADA have a positive influence on contemporary
society; nevertheless, these systems are under increasing
pressure to improve connectivity via the Internet [12]. Thus,
the recently isolated systems are becoming more dependent
on interconnection with external technologies [1]. This re-
cent evolution of industrial systems resulted in productions
of new vulnerabilities. Thus, the protected system becomes
more vulnerable to new cyber-attacks.
III.
SHODAN
Shodan is a robust search engine for Internet connected
devices. The engine was developed by John Matherly.
Moreover, he launched it in 2009. Shodan has capabilities to
find and collect important information about Internet-
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

connected devices. The main source of information comes
from banners. The engine uses a banner grabbing technique
in order to find specific devices like servers, routers, printers,
ICS, etc. Shodan is continuously searching for the technolo-
gy accessible from the Internet. Furthermore, it is able to
index the devices and investigate available services. This
information is collected and stored in the main Shodan data-
base. As a result, there is a highly valuable database with
thousands of the records. The database is free to use, moreo-
ver, there are no restrictions for users. They can easily use
one of the filters in order to find valuable information. The
basic filters are focused on these fields:
•
Product name
•
Product version
•
Port
•
Operating system
•
Country or city
•
Specific IP address
Shodan is able to track most of the Internet-connected
devices. Moreover, it includes SCADA. The SCADA sys-
tems are based on specialized technology and protocols. The
uniqueness of the SCADA creates new opportunities for the
attackers. Shodan provides unique ability to find and scan
industrial devices. The representation of SCADA devices
connected to the Internet can be seen in Figure 1. Thus, they
are accessible around the World especially in the United
States of America and Europe. As a result, there are a con-
siderable number of vulnerable devices connected to the
Internet.
Figure 1.
The SCADA map created by Shodan. (adapted from [3])
Reconnaissance and data gathering is the first step of
every cyber-attack. Moreover, the attacker can focus on im-
portant information about the targeted organization. They are
looking for vulnerable elements of the system which can be
exploited. For example: the information about SCADA as-
sets, ICT assets, partners, services, protective measures and
even employees themselves [2].
A.
Banner Specification
The banners are metadata about the system. They are
highly useful for administrators to manage and categorize
their networks. However, the banners are the main type of
information for Shodan. Besides, there is the technique
called banner grabbing. It is used to identify the information
like services, operating system, open ports, communication
protocol name or information about product and its version
in order to find a vulnerable system [4]. A partial example
of the banner is shown in Figure 2. This is real example
acquired from the Shodan. There is a lot of information
about the system; however, only some information is really
important. The important information includes: port, longi-
tude, latitude, area_code, dma_code, and ip.
•
Port – This segment represents the end point of
network communication. Furthermore, it has
close relationship with IP address and commu-
nication protocol. Each port is developed for
different services.
•
Longitude – The longitude is a geographic co-
ordinate. Moreover, it defines east-west geolo-
cation of the device.
•
Latitude – The latitude is a geographic coordi-
nate. Moreover, it defines north–south geoloca-
tion of the device.
•
Area_code – The area code is a special identi-
fier for the location where the device is located.
However, it is only available in the USA [3].
•
Dma_code – The DMA code is an acronym for
designated market area code. It is a specific
group of counties covered by television sta-
tions.
•
IP – It is designed as a unique identifier for
every device connected to a global or local
network.
Figure 2.
The real example of the banner. (adapted from [3])
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 2 shows the other important information such as
organization name, Internet Service Provider (ISP), country
code or city. The information extracted from the banners is
very useful for administrators. However, it is also helpful to
hackers.
IV.
INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS CYBER EMERGENCY
RESPONSE TEAM
Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response
Team (ICS-CERT) is a division of the Department of
Homeland Security. The objective of the ICS-CERT is to
create a reliable system for one main purpose. The ICS-
CERT designed a complex system in order to manage the
risk of the ICS. The database of ICS vulnerabilities was
developed. Furthermore, the ICS-CERT provides important
services for ICS cyber security [5]. Figure 3 illustrates the
essential ICS-CERT services.
Figure 3.
The essential ICS-CERT services. (adapted from [5])
The information published by ICS-CERT has significant
influence in risk reduction in relation to the SCADA system.
Nevertheless, it has a high value for the attackers. The data-
base of ICS vulnerabilities can be used for targeting and
exploiting of the vulnerable system. Furthermore, the
SCADA has enormous problems with the updates. The up-
dates implementation is a time consuming process because
of testing. The time gap between publication of the vulnera-
bility and updating of the system is the target for the attack-
er.
V.
INDUSTRIAL COMMUNICATION NETWORK
PROTOCOLS
Industrial networking is essential for every SCADA sys-
tem. Moreover, it is responsible for establishing and main-
taining industrial communication between controls, supervi-
sory or even business devices. This section is designed as a
theoretical basis which describes industrial communication
network protocols.
A.
Modbus
It is one of the most widely used industrial communica-
tion protocol. It can be described as a serial communication
protocol which is robust, open and simple. It was designed
in 1979 by Modicon [2]. This communication protocol
commonly uses port 502 in order establish communication.
B.
DNP3
Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3) is an extensively
used industrial communication protocol which is designed
to establish traffic between master station and slave stations.
In addition, it is widely used in the water and electric sectors
of the critical infrastructure [2]. It is common knowledge
that DNP3 uses port 20000 for communication.
C.
IEC-104
This standard for industrial communication was created
by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
The whole name of the standard is IEC 60870-5-104. More-
over, the standard enables communication between control
station and remote sites via TCP/IP [6]. The standard usual-
ly uses port 2404.
D.
EtherNet/IP
This application layer protocol is based on Ethernet
technologies and Common Industrial Protocol [6]. The pro-
tocol can be used for information exchange or controlling of
processes. It was developed by Rockwell Automation [6]. In
addition, it is mostly used in the USA. EtherNet/IP estab-
lishes the communication based on port 44818.
E.
EtherCAT
This Ethernet based Fieldbus was invented by Beckhoff
Automation. This protocol excels in short time cycle, low
jitter and low hardware costs. The EtherCat is applicable for
hard and soft real-time requirements in automation technol-
ogy; it was introduced in 2003 [7]. This communication
protocol commonly uses 34980 port in order establish
communication.
VI.
METHODS
The research presented in this paper is entirely focused
on a process of identification of the SCADA via the Inter-
net. Therefore, the search engine for Internet-connected
devices Shodan was used. This research can be divided into
two main parts.
The first objective of the research is to evaluate the cur-
rent state of vulnerable SCADA devices which are accessi-
ble via the Internet. To fulfill this goal of the research we
used Shodan and ICS-CERT database of vulnerabilities. Our
primary aim is the time gap between publication of the vul-
nerability and updating of the system in order to eliminate
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

the vulnerability. The SCADA updates cannot be imple-
mented on a daily basis due to updates testing. Therefore,
every update can be considered as critical. Thus, this inter-
val is extensive in case of SCADA. We used ICS-CERT
database in order to identify potential vulnerable devices.
Moreover, we focused especially on devices which must not
be accessible via the Internet due to the mitigation strate-
gies. Thus, the research is concentrated on the product name
and its version in order to detect vulnerable systems. Fur-
thermore, the product name and version is collected as a
result of banner grabbing technique. Thereafter, we identify
and uncover vulnerable devices via Shodan. A considerable
number of devices were collected. The total sample consists
of almost one thousand devices which were collected in the
first three months of 2016. In the follow-up phase of the
study, we evaluated the data in order to obtain crucial in-
formation for the purpose of the article. In addition, each
device was evaluated and classified.
The second goal of the research is to specify the current
state of cyber security in relation to industrial communica-
tion protocols. Five industrial communication protocols
were chosen. They are main representatives of the industrial
protocols. Furthermore, we identified their commonly used
communication ports. As a result of this knowledge, we
were able to find these devices via Shodan. Moreover, the
operating system of each device was tested in order to find
devices based on industrial communication protocol with
vulnerable operating system like Windows XP.
TABLE I.
SCADA PORTS
Industrial Communication
Protocol
Port
Modbus
502
DNP3
20000
IEC-104
2404
EtherNet/IP
44818
EtherCAT
34980
Table 1 presents the tested industrial communication
protocols with their ports. In the interest of determining the
relationship between industrial communication protocols
and operating systems, a quantitative data analysis was
used. Each rule was evaluated and classified.
VII.
RESULTS
The aim of the article is the evaluation of the cyber
threats in relation to the SCADA systems. In order to evalu-
ate the SCADA cyber security, we determined two main
objectives. The first objective of the research was to evalu-
ate the data in term of vulnerability distribution and the
influence on the countries. The second objective focused on
the cyber security in relation to industrial communication
protocols. The cyber security specification of industrial
communication protocols and their vulnerabilities was de-
veloped.
The first goal of the research can be divided into two
main parts. The first of them is aimed on a specific group of
vulnerabilities. They are published by ICS-CERT. There-
fore, they are considered as a serious threat. Moreover, all
the collected vulnerabilities cannot be accessible via the
Internet due to mitigation strategies. However, we found
974 devices with vulnerability registered in ICS-CERT
database. The distribution of the devices collected via Sho-
dan is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Vulnerable devices collected via Shodan.
As can be seen, the largest percentage of cases repre-
sents vulnerability with name ICSA-16-026-02 with almost
48% of all cases; following ICSA-15-274-01 with 16,12%
and ICSA-15-013-03 with 13,96% of all cases.
The second part of the first objective is based on the
previous part. Furthermore, we wanted to find the answer to
the question: “Which country is the most affected by the
vulnerabilities from the previous section.” The result can be
seen in Figures 5 and 6.
Figure 5.
Affected countries due to the vulnerabilities - high impact.
Due to a considerable number of affected countries, the
sample was divided into Figure 5 and Figure 6. As can be
seen in Figure 5 the most affected country is the USA with
almost 50% of all affected devices. On the other hand, we
cannot omit Spain with 75 affected devices and Canada with
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

59 affected devices. In addition, even in the case of Europe,
there are only 291 affected devices in comparison with the
USA.
Figure 6 shows us the countries which were affected less
than the countries in Figure 5. However, Figure 5 shows us
that even relatively small countries like Lithuania, Nether-
lands or Austria were affected by the vulnerabilities.
Figure 6.
Affected countries due to the vulnerabilities - low impact.
The second objective of the research was to evaluate the
current state of industrial communication protocols. Five
industrial control protocols were evaluated. The main idea
of the research was to find and identify vulnerable points in
relation to industrial communication protocols. Therefore,
we focus on an operating system of the devices. Thus, the
SCADA devices were identified via an industrial communi-
cation protocol; moreover, the sample was classified by
operating system due to find vulnerable devices. We consid-
er Windows XP as vulnerable against cyber-attacks. There-
fore, every system running on Windows XP is not reliable
compared to others operating systems.
According to the research, we examined 317 891 Inter-
net-connected SCADA devices. The distribution of the de-
vices is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7.
The distribution of the Internet connected SCADA devices.
This considerable number of the Internet-connected
SCADA devices is mostly represented by the devices with
the DNP3 communication protocol (94.25% of all devices).
It is noticeable that the other SCADA protocols contain only
5.75% of all devices. They consist of 18 275 devices.
The second part of the objective was to evaluate the
SCADA devices according to their operating system. For
the purpose of the research; the data from the previous sec-
tion were used. We added a new query which led to infor-
mation selection. The results can be seen in Figure 8.
Figure 8.
The distribution of the internet connected SCADA devices
based on Windows XP.
The total number of affected devices was 188. In addi-
tion, it is important to notice that only devices based on
Modbus (30% of all devices) and DNP3 (70% of all devic-
es) communication protocol use Windows XP as an operat-
ing system. As a consequence, there are 56 potentially vul-
nerable Modbus devices in the USA. Furthermore, there are
132 potentially vulnerable DNP3 devices divided between
the USA, Serbia, Croatia, the United Kingdom and the Rus-
sian Federation.
VIII.
DISCUSSION
The objective of the article was to evaluate the SCADA
cyber security. Therefore, this case study was based on
search engine Shodan and ICS-CERT database. The results
are in relation with earlier studies conducted with Shodan
(Patton et al. [9]; Markowsky et al. [10]; Bodenheim et al.
[11]. However, the results indicate the enormous number of
vulnerable devices accessible via Shodan.
Contemporary trends show us the imminent interest in
identifying of Internet connected devices like IoT or
SCADA. However, the results show us that there is a group
of potentially vulnerable devices. Moreover, there must be
noted that every SCADA vulnerability can be considered as
a critical threat.
Our research is concentrated primarily on a time gap be-
tween publication of the vulnerability and updating of the
system in order to eliminate the vulnerability. Once the
information about vulnerabilities is published, every attack-
er may exploit it for cyber-attack.
The first objective of the research showed us that 974
SCADA devices can be accessible via the Internet although
it is not allowed. Furthermore, almost 50% of all devices
were affected by the ICSA-16-026-02 vulnerability. In addi-
tion, the most affected country was the USA with 491 de-
vices. It is 50% of all affected devices due to the highest
density of SCADA devices. Furthermore, it is noticeable
that all of the affected countries are considered technically
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

advanced with the relatively high density of SCADA devic-
es.
The second objective of the research showed the cyber
security comparison between industrial communication
protocols. Thus, five protocols were tested. Almost 320 000
devices were collected. 94% of all collected devices operat-
ed via the DNP3 communication protocol.
Even though DNP3 is one of the most widely used
communication protocols, the current state of the DNP3
devices density does not match the results of this research.
Therefore, we can conclude that devices communicating via
DNP3 are vulnerable against search engines like Shodan.
In addition, we used the collected data in order to find
SCADA systems operating with Windows XP, which is not
considered as a trustworthy operating system. It should be
noted that 188 devices were affected. 70% of all devices
operate with the DNP3 protocol and the rest with the Mod-
bus protocol. The collected SCADA devices can be vulner-
able against cyber-attacks focused on the exploitation of the
operating system. Furthermore, the rest of protocols seem to
be secured against banner grabbing technique.
It should be noted that this study has been primarily
concerned with SCADA-specific devices. Although we
examined an enormous amount of SCADA devices, we
must consider that only a few of them can be exploited.
However, we tried to make the sample as accurate and cred-
ible as possible. Thus, the necessary extension of the state of
the art was fulfilled. Nonetheless, more research is required
in this area in order to determine the reliable cyber defense
of the critical information infrastructure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded by the Internal Grant Agency
(IGA/FAI/2016/014) and supported by the project ev. no.
VI20152019049 "RESILIENCE 2015: Dynamic Resilience
Evaluation of Interrelated Critical Infrastructure Subsys-
tems", supported by the Ministry of the Interior of the Czech
Republic in the years 2015-2019. Moreover, this work was
supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of
the Czech Republic within the National Sustainability Pro-
gram project No. LO1303 (MSMT-7778/2014) and also by
the European Regional Development Fund under the project
CEBIA-Tech No. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Stouffer, J. Falco, and K. Scarfone, Guide to Industrial
Control
Systems
(ICS)
Security,
National
Institute
of
Standards and Technology, 2011.
[2]
E. Knapp, Industrial network security: securing critical
infrastructure networks for Smart Grid, SCADA, and other
industrial control systems. Waltham, 2011.
[3]
Shodan:
The
search
engine.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.shodan.io/ 2016.03.01
[4]
T. S. Kondo and L. J. Mselle, “Penetration Testing With
Banner Grabbers and Packet Sniffers,” Journal of Emerging
Trends in Computing and Information Sciences, vol. 5, no. 4,
Apr. 2014, pp. 321-327.
[5]
Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response
Team. ICS-CERT. [Online]. Available from: https://ics-
cert.us-cert.gov 2016.03.16
[6]
B. Galloway and G. P. Hancke, “Introduction to industrial
control networks,” Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol.
15, no. 2, Jul 2013, pp. 860-880.
[7]
EtherCat: Technology Group. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.ethercat.org/en/technology.html 2016.03.18
[8]
J. Pollet, SCADA 2017: The Future of SCADA Security.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://files.sans.org/summit/euscada12/PDFs/RedTigerSecuri
ty_SCADA_2017.pdf 2016.03.15
[9]
M. Patton, E. Gross, R. Chinn, S. Forbis, L. Walker, and H.
Chen, “Uninvited Connections: A Study of Vulnerable
Devices on the Internet of Things (IoT),” IEEE Joint,
Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (JISIC
2014), Sept. 2014, pp. 232-235, doi: 10.1109/JISIC.2014.43.
[10] L. Markowsky and G. Markowsky, “Scanning for vulnerable
devices
in
the
Internet
of
Things,”
Intelligent
Data
Acquisition and Advanced Computing Systems: Technology
and Applications (IDAACS 2015), Sept. 2015, pp. 463-467,
doi: 10.1109/IDAACS.2015.7340779.
[11] R.
Bodenheim,
J.
Butts,
S.
Dunlap,
and
B.
Mullins,
“Evaluation of the ability of the shodan search engine to
identify
internet-facing
industrial
control
devices,”
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, vol.
7, no. 2, Jun. 2014, pp. 114-123.
[12] J. Vávra and M. Hromada, “Comparison of the intrusion
detection system rules in relation with the SCADA systems,”
5th Computer Science On-line Conference (CSOC 2016), vol.
465, Apr. 2016, pp. 159-169, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-33622-
0_15.
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

