A Study on User Perceptions of ICT Security 
 
Christine Schuster 
Institute for Empirical Social Studies 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: christine.schuster@ifes.at 
 
 
Johannes Göllner, Christian Meurers,  
Andreas Peer, Peter Prah 
Department of Central Documentation & Information 
National Defence Academy of the Austrian Federal 
Ministry of Defence and Sports 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {johannes.goellner | christian.meurers |  
andreas.peer | peter.prah}@bmlvs.gv.at 
Martin Latzenhofer, Stefan Schauer 
Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology  
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {martin.latzenhofer | stefan.schauer}@ait.ac.at 
Gerald Quirchmayr1, Thomas Benesch2 
1Research Group Multimedia Information Systems  
Faculty of Computer Science 
2Institute for International Development 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: {gerald.quirchmayr | thomas.benesch}@univie.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract— The human risk factor is a decisive factor in 
information security but has still not been fully integrated into 
information 
security 
programs 
and 
risk 
management 
approaches. Based by this lack of integration, we have 
designed a study on user attitudes to information security 
issues in Austrian companies. The survey that has been carried 
out within this study is based on extensive literature research 
on risk, behavior and trust models. The analysis of the results 
comprises the identification and confirmation of user 
perceptions and trustworthiness factors. Building upon the 
survey results, we propose a set of significant indicators that 
can help to identify ICT-related misuse and fraudulent 
behavior as a situation awareness instrument. 
Keywords— information security; user perceptions; attitude; 
human risk factor; work satisfaction; compliance. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The vital role of trust in an organization’s information 
and communication technology (ICT) systems has been 
amply discussed in the literature from various perspectives 
[1][2]. The attitude of employees as an indicator of emerging 
problems has also been described in recent publications 
[3][4]. The key issue here is that the human behavior 
represents a major risk factor and is hard to control from an 
organization’s perspective. Neither can these non-technical 
vulnerabilities be measured nor is there a real-time early 
warning system covering this aspect in a sufficiently reliable 
way. Repetitive awareness measures help to strengthen an 
organization’s culture, but their effectiveness is hard to 
assess and those measures take a long time and many 
iterations. So far, there is no satisfying and reliable method 
that can be applied with reasonable effort to assess the 
human risk factor in an organization’s environment [5][6]. 
As part of the KIRAS MetaRisk project [7], originally 
initiated by Johannes Göllner, supported and partially 
financed by the Austrian National Security Research 
Program KIRAS, we conducted a survey among employees 
with and without management functions. Based on the 
results of this survey, we investigated the situation regarding 
information security in Austrian companies in 2015. Key 
topics covered by this survey were how individual staff 
members applied the safeguards that have been set up, how 
employees treat security-relevant incidents – especially 
activities to avoid or circumvent those incidents including 
activities that cause harm to the organization – and the 
general relationship between employer and employees. By 
analyzing the employees’ attitudes, tendency of activities and 
behavior patterns, we have identified possible indicators 
which can even point to insider fraud in extreme cases.  
In the context of information security, the human aspects 
assume a decisive role as either an early warning of decaying 
information security awareness or as a careless attitude 
towards the issue. The continuously growing number of 
phishing, spear phishing and identity fraud attacks against 
normal and unexperienced users shows that these types of 
attacks have recently become even more attractive. With 
more sophisticated forms of attacks, for example advanced 
persistent 
threats 
(APT) 
where 
perimeter 
controls 
substantially lose their protective effectiveness [8], the 
problem becomes more critical. These forms of attacks are 
trying to obtain an organization’s most confidential business 
information, causing financial damage and in stealing trade 
secrets. On the other hand, economic pressure is growing in 
general and both employees and employers are trying to 
reduce cost, aim for leaner processes and at minimizing 
efforts, thus making the work environment less comfortable. 
This is one reason why the potential for misuse, business and 
cyber-crime is rising [1][6]. A small but significant set of 
indicators reflects the attitude of the employee towards the 
information security situation in an individual organization. 
Consequently, if we look at this set of indicators all together 
we can identify the principal vulnerabilities of an 
organization related to the human risk factor. If we link these 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

indicators to particular types of attacks, e.g., social 
engineering, we can decide whether an organization is more 
vulnerable than another. 
The present paper is structured into five sections. In 
Section 2, we first present the scientific basis from the 
relevant literature and our motivation for the study. Section 3 
describes the applied methodological approach of the survey 
performed for the study. In Section 4, we discuss the main 
results of the study compared to retrospectively documented 
attack stories from real life. Section 5 proposes aspects for 
further research and we present concrete indicators that can 
serve as basis for forming a radar chart and as input for a 
scorecard. This leads to a general overview of the influence 
of human risk on information security. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND BACKGROUND 
As amply described in a large number of recent 
publications including textbooks, information security is an 
issue of continuously growing importance for organizations 
of all sizes. Recent trends in Austria [9, p. 8][10][11] and 
Germany [12][13, p. 7] (the German situation is closely 
comparable to the Austrian one) have been a shift in attacks 
towards social engineering and fraud. An analysis of attack 
types performed in 2014 [14], shows which types of attacks 
were most successful in affected enterprises (Figure 1). In 
this context, phishing attacks had the highest success rate, 
followed by the classic attack types “malware” and “hacking 
attempts” and by “social engineering”. The Austrian internet 
security report 2015 [10, p. 45] explicitly states that social 
engineering methods are growing significantly in number 
and sophistication. This sort of attack can be seen as the 
currently most dangerous attack type. Therefore, the human 
factor has turned into the weakest link in the cyber defense 
chain of an organization. 
 
Figure 1. Successful attack types in affected  
respondent’s enterprises in 2014 [14, p. 6] 
As these attacks have a significant financial impact on 
affected companies [14], it is important to know the human 
vulnerabilities towards social engineering attacks and 
financial fraud that use information technology as a vehicle 
to commit crime. In one extreme case, such a financial fraud 
attack on an Austrian aerospace manufacturer has recently 
caused an estimated damage of 50 million EUR [15]. To 
emphasize this financial aspect, Figure 2 points out that 
almost 50% of US companies suffer financial damage from 
attacks at least annually, while at the same time employees 
and managers are more and more ignorant of the impacts of 
cybercrime.  
 
Figure 2. Relative financial impact  
of cybercrime on organizations [16, p. 28] 
Figure 3 clearly shows that insiders – no matter whether 
they have malicious or non-malicious intents – have made a 
significant contribution to the damage that enterprises 
suffered in 2014. 
 
Figure 3. Threat actors [14, p. 5] 
The list of threat actors consequently raises the question 
of how to ensure expected behavior of involved persons in 
an organization. The term compliance can be defined as the 
sum of all reasonable measures that address lawful and rule-
consistent behavior of a company, its members and 
employees with regard to legal commands or prohibitions. 
The business integrity should also be consistent with social 
guidelines, moral concepts and ethical behavior [17]. In 
contrast, non-compliance entails all forms of non-observance 
of guidelines. It can be measured in terms of the seriousness 
of the infringement and can be categorized into violations 
that damage the company itself or employees. Three 
underlying motivational factors for divergent or non-ethical 
behavior of or within companies have been discussed in the 
literature: first, non-compliance can be justified by the 
personal 
benefit 
that 
employees 
gain 
by 
violating 
regulations. Second, the company as a whole can derive 
benefits from delinquent behavior. Third, non-compliance 
can be used to deliberately harm the company or external 
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

stakeholders [18, p. 225f]. Various factors might increase the 
likelihood of non-compliance: difficult working conditions; 
competitive pressures; unrealistic objectives and focus on 
simplistic success parameters; too much or too little control 
within a company’s control system; management style; and 
corporate culture [18, p. 233ff].  
In general, working conditions can be divided into three 
categories; macro, meso and micro level [19]. Raml [20, p. 
87ff] allocates economic and social conditions, such as 
career perspective, economic situation, social status, 
balancing of family and working life to the macro and meso 
level. Similarly, work structures and resources (work 
organization, time models, work atmosphere, career 
opportunities, bonus payments, information related to work) 
belong to the macro and meso level [20]. On the other hand, 
resources and stress are located at the interface between 
employees and their own work, and are therefore assigned to 
the micro level [20]. This entails the scope of action, work 
contents, 
professional 
qualification, 
disturbances 
and 
interruptions in daily routine, too many regulations and 
restrictive surrounding conditions. 
It is widely accepted that insiders pose a special form of 
threat to businesses, institutions and organizations [22][23] 
[24]. Insiders are persons who have a legitimate access to 
components of the ICT infrastructure. In contrast to external 
hackers, they have always at least one access point to ICT 
systems, and thus they do not require time consuming efforts 
to obtain additional privileges. The predefined trust that 
insiders must be granted requires more sophisticated security 
measures. The insider threat is related to the level of their 
sophistication and depends on the users’ breadth and depth 
of knowledge, as well as their finesse [24].  
Insiders can trigger either an accidental or malicious 
threat, i.e., they can intentionally try to cause harm. 
Information security measures – e.g., encryption, access 
control, or least privileges principle – must be implemented 
regarding to human factors, e.g., with personnel checks or 
focused risk assessments regarding motivation, opportunity 
and capability. While these insider threats cannot be 
eliminated, they can be assessed and managed. Users must 
understand the reasons for security controls in order to 
ensure their effectiveness. Hence, they may find ways to 
circumvent technical restrictions they are faced with [22].  
A variety of models addresses the insider issue, either 
concentrating on certain aspects (e.g., end user sophistication 
[24]) or more holistic in nature [23][25]. The latter approach 
incorporates characteristics of the organization, the actor 
including behavior and attitudes, and the attack itself; overall 
representing 
the 
interdependencies 
of 
the 
different 
influencing factors [23][25]. 
Prior national and international studies on insider security 
threats [25][26][27] have been conducted in the last decade 
and show the increasing importance of this issue up till now. 
Despite a good coverage of security policies and measures, 
the users may obviously work around the controls fulfilling 
their job objectives in a timely manner. Key issues identified 
by these studies are data loss prevention, remote information 
access and the threat against the whole information life 
cycle. They identified awareness trainings and intensive 
monitoring 
measures 
as 
effective 
countermeasures 
[25][26][27]. 
Working conditions in Austria are regularly measured by 
the „Work Climate Index“, which was first conducted in 
1997 by the Institute for Empirical Social Studies in 
cooperation with the Upper Austrian Chamber of Labor. It 
has evolved into a longitudinal study since then and aims at 
capturing the perception of employees concerning their 
working conditions, and reveals long-term changes in the 
structure of employment (e.g., increases in precarious 
employment), evaluates the subjective situation of Austrian 
employees, and analyses specific subgroups of employees 
(e.g., women or older employees). Since 2008, the “Work 
Climate Index” is complemented with the “Austrian 
Occupational Health Monitor” focusing on questions of 
subjective work-related health. Both studies are based on 
4.000 interviews conducted annually [28][29][30][31]. Key 
finding of both studies is the relationship between time 
related stress and working conditions [28, p. 14]. The stress 
increasing factors are regulations exceeding the common 
working time hours Monday to Friday from 7 am to 5 pm 
(especially working on Saturdays or Sundays or at night) or 
working over-time regularly. Other factors are contributing 
to time-stress as well, for example permanent contact to 
customers, high responsibility, permanent surveillance or a 
lack of support from colleagues. 
As a further step, our study follows a well-founded 
approach, combining qualitative question technique for 
discussion rounds and additionally contrasted by the results 
of a structured and rather restrictive predefined survey with a 
significant amount of participants. Despite the fact that 
human behavior can never be modeled accurately through 
surveys and the results may not be generalized as conclusive 
evidence for tactical changes in established organizations, 
the approach reflects a strongly required combination of 
work satisfaction with information security principles. Due 
to the extensive survey and the great random sample of 
respondents, this work might positively influences a proper 
methodology 
analyzing 
the 
human 
risk 
factor 
in 
organizations 
in 
future, 
e.g., 
heuristics, 
indicators, 
conditional relationships etc. 
Based on attack types documented in recent publications 
[10][12][14], we have identified a series of major risk factors 
that contribute to the success of attacks and have 
consequently derived a targeted list of questions. Some of the 
most interesting questions that were asked in the study 
described in this paper are: 
• What is the role of ICT security in your company? 
• How are security and user guidelines handled? 
• What is the current state of awareness among 
employees? 
• Which measures are taken to increase the awareness 
for ICT security? 
• Up to which extent is the private use of company 
equipment allowed? 
• Are there currently any privacy or data loss 
problems? 
• How does the company handle personal data? 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• How does the company handle information security? 
• Who is responsible for information security in the 
company?  
It is expected that by analyzing the answers to these 
questions and linking them to attack types, a good 
assessment of an organization’s preparedness for handling 
attacks can be performed based on organizational 
vulnerabilities and involving social engineering.  
III. 
STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING 
Regarding the design of the study, we followed a well-
proven approach that was developed by the Institute for 
Empirical Social Studies. We decided to use a mixed-
method-approach and combine quantitative and qualitative 
aspects of social research, starting with desk research and 
following up with two focus groups and questionnaires.  
In the desk research, we analyzed current studies on 
business crime [32][33][34][35], especially concerning  
(non-)compliance, fraud and personnel risk and summarized 
key findings. Cases of Business Cybercrime generally have 
risen over the last years and researchers assume a large 
estimated number of unreported cases. The offenders are 
quite often the own employees of an organization, not only 
caused by intentional acting but carelessness and lack of 
awareness. We found out that there are some conditions 
promoting non-compliant behavior: personal characteristics, 
the own moral awareness, individual situation on a personal 
level; work conditions, competitive pressure, excessive 
objective management, lack of internal control, leadership, 
and organizational culture. Based on these aspects, we 
derived the security level of the organization and the 
indicators which determine it. Thus, we were able to develop 
appropriate interview guidelines as well as questions and 
answers for the survey. These questions reflect identified key 
aspects whether an organization is affected by non-
compliance more likely or not. 
For two focus groups that took place on April 23rd and 
29th 2015 we invited both ordinary employees and persons 
with management functions. The selection process for the 
participants in the focus groups had two stages and was in 
line with internal quality standards of the Institute for 
Empirical Social Studies in order to form optimal focus 
groups with uniformly distributed attributes, e.g., age, sex, 
and consuming behavior. In the first group, six ordinary 
employees (three men, three women) aged between 31 to 62 
years took part. The second focus group consisted of eight 
persons in management position (six men, two women) aged 
between 42 and 61 years. The group discussions were based 
on qualitative question techniques and moderated by trained 
persons following a structured interview guideline, which 
allowed for an open exchange of opinions. We emphasized 
on security measures, recent incidents critical for information 
security, and on the relationship between employer and 
employee. 
All 
members 
described 
information 
and 
communication activities as main part of their ordinary 
working routine.  
In parallel to the focus groups, we conducted personal 
interviews with 891 employees of Austrian companies (53% 
men, 47% women) including persons with management 
function in the period from January to March 2015. These 
face-to-face interviews were structured by a prepared survey 
consisting of 48 questions having either several predefined 
answer possibilities or offering a five-tier rating. The 
interviewer leads through the questionnaire, explains, 
discusses and finally documents the participant’s answers. 
Participants were chosen by a multistage random sampling, 
where Austrian municipalities were grouped by the total 
number of inhabitants for each federal state and political 
district. Then, municipalities from each predetermined group 
were picked randomly. Within these municipalities, we 
randomly picked eligible households that again were used as 
samples for finding further addresses. Target persons were 
exclusively chosen based on their home addresses. Within 
each target household, members were assigned by random 
numbers, and only those were interviewed, whose number 
matched the one provided by the Kish selection grid [21]. 
Thus, each stage in the selection process of participants was 
guided by randomization.  
The survey covered central issues of job satisfaction, 
general 
health 
situation, 
satisfaction 
with 
corporate 
management, security measures within the organization as 
well as ICT security in general. Twenty-five percent of the 
respondents were aged below 29 years, 34% between 30 and 
44 years, and 41% older than 45 years. Each interview with 
workers (30%), employees (55%) and members of public 
administration affiliates (15%) took 25 minutes on average 
and was performed at the respondent’s personal domicile. 
Most of the respondents had completed compulsory 
education (9%) or with apprenticeship as craftsmen (42%). 
16% of respondents had gone to college and passed their 
school leaving examination, 16% went to college but did not 
finish it, and 17% had graduated from university. More than 
three fourths (76%) of respondents are employed full time, 
the rest worked less than 36 hours per week (24%). The 
results are shown separately between persons with a leading 
function (11%) and those without (89%). 39% of the 
respondents earn less than 1.500 EUR per month, 39% more 
than 1.500 EUR per month and 22% refused to indicate their 
salary. 
The study design described above was geared both 
towards obtaining a better understanding of how information 
security works in companies and towards determining key 
indicators of non-compliance by indirectly gathering 
information of employees of Austrian companies. This 
benchmark approach aimed at obtaining an accurate and 
undistorted view of employees older than 16 years within 
Austria across various organizational sizes and business 
sectors. The research community could now start follow-up 
projects with the same or a similar study design, which 
would enable more detailed analysis of one business sector 
or company size. 
IV. 
MAJOR RESULTS 
The members of the focus groups reported on relevant 
information security incidents in their organizations, e.g., 
data loss of emails during archiving, loss of business data 
due to collapse of servers, stealing of material, sensitive 
information, and electronic equipment, physical damage by 
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

fire, perimeter control vulnerabilities, accounting errors due 
to account number conversion, and phishing. The members 
of the focus groups generally point out the need for a balance 
between scope for development and restrictive measures. 
Both too much surveillance and the lack of it were 
considered as problematic. The loyalty of employees 
suffered when managers enforced strict time recordings, 
cancelled home office arrangements, and collectively 
punished employees for the misbehavior of single 
employees. In contrast, when managers fostered team work, 
actively took over responsibility and selected the right 
personnel the sense of responsibility among employees grew. 
The personal interviews with employees show that the 
respondents are most satisfied about the collaboration with 
their colleagues, the company`s image, the content of their 
work and the appreciation of their work by colleagues – it is 
reflected by more than 78% – and 63% of persons with only 
compulsory 
education 
(the 
latter 
group 
reveals 
comparatively lower values than for the others and is 
explicitly represented by the second percentage quotation in 
the following). Respondents indicated medium satisfaction 
with their line managers, their individual autonomy to take 
decisions on their working processes, their working time, 
and the social policies of the company (more than 66% and 
45%, respectively). The respondents were least satisfied with 
training options, workload, employee participation and 
potential career possibilities (more than 48% and 33%, 
respectively).  
Furthermore, the interviews showed that seven to eight 
out of ten employees comply with ICT policies, do not cheat 
the organization, do not take home data or steal anything, do 
not harm the enterprise intentionally or unintentionally, do 
not print private documents and do not talk about sensitive 
information outside of the work. In contrast, up to 7% have 
committed at least one of those actions. 14% of employees 
and 19% of managers go to work when they are ill due to 
their sense of duty, workload and a lack of deputies. In 
contrast, 9% of the respondents indicated that they had 
stayed at home at least once in the past although they had not 
been ill. 
Respondents considered ICT services to be a key issue in 
organizations, regardless of the business sector. Almost half 
of the respondents indicated that company smartphones are 
an important topic. The proportion of ICT and smartphone 
usage is considerably higher in organizations with less than 
ten employees and only one location. 30% of the employees 
and 46% of the managers are allowed to use the devices 
privately. Bring your own device (BYOD) is permitted only 
for one fifth of employees.  
One third of the employees answers company emails 
outside of working hours. Especially managers often can be 
reached outside of normal working hours: two thirds of them 
sometimes and 44% several times a week, whereas only 12% 
of normal employees work outside of normal working hours. 
The more the work depends on ICT services, the more the 
respondents communicate about work after working hours.  
Around 15% of employees are allowed to work at home. 
The proportion raises with the level of education: university 
graduates telework up to 35% of their working hours. The 
larger the company and the higher the employee’s position in 
the hierarchy, the more likely is the employee to be allowed 
to work at home.  
More than half of the respondents and three fourths of the 
interviewed managers consider information security to be an 
important topic. The survey results indicate that the 
importance that is attached to information security grows in 
line with the size of the organization and has special 
relevance when the company has offices abroad. Almost 
75% of the persons working in large-scale companies (more 
than 
100 
employees) 
assess 
information 
security’s 
importance to be very high or high, as shown in Table 1. The 
survey also showed that the sensitivity regarding information 
security is low among employees of very small organizations 
and of organizations with a low ICT usage. The first row in 
Table 1. entitled with “Total” compares the corresponding 
percentage value without distinction of the organization sizes 
as reflected by row two to six. 
Table 1. Importance of information security  
divided into company size (n=891) 
Company Size
(numeric values in %)
very high
high
medium
low
very low
don't know / 
not specified
Total
28,39
24,55
11,43
5,20
6,90
23,53
Below 10 employees
20,41
17,96
13,87
7,35
13,06
27,35
10 to 19 employees
24,42
26,27
12,44
5,53
5,53
25,81
20 to 49 employees
28,37
27,40
11,54
5,77
6,25
20,67
50 to 99 employees
34,07
30,77
7,69
3,30
3,30
20,87
100 or more employees
47,15
25,20
7,33
0,81
0,81
18,70  
 
Information security was found to have an exceptional 
standing in companies in the finance and insurance sector 
(90%), in public administration (77%), and in the health and 
welfare sector (66%), presumably due to the awareness for 
processing sensitive data. Nevertheless, one third of the 
respondents indicated that they have no information security 
guideline for ICT usage. It is remarkable that especially 
employees with a lower level of education do not know 
about any regulations. The information security awareness is 
comparatively higher in the finance and insurance sector 
(93%) and in public administration (81%).  
A similar picture appears when analyzing the existence 
of information security awareness measures. Only 28% of 
respondents reported of (semi-)annual measures, 15% 
indicated that those measures are rarely performed, one third 
indicated that no such measures are performed, and one 
fourth of the respondents did not know whether such 
measures exist. These results indicate that for almost half of 
the respondent’s organizations no awareness activities are in 
place. This is emphasized by the results about employee’s 
awareness attitude in Figure 5; almost 60% of the 
respondents see information security awareness attitudes of 
their colleagues, but on the other hand 40% do not. The main 
topics addressed by these awareness measures concern the 
handling of passwords, behavior during information security 
incidents and using the internet, awareness concerning the 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

sensitivity of the processed data, risks of mobile ICT devices 
and data storages, contracts with external personnel, and 
social engineering strategies.  
 
 
Figure 4. Employees’ awareness assessment (values in %; n=891) 
Almost half of the respondents answered that internet and 
ICT services cannot be used for private purposes, whereas 
the rest of the respondents were not sure about it. Only 17% 
of the respondents reported that they have an explicit 
permission to privately use the internet and ICT services 
provided by their organization. The smaller the organization, 
the more likely it is that the organization enforces no rules 
concerning this private use. Companies with offices abroad 
are more likely to have some rules concerning the private 
usage of ICT services. Almost three fourths of respondents 
indicated that there have been no data loss and data 
protection incidents in their organizations, whereas the rest 
could not answer the questions. 86% of the respondents trust 
their employers concerning the processing of their sensitive 
data, only 8% do not. The proportion of those who do not 
trust their employers in this regard is higher in public 
administration: 18% have doubts whether their organization 
protects data appropriately. 46% of the respondents know 
which data his or her employer stores, whereas 45% do not 
know.  
The main proportion of the employees uses working time 
recording systems, either manual recordings (33%) or an 
electronic badge (41%). In particular, large-scale enterprises 
use working time recording and access systems, have special 
visitor regulations, accounting systems for services or 
telephone cost monitoring. Video surveillance is more 
common in the finance and insurance sector, whereas Global 
Positioning System (GPS) locating is more common in 
transport services. Around 68% of the respondents have no 
impression that their work place is monitored electronically – 
this is especially evident for employees from large-scale 
enterprises. On the other hand, 27% think that they are under 
surveillance at work.  
In companies in Austria, a whistleblower hotline is rather 
unusual: 
72% 
of 
respondents 
indicated 
that 
their 
organizations have no anonymous hotline, whereas 20% of 
respondents indicated that they do not know whether such a 
hotline exists. The overall handling of information security 
differs strongly between managers and employees. The 
knowledge on information security is substantially lower 
among employees. The probability, that an organization 
enforces regulations on information security, increases with 
the size of the organization or if the organization has offices 
abroad. Again, the finance and insurance sector, public 
administration and the health and welfare sector are those 
business sectors in which information security forms an 
integral part of organizational culture. 
It is remarkable to note that only 15% of the respondents 
indicated that their organization has defined who is 
responsible for information security, risk and compliance, 
whereas 54% reported that their organization has not defined 
this responsibility and 31% did not know. In different 
organizations, the responsibility is defined in different ways 
and may lie with the ICT department, a dedicated person 
who is responsible for information security, an external 
company, an audit department or the top management. The 
likeliness, that appropriate responsibilities are established 
and enforced, increases with the size of the organization and 
if the company has offices abroad. 
Future research might focus on a comparison of several 
countries in different cultural areas and within Europe. 
Another approach we want to follow is to feed an 
appropriate risk management model with the data presented 
here. This more systematic research could lead to 
quantifiable key risk parameters and development of distinct 
thresholds for the human risk factor of information security. 
Due to the characteristics of behavior, attitude and 
perception a heuristic approach could generate input for a 
scorecard or radar chart with the suggested small set of most 
interesting questions. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Our findings show that non-compliance is more likely in 
an environment that is characterized by poor working 
conditions (inadequate salary, job insecurity, insufficient 
appreciation of work, lacking support from team members or 
supervisors, mobbing, and lack of the resources that are 
necessary to get the work done), competitive pressures, focus 
on simplistic success parameters, and problems in a 
company’s control system, management style and corporate 
culture. Favorable working conditions are therefore 
important in order to enhance the motivation and loyalty of 
employees. Thus, it is crucial for companies to ensure good 
working conditions. External regulations and technical 
solutions, e.g., automated logouts, frequent password 
changes, access and time badges – are replacing the 
individual behavioral orientation. Overregulation leads to 
employees boycotting or bypassing the control system. 
Excessive control and regulation has a negative impact on 
the work environment and hampers productivity. Employees 
often spend working hours with defiant attitudes.  
Managers have great influence on the work environment 
of their employees. Therefore, it is crucial that the managers 
are selected carefully because they contribute essentially to 
the company's success and working atmosphere. Good 
relationships between employees and managers, transparent 
information and communication structures, transparent work 
organization and participation in decision-making are 
necessary to enhance work-life satisfaction and reduce the 
occurrence of mental disorders. Work life balance in general 
is considered a necessary requirement for healthy, hard-
working, compliant behavior. At the same time, smartphones 
and laptops enable an integration of work and private life. 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The result is that the line between work and leisure is 
becoming more and more blurred. 
Although Austrian companies are in general well-
prepared concerning information security, the small and 
medium-enterprises will have to increase their efforts in 
order to catch up. Besides the size of the organization, the 
business sector is decisive for whether information security 
measures are implemented or not. In sectors where 
employees are used to handle a lot of sensitive data, such as 
in the finance and insurance sector, the health sector or the 
public administration sector, advanced information security 
measures can be found. Our findings indicate that stronger 
regulations, monitoring and surveillance measures might not 
lead to the expected effects in all cases. Consequently, one of 
the main tasks for human resource management is the 
selection of loyal employees and the successful integration of 
employees into the organization.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Plischke, “Company’s Prevention: Risk Management 
Competing with Technology“ [in German: “Unternehmens-
prävention: Risikomanagement im Wettlauf mit der 
Technik”], Inf. Manag. Consult., no. 3, 2009, pp. 57–60. 
[2] 
C. Suchan and J. Frank, Analysis and Design of Powerful IS 
Architectures: Model-based Methods from Research and 
Teaching in Practice [in German: Analyse und Gestaltung 
leistungsfähiger IS-Architekturen: Modellbasierte Metho-
den aus Forschung und Lehre in der Praxis], Springer-
Verlag, 2012. 
[3] 
M. Baram and M. Schoebel, “Safety culture and behavioral 
change at the workplace” Saf. Sci., vol. 45, no. 6, 2007, pp. 
631–636. 
[4] 
C. Buck and T. Eymann, “Human Risk Factor in Mobile 
Ecosystems“ [in German: “Risikofaktor Mensch in mobilen 
Ökosystemen”], HMD Prax. Wirtsch., vol. 51, no. 1, 2014, 
pp. 75–83. 
[5] 
F. W. Guldenmund, “The use of questionnaires in safety 
culture research–an evaluation” Saf. Sci., vol. 45, no. 6, 
2007, pp. 723–743. 
[6] 
B. Fahlbruch and M. Schöbel, “SOL–Safety through 
organizational learning: A method for event analysis,” Saf. 
Sci., vol. 49, no. 1, 2011, pp. 27–31. 
[7] 
Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology 
(BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG), 
“KIRAS Security Research: MetaRisk,” 2016. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.kiras.at/. [Accessed: 17-Feb-2016]. 
[8] 
S. Schiebeck, et.al., “Implementation of a Generic ICT Risk 
Model 
using 
Graph 
Databases,” 
presented 
at 
the 
SECURWARE 2015, 9th International Conference on 
Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies, 
Venice, Italy, 2015, pp. 146–153. 
[9] 
Federal Chancellery of Austria, Ed., “Cybersecurity in 
Austria” [in German: “Cybersicherheit in Österreich”], 
Mar-2015. 
[10] 
nic.at and CERT Austria, “Report Internet Security Austria 
[in German: “Bericht Internet-Sicherheit Österreich 2015”], 
Feb-2016. 
[11] 
Ministry of Finance, Federal Chancellery of Austria, and A-
SIT Center for Secure ICT, “ICT Security Portal – 
Cybermonitor” [in German: “IKT-Sicherheitsportal – 
Cybermonitor”], 
Onlinesicherheit.at, 
16-Feb-2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.onlinesicherheit.gv.at. 
[Accessed: 16-Feb-2016]. 
[12] 
Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI), 
“The Situation of IT Security in Germany 2015“ [in 
German: “Die Lage der IT-Sicherheit in Deutschland 
2015”], Nov-2015. 
[13] 
Bundeskriminalamt 
Wiesbaden, 
“Cybercrime 
Federal 
Overview 2014“ [in German: “Cybercrime Bundeslagebild 
2014”], Bundeskriminalamt Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[14] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “State of Cybersecurity: Implications for 
2015 - An ISACA and RSA Conference Survey.” 2014. 
[15] 
G. Cluley, “Hackers Steal $55 million From Boeing 
Supplier,” 21-Jan-2016. [Online]. Available: http://www. 
tripwire.com/state-of-security/security-data-protection/ 
boeing-supplier-hacked-claims-55-million-worth-of-
damage-as-stock-price-falls/. [Accessed: 16-Feb-2016]. 
[16] 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, “Economic crime: A threat to 
business processes - PWC´s 2014 Global Economic Crime 
Survey - US Supplement.” 2014. 
[17] 
H. 
Quentmeier, 
Practice 
Manual 
Compliance: 
Fundamentals, Objectives, and Practical Advice for Non-
lawyers 
[in 
German: 
Praxishandbuch 
Compliance: 
Grundlagen, Ziele und Praxistipps für Nicht-Juristen], 1. 
Edition. Wiesbaden: Gabler, 2012. 
[18] 
W. Schettgen-Sarcher, S. Bachmann, and P. Schettgen, 
Eds., Compliance Officer: The Augsburg Qualifying Model 
[in 
German: 
Compliance 
Officer: 
das 
Augsburger 
Qualifizierungsmodell], Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler, 2014. 
[19] 
N. Semmer, “Stress” in Handwörterbuch Arbeitswissen-
schaft, H. Luczak and W. Volpert, Eds. Stuttgart: Schäffer-
Poeschl, 1997, pp. 332–339. 
[20] 
R. Raml, “Positive indicators for health in context of work: 
an interdisciplinary extension of the term health and its 
consequences for the differentiation of health situations for 
employees“ 
[in 
German: 
“Positive 
Indikatoren 
der 
Gesundheit im Kontext Arbeit: eine interdisziplinäre 
Erweiterung des Gesundheitsbegriffs und dessen Folgen für 
die Differenzierung gesundheitlicher Lagen bei unselb-
ständig Beschäftigten”], Medical University, 2009. 
[21] 
L. Kish, “A procedure for objective respondent selection 
within the household,” J. Am. Stat. Assoc., vol. 44, no. 247, 
1949, pp. 380–387. 
[22] 
C. Colwill, “Human factors in information security: The 
insider threat–Who can you trust these days?” Inf. Secur. 
Tech. Rep., vol. 14, no. 4, 2009, pp. 186–196. 
[23] 
J. R. Nurse, O. Buckley, P. A. Legg, M. Goldsmith, S. 
Creese, G. R. Wright, and M. Whitty, “Understanding 
insider threat: A framework for characterising attacks” in 
Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2014 IEEE, 2014, 
pp. 214–228. 
[24] 
G. B. Magklaras and S. M. Furnell, “A preliminary model 
of end user sophistication for insider threat prediction in IT 
systems”, Comput. Secur., vol. 24, no. 5, 2005, pp. 371–
380. 
[25]  A. M. Munshi, A study of insider threat behaviour: 
developing a holistic insider threat model, Ph.D. Curtin 
University, School of Information Systems, 2013 
[26]  RSA, The Insider Security Threat in I.T. and Financial 
Services: Survey Shows Employees' Everyday Behavior 
Puts Sensitive Business Information at Risk, RSA, 2008.  
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[27] 
L. Tan, “Asia worried about insider threat. ZDNet Asia.“, 
2008. 
[28]  R. Raml, “Working conditions and stress: findings of the 
Austrian 
Work 
Climate 
Index“ 
[in 
German: 
“Arbeitsbedingungen und Stress: Erkenntnisse aus dem 
österreichischen Arbeitsklima Index”] in “Arbeitsbe-
dingungen und Stress” - Schriftenreihe Österreichischer 
Arbeitsklima Index 3, 2015, S 12-17 
[29]  R. Raml, “Scientific fundamentals of the Austrian 
Occupational Health Monitor“ [in German: “Wissenschaft-
liche Grundlagen des Österreichischen Arbeitsgesundheits-
monitors”] in Schriftenreihe Österreichischer Arbeitsklima 
Index 2 - Austrian Work Climate Index, 2012, S 12-19 
[30]  R. Raml, “A theoretical evaluation of the Work Climate 
Index“ [in German: “Eine theoretische Evaluierung des 
Arbeitsklima Index“ ] in ”Schriftenreihe Österreichischer 
Arbeitsklima Index 1 - Austrian Working Climate Index”, 
2009 
[31]  R. Raml, A. Schiff,: “The localization of the Work Climate 
Index in a sociologic, psychologic and economic theory 
spectrum“ [in German: “Die Verortung des Arbeitsklima 
Index 
im 
soziologischen, 
psychologischen 
und 
ökonomischen Theorienspektrum”], 2016 
[32] 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, “Economic crime: A threat to 
business processes - PWC´s 2014 Global Economic Crime 
Survey - US Supplement.” 2014. 
[33] 
KPMG, “Wirtschaftskriminalität. Deutschland, Österreich, 
Schweiz 
im 
Vergleich. 
Wirtschaftskriminalität 
in 
Großunternehmen und dem Mittelstand.” 2013. 
[34] 
A. V. Heerden, F. Weller, and G. Weidinger, „Business 
Crime. Gemrany, Austria, Switzerland in comparison. 
Business Crime in large-sized organizations and medium-
sized business” [in German: “Wirtschaftskriminalität. 
Deutschland, Österreich, Schweiz im Vergleich. Wirt-
schaftskriminalität 
in 
Großunternehmen 
und 
dem 
Mittelstand“], KPMG, 2013. 
[35] 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, “Business Crime 2011. Security 
Situation in Austrian companies“ [in German: “Wirt-
schaftskriminalität 2011. Sicherheitslage in österreichischen 
Unternehmen”], PWC, 2011. 
 
 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

