Cost-Effective Biometric Authentication using Leap Motion and IoT Devices 
Louis-Philip Shahim, Dirk Snyman, Tiny du Toit, Hennie Kruger  
School of Computer-, Statistical- and Mathematical Sciences 
North West University, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa. 
e-mail:lp.shahim6@gmail.com; {dirk.snyman, hennie.kruger, tiny.dutoit}@nwu.ac.za 
 
Abstract — Biometric authentication is a popular method for in-
formation security defense and access control. With the availa-
bility of small computing Internet of Things (IoT) devices in con-
junction with a hardware peripheral that is able to track hand 
geometry, multifactor authentication becomes cost-effective and 
mobile. The proposed system would attempt to authenticate sys-
tem users by combining both a user’s hand geometry scan, along 
with a series of gestures while simultaneously using machine 
learning classification techniques for user classification. Can-
celability will be insured with a novel steganography implemen-
tation for user biometric information. 
Keywords – biometrics; information security; internet of 
things (IoT); leap motion; multifactor authentication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Biometrics have long been used as an accepted user au-
thentication method and have been implemented as a security 
measure in many real world systems including personal com-
puters, mobile devices (cell phones and tablets), and also 
physical access control systems [1][2][3]. Biometrics are the 
digitalization and analysis of a person’s innate physical or bi-
ological characteristics and the use thereof to distinguish be-
tween persons that are to be afforded access to specific sys-
tems, information or physical areas [1][3]. By encoding a per-
son’s physical attributes the disadvantages of traditional pass-
word based security, like passwords being lost or stolen, can 
be overcome [1][3]. One of the factors that hampers the ac-
ceptance of biometric authentication systems is that the cost 
of the development and implementation has traditionally been 
high due to factors such as biometric hardware, computational 
processing power, infrastructure integration, user training, and 
research and testing [1][3]. Cost still remains an ever present 
consideration for organizations when deciding to implement 
novel approaches over existing traditional methods. This fac-
tor raises the question whether traditional biometrics can be 
accomplished at a lower cost by using non-traditional methods 
and/or hardware. 
With the current influx of new augmented computer inter-
action possibilities (i.e., new and non-traditional ways to con-
trol computers), a wide range of technological facets such as 
voice-, image- and movement control are receiving a lot of 
attention [3][4]. This leads to advancements in hardware ca-
pability and a definitive decrease in the cost of related hard-
ware. Hardware peripherals (like the Leap Motion Controller 
(LMC)) that extend the basic functionality of computers to in-
clude support for the aforementioned facets are becoming 
more commonplace [2]. In order to facilitate these interac-
tions, the hardware is implicitly working with information that 
can be harnessed for biometric identification. Chan et al. [2] 
mentions the possibility of partial sign language gesture 
recognition using the LMC. The recognition of simple gesture 
interactions could be implemented as a form of biometric 
identification due to the latent biometric information it con-
veys. 
The advent of the IoT movement [5][6] presents a myriad 
of small computing systems that display reasonable pro-
cessing power and connectivity capabilities at a cost point far 
lower than traditional computer systems. The IoT is the inter-
action of everyday objects over the internet or similar net-
works by embedding computer systems that add smart func-
tionality or an implied “intelligence” to these objects [5][6].  
By combining the two above mentioned paradigms, this 
paper proposes a system that would implement the required 
hardware and software in an environment that uses augmented 
user interaction techniques in order to authenticate system us-
ers. Using a LMC for advanced hand scanning, a user would 
be able to gain access to a system or physical area (interfacing 
with electronic components of traditional security systems to 
be controlled by the RPi) by having their hand geometry 
scanned, combined with a series of gestures to incorporate a 
technique called multifactor authentication [2] in an inexpen-
sive way. Because the LMC requires no direct touch (com-
pared to traditional fingerprint scanners), an applicable sce-
nario for such a system could be to allow medical surgeons 
access to an operating theatre once they have disinfected their 
hands and would not like to touch any surfaces before enter-
ing. By simply gesturing towards the authentication system, 
access will be granted if the surgeon is duly authorized 
thereto.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
presents system design in terms of security, hardware, inter-
pretation of biometric information, and advantages and disad-
vantages. The conclusion and future direction for this research 
is presented in Section III. 
II. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
A. Security considerations 
Literature [1][3] mentions a series of considerations (other 
than cost) that should be central to decision making relating to 
biometric systems and the biometric traits on which the sys-
tem functions. Among others, these include:  
1) Reliability – The system needs to be always operational 
and available and therefore hardware should be able to handle 
many interactions without fail.  
2) Error incidence and accuracy – Errors may be intro-
duced to the system by external factors like user aging or en-
vironmental changes. The accuracy of the system (false-ac-
ceptance vs. false-rejection rates) should be balanced to en-
sure security while promoting usability.  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

3) User acceptance – Users need to embrace the technol-
ogy in order for the biometric authentication method to be suc-
cessful. Unobtrusive technologies get accepted more easily.  
4) Ease of use – The biometric technology should be easy 
to use, preferably without extensive training.  
5) Security application – The choice of biometric authen-
tication method should fit the level of security expected for 
the specific application.  
6) Cancelability – Cancelable biometrics (CB) refer to the 
obfuscation of stored personal biometric information in such 
a manner that prohibits the reconstruction of said information 
by third parties using computational techniques [9]. This en-
sures the anonymity of users who submit their data to bio-
metric authentication systems by ensuring that their specific 
information is difficult to decipher by any party other than the 
intended system. One the main categories of CB is that of bi-
ometric salting [9]. This entails the transform of biometric in-
formation using transform parameters native to the user in 
question. E.g., using hand information retrieved from the 
LMC as transform parameters.  
7) Maturity of technology – Traditionally the maturity of 
the technology, i.e., the technology is often implemented and 
how well it is supported, determines its longevity. This is also 
based on prevailing standards that are expected of a proven 
technology. The LMC, when implemented as a biometrics de-
vice, should conform well to these factors mentioned above 
except for the maturity of the technology. Due to the novel 
nature of the application it is to be expected that the maturity 
level is to be quite low. 
B. Hardware  
With the LMC’s advanced hand and finger tracking capa-
bilities, the position, velocity and orientation, supplemented 
by hand geometry information, are reported upon with accu-
racy and reduced latency [8]. Chan et al. [2] present the im-
plementation of an LMC to assume the role of a biometric au-
thentication device by harnessing the abovementioned infor-
mation. The low cost factor of this device makes this imple-
mentation even more favorable in situations where cost is of 
substantial concern. One drawback of this approach is that the 
LMC is a peripheral device that still requires a computer sys-
tem to connect it to as the device cannot function in a stand-
alone way. This disadvantage will add to the associated cost 
of implementation. However, because the IoT is such a phe-
nomenon presently, many low cost alternatives to traditional 
computer systems have become commonplace. One of the 
most widely known computer systems for IoT development is 
the Raspberry Pi (RPi) platform [6][7]. The RPi presents a bal-
ance between size, connectivity, processing power and cost  
making it an ideal IoT device to serve as an electronic inter-
face (e.g., for interaction with existing physical security sys-
tems) alongside traditional computers that drive peripheral de-
vices like the LMC. The information from the LMC can be 
analyzed locally using methods such as those described by 
Chan et al. [2] but augmenting the result of the analysis by 
transmitting instructions to the RPi to effect remote digital 
electronics based tasks, for instance the arming or disarming 
of alarm systems across interconnected networks (like the In-
ternet) where the RPi serves as an intelligent node for elec-
tronic systems interaction. The RPi can further be used for the 
communication with remote sensors such as movement- or 
sound sensors. 
C. Interpreting biometric information 
In order to interpret the implicit biometric information 
that is conveyed by the LMC and harness it in order to do 
biometric authentication, [2] proposes the use of machine 
learning techniques (see [8] for more examples on machine 
learning in biometrics). The readings obtained from the LMC 
(or other biometric devices) can be presented to a machine 
learning algorithm as features. The machine learning algo-
rithms (each to their own internal structure) represent data 
that was gathered from users as a model against which to as-
sess biometric access attempts at runtime. These models for 
biometric classification are usually biased to have a high pre-
cision, but low recall rate (i.e., to favor low false-acceptance 
rate at the expense of high false-rejection rates). The follow-
ing algorithms are often implemented for biometric classifi-
cation [2][8][11][12]: Naïve Bayes classifiers, Random For-
rest classifiers, Support Vector Machines, Gaussian Mixture 
Models, and Artificial Neural Networks. 
D. Advantages/Disadvantages 
Advantages of the proposed approach to biometric au-
thentication include: a) Ease of use and convenience. b) The 
low cost factor. c) Security aspects should be good when 
compared to passwords because authentication is based on 
gestures and hand information that cannot be stolen or 
guessed. d) Auditability in terms of being able to connect us-
ers to a specific event or activity. e) Well suited for environ-
ments where typing is difficult or unwanted (e.g., surgeon in 
theatre).  
Disadvantages include: a) The technology is still in its in-
fancy and is not mature. b) While accuracy of authentication 
is expected to be high for small organizations, it may pose a 
problem with many users.  c) Error incidence due to changes 
in a person’s hands due to injury, old age, or illness. 
E. Comparison with literature 
Table 1 presents a cursory summary of a selection of sys-
tems from literature in comparison to the idea proposed in 
this paper. The proposed novelty of this idea is the combina-
tion of the resulting LMC biometric authentication system 
with an environment where IoT devices interact with existing 
security infrastructure. The idea further proposes the inclu-
sion of novel cancelability by employing a new steganogra-
phy approach for the storage and retrieval of biometric user 
information. The steganography algorithm will include bio-
metric information of each user as transform parameters. To 
further illustrate the approach, Fig. 1 presents a graphical rep-
resentation of the proposed algorithmic framework. 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE 1:  COMPARISON OF SYSTEMS FROM LITERATURE. 
Biometric device 
Biometric task 
Cancelability 
Algorithm 
IoT 
 
LMC 
3D signature 
recognition 
None specified 
Naïve Bayes/Support 
vector machine 
No 
[11] 
LMC 
Gesture based bio-
metrics 
None specified 
k-nearest neighbor clas-
sifier 
No 
[12] 
LMC 
Hand geometry 
and gestures 
None specified 
Random forest classifier 
No 
[2] 
LMC 
Hand geometry 
and gestures 
Stenographical 
encryption based 
on biometric in-
formation 
Machine learning classi-
fication and novel ste-
ganography 
Yes 
[this paper] 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the proposed idea of a LMC as a low 
cost biometric authentication device by its combination with 
an RPi as an IoT device. The next stage in this research will 
be to investigate different implementation possibilities. Fur-
ther investigation into the underlying hardware and software 
topics is warranted to gauge the feasibility of these techno-
logical aspects before experimental implementation can com-
mence. Issues in terms of information security that need to be 
investigated are: Classification methods need to be re-
searched to ensure the highest possible accuracy of imple-
mented classifiers. The implementation of secure cancelable 
biometrics to ensure user anonymity. Dlamini et al. [10] pre-
sent the encryption of user credentials in transit and rest by 
using steganography to “hide” user information in images ra-
ther than commonly used user databases. If a common user 
database is breached, all of the users’ information contained 
therein may be exposed. Future work may include the incor-
poration of biometrics (read from the LMC) as parameters for 
use in such a steganography engine as implemented by Dlam-
ini et al. [10]. This results in a steganography algorithm that 
encodes the user information in a picture based on their own 
unique traits rather than arbitrary encryption keys which may 
be computationally deduced. The premise is that even when 
one user’s information is identified from the image, the fidel-
ity of other users’ information remains intact because the en-
cryption parameters are unique to each user. Finally, exten-
sive real world experimentation is planned with the resulting 
system to identify any inherent security flaws. 
 REFERENCES  
[1] S. Liu and S. Silverman, “A practical guide to biometric security 
technology,” IT Professional, vol. 3, no. 1, 2002, pp. 27-32.  
[2] A. Chan, T. Halevi, and N. Memon, “Leap Motion Controller for 
Authentication via Hand Geometry and Gestures,” In Human Aspects 
of Information Security, Privacy, and Trust, 2015, pp. 13-22. 
[3] A. K. Jain, K. Nandakumar, and A. Ross, “50 Years of Biometric 
Research: Accomplishments, Challenges, and Opportunities,” Pattern 
Recognition 
Letters, 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016786551500436
5.2016.06.10. 
[4] X. Wang, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee, “A comprehensive survey of 
augmented reality assembly research,” Advances in Manufacturing, 
vol. 4, no. 1, 2016, pp. 1-22.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Graphic representation of the algorithm. 
 
[5] F. Xia, L. T. Yang, L. Wang, and A. Vinel, “Internet of things,” 
International Journal of Communication Systems, vol. 25, no. 9, 2012, 
p. 1101.  
[6] M. Maksimović, V. Vujović, N. Davidović, V. Milošević, and B. 
Perišić, “Raspberry Pi as Internet of things hardware: performances 
and constraints,” Design issues, vol. 3,  2014, p. 8. 
[7] MagPi, “Raspberry Pi 3 is out now! Specs, Benchmarks & More,” 1 
March 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.raspberrypi.org/magpi/raspberry-pi-3-specs-
benchmarks/. 2016.03.01. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[8] G. Damousis and S. Argyropoulos, “Four Machine Learning 
Algorithms for Biometrics Fusion: A Comparative Study,” Applied 
Computational Intelligence and Soft Computing, vol. 2012, 2012, p. 6. 
[9] C. Rathgeb and A. Uhl. “A survey on biometric cryptosystems and can-
celable biometrics.” EURASIP Journal on Information Security 
2011.1, 2011, pp. 1-25. 
[10] M.T. Dlamini, J. Eloff, H.S. Venter, M. Eloff, K. Chetty, and J. Black-
ledge. “Securing cloud computing's blind-spots using strong and risk-
based MFA,” In International Conference on Information Resource 
Management, 2016, pp. 58:1-28. 
[11] I. Nigam, M. Vatsa, and R. Singh. “Leap signature recognition using 
hoof and hot features,” In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Im-
age Processing (ICIP), 2014, pp. 5012-5016. 
[12] M. Piekarczyk and M.R. Ogiela, “On using palm and finger move-
ments as a gesture-based biometrics,” In 2015 International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Networking and Collaborative Systems (INCOS), 
2015, pp. 211-216. 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

