Modeling Vulnerable Internet of Things on SHODAN and CENSYS :  
An Ontology for Cyber Security  
Marc Arnaert 
Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis, I3S, UMR 
7271, 06900 Sophia Antipolis, France 
CNRS, I3S, UMR 7271,  
06900 Sophia Antipolis, France  
e-mail: marc@arnaert.com 
Yoann Bertrand 
Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis, I3S, UMR 
7271, 06900 Sophia Antipolis, France 
CNRS, I3S, UMR 7271,  
06900 Sophia Antipolis, France  
e-mail: bertrand@i3s.unice.fr 
Karima Boudaoud 
Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis, I3S, UMR 
7271, 06900 Sophia Antipolis, France 
CNRS, I3S, UMR 7271,  
06900 Sophia Antipolis, France  
e-mail: karima@unice.fr 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—With the increase of connected devices on the 
Internet, managing security can become a very difficult task 
for Information Technology (IT) and security managers. In 
order to find vulnerabilities for these devices, we can use 
search engines. Despite the fact that these engines are very 
powerful, they often propose various and complex syntaxes for 
queries. Moreover, sorting the results, due to their complexity 
and quantity, can be challenging and time-consuming for IT & 
security managers. To overcome these issues, we propose in 
this paper an ontology that can reduce the complexity and 
improve the results of search engines to help these managers to 
detect vulnerable devices. 
 Keywords-vulnerability; Shodan; Internet of Things; Censys; 
ontology; cyber security 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
US research firm Gartner has estimated that 20.8 billions 
objects will be connected on the Internet by 2020 [1]. This 
tremendous amount of objects, often referred as Internet of 
Things (IoT), can be problematic for security. 
 
Indeed, in order to be accessible and operational, these 
objects need to be connected (for instance, video 
surveillance, telephony, building management systems, air 
conditioners, automated doors, etc.). Such quantity of 
devices can leave a potential open door that can be exploited 
by intruders. 
Moreover, IoT components are heterogeneous and often 
poorly protected, increasing de facto the risk of security 
breaches (for instance, Fiat-Chrysler has recalled 1.4 
Million cars to prevent hacks in July 2015) [2]. 
 
To secure connected objects within their companies, 
security experts or employees in charge of defining security 
policies can gather information in order to build a 
vulnerability 
assessment 
plan 
and 
have 
a 
better 
understanding of the weaknesses of the deployed devices.  
 
In other words, an expert wants to answer the following 
question: “Is my device vulnerable and accessible by 
someone else?”. 
 
To do so, she/he can use specialized search engines 
available on the Internet. However, due to the increasing 
quantity, known vulnerabilities and diversity of connected 
objects, a basic search can return thousands of results. Such 
quantity of results can be complex to sort, understand and 
analyze, especially for non-security experts. Thus, this task 
can be difficult and time-consuming. 
  
In this article, we propose an ontology that models 
vulnerabilities of IoT objects. Our ontology is based on 
existing search engines (Shodan and Censys) and aims at: 
• Reducing the number of aggregated results during a 
search. 
• Increasing the relevance of results (i.e., returned 
vulnerabilities). 
• Be usable for non-security experts. 
 
By doing so, we aim at reducing the time-consumption 
and increase the robustness and feasibility of assisted 
vulnerability assessments in IoT.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the related works in the domain of security search 
engine. Section III describes our contribution, while Section 
IV discusses future works. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A. Online Databases and tools 
 
At first, the hackers used specialized security tools 
software to find potential and vulnerable target, like Kali-
Linux [6] the most advanced penetration distribution.  
 
In order to gather information for cybersecurity now, 
online databases and search engines can be used. 
 
Shodan.io is a search engine designed by programmer 
John Matherly in 2009. It interrogates devices ports and 
grabs the resulting banners, then indexes the corresponding 
public IP address and search into an intern databases for 
futures lookup. Shodan aggregates a significant amount of 
information (more than 3.7 billion public IPv4 addresses 
and also checks hundreds of millions of IPv6 addresses).  
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Many wonderful works can be found on Shodan. These 
works encompass vulnerability assessment tool [4], reveals 
magnitude of IoT [5] and usages in industrial context [3].  
 
Censys.io is a search engine designed by Zakir 
Durumeric in 2015 [7]. It allows researchers to ask 
questions about what composes the Internet. Censys collects 
data through daily Zmap scans of more than 3 Billions IP v4 
addresses. Researchers can interact with these data through 
scripts that can be requested thanks to a SQL engine. 
 
However, using Censys or Shodan can lead to the 
following issues: 
• Results can be too numerous to be efficiently 
interpreted. 
• Results can be irrelevant (i.e., outdated, non-specific, 
incomplete, etc.). 
• Both queries and results can be hard to understand and 
analyze by non-security experts (i.e., you must know 
different syntaxes to interact with the two engines, you 
must sort the results to find the corresponding domain 
devices, you don’t know if these devices are vulnerable 
and if yes, which vulnerabilities). 
 
B. Security Ontology 
Existing security ontology covers special domains like 
networks, architectures, cryptography or resilience domains. 
Few academic works have been proposed to use security 
ontology with Shodan ([8][9]) and no ontology has been 
actually published for Censys. None of them cover the 
semantic security knowledge to easily find vulnerable 
devices using Shodan or Censys.   
 
 
Concerning the IoT domain, several specific ontologies 
have been proposed (i.e., Iot-ontology [10], SAREF [11]  or 
openiot-ontology [12]). Again, none of them contain the 
semantic knowledge that could be used with Shodan or 
Censys to find vulnerable IoT devices into specific domain. 
 
In conclusion, by using existing search engines, we need 
to know the semantic behind the search engine (in our case, 
Censys and Shodan) and need to be a security expert to find 
and understand vulnerabilities on these  objects. 
 
Moreover, existing search engines suffer from the 
following drawbacks: 
• There 
is 
no 
correlation 
with 
CVE 
(Common 
Vulnerabilities 
Exposure) 
published 
by 
CERTs 
(Computer Emergency Response Team) [5]. 
• It is complex to achieve cross-domain and interdatabases 
operations. 
• There is no possibility to reuse the results. 
• There is no modeling or automated process. 
• Errors or omissions can be done due to human 
interpretation. 
• There is an excessive consumption of time to obtain 
exploitable results with vulnerable objects. 
 
To overcome previous drawbacks, we propose an 
ontology that is described in the next section. 
III. 
CONTRIBUTION 
 
As stated previously, we first aim at reducing the 
quantity of results returned by Censys and Shodan. More 
specifically, we aim at reducing the complexity of semantic 
of returned results, increase the relevance of vulnerable 
objects and ease the use of such tools. 
 
A. Genericity of the proposal 
 
Although our contribution focuses on these two search-
engines, our model has been implemented to be as generic 
as possible. Thus, our model can be adapted to the preferred 
search engine of the IT manager (i.e., Google, Bing, etc.). 
To facilitate this adaptation, we have used the concept of 
ontology. 
 
B. Definition of a cybersecurity ontology 
 
In order to propose a tool able to model this knowledge 
semantic, we have created an ontology of research and 
diagnosis. A graphical representation of such mechanism is 
depicted in Figure 1. This modeling will allow us to: reuse 
the field of knowledge, facilitate interoperability and 
portability, use a reasoning engine to bring new knowledge 
by inferences, add more accurate descriptions of metadata 
and facilitate its integration and update in an open and 
flexible way.  
 
Figure 1. Specific and relevant results can be obtained via ontology. 
 
 
To define our model, we have retained semantic web 
best practices and tools such NeOn methodology [13], 
Linked Data best practices [14]. 
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

These works propose methodologies to build well-
structured ontologies or datasets from scratch and suggest 
reusing as much as possible existing works by linking them 
together.  
 
We have also chosen Stanford’s ontology editor ‘Protégé 
2000’ to easily define and improve our ontology. This 
software is particularly recommended to create a domain 
ontology [15]. 
 
To conclude the main objectives of our work are: 
• To create an ontology of research and diagnostic; 
• To model a semantic search over Censys or Shodan; 
• To 
include 
aggregation 
of 
existing 
security 
vulnerabilities ontologies; 
• To validate the syntax of our ontology with W3C (World 
Wide Web Consortium) tools; 
• To evaluate our ontology via standardization tools 
available on the Internet. 
 
 
Figure 2. A first version of our ontology into ‘protégé 2000’  
 
a) Select semantic for specific domains 
To find the semantic related to a specific domain, we 
have explored publications that define vulnerability 
semantic [16], projects focusing on Shodan [3], darknet 
videos [17], deposits of sites (Pastebin), website of 
published 
vulnerabilities 
(db-exploit), 
and 
other 
GoogleDork [18]. 
 
The aggregation of these information allowed us to 
create a primary knowledge base called S3 “Syntax Search 
Semantic” who can target specific objects in relation to 
specific research areas. Effectively, using the keywords 
stored in S3 in engines such as Censys and Shodan allows 
users to find the right targeted devices. 
 
b) Select reference vulnerability 
In order to test our ontology, we have chosen a reference 
vulnerability type. For our preliminary tests, we have 
chosen the “default credentials” vulnerability. This 
vulnerability exploits default logins and passwords. These 
credentials can easily be found in the manufacturers’ 
documentation that are accessible on the Internet and 
contain default passwords in clear texts. 
 
Moreover, we have find default credentials lists on the 
Internet (1000+) and have aggregated them to increase the 
number of possibilities into our database. 
To facilitate our search, we have developed a script that 
searches documents for specific keywords (i.e., “username”, 
“password”, “login”, etc.). Thanks to this script, we have 
generated a database of existing manufacturer’s default 
credentials.  
 
We assume that the person who installed the device has 
not changed the default password, and we can use it 
successfully. The advantage of this vulnerability is that it is 
not iterative and therefore not intrusive and somewhat 
wordy, in the sense that we do not try repeatedly to 
penetrate a system. We have created a second database that 
keeps the "default credentials" of associated devices. We 
will call this second database DCS "Default Credentials 
Semantic ". 
 
Figure 2, shows a first version of our ontology where S3 
and DCS knowledge can be highlighted to help us to find a 
field type of vulnerable and assailable IoT device. 
 
c) Validation of S3 with DCS 
We have tested the correlation between S3 and DCS 
over Censys. Our ontology will be available on Internet with 
a specific namespace (URI). It contains S3 and DCS 
information. The realization of a first program in Python 
(both allow on Shodan & Censys), allows us to test our 
ontology for which the test proves that it is fully functional. 
 
We have obtained at screen a short list of public IP 
addresses with the open type protocol. Figure 3. shows a 
textual example of the obtained results. For these 
preliminary tests, we have validated our proposal by doing a 
copy/paste of one of the public IP addresses returned into a 
new browser page. By entering this IP, we have reached the 
login page of the connected IoT device. 
 
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 3. Finding Vulnerable Objects in Censys with our application 
 
For these preliminary tests, we have validated our 
proposal by doing a copy/paste of one of the public IP 
addresses returned into a new browser page. By entering 
this IP, we have reached the login page of the connected IoT 
device. 
 
We have fetched the corresponding login and password in 
our DCS for this specific device. By entering these 
credentials, we have obtained a granted access to the full 
configuration of the IoT device, proving that our solution is 
quite functional. 
 
In final, we have built a Sparql server [20] and validate 
basic Sparql queries to obtain the complete list of S3 and 
DCS. 
IV. 
FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed an ontology to obtain 
more accurate results concerning vulnerable IoT devices, 
when using search engines such as Censys or Shodan. 
 
For future works, we will create a user-friendly semantic 
web application that has two goals. The vulnerable domain 
researching will be unique and user-friendly (i.e., easy to 
understand and mastered for all types of users). Secondly, 
the type of vulnerabilities will aim at sorting and obtaining 
more relevant results.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are extremely grateful to John Matherly for 
unlimited access to Shodan resources and his precious help 
and we thank Zakir Durumeric for his wonderful tool 
Censys.io. 
 
We thank Olivier Corby and Isabelle Mirbel for their 
help concerning semantic web, Sparql syntaxes and 
ontologies. 
 
We thank for their inducements, advices and valuable 
feedbacks Alain Giboin and Frédéric Precioso. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
GARTNER, S. (2015). Gartner Says 6.4 Billion Connected “Things” 
will be in use in 2016, up 30 Percent from 2015 [interactive].[viewed 
2015 m. november 10 d.]. Access through internet: <http://www. 
gartner. com/newsroom/id/3165317. 
[2] 
Miller, C., & Valasek, C. (2015). Remote exploitation of an unaltered 
passenger vehicle. Black Hat USA. 
[3] 
Bodenheim, R., Butts, J., Dunlap, S., & Mullins, B. (2014). 
Evaluation of the ability of the Shodan search engine to identify 
Internet-facing industrial control devices. International Journal of 
Critical Infrastructure Protection, 7(2), 114-123. 
[4] 
Genge, B., & Enăchescu, C. (2015). ShoVAT: Shodan‐based 
vulnerability assessment tool for Internet‐facing services. Security 
and Communication Networks. 
[5] 
Radvanovsky, B. (2013). Project shine: 1,000,000 internet-connected 
scada and ics systems and counting. Tofino Security, 19. 
[6] 
Arnaert, M. (2015). Initiating to Ethical Hacking with Kali-Linux. 
Amazon press. 
[7] 
Durumeric, Z., Wustrow, E., & Halderman, J. A. (2013, August). 
ZMap: Fast Internet-wide Scanning and Its Security Applications. In 
Usenix Security (Vol. 2013). 
[8] 
Stepanova, T., Pechenkin, A., & Lavrova, D. (2015, September). 
Ontology-based big data approach to automated penetration testing of 
large-scale heterogeneous systems. In Proceedings of the 8th 
International Conference on Security of Information and Networks 
(pp. 142-149). ACM. 
[9] 
Krotofil, M., & Gollmann, D. (2013, July). Industrial control systems 
security: What is happening?. In Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 
2013 11th IEEE International Conference on (pp. 670-675). IEEE. 
[10]  Kotis, K., & Katasonov, A. (2013). Semantic interoperability on the 
internet of things: The semantic smart gateway framework. 
International Journal of Distributed Systems and Technologies 
(IJDST), 4(3), 47-69. 
[11] Daniele, L., den Hartog, F., & Roes, J. (2015). Created in Close 
Interaction with the Industry: The Smart Appliances REFerence 
(SAREF) Ontology. In Formal Ontologies Meet Industry (pp. 100-
112). Springer International Publishing. 
[12] Soldatos, J., Kefalakis, N., Hauswirth, M., Serrano, M., Calbimonte, 
J. P., Riahi, M., ... & Skorin-Kapov, L. (2015). Openiot: Open source 
internet-of-things in the cloud. In Interoperability and Open-Source 
Solutions for the Internet of Things (pp. 13-25). Springer International 
Publishing. 
[13] Suárez-Figueroa, M. C., Gomez-Perez, A., & Fernandez-Lopez, M. 
(2012). The NeOn methodology for ontology engineering. In 
Ontology engineering in a networked world (pp. 9-34). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. 
[14] Bizer, C., Heath, T., & Berners-Lee, T. (2009). Linked data-the story 
so far. Semantic Services, Interoperability and Web Applications: 
Emerging Concepts, 205-227. 
[15] Noy, N. F., & McGuinness, D. L. (2001). Ontology development 101: 
A guide to creating your first ontology. University of Standford. 
[16] Leverett, E. P. (2011). Quantitatively assessing and visualising 
industrial system attack surfaces. University of Cambridge, Darwin 
College. 
[17] Shovgenya, Y., Skopik, F., & Theuerkauf, K. (2015, June). On 
demand for situational awareness for preventing attacks on the smart 
grid. In Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment 
(CyberSA), 2015 International Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
[18] Lancor, L., & Workman, R. (2007, March). Using Google hacking to 
enhance defense strategies. In ACM SIGCSE Bulletin (Vol. 39, No. 1, 
pp. 491-495). ACM. 
[19] Cheng, J., Ma, Z. M., & Tong, Q. (2015). RDF Storage and Querying: 
A Literature Review. Handbook of Research on Innovative Database 
Query Processing Techniques, 460. 
[20] Arnaert, M. (2016). Create your own SPARQL web Server for 
semantic web with DEBIAN & VIRTUOSO. Amazon press. 
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

