Security of Seniors – The Detection and Prevention of Falls 
 
Lubomír Macků 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Tomas Bata University in Zlín 
Zlín, Czech Republic 
e-mail: macku@fai.utb.cz 
Markéta Matějíčková 
EUROALARM Ltd. 
Praha, Czech Republic 
e-mail: matejickova@euroalarm.cz
 
Abstract— The paper deals with the issue of seniors security, 
namely the security problems related to falls of independently 
living elderly citizens. Various possibilities of their fall 
detection are studied. We analyze the historical development, 
current capabilities and efficiency of different approaches and 
methods. We address the willingness and ability of seniors to 
actively use technology, detection limits, privacy, personal data 
security and other important factors. In addition, we discuss 
the challenges, current shortcomings, issues and trends in fall 
detection or operation reliability in real-life conditions.  The 
main future goal would be to maintain the personal privacy 
and security of irrelevant information in modern fall detection 
systems. 
Keywords-security; 
seniors; 
emergency 
response; 
fall 
detection; smart phones; assistive technology; senior inspect; 
witrack. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Worldwide, the number of persons over 60 years is 
growing faster than any other age group. According to the 
World Health Organization (WHO) study [1] approximately 
28-35% of people aged 65 and over fall each year. This 
number is even increasing to 32-42% for those over 70 years 
of age. In fact, the number of falls increases exponentially 
with age-related biological changes. Falls are defined here as 
“inadvertently coming to rest on the ground, floor or other 
lower level, excluding intentional change in position to rest 
on furniture, leaning on the walls or other objects”. Falls and 
consequent injuries are major public health problems that 
often require medical attention. They lead to 20-30% of mild 
to severe injuries, and are underlying cause of 10-15% of all 
emergency department visits and account for 40% of all 
injury deaths. If preventive measures are not taken in 
immediate future, the numbers of injuries caused by falls is 
projected to double in the year 2030. 
In addition, falls may also result in post-fall syndrome 
that includes dependence, loss of autonomy, confusion, 
immobilization and depression, which will lead to a further 
restriction in daily activities. Such dependence is shown, for 
example, in a study by S. M. Friedman et al. [2], where 
authors state that each syndrome may lead to the other. 
Namely, an individual who falls may subsequently develop 
fear of further falls. This distinction underlies the concept of 
primary prevention, in which the onset of fear of falling is 
prevented, versus secondary prevention, in which fear of 
falling is prevented from progressing. Falls consequences 
can significantly mitigate their early detection combined 
with an effective emergency system. 
The effect of automatic fall detection units on the fear of 
falling was studied by S. Brownsell et al. [3] on the group of 
participants, who had experienced a fall in the previous six 
months. Most users who wore their fall detectors at least 
occasionally felt more confident and independent and 
considered that the detector improved their safety. 
One of determining factors influencing the severity of 
fall consequences in older people is the amount of time spent 
lying on the floor or ground [4]. This is particularly critical 
when a person cannot call for help, for instance when she/he 
has lost consciousness or is alone when the fall occurs. Even 
when uninjured, 47 % of people who have experienced a fall 
were unable to get back up without help. Lying on the floor 
due to a fall event for one hour or more is defined as a “long-
lie”. Experiencing a “long-lie” event is associated with 
serious injuries, higher mortality rates and hospital 
admissions, as well as consequent care home admissions.  
Therefore, 
calling 
for 
help 
systems 
and 
other 
technological equipment for detecting, preventing, and 
mitigating falls consequences have become a social necessity 
and it is very important to use reliable and sufficiently 
sensitive systems..  
A fall detection system could be defined as a system 
which detects falls and alerts a designated person or 
emergency services in order to facilitate rapid assistance. 
A system causing too many false alarms is inconvenient for 
the system supervisor while the not responding system can 
result in injuries or even in death. 
For these and other reasons, some fall detection studies 
originated a few years ago, for example Noury and collective 
[5] in 2008 or a similar analysis [6] published in 2012 by 
Mubashir and other co-authors. In recent years, there has 
been rapid development in the field of fall detection and so 
some systems are missing in the above studies, such as those 
based on the use of smart phones and the like. These missing 
trends are described in this work. 
In section II., individual systems are described. Starting 
with “The first call for help system”, continuing with the 
“Automatic fall detection” and, at the end, the “Mobile 
personal airbag” system. In section III., more recent and 
some complex projects are mentioned. Also the possibility of 
using smartphones in the area of fall detection can be found 
here. Section IV. concludes the article and suggests future 
possible developments in the area. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II. 
INDIVIDUAL SYSTEMS 
A. The first call for help system  
The first call for help system, in English often called 
Medical Alarm or Personal Emergency Response System 
(PERS) was developed in Germany in the early 70s of the 
20th century by Wilhem Hormann [7]. The system was 
programmed to send messages after pressing a button. The 
button (transmitter) was designed to be worn by a senior 
living alone. The cost was 795 USD and was offered through 
Popular Science magazine in October 1975. 
B. Automatic fall detection 
Research on automatic fall detection progressed through 
the nineties of the twentieth century. Lord and Colvin [8] 
studied the causes and consequences of falls in the elderly, 
they tried to prevent falls and suggested the use of an 
accelerometer to detect a fall. The first detector prototype 
was developed in the fall of 1998. It used a piezoelectric 
shock sensor for detecting abnormal peaks caused by the fall 
and a mercury tilt switch for detecting the orientation of the 
falling user. 
One of the first attempts to detect the fall based on video 
cameras was described by Wu [9] in 2000. Results showed 
that the horizontal and vertical speed can be utilized to 
distinguish a fall from normal activities. 
In 2002, Prado et al. [10] developed a prototype system 
for detecting fall based on two dual-axis accelerometers 
placed in a patch worn on the user back at his cross level. 
The same year, Norbert Noury [11] developed a smart sensor 
with evaluation algorithm. The prototype contained a 
piezoelectric accelerometer, vibration sensor and a switch 
responsive to the position. Unfortunately, it turned out that 
the vibration sensor is too sensitive.  
T. Degen et al. [12] introduced a fall detector for elderly 
people in the form of a wristband in 2003. The device was 
comfortable to wear, but its reliability was only 65%.  
Some of the acceleration based fall detectors can be seen 
in Table 1. 
In 2004, Sixsmith et al. [20] used a variety of cheap 
infrared cameras mounted on the wall. The alarm started 
when there was no observed activity over long period of time 
or during the detection of a fall. Attempts (20 falls + 10 
attempts without falling) unfortunately showed that only 
30% of falls were properly detected. 
Several groups around the world were engaged in the 
new devices development in 2006. Kang et al. [21] have 
developed a bracelet, in which the fall monitoring and 
modules 
for 
measurement 
of 
the 
single-channel 
electrocardiogram (ECG), blood pressure, pulse oximetry, 
breathing, and temperature were merged. Nyan et al. [22] 
have conducted fall detection experiments based on a high-
speed camera and three gyroscopes installed in the 
undershirt. The gyroscopes were concretely placed on the 
chest, arm and at the waist. The camera was used to study the 
position of the body during the fall, while the angular 
velocity was the guideline for the fall detection. Miaou et al. 
[23] reported fall detection based on the panoramic camera 
and information about the user (the height to width ratio and 
Body Mass Index (BMI)). This system brought a 70% 
accuracy without user information and 81% accuracy with 
this information. Alwan et al. [24] suggested a fall detection 
system based on floor shocks sensing by a piezoelectric 
sensor. It showed 100% detection rate, but falls simulations 
were carried out with dummies.  
Srinivasan et al. [25] studied the automatic detection of 
the fall based on triaxial accelerometer and passive infrared 
detectors (PIR) in 2007. The triaxial accelerometer worn by 
the user was placed at the waist for fall detection while the 
PIR detectors were mounted on the wall to provide 
information about the horizontal movement. The same year 
Almeida et al. [26] presented the stick with a gyroscope, 
which helped detect the downfall and measured the number 
of steps. The fall detection was based on the angular velocity 
evaluation. 
In 2008, Doukas and Maglogiannis suggested a 
combination of accelerometer and a microphone placed on a 
leg [27]. Based on the short-time Fourier transformation 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF ACCELERATION BASED FALL DETECTORS 
Study 
Year 
Objective 
Detection technique 
Tested 
SP/SE 
Detector 
location 
Kangas et al.[13] 
2009 
prototype verification 
exceeding the threshold value; 
min.2 phase 
20 persons 
100% / 97% 
wrists, head, 
waist 
Shan et al.[14] 
2010 
investigation of a pre-impact 
fall detector 
support vector machines 
(SVM) 
5 persons 
100% / 97,5% 
waist 
Bourke et al. [15] 
2010 
comparision of novel fall 
detection algorithms 
considering the fall impact, 
the velocity and the person 
posture 
20 persons 
SP: 100% 
waist 
Lai et al. [16] 
2011 
several acceleration 
sensors for joint sensing fall 
events 
exceeding the threshold value; 
compared acceleration in 3 
axes 
9 persons 
Accuracy 
92.92% 
neck, hand, 
waist, foot 
Yuwono et al. [17] 
2012 
verification of a sophisticated 
fall detection method 
machine learning,  perceptron 
network structure adaptation  
8 persons 
99% / 98,6% 
waist 
Kerdagari et al. 
[18] 
2012 
investigation of the 
performance of different 
classification algorithms 
machine learning; combination 
of several methods 
50 persons 
SE: 90.15% 
waist 
Cheng et al. [19] 
2013 
daily activity monitoring 
and fall detection 
exceeding the threshold value; 
using a decision tree 
14 persons 
95%/97,6% 
chest, thigh 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

it was described that during the impact the low-frequency 
sound signals with high amplitude are formed and can be 
used to detect falls. The same year, Bourke et al. [28] 
introduced a fall detection system and algorithm that were 
incorporated into a custom designed garment.  
Tzeng et al. [29] used in 2010 a pressure sensor in the 
floor to identify fall strength combined with infrared camera 
to detect the movement of a person. Bianchi et al. [30] 
developed a fall detection system based on barometric 
pressure sensor and a triaxial accelerometer located at the 
waist. On the basis of the barometric pressure difference 
between the waistline and the earth, the experimental results 
showed that the obtained sensor information was useful for 
the fall detection. 
C. Mobile personal airbag 
It is a 2009 pilot project for the protection against injuries 
from falls [31]. Behind this project stands a Japanese 
scientist Toshiyjo Tamura and his team. The researchers 
designed a wearable device containing a fall detector directly 
connected to the airbag. The signal containing information 
about the acceleration and angular velocity was used for the 
airbag activation. Sixteen people were monitored during a 
fall simulation. Based on the data an algorithm was designed 
so that the downfall was evaluated 300 ms before the actual 
impact of people on the ground. This signal was then used to 
start the 2.4 liter airbag. Although this system can help to 
prevent injuries due to falling, other research/development is 
required to miniaturize the inflation system. 
III. 
MORE RECENT PROJECTS 
A. Fallwatch project 
The French company Vigilio S.A. launched a project 
FallWatch [32] funded by the FP7-SME program with the 
timeframe 2009 - 2012. The challenge was to develop a new 
generation of fall detection devices, including call for help 
system, which would be effective in minimizing the 
consequences of falls.  FallWatch is a miniature radio 
communicating wearable device in the form of an adhesive 
patch. The project deals with the fall from the moment it 
occurs, i.e., from its detection through the cause investigation 
to desired action. Fall-Watch may be regarded as a context-
aware system. The user wears a "patch" and FallWatch 
constantly monitors the kinematic variables and classifies the 
situation according to three degrees of state activity: low, 
medium and high. Another component is the home central 
unit that monitors activity using signals from PIR detectors 
and classifies the situation according to three-level scale (no 
activity, normal activity, exceptional activity). 
B. Smartphones as a fall detection system 
Developers are trying to detect the fall using smart 
phones since 2010. Dai et al. [33] introduced the fall 
detection based on mobile phones in 2010 and recently the 
detection based on triaxial accelerometers becomes more and 
more popular. 
In 2012, Fang et al. [34] compared the accuracy of fall 
detection for smart phones placed on the waist, chest and 
thigh, and found that its chest location is the most 
appropriate. The advantage of using a smartphone to detect 
the fall is the possibility of simultaneous use for sending 
warning messages and / or tracking the person who needs 
help. 
Koshmak et al. [35] experimented with detection of a fall 
with 7 skiers. They had with them a smart phone when 
skying downhill and the pulse and blood oxygen saturation 
were measured. The measured values were unexpectedly 
variable in critical situations. 
Also, Kau and Chan [36] conducted a study with 
smartphones. Fall was detected using a triaxial accelerometer 
and electronic compass. 
C. The Senior Inspect project 
A purely Czech product in the fall detection area is the 
Senior Inspect project. The project was developed by The 
CleverTech spin-off company.  
The spin-off company allows the important process 
called technology transfer in 
academic environment to take place and is usually 
founded by university 
staff with contribution from external specialists or 
companies. The CleverTech is a spin-off company consisting 
of Faculty of Biomedical Engineering at Czech Technical 
University (CTU) in Prague, First faculty of medicine at 
Charles University in Prague and some external entities. The 
first testing of the product began in 2010, the commercial use 
in 2013 [37]. 
The user wears a small communications unit and in 
a critical situation presses the SOS button. The system also 
enables a range of advanced automatic features in case the 
user is unable to press the button by himself/herself. When 
setting off an alarm in the surveillance center the position is 
determined and the voice call is established directly with the 
user through the communication unit. On the base of the 
individual assistance profile and the user agreement the next 
procedure is selected (the family, professional associations, 
integrated rescue system etc. are contacted). Key benefits 
include: 
• 
simplicity of use 
• 
possibility of the communication, localization 
• 
panic button 
• 
the support for proper use 
• 
automatic 
detection 
of 
emergency 
situations 
(including the fall) 
D. FATE Solution 
The Polytechnic University of Catalonia project Fall 
Detector for the Elderly (FATE), which was launched in 
2012 with EU funding, should soon bring results. The FATE 
system is being developed to be an affordable and reliable 
system capable of detecting falls both inside and outside 
home [38]. The system consists of two main elements plus a 
series of secondary elements. The main elements are: 
• 
highly 
sensitive 
fall 
detector 
incorporating 
accelerometers, capable of running a complex, 
specific fall detection algorithm in order to provide 
accurate fall detection. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• 
telecommunications 
layer 
based 
on 
wireless 
technologies. 
It 
consists 
of 
an 
indoors 
telecommunications network based on Zigbee, a 
central 
computer 
(with 
or 
without 
Internet 
connection) and a mobile phone communication 
with the central computer and the fall sensor via 
Bluetooth. All incidences and measures are stored in 
the server, so that they can be used as a monitoring 
data for the carers/doctors thus improving subject 
fall prevention and treatment. Once detected and 
confirmed, fall events are communicated by the 
mobile phone (or Internet, if this service is available) 
to relatives or health service providers. 
Secondary elements are: 
• 
bed presence sensor to dismiss false falls (if the 
person lies on the bad in a sudden way while 
wearing the fall detector) to control the time the 
person spends in bed (to detect potential health 
problems or behavior anomalies) and to detect falls 
from the bed (as the user may decide not to wear the 
fall sensor during sleeping hours). 
• 
i-Walker to detect fall risk for elders with significant 
gait 
difficulties, 
i.e., 
walker 
with 
integrated 
automatic brake, tilt sensors and with pressure 
sensors placed in the handle. 
E. Personal motion sensor with the fall detection IMSAFE. 
Individual Mobility Sensor for Automatic Fall Evaluation 
(IMSAFE) [39] is based on a combination of the power 
converter placed in shoe soles with accelerometer located in 
the belt measuring stroke, orientation and deviation from the 
pattern posture (Fig. 1). The device was developed in the 
form of 2 different prototypes in 2012 at the University of 
San Diego. The declared detection accuracy of this project is 
high, 97.14%. 
F. Czech project ARTEMIS 
Another Czech project monitoring the health condition 
comes from student Marek Novak. This student was awarded 
a prize in 2013 for his project Artemis [40], whose aim was 
to develop the concept of wireless modules for monitoring 
and processing of physiological parameters.  
Here, the sensors wirelessly transmit data to a central unit 
in the form of a wristwatch (hereinafter referred to as watch), 
which performs filtering, processing and data displaying. 
The watch enables communication with similar devices, and 
network access. Miniature sensors are wearable on clothing 
  
Figure 1.  IMSAFE - fall detection in the soles [39] 
or can be worn as bracelets. Such sensors are sensor for 
measuring an electrocardiogram (ECG), a motion sensor for 
detecting a fall, global positioning system (GPS) location 
sensor, temperature, transmissive pulse oximetry and several 
others. The watch is equipped with a 1.8-inch color display. 
From a technological perspective, the application runs on 
inexpensive low-power communication modules Nordic 
nRF24L01+ and MRF49XA with low power consumption. 
For controlling STM32L microcontrollers are used. The 
whole implementation uses as a power supply ordinary 
Li-Ion battery. Communication with the public networks is 
provided via Bluetooth and Global System for Mobile 
Communication (GSM). 
From the application point of view, ARTEMIS provides 
an inexpensive and convenient all age groups monitoring, 
from newborns to seniors. The next version should be based 
on the platform Intel Quark, which allows with integrated 
Wi-Fi even better wireless options. 
G. Kinect, game console 
Putting Microsoft Kinect game console on the market 
aroused an interest for many researchers dealing with the 
camera fall detection. This console detects the motion using 
sensors and the response action is based on the player motion 
without the need of any control device touching. Stone et al. 
[41] introduced in 2013 two state detection techniques and 
verified the system using a relatively large set of data from 
thirteen households. The detection algorithm was based on 
the following measured variables: minimum and average 
vertical speed, the maximal vertical acceleration and the 
shading rate (which is evaluated for each of the pixels). This 
data set included 3339 days (i.e. 9 years) of continuous data, 
holding 454 falls, of which 445 were performed by actors 
and nine cases involved real falls in a normal situation. 
Further study using the game console Kinect was 
elaborated at Lawrence Technological University [42]. The 
authors utilized three types of Kinect sensors: a standard 
camera, an infrared (IR) camera, and a microphone array. 
The IR camera detects points projected by a laser and 
automatically converts them into a depth map. The cameras 
are calibrated so that the depth map pixels correspond to the 
pixels in the standard camera images. They also use a Kinect 
software development kit (SDK) which is a free software 
package providing a variety of useful tools. The software 
automatically detects the 3D location. Additionally, the floor 
plane is automatically detected. Two algorithms to detect 
falls using the Kinect SDK were developed. The first 
algorithm uses only joint position data. This algorithm 
calculates the distance from the floor to each joint. If the 
maximum distance is less than some threshold value, a fall is 
detected. The second algorithm calculates the velocity of 
each joint in the direction normal to the floor plane. The 
velocities are averaged over all joints and many frames. If 
this average velocity is lower (downward velocities are 
defined as negative) than some threshold value, a fall is 
detected. 
Voice recognition is used to reduce false positive reports. 
After a fall is detected, the event is validated using the 
Kinect microphone array and a voice recognition system. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Once a fall is detected, a new thread is created to ask the user 
if he requires assistance. The thread waits for a response of 
yes or no. In the case of a yes, a fall is reported. In the case 
of a no, the report is canceled. A timer is also set. If the timer 
ends without receiving a yes or no response, a fall is 
reported. 
Falls are reported through email or Multimedia 
Messaging Service (MMS) with attached pictures of the 
event. 
The system has been tested quite extensively even with 
people using canes, crutches, and walkers and works 
reliably. It offers an affordable way of fall detection. One 
major concern is that a simulated fall may be significantly 
different from an actual fall. 
H. WiTrack project 
Since 2013, the WiTrack project is in its prototype stage. 
It is a 3D monitoring which works even if the person is 
occluded from the WiTrack device or in a different room. 
This project originated at Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT). The system tracks the 3D motion of a 
user using the radio signals reflected from his body. WiTrack 
does not require the user to carry any wireless device, yet its 
accuracy exceeds current radio frequency (RF) localization 
systems, which require the user to hold a transceiver [43]. It 
operates at a fairly low-power, transmitting only 0.75 
milliwatts. This signals strength is 100 times lower than the 
Wi-Fi and even 1000 times lower than the broadcast signal 
from a GSM phone. WiTrack can determine not only the 
center of the human body, but also monitors the movement 
of the limbs and head. The detection accuracy is 96.9%. 
WiTrack may be part of the user electronics and has wide 
possibilities of usage, not just a fall detection, but also 
appliance control or playing games. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Although it may seem that, with all technological 
development nowadays, fall detection must be a simple 
matter, it is actually not. Currently, this complex problem 
does not have a standardized solution. Reliable, inexpensive 
and senior friendly devices for the fall detection are still not 
available on the market despite the fact that they become 
essential in order to provide a rapid assistance and to prevent 
fear of falling among seniors. 
Most often, detection methods are based on signals from 
accelerometers and gyroscopes placed in the various types of 
equipment and on the video detection. Lately, efforts are 
being made towards the smart phones use and more free of 
charge applications are becoming available.  
One of the shortcomings of current solutions is loss of 
privacy, mainly when using video detection but not only. 
The smart phone fall detection needs to solve the problems 
associated with limited battery capacity and the need for 
recharging. Also, the smart phones cannot compete with the 
complex solutions that sophisticate systems provide.  
Helpful would be a public database of accelerometer 
signals and video signals of fall situations. Since it is not 
acceptable to subject older people to simulated falls, the data 
are severely limited. Most reported studies used young 
volunteers to simulate falls. Unfortunately, even if there was 
a public database the simulated data might not match those 
of the real seniors´ daily life situations. 
Sharing source codes of the algorithms would also be 
helpful.  
The future fall detection development will probably 
includes using more sophisticated smart mobile phones 
because of their decreasing price and increasing hardware 
potential. In the commerce sphere, the extension of systems 
like the Senior Inspect with other health functions has huge 
potential. The combination of systems which are able to 
monitor the user without using wearable devices inside his 
home with some suitable device used outside will definitely 
succeed. The main goal will be to maintain the privacy and 
security of irrelevant information (the data obtained in the 
time during which falls do not occur), but simultaneously to 
monitor and capture sufficient data when it is crucial. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization, “WHO global report on falls 
prevention in older age”, Geneva, Switzerland, iv, 47 p. ISBN 
92-415-6353-2, 2008 
[2] S. M. Friedman, 
B. Munoz, 
S. K. West, 
G. S. Rubin, 
L. P. Fried, ”Falls and fear of falling: which comes first? A 
longitudinal prediction model suggests strategies for primary 
and secondary prevention,” Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society, 50(8), pp. 1329-1335, 2002. 
[3] S. Brownsell and M. S. Hawley, "Automatic fall detectors and 
the fear of falling," Journal of telemedicine and telecare 10(5), 
pp. 262-266, 2004. 
[4] F. J. T. Thilo, S. Hahn, S. Bilger, J. M. Schols, R. J. Halfens, 
"Involvement of older people in the development of fall 
detection systems: a scoping review," BMC geriatrics 16.1, 
2016. 
[5] N. Noury, 
P. Rumeau, 
A. K. Bourke, 
G. ÓLaighin, 
J. E. Lundy, "A proposal for the classification and evaluation 
of fall detectors," Irbm 29.6, 2008, pp. 340-349. 
[6] M. Mubashir, L. Shao, L. Seed, "A survey on fall detection: 
Principles and approaches," Neurocomputing 100, 2013, pp. 
144-152. 
[7] "Emergency Dialer," Popular Science, p. 104, October 1975. 
[8] C. J. Lord and D. P. Colvin, "Falls in the elderly: Detection 
and assessment," Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society, 1991. Vol. 13: 1991., Proceedings of the Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE. IEEE, 1991, 
pp. 1938-1939. 
[9] G. Wu, "Distinguishing fall activities from normal activities 
by velocity characteristics," Journal of biomechanics 33.11, 
pp. 1497-1500, 2000. 
[10] M. Prado, J.  Reina-Tosina, L. Roa. "Distributed intelligent 
architecture for falling detection and physical activity analysis 
in the elderly," Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2002. 
24th Annual Conference and the Annual Fall Meeting of the 
Biomedical Engineering Society EMBS/BMES Conference, 
2002, Proceedings of the Second Joint. Vol. 3. IEEE, 2002, 
pp. 1910-1911. 
[11] N. Noury, "A smart sensor for the remote follow up of 
activity and fall detection of the elderly," Microtechnologies 
in Medicine &amp; Biology 2nd Annual International IEEE-
EMB Special Topic Conference on. IEEE, 2002, pp. 314-317. 
[12] T. Degen, H. Jaeckel, M. Rufer, and S. Wyss, ”SPEEDY: a 
fall detector in a wrist watch,” Proc. Seventh IEEE 
International Symposium on Wearable Computing, 2003, 
pp. 184-187. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[13] M. Kangas, I. Vikman, J. Wiklander, P. Lindgren, L. Nyberg, 
T. Jämsä, Sensitivity and specificity of fall detection in people 
aged 40 years and over. Gait & posture, 29(4), pp. 571-574, 
2009. 
[14] S. Shan and T. Yuan, "A wearable pre-impact fall detector 
using feature selection and support vector machine," In Signal 
Processing (ICSP), 2010 IEEE 10th International Conference 
on, IEEE, October 2010, pp. 1686-1689. 
[15] A. K. Bourke et al. "Assessment of waist-worn tri-axial 
accelerometer 
based 
fall-detection 
algorithms 
using 
continuous unsupervised activities," Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society (EMBC), 2010 Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE. IEEE, 2010, pp. 2782-2785. 
[16] C. F. Lai, S. Y. Chang, H. C. Chao, Y. M. Huang, "Detection 
of cognitive injured body region using multiple triaxial 
accelerometers for elderly falling," Sensors Journal, IEEE, 
11(3), pp. 763-770, 2011. 
[17] M. Yuwono, 
B. 
D. Moulton, 
S. W. Su, 
B. G. Celler, 
H. T. Nguyen, "Unsupervised machine-learning method for 
improving the performance of ambulatory fall-detection 
systems," Biomed Eng Online, 11(9), 2012. 
[18] H. Kerdegari, 
K. Samsudin, 
A. R. Ramli, 
S. Mokaram, 
"Evaluation of fall detection classification approaches," In 
Intelligent and Advanced Systems (ICIAS), 2012 4th 
International Conference on (Vol. 1, pp. 131-136). IEEE, 
June 2012, pp. 131-136. 
[19] J. Cheng, X. Chen, M. Shen, "A framework for daily activity 
monitoring 
and 
fall 
detection 
based 
on 
surface 
electromyography and accelerometer signals," Biomedical 
and Health Informatics, IEEE Journal of, 17(1), 2013, 
pp. 38-45. 
[20] A. Sixsmith and N. Johnson. "A smart sensor to detect the 
falls of the elderly," Pervasive Computing, IEEE 3.2, 
pp. 42-47, 2004. 
[21] J. M. Kang, T. Yoo, H. C. Kim, "A wrist-worn integrated 
health monitoring instrument with a tele-reporting device for 
telemedicine 
and 
telecare," 
Instrumentation 
and 
Measurement, 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
55.5, 
2006, 
pp. 1655-1661. 
[22] M. N. Nyan, 
F. E. Tay, 
A. W. Y. Tan, 
K. H. W. Seah, 
"Distinguishing fall activities from normal activities by 
angular 
rate 
characteristics 
and 
high-speed 
camera 
characterization," Medical engineering & physics 28.8, 
pp. 842-849, 2006. 
[23] S. G. Miaou, P. H. Sung, C. Y. Huang, "A customized human 
fall detection system using omni-camera images and personal 
information," Distributed Diagnosis and Home Healthcare, 
2006, D2H2, 1st Transdisciplinary Conference on. IEEE, 
2006, pp. 39-42. 
[24] M. Alwan, P. J. Rajendran, S. Kell, D. Mack, S. Dalal, 
M. Wolfe, R. Felder, "A smart and passive floor-vibration 
based 
fall 
detector 
for 
elderly," 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies, 2006. ICTTA'06. 2nd. Vol. 1. 
IEEE, 2006, pp. 1003-1007. 
[25] S. Srinivasan, J. Han, D. Lal, A. Gacic, "Towards automatic 
detection of falls using wireless sensors," Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, 2007. EMBS 2007. 29th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE. IEEE, 2007, 
pp. 1379-1382. 
[26] O. Almeida, M. Zhang, J. C. Liu, "Dynamic fall detection and 
pace measurement in walking sticks," High Confidence 
Medical Devices, Software, and Systems and Medical Device 
Plug-and-Play Interoperability, 2007. HCMDSS-MDPnP. 
Joint Workshop on. IEEE, 2007, pp. 204-206. 
[27] C. Doukas and I. Maglogiannis, "Advanced patient or elder 
fall detection based on movement and sound data," Pervasive 
Computing 
Technologies 
for 
Healthcare, 
2008. 
PervasiveHealth 2008. Second International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2008, pp. 103-107. 
[28] [1] A. K. Bourke, P. W. van de Ven, A. E. Chaya, G. M. 
OLaighin, J. Nelson, "The design and development of a long-
term fall detection system incorporated into a custom vest for 
the 
elderly," 
In 
Conference 
proceedings:... 
Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society. Annual Conference, 2007, pp. 
2836-2839. 
[29] H. W. Tzeng, M. Y. Chen, M. Y. Chen, "Design of fall 
detection system with floor pressure and infrared image," 
System Science and Engineering (ICSSE), 2010 International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 131-135. 
[30] F. Bianchi, 
S. J. Redmond, 
M. R. Narayanan, 
S. Cerutti, 
N. H. Lovell, 
"Barometric 
pressure 
and 
triaxial 
accelerometry-based falls event detection," Neural Systems 
and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 18.6, 
2010, pp. 619-627. 
[31] T. Tamura, T. Yoshimura, M. Sekine, M. Uchida, O. Tanaka, 
"A wearable airbag to prevent fall injuries," Information 
Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on 13.6, 
2009, pp. 910-914. 
[32] Y. Depeursinge, 
J. Krauss, 
M. El-Khoury, 
"Device 
for 
monitoring the activity of a person and/or detecting a fall, in 
particular with a view to providing help in the event of an 
incident hazardous to life or limb," U.S. Patent No. 6,201,476. 
13 Mar. 2001. 
[33] J. Dai, X. Bai, Z. Yang, Z. Shen, D. Xuan, "Mobile phone-
based pervasive fall detection," Personal and ubiquitous 
computing 14.7, pp. 633-643, 2010. 
[34] S. H. Fang, Y. C. Liang, K. M. Chiu, "Developing a mobile 
phone-based fall detection system on android platform," 
Computing, Communications and Applications Conference 
(ComComAp), 2012. IEEE, 2012, pp. 143-146. 
[35] G. A. Koshmak, M. Linden, A. Loutfi, "Evaluation of the 
android-based fall detection system with physiological data 
monitoring," Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(EMBC), 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1164-1168. 
[36] L. J. Kau, C. S. Chen, "A smart phone-based pocket fall 
accident 
detection, 
positioning, 
and 
rescue 
system." 
Biomedical and Health Informatics, IEEE Journal of 19.1, 
pp. 44-56, 2015. 
[37] Senior Inspect - detail information [Online], Available from:  
http://www.seniorinspect.cz/cs/podrobne-informace.html, 
2015.03.16 
[38] FATE PROJECT - Fall Detector for the Elderly [Online], 
Available from:  http://fate.upc.edu/index.php, 2015.03.11 
[39] IMSAFE: Individual Mobility Sensor for Automatic Fall 
Evaluation, 
Functional 
Cardiovascular 
Engineering 
Laboratory 
[Online], 
Available 
from: 
http://web.eng.ucsd.edu/~pcabrales/imsafe.html, 2015.03.06 
[40] Czech School: Six students on the Intel ISEF [Online], 
Available from: http://www.ceskaskola.cz/2014/04/sestice-
studentu-jede-na-intelisef.html, 2015.03.05 
[41] E. E. Stone, M. Skubic, "Fall detection in homes of older 
adults using the Microsoft Kinect," Biomedical and Health 
Informatics, IEEE Journal of 19.1, pp. 290-301, 2015. 
[42] C. Kawatsu, J. Li, C. J. Chung, "Development of a fall 
detection system with Microsoft Kinect," Robot Intelligence 
Technology 
and 
Applications 
2012. 
Springer 
Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 623-630, 2013. 
[43] F. Adib, Z. Kabelac, D. Katabi, R. C. Miller, "3d tracking via 
body radio reflections," 11th USENIX Symposium on 
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 14), 
2014, pp. 317-329. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

