RMDM – A Conceptual ICT Risk-Meta-Data-Model 
Applied to COBIT for Risk as underlying Risk Model 
 
Martin Latzenhofer 1 2 
1 Center for Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
email: martin.latzenhofer@ait.ac.at 
Gerald Quirchmayr 2 
2 Multimedia Information Systems Research Group 
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
email: gerald.quirchmayr@univie.ac.at
 
Abstract— The aim of this article is to introduce an approach 
that integrates the different models and methods currently 
applied 
for 
risk 
management 
in 
information 
and 
communication technologies (ICT). These different risk 
management approaches are usually bound to the organization 
where they are applied, thus staying quite specific for a given 
setting. Consequently, there is no possibility to compare or 
reuse risk management structures because they are individual 
solutions. In order to establish a common basis for working 
with different underlying risk models, a metamodeling 
approach from the area of Disaster Recovery is used. A first 
concept for a data model described in Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) is presented and its core components 
addressing the whole risk management lifecycle are described. 
This contribution describes a comprehensive mapping of 
information artefacts – in this case obtained from the COBIT 
for Risk framework – which are then lifted to the meta-level of 
the proposed ICT risk-meta-data-model in order to be able to 
work with them in a consolidated way. Through this mapping 
process, all information artefacts are extracted, consolidated 
and harmonized to minimize the number of relevant objects. It 
has turned out that both the list of consolidated objects and the 
derived describing attributes can in general be incorporated 
into the proposed ICT risk-meta-data-model (RMDM), i.e., the 
essential information for working with the COBIT for Risk 
model can be stored in the proposed ICT risk-meta-data-
model. The results of the mapping show that it is worth 
examining a data-structure-oriented approach in order to 
develop both a model and a data structure for further 
framework-independent processing. 
Keywords-information and communication technology risk 
management; ICT risk-meta-data-model; COBIT for Risk; 
metamodeling; data model; UML.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In literature and in practice, many different risk 
management approaches and models can be found for the 
area of information and communication technology (ICT) 
systems. Even within the field of ICT, these approaches and 
models are tailored quite narrowly to specific areas and are 
typically restricted to one single organization. Therefore, the 
information on risk management is usually not comparable 
and transferrable between different organizations. This 
means that the risk model, the established risk management 
method, the concrete process implementation, the required 
input data and the resulting outcome have to be adapted to 
the current requirements of an organization every time the 
risk management process is set up. This often leads to high 
efforts for an organization or a company because they have 
to 
initialize 
and 
re-establish 
the 
risk 
management 
frameworks and related processes each time. It is evident that 
these parameters result in a smaller degree of reusability of a 
given risk management process and less comparability of the 
information obtained from it.  
When interpreting this problem as a pure ICT issue, an 
explicit ICT solution is required. This leads to the main 
research question of this paper, i.e., whether it is possible to 
develop a common risk management model, which is 
flexible enough to be applicable in different fields of the ICT 
area as well as among different organizations. To achieve 
that, it is crucial to define a suitable level of modeling. 
Therefore, the goal of the introduced approach is to design a 
meta-model for ICT risk management. By integrating 
different existing ICT risk management models, which are 
suitable for various fields of application into a meta-model, a 
generic data structure that focuses on common aspects of 
these models can be developed. This umbrella model simply 
obtains data from the underlying specialized models that 
have been defined by different frameworks. The approach 
introduced in this article postulates a superordinate meta-
model for ICT risk management and represents it as a data 
model, expressed a UML class diagram. Considering the 
application of ICT risk management in practice, the state-of-
the-art frameworks are well-established in the daily business 
of organizations. Consequently, it is not realistic to replace 
them by a new, universally valid model. The ICT risk-meta-
data-model approach introduced here firstly establishes a 
common data base of risk information gathered by different 
risk management frameworks, secondly makes data retrieved 
from different sources comparable, and thirdly verifies its 
practical applicability by describing real-life use cases, 
shown as an instantiation of the ICT risk-meta-data-model. 
The main goal is to specify the meta-model as a 
substantial data model. Using such a precise data model, the 
meta-model is directly applicable to real-life scenarios and 
enables the implementation of a dedicated ICT application or 
data structure. The data model is directly applicable for ICT 
tasks, provides a concrete ICT data structure where risk 
information can be stored, and is a fundamental (data) basis 
for ICT risk management applications. 
This paper is divided into five main sections. Following 
this introduction, Section II discusses those processes of 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

COBIT for Risk, which are relevant for risk management in 
detail, describes the fundamentals of the metamodeling 
approach, and concludes with discussing related work. In 
Section III, the conceptual data model RMDM, described in 
Unified Modeling Language (UML) is introduced. Section 
IV discusses the mapping of the information artefacts, input 
and output components of COBIT for Risk – the core of the 
derived risk model – and the objects of the proposed ICT 
risk-meta-data-model (RMDM). The objective of Section IV 
is to apply the postulated meta-model by modelling an 
instance of a concrete risk model. The concluding Section V 
outlines the results and proposes further research that is 
needed to refine the ICT risk-meta-data-model (RMDM). 
II. 
FUNDAMENTALS 
A. COBIT for Risk 
Typically, organizations have a continuous need to 
manage the risks in their business environment. Such a need 
due to extrinsical factors is often motivated by legal 
requirements. Organizations have to ensure compliance with 
regulations, especially relating to finance and public 
accounting. Therefore, the responsible person implements 
risk management – in this case limited to the ICT area – by 
doing research and building upon already existing risk 
management 
structures. 
Special 
risk 
management 
frameworks that are applicable to ICT, e.g., International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) 31000 [1], National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special 
Publication (SP) 800-30/-37/-39 [2] [3] [4], Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) 
Enterprise 
Risk 
Management 
(ERM) 
[5], 
Management of Risk [6] or COBIT for Risk [7], have proven 
to be effective within one single organization. These 
frameworks set up a baseline in an organization when it 
comes to implementing risk management structures. This 
usually generates isolated solutions. The different risk 
management frameworks are characterized by relatively 
similar objects and terms but very different artefacts, which 
cannot be related, compared, or summarized. One important 
issue is to harmonize the semantic differences between the 
various risk management frameworks, and even within one 
single framework. 
COBIT for Risk [7] is a special publication edited by 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA, since 2008 the acronym itself is used as a brand 
name) [8] and is entirely based on Control Objectives for 
Information and Related Technology (COBIT, since version 
5 only the acronym itself is used as a brand name) 5.0 [9], a 
framework for governance and management of Enterprise 
ICT, especially for the interaction between ICT and classic 
business objectives. COBIT for Risk is a comprehensive 
guide for risk professionals. It elaborates the driving aspects 
for risk management in COBIT – principles and enablers – 
and extends the framework with risk scenarios. Furthermore, 
it provides suggestions for appropriate response measures 
using a combination of enablers. It has – similar to ISO 
31000 [1] – a two-tier approach: the risk management 
perspective puts the high-level principles into practice and 
the risk function view seeks to identify relevant COBIT 
processes, which support the risk management, as depicted 
in Figure 1. In this figure, the two core risk processes are 
shown in light blue, the other twelve key supporting 
processes are colored in dark red. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Supporting COBIT processes for the risk function [7, p. 35]
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The COBIT for Risk framework was chosen as a the first 
candidate for the intended mapping because of its good 
balance between general applicability for risk management 
topics and very specific statements in form of concrete 
control objectives for risk management. It definitely provides 
much more topic-oriented reference-points than standard 
COBIT. The framework is clearly structured and its 
description is not too narrative. A highly narrative 
framework might increase the effort for identifying class 
objects. In summary, all these characteristics were 
considered to be good prerequisites for the practical mapping 
work. Other frameworks, e.g., ISO 31000 [1], might be too 
generic in order to derive substantial class objects to a 
sufficient extent or, e.g., NIST [2] [3] [4], is too text-heavy 
for an efficient proof of concept. Consequently, all the other 
frameworks are rather suitable for verifying the ICT risk-
meta-data-model in a more advanced state of development. 
B. Metamodeling Approach 
The semantic meaning of a risk model must be 
transferred to the meta-level. A formal, scientific approach to 
build a consistent umbrella is missing. The meta-modeling 
process helps to create a common basis for standardization. 
The instantiation procedure of the meta-model down to the 
distinct risk management framework provides rules for 
transferring data from a concrete model up to the meta-
model, and is in that way working as a normalization 
process. The first advantage of representing the risk-meta-
model as data model is the immanent design of a structured 
data management based on a semantic model. It must be 
verified whether the general concepts can be divided from 
content-specific aspects in such a way that the interaction 
between meta- and model-level still remains efficient. The 
data model works as a structure model and holds static 
information. 
The 
risk 
management 
process 
and 
corresponding workflows change this data dynamically, 
providing a data model for the whole risk management life 
cycle. However, this article focuses on the verification of the 
basic content and on whether the data model can process the 
information. In addition, the meta-model approach for 
standardizing risk management information can be implicitly 
verified by setting up the data model, at least for those risk 
models which have been analyzed earlier. Certainly, it is no 
evidence for its comprehensiveness that all existing risk 
models still fit in the proposed meta-model. In fact, some 
models might be unsuitable for mapping. However, re-
performing the transformation process for a specific number 
of widely accepted risk frameworks ensures that the meta- 
model is sufficiently applicable for risk management tasks in 
organizations. 
In the context of a metamodeling hierarchy according to 
Karagiannis and Kühn [10] (cf., Figure 2. ), the ICT risk-
meta-data-model is situated on Level 2 – Metamodel, 
described by the Metamodeling Language UML. The 
selected risk management framework, e.g., COBIT for Risk 
[7], corresponds to Model on Level 1. It is described by 
means of the published framework, here in a semi-narrative 
way. The underlying Original itself can in fact be referred to 
as Level 0, and represents the organization’s risk 
management structure facing a concrete risk situation. On the 
top of the hierarchy, the Meta²-Model on Level 3 defines the 
structural elements of the general UML class diagram. The 
Meta²-Modeling Language can be understood as the 
modeling language UML used to describe the ICT risk-meta-
data-model. 
 
Figure 2.  Metamodeling hierarchy [10] 
C. Related Work 
The approach introduced in this article is inspired by 
similar work in the field of disaster recovery [11] [12], which 
introduced a meta-model integrating data from different 
natural disaster scenarios. Othman and Beydoun have 
implemented a data model in order to store data relevant to 
disaster recovery and have conducted a proof of concept for 
two natural disaster incidents of recent history, the 
Christchurch earthquake and Fukushima nuclear incident 
[12]. In this article, their approach is shifted into the ICT risk 
management domain while verifying whether it is a 
sustainable method for risk management. 
The conceptual ICT risk-meta-data-model was first 
introduced as a draft proposal at DACH Security 2016, 
Klagenfurt, Austria [13]. The present paper now provides a 
first comprehensive application of the mapping between the 
concrete risk model – here provided by COBIT for Risk – 
and the ICT risk-meta- data-model. 
III. 
ICT RISK-META-DATA-MODEL (RMDM) 
A. General Requirements 
One of the main objectives of the conceptual ICT risk-
meta-data-model is to record key information of any 
underlying risk model in a way that it can be compared, 
consolidated, merged and subsequently analyzed from an 
abstract meta-perspective. This approach ensures that risk 
management models that have already been implemented in 
organizations in practice continue to be used, at least the 
most commonly applied frameworks. Furthermore, this 
abstraction step reduces the information risk managers work 
with to the really essential requirements needed to establish 
the risk management framework and to perform the risk 
management process. This transformation from the risk 
model to the more abstract and general meta-level must 
follow specific rules and definitely causes some information 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

loss. To succeed it is necessary to strike a viable balance 
between the appropriate level of detail of the information 
content – by selecting only the key data, combining it 
semantically correct and transferring it to the meta-level – 
and the complexity level of the risk-meta-data-model. The 
authors assume that an adequate level of abstraction is 
reached when three to four structurally different risk models 
can be consistently represented as instances of the ICT risk-
meta-data-model. This iterative refinement of the risk-meta-
data-model through the analysis of different underlying risk 
models enhances its sustainability and robustness for 
practical application. The major advantage of formulating the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model as an ICT data model is that this 
allows organizations and companies to apply it in practice. 
By depicting the meta-model as unified modelling language 
(UML) classes diagram the modeler can immediately 
generate the corresponding data structure, implementing a 
demonstrator, which can serve as a proof of concept. 
Consequently, 
the 
ICT 
risk-meta-data-model 
itself 
constitutes an ICT application that can be applied in practice. 
In other words, the ICT problem to merge data from different 
risk models requires an ICT solution, which can immediately 
be applied by IT means. 
The first draft of the ICT risk-meta-data-model was 
developed based on literature research on different risk 
management frameworks, which all propagate distinct risk 
models but use the same or similar terms. The literature 
research also indicated that there is a need to reflect on the 
exact meaning of the used terms, even if they seem to be 
identical. A feasible mapping of the concepts used in 
different risk models is a prerequisite for successfully raising 
the key information of the risk model up to the meta-level. 
This requires the definition of consistent concepts on the 
meta-level in order to prevent overlapping of concepts and 
resulting misinterpretations. However, it depends on the 
specific framework whether the risk model can be derived 
directly from the publications. ISO 31000 [1], for example, is 
formulated in a generic way, thus leaving room for 
interpretation. COBIT for Risk [7], does in contrast provide 
very specific control objectives for the key and supporting 
processes on a more detailed level. This characteristic was 
the main reason for selecting COBIT for Risk for the first 
mapping of a risk model to the ICT risk-meta-data-model. 
The conceptual model aims at reflecting both the 
fundamental framework establishment and the operative risk 
management process that covers the risk management 
lifecycle. This dual perspective is a key feature of many 
frameworks and easily visible in, e.g., ISO 31000 [1], NIST 
[2] [3] [4], or even COBIT for Risk [7]. A core aspect was to 
identify appropriate objects, which represent the focus points 
within the risk management structure. These objects are 
further described by dedicated attributes, which are the 
variables for storing the relevant risk management 
information. These attributes can be changed, modified, 
extended, and adapted by specific methods. By setting up 
this data structure it is possible to transfer all relevant risk 
management data from the origin model up to the ICT risk-
meta-data-model. A very first draft of the modelling was 
already introduced in [13]. This article included a first draft 
of the ICT risk-meta-data-model and a possible approach for 
a proof of concept by applying COBIT for Risk as the 
underlying risk model. The first version of the ICT risk-
meta-data-model was the result of a creative process. This 
process followed the life cycle of risk management: starting 
with the identification of risk factors, followed by the 
analysis of the resulting risk by linking it to the current 
challenges that the organization has to cope with, and finally 
the evaluation of the risk. Furthermore, the data-model may 
represent the monitoring of established treatment activities. 
As a consequence, the data model fulfills the essential 
requirements of the risk management process as suggested in 
[1]. The next step is to perform a precise mapping of 
information artefacts propagated by COBIT for Risk [7] as 
described in Section IV. 
B. Main Components 
Figure 3 shows the status quo of the advanced ICT risk-
meta-data-model (RMDM) after the mapping. Classes or 
relationships written in italics are represented in the UML 
diagram. On an abstract level, all classes are derived from 
class Organisation and further divided in Input, Process, 
Output and Actor. The class Actor represents all actors and 
the responsibilities taken over by organizational entities, 
persons or roles, e.g., by the risk manager. This construction 
with generalization relationships both introduces an 
additional inherent structure of the data model and applies 
generalization and inheritance of attributes by superior 
classes in order to cope with the rising complexity. However, 
especially the class Process should also be able to 
summarize all important processes, policies, standards and 
guidelines that form the operational environment. It is not 
only an abstract data structure, but rather a hybrid class. 
The operative part of the conceptual model and the linked 
classes can be divided into three virtual parts, which are not 
explicitly included in the UML diagram in Figure 3. In the 
first phase, the conceptual model shows the causal chain 
from the single risk factors to the identified risk, which is in 
fact a prerequisite for performing an operational risk 
management process. The causal chain starts on the left side 
with a pure Hazard, which threatens a particular 
Vulnerability, resulting in the associated class Threat. Hence, 
the Threat explicitly affects an Asset of the organization, 
leading to one main risk factor Impact, which is also 
designed as an associated class. The Threat has also some 
Probability to materialize, which is the second main risk 
factor. Typically, the Risk can be characterized by its 
essential components Impact and Probability, which are 
often shown in a risk matrix and here designed as 
composition of both risk factors. However, the Risk reflects 
only the identified risks and does not yet link to a detailed 
assessment, which the organization is required to do as a 
next step. The second phase of the risk management process 
involves the assessment of the previously identified raw risks 
and linking them with the given influencing factors and 
framework conditions. Accordingly, the class Risk is a 
composition for AssessedRisk. This class records all 
necessary evaluations of the risks.  
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 3.  Conceptual ICT risk-meta-data-model (RMDM) described as UML class diagram 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A Measure treats AssessedRisk, but there is no indication 
whether these measures are really applied in this stage. This 
is indicated by the associated class Treatment. In this way, a 
gradual filter starting from Risk, via Measure to Treatment 
can be applied. This filter allows focusing only on those 
risks, which should be actively addressed in the risk 
management process and further reduces the complexity of 
the model to the high-risk areas according to the individual 
risk level. Consequently, all the selected Treatments are 
managed by Mitigation Management during their whole 
lifecycle. Thus, this class represents the core structure for 
performing the risk management process within the defined 
risk management framework over time. The third part of the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model addresses the management’s 
governance and its supporting elements, e.g., key output, risk 
events, or metrics. The class Governance establishes 
requirements for the class MitigationManagement and 
subsumes all the influencing factors to set up the appropriate 
risk environment. It holds management information about 
finance, strategy, objectives, risk appetite and tolerance etc. 
It is supported by ongoing Changes, which subsume all 
ancillary activities that support risk management activities, 
i.e., projects, changes. The class Categorization addresses all 
forms of structuring, e.g., categories, graduations, risk scales, 
and cluster definitions in the context of risk management 
efforts, and provides additional structure, while leaving 
enough leeway for individual metrics. 
It is also possible to integrate external catalogues, 
frameworks, and regulations into the risk management model 
through the interface class Catalogue. Documentation in any 
form, especially Reports or (Key Risk) Indicators, has 
specifying classes, which are implemented as aggregations 
from the generic structure (Documentation) to more 
quantifiable information (Indicator). Documentation covers 
all documents that are relevant for governance decisions and 
thus creates an information repository. Metrics with specified 
CalculationRules stores all kinds of calculation bases, e.g., 
for Balanced Scorecard, Key Risk Indicators, or Process 
Performance. This ICT risk-meta-data-model also includes 
an important feedback loop. The class RiskEvent ensures the 
remediation of risk information based on new findings due to 
incidents based on real-life incidents. In combination with 
the class Frequency, the quantification of already suffered 
risk events enables the adjustment of the underlying risk 
factors, thus increasing the accuracy of further assessments. 
Intended self-referencing relationships for the classes 
Categorization, Threat, Impact, AssessedRisk, and Treatment 
enable further substantial analysis, e.g., multidimensional 
assessments of cascading effects if needed. 
IV. 
MAPPING 
A. Method 
The critical success factor for the proper functioning of 
the meta-modeling idea is the coherent transformation of the 
information of the selected risk model up to the meta-model 
while at the same time sufficiently reducing the information 
content. This transformation is in fact a mapping of all the 
relevant pieces of information that is necessary for 
performing risk management with the selected risk model. 
The risk model COBIT for Risk was selected as the first 
proof of concept for the metamodeling approach. It provides 
an appropriate degree of concreteness in order to verify the 
draft concept that was first introduced in [13].  
In a first step, both risk management core processes 
Evaluate, Direct and Monitor (EDM) 03 “Ensure Risk 
Optimisation” – the setup of the risk management 
environment in the organization – and Align, Plan and 
Organise (APO12) “Manage Risk” – the risk management 
process as discussed above – were analyzed. All information 
artefacts mentioned as input or output objects and in the 
description of the risk specific activities were extracted to a 
list. These have a different degree of concreteness, which 
was also assessed. This step was repeated for each of the 
other twelve supporting processes, which are marked in dark 
red in Figure 1. This finally resulted in a list of 1619 
identified information artefacts, but this list included 
duplicates, synonyms, and different notations of the same 
objects, cf. Figure 4. In a second step, all these entries were 
consolidated in order to even out differences and reduce the 
amount of information artefacts for further analysis. All 
entries were transformed into a consolidated object, in fact 
performing a form of abstraction. This transformation 
resulted in a list of 26 objects, which corresponds to the 
column ‘synonym’ in Figure 4. The purpose of these objects 
was to set up a data store, leading to a UML class at the end 
of this process. This abstraction process was conducted as 
iterative working step because the consolidated object list 
initiated continuous improvement actions in order to get a 
coherent list for the subsequent steps. Once the list of 
consolidated objects had been verified, the consolidated 
object list was mapped to the classes in the UML diagram. In 
a third step, the class attributes were revised so that the 
essential data for risk management fit properly into the 
appropriate classes.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Excerpt of the list of information artefacts [own research] 
B. Results 
The mapping process showed that it is generally possible 
to transform the essential risk management data from COBIT 
for Risk up to the meta-level. Small amendments to the draft 
version of the ICT risk-meta-data-model were necessary 
after completing the mapping process, e.g., the introduction 
of the new class Changes, which reflects all current change 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

management activities in the considered organization. The 
transformation is highly dependent on how concrete the 
specification of the risk model and its components is. If the 
risk model leaves too much room for interpretation 
inconsistencies may appear in the instantiation of the ICT 
meta-data-risk-model itself. This means that activities 
without inputs or outputs should be scrutinized. Almost all 
inputs, outputs and standard COBIT 5 activities specified in 
the twelve risk supporting processes were unsuitable for the 
mapping. Thus, certain problems are expected when using 
ISO 31000 as base risk model because of its highly generic 
approach. This means that not every risk management 
framework may be suitable for the mapping due to the 
different levels of detail of the different frameworks. 
Furthermore, the framework must provide storage of all kind 
of documentation that supports the functioning of the 
management system. Currently, the meta-model includes the 
dedicated class Documentation for this issue. It was 
originally intended only for risk management documentation, 
but it has a broader scope, providing a repository for all 
documentation produced by the applied management system.  
The presented work extends the proof of concept that was 
outlined in [13] to all affected risk management processes of 
the COBIT for Risk framework. Some small adjustments of 
the first draft of the ICT risk-meta-data-model were made, 
but no fundamental changes of the inherent structure of the 
classes or relationships were necessary. This shows that the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model is able to represent and store the 
necessary information for applying the COBIT for Risk 
framework in principle. 
C. Further Research 
Further 
research 
is 
still 
needed 
to 
verify 
the 
transformation process with two or three other risk 
management frameworks. This verification should definitely 
be done for ISO 31000 [1], despite the above-mentioned 
difficulties to be expected The suitability of ISO 31000 
should be verified because of its outstanding importance as a 
widely accepted standard. The NIST publications [2] [3] [4] 
and COSO ERM in its new published version [5] also 
provide the more detailed content that is necessary for the 
mapping and are thus good candidates. If it is possible to 
map their information requirements in the same way as it has 
been done for COBIT for Risk, the ICT risk-meta-data-
model can be applied at least for these four risk management 
frameworks, in this way providing an adequately sustainable 
meta-model solution. If the mapping has been applied 
several times and the attributes are almost stable (except for 
a refinement of the definite data types and the visibility 
properties), the methods can be refined next. The methods of 
a class should be able to support the complete lifecycle of the 
concerning attributes. The third area in which refinements 
are needed is the relationships. It must be verified whether a 
direct data exchange between the different objects is needed 
or transitive relationships achieve the same result. Once 
these three research questions have been solved, the ICT 
risk-meta-data-model can be implemented as a first 
demonstrator, thereby starting the technical verification 
process. Analyzing these research questions is an ongoing 
process in order to verify the applicability and utility of the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model.  
The fundamental idea of aggregating risk management 
data that is stored in different risk models and can be 
effectively applied when different risk information, e.g. from 
different companies or organization units that still apply 
different risk models, need to be migrated. This might be 
necessary when different companies merge or Comparisons 
across industry sectors are needed. This means that the final 
evidence for the added value of the ICT risk-meta-data-
model can be provided when different risk models have been 
analysed. The upcoming research on applying the ICT risk-
meta-data-model to a second risk model will further 
strengthen this evidence. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This article shows the basic instantiation of a specific risk 
model – in this case the risk model of COBIT for Risk – by 
means of the conceptual ICT risk-meta-data-model. The 
objective of the research design is to introduce an ICT risk-
meta-data-model for ICT, and to embed it in the context of 
different established risk models that are commonly applied 
in the ICT area. The approach of designing a consistent 
superstructure in form of a meta-model with no need for 
replacement of the already established ICT risk management 
models is based on the principle of an ex-post adjustment. 
Additionally, it provides a data-oriented and more formalized 
way of overcoming the current organizational and model-
related restrictions. The meta-model addresses the whole risk 
management lifecycle as recommended in [1], from 
identification, analysis, evaluation to treatment. It reflects 
both the risk management context and the monitoring and 
communication requirements for the process. The three main 
components and the conceptual background of the involved 
objects are discussed. The findings can be summarized as 
follows: 
• 
An instantiation of the ICT risk-meta-data-model is 
generally possible and is a promising possibility to 
overcome the current situation in ICT, where many 
different risk models and methods are applied. 
• 
The critical success factor is the coherent 
transformation of the information of the selected risk 
model up to the meta-model, while at the same time 
sufficiently reducing the information content. All 
essential data of the risk model have an equivalent 
reference in the superstructure. 
• 
It is crucial to repeat the mapping with other 
appropriate ICT risk models in order to strengthen 
the ICT risk-meta-data-model. Moreover, this will 
reconfirm the general applicability of the meta-data-
model and will increase its utility due to having 
several different risk models mapped to a meta-level. 
• 
The methods and relationships of the objects in the 
ICT risk-meta-data-model need to be refined before 
a practical demonstrator can be implemented that 
can be fed with risk management use cases. 
Results show that transferring the general information 
artefacts specified by COBIT for Risk into the classes of the 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

meta-model is feasible and promising. The future refinement 
effort will iteratively improve the ICT risk-meta-data-model 
in order to further develop and evaluate it and strengthen its 
applicability for ICT risk management. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Ed., 
ISO 31000:2009 Risk management - Principles and 
guidelines. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.  
[2] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Task Force 
Transformation Initiative Information Security, Ed., “NIST 
800-30: Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments.” 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology 
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, USA, Sep-2012 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
30/sp800-30.pdf 
[3] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Task Force 
Transformation Initiative Information Security, Ed., “NIST 
800-37: Guide for Applying the Risk Management 
Framework to Federal Information Systems: A Security 
Life Cycle Approach.” Computer Security Division, 
Information Technology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, 
USA, Feb-2010 [Online]. Available: http://nvlpubs.nist.gov 
/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-37r1.pdf 
[4] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Task Force 
Transformation Initiative Information Security, Ed., “NIST 
800-39: 
Managing 
Information 
Security 
Risk 
- 
Organization, Mission, and Information System View.” 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology 
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, USA, Mar-2011 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
39/SP800-39-final.pdf 
[5] 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO) and Price Waterhouse Cooper (PwC), 
“Enterprise Risk Management - Aligning Risk with Strategy 
and Performance (Public Exposure Draft).” Jun-2016.  
[6] 
The Stationary Office (TSO), Ed., “Management of Risk: 
Guidance for Practitioners.” 2010.  
[7] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “COBIT 5 for Risk.” Information Systems 
Audit and Control Association, Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 
USA, 2013 [Online]. Available: http://www.isaca.org/ 
COBIT/Pages/Risk-product-page.aspx 
[8] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), “ISACA.”  [Online]. Available: https://www. 
isaca.org/Pages/default.aspx. [Accessed: 31-Mar-2016] 
[9] 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), Ed., “COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the 
Governance 
and 
Management 
of 
Enterprise 
IT.” 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association, 
Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 USA, 2012 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.isaca.org/cobit/Pages/CobitFrame 
work.aspx 
[10] 
D. Karagiannis and H. Kühn, “Metamodelling Platforms,” 
in E-Commerce and Web Technologies, vol. 2455, K. 
Bauknecht, Am. Tjoa, and G. Quirchmayr, Eds. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2002, p. 182 [Online]. Available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45705-4_19 
[11] 
S. H. Othman and G. Beydoun, “Metamodelling approach 
to support disaster management knowledge sharing,” 
presented at the 21st Australasian Conference on 
Information Systems (ACIS), Atlanta, GA, USA, 2010, pp. 
1–10 [Online]. Available: http://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/view 
content.cgi?article=10789&context=infopapers 
[12] 
S. H. Othman and G. Beydoun, “Model-driven disaster 
management,” Inf. Manage., vol. 50 (2013), no. Elsevier, 
pp. 218–228, Apr. 2013.  
[13] 
M. Latzenhofer, “Ein Meta-Risiko-Datenmodell für IKT,” 
in 
Bestandsaufnahme, 
Konzepte, 
Anwendungen, 
Perspektiven, Klagenfurt, pp. 161–173.  
 
 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

