Investigating SLA Conﬁdentiality Requirements:
A Holistic Perspective for the Government Agencies
Yudhistira Nugraha∗†, Andrew Martin∗
∗Centre for Doctoral Training in Cyber Security
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
†Directorate of Information Security, Ministry of ICT, Jakarta, Indonesia
Email: {yudhistira.nugraha, andrew.martin}@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract—Many governments consider the use of remote comput-
ing, communications and storage services provided by external
service providers to process, store or transmit sensitive govern-
ment data to increase scalability and decrease costs of maintaining
services. The use of assurance approaches based on service
level agreement (SLAs) is becoming increasingly important in
procuring a wide range of such services from external service
providers. However, such existing SLAs are not well-suited to a
dynamic cyber threat environment because SLA security require-
ments (considering data conﬁdentiality) have not been deeply
studied by the academic computer security community. Such an
understanding of the real needs of government is essential to the
formulation of security-related SLAs. This paper seeks to provide
such insights, by investigating 35 government participants using
Indonesia as case study via a grounded adaptive Delphi study.
We found that undeveloped SLA conﬁdentiality requirements
can illuminate other administrations to include government’s
security requirements and security capabilities of the service
providers in SLAs when using such external services. Based
on our ﬁndings, we make recommendations to the government
agencies, service providers and researchers for improvement to
existing SLA deﬁnition and future lines of research.
Keywords–Security, Trust, Assurance, Conﬁdentiality Require-
ments, Service Level Agreement (SLA), Service Provision
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent decades, many government agencies (GAs) gen-
erate, collect, store and share far more sensitive data than
private organisations within and with external agencies. In
fact, there is evidence that GAs increasingly rely on external
service providers (SPs) to operate a wide range of remote
computing, communications and storage services (e.g. cloud-
based services) on behalf of the government. The relationships
with external SPs are usually established through service level
agreements (SLAs), which are binding agreements between
GAs and external SPs. Such SLAs are mainly focused on the
system availability and performance aspects, but overlook data
conﬁdentiality and integrity in SLAs.
Several attempts have been made to express security
properties in SLAs, such as Secure Provisioning of Cloud
Services based on SLA Management (SPECS) [1], the Multi-
Cloud Secure Applications (MUSA) [2], SLA-Ready [3] and
SLALOM [4]. However, these frameworks are not widely
used in a government context, especially for procuring such
remote computing, communications and storage services from
external SPs. Yet there has been no detailed investigation of
the government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements that can be
used in the formulation of security-related SLAs. Although
some researchers have carried out extensive research on the
development of security-related SLAs [5]–[10], no single study
exists that has a clear direction for an understanding of
government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements. This indicates a
need to understand various SLA conﬁdentiality requirements
that exist among the GAs when using such remote services
offered by external SPs.
To increase the consideration of conﬁdentiality and security
requirements in SLA deﬁnition, it is necessary that external
SPs should understand government SLA conﬁdentiality re-
quirements, as well as what types of government assets to
protect and what types of risks to mitigate. However, the
formulation of SLA conﬁdentiality requirements has not been
deeply studied by academic computer security community. We
seek to ﬁll the gap by understanding government’s perspective
about SLA conﬁdentiality requirements, which are targeted at
participants who are employed by or have experience working
with government agencies using Indonesia as a case study.
To this end, we develop a grounded understanding of
SLA conﬁdentiality requirements for service provision using
a grounded adaptive Delphi study [11]. Following accepted
a Delphi study for qualitative study to elicit the views of
government participants, we conducted a grounded Delphi
study by asking 35 participants via group discussions and
individual sessions [11] [12] and conducting a grounded theory
analysis [13]–[15] of the Delphi study data to categorise the
extracted statements.
Based on our preliminary ﬁndings, there are undeveloped
government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements, which might
arise from the fact that our participants were inﬂuenced by
existing security standards. However, our study can be used to
guide the creation of trustworthy SLA capabilities a means of
incorporating conﬁdentiality requirements and capabilities in
the formulation of security-related SLAs.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In
Section 2, we provide a background of this study. Section
3 presents the research methodology. Section 4 reports key
ﬁndings. Section 5 discusses the implications of our ﬁndings,
followed by the limitations of the study. We conclude this
paper in Section 6.
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II.
BACKGROUND
Some governments have taken steps to reduce the level of
cybersecurity risk, especially for government procurement of
external computing, communications and storage products and
services supplied by SPs or suppliers. We provide context for
our study by looking at other governments’ security require-
ments, such as the UK, the US and China.
The UK government has introduced cybersecurity require-
ments, called ‘Cyber Essentials, which is intended for external
SPs or suppliers that handle sensitive government data and
personal information [16]. There are ﬁve technical security
controls required for basic security requirements against com-
mon types of cyberattacks in such a government organisa-
tion. The cybersecurity requirements are boundary ﬁrewalls,
Internet gateways, secure conﬁgurations, access control mech-
anisms, malware protection systems, and patch management
tools. As a consequence, these minimum security requirements
must be addressed by suppliers or contractors seeking to
conduct business with the UK government.
Additionally, the Cyber Essentials is a continuous effort by
the UK government to address cybersecurity risk, following
the success of the 10 Steps of Cybersecurity guidance, which
is designed for organisations as an effective means to protect
information assets from cyber threats or attacks [17]. The secu-
rity requirements are risk management, secure conﬁguration,
network security, managing user privileges, user education
and awareness, incident management, malware prevention,
monitoring, removable media controls and home and mobile
working. The present requirements are signiﬁcant for establish-
ing the effectiveness of basic security controls against cyber
threats.
Similarly, any potential and existing providers or contrac-
tors working with the U.S. Federal agencies are required to
meet cybersecurity requirements described in NIST SP800-
171 [18]. The standard consists of 14 security requirements,
which are adapted from FIPS 200 and NIST SP800-53. Those
requirements are access control, awareness and training, audit
and accountability, conﬁguration management, identiﬁcation
and authentication, incident response, maintenance, media
protection, personnel security, physical protection, risk assess-
ment, security assessment, system and communication protec-
tion and system and information integrity [19]. The derived
security requirements are intended for use by federal agencies
and for protecting the conﬁdentiality of any information that
law, regulation or policy requires to have security controls [18].
However, the NIST standard does not deal with information
integrity or availability and aim to clarify speciﬁc security
requirements applied to SPs or contractor who process or
store sensitive government data on their information system
services [18].
Furthermore, the NIST SP 800-171 standard is intended
for suppliers or contractors that want to use internal cloud-
based services as part of its internal enterprise network systems
to process, store or transmit data when performing under
the government contract requirements (e.g. DoD contract).
However, it does not apply when suppliers or contractors
intend to use external computing, communications and storage
services provided by other external providers to store, process
or transmit any sensitive data for the contract. Such suppliers
or contractors need to apply security controls and indepen-
dent assessments from the Federal Risk and Authorisation
Management Program (FedRAMP) [20] when acquiring a
variety of cloud-based services from other external providers,
which are required to comply with security requirements con-
tained within DFARS (Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation
Supplement) 252.204-7012. The security requirements are as
follows: cyber incident reporting, malicious software, media
preservation and protection, access to additional information
and equipment necessary for forensic analysis, and cyber
incident damage assessment [21].
Likewise, the government of China has also proposed
cybersecurity requirements for external suppliers that provide
hardware and software to the banking industries in China.
Those proposed security requirements include source code
disclosure, local presence, intellectual property rights, local
encryption technology, regulatory backdoor and risk assess-
ment [22]. For example, the government approval is required
for all products containing encryption technology of which
cryptographic algorithms and encryption keys are required to
disclose to the government. It is somewhat surprising that the
government does not allow the import of foreign encryption
technologies. The regulation does not give detailed guidance
on the scope of this national security examination and how it
will be implemented [22].
Overall lack of security considerations, especially data con-
ﬁdentiality and integrity in SLAs has remained as an open issue
for many years. Research continues about the best approach
for incorporating security capabilities into the formulation
of security-related SLAs. Many governments to date have
tended to focus on the use of certiﬁcation schemes to evaluate
security controls to ensure the controls are effective against
identiﬁed risks [23]. Whereas, an assurance technique based
on SLAs has only been applied to regulate service availability
and quality of service (QoS). So far, no research has been
found about understanding SLA conﬁdentiality requirements
in service provisioning.
III.
THE STUDY
This paper investigates government SLA conﬁdentiality
requirements by means of 35 participants based in Indonesia
using a grounded adaptive Delphi study [11]. We use Indonesia
as a case study because according to Article 12 of Indone-
sian Government Regulation on the Operation of Electronic
Systems and Transactions Number 82 of 2012, electronic
system operators including SPs have obligations to ensure
agreements on minimum service level and information security
when providing such external service provision to GAs.
A. Ethical Consideration
Approval to conduct this study was obtained from the
central university research ethics committee, University of
Oxford. Research consent from participants was obtained after
email communications. The participants were told the objective
of the study, and asked for their involvement in the study. Our
participants were voluntary and anonymous and they had the
right to drop out in any round.
B. Recruitment
We recruited our participants for the Delphi study via our
existing connections to the government employees including
government consultants, usually via verbal or email communi-
cations with the participants, followed by an email containing
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

an ofﬁcial invitation letter from the government ministry who
looks after information assurance and security in Indonesia. In
communication with the participants, we stressed a desire for
balance in terms of participants’ technical expertise and their
involvement in policy-making process to achieve meaningful
results and keep the failure rate as low as possible [12].
Before the study began, we gave participants a clear
understanding of the problem statements along with the initial
research questions to all invited participants before they agreed
to participate in our series of data collection activities. Finally,
we engaged with 35 of 45 invited participants. Most group
discussions and individual sessions were conducted in-person,
although some were conducted via Skype.
For this study, we limited our participants to those who
were directly employed by or have experience working with
Indonesian government. This focus allowed us to explore the
problem of preserving the conﬁdentiality of sensitive data
across GAs. Our government participants came from a diverse
work experience and technical backgrounds, such as cyber
defence experts, malware experts, cryptography experts, pen-
testers, and information security management experts. Also,
12 participants hold a PhD degree in information technology-
related topics and most participants hold security certiﬁcations.
To maintain anonymity, we refer to the participants using labels
P1 to P35, respecting the participant’s identiﬁcation. We will
provide a summary of the participants, but the information
given will be anonymised1
C. Delphi Study Procedure
We collected data primarily through a three-round Delphi
study with 35 participants. We use some features of Delphi,
such as group responses with group discussions for eliciting
collective views and individual sessions with semi-structured
interviews for collecting individual views where participants
may not wish to elaborate in a group discussion. Unlike other
Delphi studies [24], [25], this study used focus groups and
interviews instead of questionnaires as the instrument for data
collection because the questionnaires are impractical for the
purpose of eliciting genuine views or thoughts from elite
participants, such as senior government ofﬁcials.
1) Round 1: Kick-Off Meeting: We conducted a kickoff
meeting with government employees from the Indonesian Di-
rectorate of Information Security who looks after information
security and assurance across all government agencies in
Indonesia. This round was intended to gather comments and
recommendations regarding the Delphi questions and other
material. This stage was also important to reﬁne the Delphi
questions for the next round of Delphi.
2) Round 2: Brainstorming Phase: The second step was
the brainstorming phase with exploratory group discussions
with government participants. We conducted a series of group
discussions to adapt the work schedules of government par-
ticipants when participating in group discussions. Each panel
discussed the problem of preserving the conﬁdentiality of
sensitive data across government agencies. Furthermore, we
asked participants to explore Article 12 of the Government
Regulation Number 82 of 2012. Also, we asked the participants
how to incorporate conﬁdentiality requirements and capabili-
ties speciﬁed into SLAs according to reasonable risks.
1Participants information, https://goo.gl/w0Y4Sz, (Accessed March 2017).
For this round, we engaged with 18 of the 45 invited
participants in three group discussions to explore a rich un-
derstanding of participants’ experiences and beliefs, as well as
to generate information on collective views [26] in which the
optimum size for a focus group is 6 to 11 participants [26].
However, in practice, focus groups can work successfully with
from three to fourteen participants [27]. For this study, the
focus group varies from three participants to six participants
to provide control over the period from securing participant
work schedules to participating group discussions.
3) Round 3: Enrichment and Generalisation Phase: We
conducted individual sessions using semi-structured interviews
to elicit detailed information from government participants
based on the results of the previous round. We sent the initial
results of the ﬁrst round in the form of Delphi questions and
asked again 45 invited participants to take part in this study.
In this round, we engaged with 32 government participants
and recorded each individual interview in an audio format
after receiving the participant’s consent. Each individual in-
terview took between 20-120 minutes. Interviews were later
transcribed and coded. We then sent each transcription to
the corresponding participants and asked for feedback and
corrections, which we did not receive any.
D. Data Analysis
We applied the grounded theory analysis [13]–[15] to
examine the Delphi study data, and to categorise and generalise
the extracted statements. We conducted initial coding of a
group discussion transcript from the brainstorming phase to
identify general codes. Further, we analysed the interview
transcripts from the enrichment and generalisation phase, using
initial coding, intermediate coding and advanced coding [28].
The initial coding aims to identify topic of interest ‘key-
point coding’ of which the researcher extracted useful sen-
tences or statements and applied codes against the Delphi
study data. In intermediate coding, we began to select cate-
gories from amongst topics of interest and found relationships
among the initial codes (e.g. the most frequent or important
codes) [15]. In advance coding, once categories were identi-
ﬁed, we established the relationship between the categories to
integrate them into a cohesive theory.
To illustrate the grounded theory process, we provide
an example as follows. One participant commented that the
greater threat to GAs mostly come from internal sources, such
as an insider threat. We coded it as “collaborator”, as described
in Table II. Our Delphi study data were coded only by the
main researcher due to conﬁdentiality reasons. Thus, this was
the rationale behind our decision to use the main researcher
as the only coder. However, the main researcher discussed his
ﬁndings with another researcher to receive feedback.
IV.
RESULTS
We organise our results into three themes: (1) government
asset, (2) risk perception and (3) SLA conﬁdentiality require-
ments. These ﬁndings reveal opportunities for improving the
consideration of security requirements in SLA deﬁnition.
A. Government Asset
We began by looking from the perspective of what types of
government assets to protect by identifying government data.
Several statements have been made by participants related
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

to government assets-based data classiﬁcation. However, we
noticed that the classiﬁcation of sensitive government data has
not been clearly deﬁned. Therefore, we highlight the notion of
government assets where applicable, as shown in Table I.
TABLE I. GOVERNMENT ASSET
Category
Government Data
Human Asset
Senior Government Ofﬁcials
Knowledge
Others
Information
Citizen Data
Asset
Medical Record
Financial Transaction
Law Enforcement Data
Diplomatic Information
Personal representative deed
Personally identiﬁable information
National economic resilience
Natural wealth/resources
Physical
National defense and security systems
Asset
Critical National Infrastructure
Communication Servicea and Devices
1) Human Asset: Our participants agreed that human as-
sets (e.g. employees, senior government ofﬁcials) are part of
intangible assets that the government has. Although the Public
Information Disclosure Act No 14 of 2008 does exist, our
participants typically reported that most GAs face a challenge
of classifying sensitive human assets and non-sensitive human
assets. Therefore, we placed emphasis on opinions from gov-
ernment participants regarding the concepts of sensitive human
assets, such as the following:
“...In relation to human assets, if the person is a se-
nior government ofﬁcial who performs such activities,
the person itself is a national asset that needs to be
protected...” (P8).
2) Information Asset: Many public organisations routinely
collect, create or process sensitive data. Our participants ex-
pressed concern in response to protecting information assets
data that may not be appropriate for public release. For
example, P2 indicated the following:
“...In government sectors, it looks “gray”, for ex-
ample, one has uploaded the entire local govern-
ment meetings including their internal meetings to
Youtube, with the aim to build trust to the public.
However, all information related to strategic meetings
should be protected...”(P2).
3) Physical Asset: Although it used to be that security
objectives were focused in protecting physical assets, such as
communication channels, systems and devices, our participants
considered the importance of protecting physical assets con-
taining sensitive government data. Securing information assets
is critical and may be more than important than protecting
physical assets. For example, P1 pointed out the following:
“...such electronic information requires physical fa-
cilities like data centre, network, systems and devices.
It is also necessary to ensure safety and effective
physical protection for the facilities...”(P12).
Our participants indicated that there is an absence of
government security classiﬁcations that apply to the GAs,
which generate, process, collect, store or transmit sensitive data
in order to conduct government activities and to deliver public
services. In response to this, the government should classify
government data so that everyone who works with the GAs
knows how best to protect sensitive data.
B. Risk Perception
We carefully examined speciﬁc risks that our participants
are attempting to counter. Several statements have been made
by participants related to risks that need to be mitigated. We
noticed consensus was obtained regarding a speciﬁc risk and
highlight the notions of threat models where applicable, as
shown in Table II.
TABLE II. RISK PERCEPTION
Category
Threat/Attack
Collaborator
Insider (Employee)
Insider (Former employee)
Insider (Contractor)
Malicious actions (Service provider)
Exfiltration
Connect-Transmit (Device)
Outbound (Trafﬁc)
Extract (Content/Key)
Brute-force (Key)
Observation
Discovery (State actor)
Scan (Metadata/Trafﬁc)
Intercept (Device/Content/Trafﬁc)
Insertion
Inject (Malware/Trojan/Backdoor/Scripts)
Install (Ransomware/Rootkit)
Manipulation
Manipulate-Phishing (People/Content)
Impersonate (People/System/Trafﬁc)
1) Collaborator: Our participants discussed this threat as
the main security concern, which allows a person to cooperate
traitorously with an adversary. Therefore, our participants paid
much attention to mitigating this threat (e.g. insider threats).
For example, one participant highlighted that government data
leakage is mainly caused by an insider who is a closely related
person with senior government ofﬁcials, as follows:
“...the issue about government data theft normally
does not occur while data is transmitted, but when
data was processed or created. For example, an
insider can disclose and share the sensitive data
obtained with an adversary...” (P22).
2) Exﬁltration: Our participants were concerned with the
unauthorised transfer of sensitive data through various means.
For example, one participant indicated the following:
“...Now the fact that threats and attacks can actu-
ally come from inside. For example, our observation
discovered botnets keep sending out data...” (P13).
3) Observation: Our participants discussed the importance
of preventing pervasive surveillance, as this threat allows the
adversary to closely observe or monitor targets. One participant
indicated this type of threat, as follows:
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

“...we are aware that when we are talking with our
interlocutor, there must be other people listening
without knowing them...”(P4).
4) Insertion: Our participants reported that an adversary
could place or insert malicious software (malware) on the
targeted government’s information systems through various
methods, as indicated in the following statement:
“...they embed code on the opposing side in any way
to divulge the sensitive government data...” (P1).
5) Manipulation: Our participants reported that the action
of manipulating information systems is an effective way to
obtain sensitive data from targets (e.g. people). This allows
the adversary to pretend to be another person with the aim
of obtaining sensitive government data from the target. For
example, P3 pointed out the following statement.
“...For threats to military information and sensitive
government data, in general the threats were in the
form of impersonation. Besides the impersonation,
they can also do phishing...” (P3).
Overall, our participants were clear about the perceived
shortcomings of the existing knowledge to be used to un-
derstand the characteristics of threats. In so doing, it is of
paramount importance to enforce SLA conﬁdentiality require-
ments according to perceived threats for government assets-
based data classiﬁcation in security-related SLAs.
C. SLA Conﬁdentiality Requirements
The statements from our participants conﬁrmed that most
government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements are derived from
a very high level of abstraction, such as laws, policies, regula-
tions and standards. However, we noticed that the concepts of
government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements have not been
clearly deﬁned in the context of security-related SLAs. Thus,
we highlight the government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements
where applicable, as shown in Table III.
1) Skills and Reputation: Our participants reported rela-
tively strong support for inadequate awareness and training
for employees, as described the following statement:
“...at the simplest level, we still have problems due
to lack of awareness of employees, so we need to
mitigate such risk...” (P2).
2) Zero Access to Data: Our participants reported that
access control must be in place to ensure that all sensitive
government data are limited to authorised users, as follows:
“...Who gets access to the information systems?
Trusted person must need approval ﬁrst before di-
rectly go into the system...” (P15).
3) Personnel Security: Our participants expressed concern
about people as a point of security failure, as follows.
“...Security screening should be there. Access restric-
tion is based on a need-to-know basis...” (P6).
TABLE III. SLA CONFIDENTIALITY REQUIREMENTS
Category
Need
Skills and
Awareness
Reputation
Training
Certiﬁcation
IT Audit and Assurance
Penetration Testing
Zero Access
Separate duties
to Data
Control and Limit Connections
Privilege Access Control
Personnel
Implement Screening
Security
Identify behaviours
Develop Security Culture
Non-disclosure agreement (NDA)
Physical
Physical Access (e.g. Access Card, Keys)
Security
Audit logs of physical access
CCTV (closed-circuit television)
Alarm systsm (sensor)
Media
Employ cryptography to protect media
Protection
Access Control Policy
Metadata
Metadata Standard
Protection
Metadata retention
Malware
Employ anti-malware
Protection
Limit use of external devices
Communications
Encryption
Protection
Secure channels (e.g. VPN Tunnel)
Use code in communications
Data Protection
Data Localisation
IT Audit and Assurance
Isolation
Firewall
Whitelist
Block access to known ﬁle transfer
Air-gapping
Authentication
Multifactor authentication
4) Physical Security: Our participants pointed out that
physical security is one of the key security requirements. For
example, one participant mentioned physical security measures
as described in the following statement:
“...it seems to me security controls should be inte-
grated with physical elements, such as a room, doors
and locks that need to be installed...” (P32).
5) Media Protection: Our participants typically reported
that it is important to prohibit the use of portable storage
devices when such personal devices belong to government em-
ployees or contractors, as described in the following statement:
“...data storage device should not be brought from
outside, everyone who enters, does not allow to bring
ﬂash disks, and other media storage...” (P1).
6) Metadata Protection: Our participants also expressed
concerns about metadata protection related to sensitive gov-
ernment data that is processed, stored or transmitted in infor-
mation system services provided by SPs, as follows:
“...we should have a metadata standard for the beneﬁt
of the government, so that all are used unique, in
preventing no data is revealed...” (P4).
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

7) Malware Protection: Our participants expressed concern
about malware. It is acknowledged that malware can come into
our information systems from all types of sources, for instance:
“Malware including Ransomware mostly comes from
email and web phishing” (P15).
8) Communications Protection: Our participants reported
that network communications are important to be controlled
and secure against threats, as follows:
“...we need to think government secure networks are
created with a single entrance point, so if there is a
leak, we can know from which point...”(P1).
9) Data Protection: Our participants expressed concerns
about how to protect sensitive government data (the secrecy,
integrity and availability of sensitive data). As data resides in
many places, one participant expressed in the following case:
“...government requirements should not allow sen-
sitive government data to store in other countries
without additional security capabilities taken, such
as a strong password...” (P3).
10) Isolation: Our participants expressed concerns about
isolation of communications and information systems to pre-
vent unauthorised disclosure of data, as such the following:
“...It is clear that different treatments are required,
such as a layer of insulation (e.g., VPN layers).
So later, all sensitive data that really matter are
protected and isolated using those layers...” (P8).
11) Authentication: Our participants explicitly mentioned
using authentication to access such services, as follows:
“...It is important to allow who is entitled to access
the data. But authentication is required to enter the
systems...” (P8).
It is clear that our participants revealed undeveloped gov-
ernment SLA conﬁdentiality requirements. The preference for
the requirements was evident even though there would be room
for improvement to better deﬁne such SLAs.
V.
DISCUSSION
We discuss the implications of our ﬁndings for GAs, SPs,
and researchers. We consider the following take-aways to be
the most important one from our ﬁndings.
A. Implications
1) Implications for Government Agencies: Based on our
ﬁndings, we give two recommendations to GAs. First, know
your assets. Our study suggests that different assets have
different risks associated with it. The SPs seem to neglect to
consider appropriate security controls for protecting the value
of government assets, while the GAs do not provide high-
level security requirements up-front. In either case, GAs should
understand what types of conﬁdentiality requirements that need
to be deﬁned in SLAs according to acceptable risks that
might affect government asset value. Second, understanding
the risks to government assets. We found that speciﬁc threats
are typically scattered across different participants. However,
some conclusions were drawn from the ﬁndings concerning
risk perception. Thus, GAs should identify which perceived
threats are mitigated best by security capabilities (e.g. security
controls) provided by external SPs.
2) Implications for Service Providers: It is acknowledged
that many GAs commonly make decisions to preserve the con-
ﬁdentiality of government data by applying speciﬁc security
capabilities through technical, physical and human elements. In
this case, the GAs heavily rely on certiﬁcation schemes such as
ISO 27001, which is not sufﬁcient to address speciﬁc perceived
and emerging threats [23]. Our study shows that the derived
ﬁndings provide basic insights into deﬁning conﬁdentiality
requirements in SLAs. Thus, the SPs can determine and
negotiate appropriate security capabilities, which demonstrate
compliance with the government’s security requirements. In
the context of formulation of security-related SLAs, the level
of trust between the GAs and external SPs can be determined
by using conﬁdentiality capabilities according to speciﬁc per-
ceived threats for government assets-based data classiﬁcation.
3) Implications for Researchers: Finally, our ﬁndings can
provide a rich foundation for incorporating the interplay of
perceived threats, security requirements and capabilities spec-
iﬁed in SLAs according to government assets. However, we
acknowledge that it is difﬁcult to require explicit assumptions
about conﬁdentiality requirements and capabilities regarding
perceived threats for government assets. Often, there is the
risk of liability and compensation with the particular level
of security expressed in SLAs. These questions sketch many
avenues for future work.
B. Limitations
As with any research methodology, our choice of research
methods has limitations.
1) Construct Validity: It is important to measure whether
these ﬁndings can be correctly reﬂected by means of Del-
phi study. First, group discussions and individual feedback
obviously rely on the statements of the participants. Insights
and views from the participants are subjective and may not
properly reﬂect the actual situations. However, we engaged
with experienced participants from different expertise to gain a
broader spectrum of viewpoints. While subjectivity is difﬁcult
to eliminate in a qualitative study, we limit its effects by
basing our ﬁndings exclusively on multiple statements from
a series of iterative data collection activities using group
discussions and individual sessions. Further, the nature of our
Delphi study allowed us to react to participants’ statements,
and to further clarify, whenever needed. Second, there are
possible misperceptions associated with the interpretation of
the statements by the main researcher. The coding process
was performed manually and by only one researcher, which
potentially a biased to the interpretation of the data. To mitigate
this threat, we asked feedback from the participants.
2) Internal Validity: Since our study is of exploratory
nature, our preliminary ﬁndings are determined mainly by the
Delphi study data we have obtained from 35 selected govern-
ment participants through a purposeful sampling strategy. We
selected participants across Indonesian government employees
including participants with a wide variety of insights and
opinions as it is expected from the nature of Delphi study. This
study is completely recorded that provides full traceability of
ﬁndings back to the original statements from our participants.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

3) External Validity: The applicability of our ﬁndings has
to be established carefully. The main limit to the generalizabil-
ity of our ﬁndings from the fact that we only engaged with 35
participants from one country. Although our ﬁndings may be
applicable only to the domain and context being studied [15],
the results of this study can illuminate other governments to
include security capabilities of the service providers in SLAs
when procuring such external computing, communications and
storage services. We could increase conﬁdence by involving
more government participants in the country or from other
countries may create a more rigorous ﬁndings. Bearing in
mind that this study is of exploratory of nature and was not
designed to be largely generalizable, but it aimed to understand
what are the SLA conﬁdentiality requirements needed from the
government.
VI.
CONCLUSION
It is acknowledged that, until now, security best practices
and standards are often considered to be key elements of
implementing and enforcing the most basic security require-
ments. However, government SLA conﬁdentiality requirements
have not been studied in depth by governments, providers, and
researchers. To address this gap and inform ongoing and future
work on external computing, communications and storage
service provision, we conducted a grounded adaptive Delphi
method with 35 government participants using Indonesia as
a case study. Most importantly, we found that government
SLA conﬁdentiality requirements have seen limited demand
for services provision in government contracts relating to exter-
nal computing, communications and storage services supplied
by external SPs. However, our ﬁndings provide insights to
increase the consideration of conﬁdentiality and security re-
quirements in SLA deﬁnition. These ﬁndings suggest that there
is a need for an approach to incorporate security capabilities
speciﬁed in security-related SLAs to enhance the level of trust
in service provision, such as cloud-based services between
GAs and external SPs. We take an important step towards
such an empirically grounded trustworthy SLA capabilities
for incorporating security requirements and capabilities into
security-related SLAs according to perceived risks for govern-
ment assets-based data classiﬁcation.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the Indonesian Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology under the
Directorate of Information Security, and the Indonesia Endow-
ment Fund for Education Scholarship (LPDP).
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Rak, N. Suri, J. Luna, D. Petcu, V. Casola, and U. Villano, “Security
as a service using an sla-based approach via specs,” in Proceedings of
the 5th IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology
and Science, vol. 2, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[2]
E. Rios, E. Iturbe, L. Orue-Echevarria, M. Rak, V. Casola et al., “To-
wards self-protective multi-cloud applications: Musa–a holistic frame-
work to support the security-intelligent lifecycle management of multi-
cloud applications,” 2015.
[3]
“SLAReady,” 2015, URL: http://www.sla-ready.eu/consortium [ac-
cessed: 2017-07-15].
[4]
“SLALOM Project,” 2015, URL: http://slalom-project.eu/ [accessed:
2017-07-15].
[5]
R. R. Henning, “Security service level agreements: Quantiﬁable security
for the enterprise?” in Proceedings of the 1999 Workshop on New
Security Paradigms (NSPW), 2000, pp. 54–60.
[6]
K. Bernsmed, M. G. Jaatun, P. H. Meland, and A. Undheim, “Security
slas for federated cloud services,” in 6th International Conference on
Availability, Reliability and Security, Aug 2011, pp. 202–209.
[7]
M. G. Jaatun, K. Bernsmed, and A. Undheim, Security SLAs – An Idea
Whose Time Has Come?
Springer, 2012, pp. 123–130.
[8]
A. Guesmi and P. Clemente, “Access control and security properties
requirements speciﬁcation for clouds’ seclas,” in 5th IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, vol. 1, Dec
2013, pp. 723–729.
[9]
J. Luna, A. Taha, R. Trapero, and N. Suri, “Quantitative reasoning about
cloud security using service level agreements,” IEEE Transactions on
Cloud Computing, vol. PP, no. 99, 2017, pp. 1–1.
[10]
T. Takahashi, J. Kannisto, J. Harju, S. Heikkinen, B. Silverajan, M. He-
lenius, and S. Matsuo, “Tailored security: Building nonrepudiable secu-
rity service-level agreements,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
vol. 8, no. 3, Sept 2013, pp. 54–62.
[11]
Y. Nugraha and A. Martin, Investigating Security Capabilities in Service
Level Agreements as Trust-Enhancing Instruments.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2017, pp. 57–75.
[12]
Y. Nugraha, I. Brown, and A. S. Sastrosubroto, “An adaptive wide-
band delphi method to study state cyber-defence requirements,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, 2016,
pp. 47–59.
[13]
S. E. McGregor, P. Charters, T. Holliday, and F. Roesner, “Investigating
the computer security practices and needs of journalists,” in 24th
USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, D.C., 2015, pp. 399–414.
[14]
S. Egelman, S. Jain, R. S. Portnoff, K. Liao, S. Consolvo, and
D. Wagner, “Are you ready to lock?” in 21st ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2014, pp. 750–761.
[15]
K. Charmaz, Constructing grounded theory.
Sage, 2014.
[16]
“Procurement policy note-use of cyber essentials scheme certiﬁcation,”
2016, URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/procurement-
policy-notes [accessed: 2017-07-15].
[17]
“National Cyber Security Centre: 10 Steps to Cyber Security,”
2016, URL: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/10-steps-cyber-security
[accessed: 2017-07-15].
[18]
“DoD
Amends
its
DFARS
Safeguarding
and
Cyber
Incident
Reporting
Requirements
with
a
Second
Interim
Rule,”
2016,
URL:
http://www.hlregulation.com/2016/01/07/dod-amends-its-dfars-
safeguarding-and-cyber-incident-reporting-requirements-with-a-second-
interim-rule/ [accessed: 2017-07-15].
[19]
R. Ross, P. VISCUSO, G. GUISSANIE, K. DEMPSEY, and M. RID-
DLE, “Protecting controlled unclassiﬁed information in nonfederal
information systems and organizations,” NIST Special Publication, vol.
800, 2015, p. 171.
[20]
“Federal risk and authorization management program,” 2016, URL:
https://www.fedramp.gov/resources/documents-2016/ [accessed: 2017-
07-15].
[21]
E. P. Roberson, “Adequate cybersecurity: Flexibility and balance for
a proposed standard of care and liability for government contractors,”
Fed. Cir. BJ, vol. 25, 2015, p. 641.
[22]
“China introduces new cybersecurity for rules for banking procure-
ment,” 2015, URL: http://knowledge.freshﬁelds.com [accessed: 2017-
07-15].
[23]
R. B¨ohme, Security Audits Revisited.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 129–147.
[24]
T. P¨aiv¨arinta, S. Pekkola, and C. E. Moe, “Grounding theory from delphi
studies,” in International Conference on Information Systems, vol. 3.
Association for Information Systems, 2011, pp. 2022–2035.
[25]
K. Howard, “Educating cultural heritage information professionals for
australia’s galleries, libraries, archives and museums: A grounded delphi
study,” Ph.D. dissertation, Queensland University of Technology, 2015.
[26]
M. C. Harrell and M. A. Bradley, “Data collection methods. semi-
structured interviews and focus groups,” RAND National Defense
Research Institute Santa Monica-CA, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[27]
P. Gill, K. Stewart, E. Treasure, and B. Chadwick, “Methods of data
collection in qualitative research: interviews and focus groups,” British
dental journal, vol. 204, no. 6, 2008, pp. 291–295.
[28]
M. Birks and J. Mills, Grounded theory: A practical guide. Sage, 2015.
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

