Recommendations for Risk Analysis in Higher Education Institutions 
 
Lidia Prudente Tixteco, María del Carmen Prudente Tixteco, Gabriel Sánchez Pérez, Linda Karina Toscano 
Medina, José de Jesús Vázquez Gómez, Arturo de la Cruz Tellez 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional 
Sección de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación ESIME Culhuacan 
Santa Ana 1000, San Francisco Culhuacán, Coyoacán, D. F., México 
email: lprudente@ipn.mx, mprudentet0900@alumno.ipn.mx, gasanchezp@ipn.mx, ltoscano@ipn.mx, jjvago@gmail.com, 
adelacruzt@ipn.mx 
 
 
Abstract— Computer attacks do not only happen in large 
companies or organizations. Educational Institutions have also 
started to become aware of computer threats to which their 
information assets are exposed. Among these institutions, 
universities, higher education and research centers are the 
most at risk, because they handle information regarding 
scientific and technological research and/or developments, 
personal data of their staff and students, academic records, 
and many others. A risk analysis is one step to start an 
information security strategy. It allows assessing the risk of 
information assets in order to know their security status, and 
helps to define a security controls implementation plan to 
avoid threats that exploit some vulnerability that could cause 
serious damage to an asset or infrastructure of Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs). This paper presents some 
recommendations to perform a risk analysis in HEIs to identify 
threats and helps to reduce the risk of their information assets. 
Keywords-risk analysis; higher education institutions; 
information systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Large companies or organizations are not the only ones 
concerned 
about 
their 
information 
assets 
security. 
Educational institutions are also becoming aware of the risk 
of incorporating information systems into their daily 
processes which makes them vulnerable to threats. Under 
these circumstances, implementing an information security 
strategy is required to help handle potential threats and 
reduce the risk of the information assets of the educational 
institutions. 
Information Systems (IS) are used to contribute in 
education field, but they introduce more risks to educational 
processes. Information Technologies (IT) support IS and they 
could have some vulnerabilities that may compromise 
confidentiality, integrity and availability of the systems and 
their information. In 2014, the Organization of American 
States (OAS) and Symantec Corporation published the Cyber 
Security Latin America and Caribbean Report [1], which 
shows the extent of the cyber security incidents reported to 
the Mexican Federal Police against different entities. The 
report shows that 31% government institutions, 26% private 
sector institutions, 39% academic organizations and 4% 
other entities were affected. 
Information security constitutes an important element for 
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). Due to the use of 
Information Technologies (IT), the number of information 
security incidents in academic environment has increased, 
and these institutions need to implement a good information 
security management to protect their information assets. 
However, this can be difficult to accomplish [2]. 
A risk analysis is an objective and efficient way to start 
an information security strategy design, which allows to 
assess the risk of information systems. It helps to identify the 
security level of the critical assets and determines a security 
control implementation plan in order to reduce threats 
probability and attacks that can cause major damages to an 
organization [8]. 
In HEIs, it is unwise to implement controls or safeguards 
just because they seem to be the right thing to do or because 
other entities or organizations are doing so. Each 
organization is unique, and the levels of exposure are 
different. By conducting a proper risk analysis, the controls 
or safeguards will address specific needs of the institution. 
This article presents a set of recommendations to perform 
a risk analysis to help HEIs and their staff to start an 
information security strategy in the institution. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
state of the art. Section III presents an explanation of 
education information systems. Section IV describes the risk 
analysis functionality. Section V describes the development 
of this research. Section VI presents the results of this 
research and Section VII conclusion and future work. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Because 
IT 
provides 
opportunities 
to 
improve 
educational services’ quality, HEIs have increased the use of 
IT to support their processes. Chen [4] mentions that the 
benefits of IT in education environment have attracted 
researchers attention. The document emphasizes that people, 
especially in the field of education, often ignore the risk in 
their processes, assets and IS. The risk in the education field 
should not be ignored and must be considered an important 
role to promote the development of innovative, protected and 
managed processes. 
On the other hand, Sari [2] states that if an information 
system within an organization, including HEIs, is not safe or 
well protected, it will be a risk. Lack of control and 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

prevention of data loss caused by disasters or security 
incidents, as well as inadequate recovery after disasters, will 
prevent institutions to continue their business. 
Information security should not only be based on 
technological security tools, but should also be backed up by 
a good understanding of people in universities, about what 
processes or assets must be protected, and how to provide the 
right solution. It means that HEIs need a good information 
security management since they have potential security 
threats. Also, the document mentions internal and external 
factors that can influence the implementation of an 
Information Security Management System (ISMS) in an 
organization, which is necessary to protect its information.  
An ISMS is constructed by some formal and informal 
controlling process as well as a technique that is applied to 
overcome any security risk. Its basic form could contain four 
phases, such as: identifying threats that could attack 
information sources, defining risks that could result from 
threats, determining information security policy, and 
implementing solutions to control and overcome the risk [2]. 
Furthermore, Azmi [5] states that data leak issues are due 
to a rapid growth of computer technologies that have resulted 
in an increase of vulnerabilities in systems. Many 
institutions, specifically educational institutions, have large 
amounts of personal data and they need to implement higher 
levels of security in their systems to stop any attempts of 
unauthorized users trying to access critical data intentionally. 
If adequate measures are not considered, records belonging 
to staff as well as students can be manipulated and used by 
unauthorized people. Finally, Azmi emphasizes that a risk 
analysis has to be done to understand the security level of an 
educational institution. 
All of the above references consider implementing 
security strategies to protect against different risks in 
processes, assets and information systems of educational 
institution, but they do not mention how. This paper presents 
recommendations for performing an easy risk analysis in 
HEIs to identify threats and risk of their information assets. 
III. 
EDUCATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
HEIs are usually organizations where people receive 
education, conduct research, exchange knowledge. However, 
HEIs and their affiliated organizations, have a sufficient 
amount of official, confidential, and restricted data, which 
must be protected. Loss or disclosure of confidential 
information could result in property damage, financial and 
damage to their reputation, among others.  
A wide range of processes, assets and information can be 
protected in HEIs such as: customer data, intellectual 
property, legal and financial records and correspondence. 
 There are certain areas that are in need of protection, 
such as [6]: 
• 
Educational and research (tests, examinations, 
research and development information, intellectual 
development, information about students, research 
projects, etc.) 
• 
Human Resources (data on staff and students, 
personal data, reports, etc.) 
• 
Legal 
(internal 
documentation, 
contracts, 
confidential information about employees, even after 
termination of their employment, etc.) 
• 
Financial 
and 
economic 
(procurement 
documentation, financial information, etc.) 
• 
IT (databases, their infrastructure, IT management 
information, logins and passwords, copyright of IT 
developments, etc.). 
Information is a critical resource in the operation and 
management of modern organizations. This is also true for 
HEIs. Availability of relevant information is vital for 
effective performance of managerial functions such as: 
planning, organizing, leading, and control. Today, IS are the 
link to connect all the components of organizations and 
universities and their departments, to provide better 
operation and survival in a competitive environment. 
An education information system is a computer system, 
which collects, transmits, processes, and stores data within 
an educational institution, specifically HEIs. It is designed to 
support operations, management, and decision-making 
functions of the HEIs, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.   Educational Information System 
Because of the growing use of information and its 
evolving nature, reforms at or within HEIs have an increased 
responsibility to ensure that they have robust policies in 
place to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
their information. There are different factors that force HEIs 
to develop a security strategy to protect their IT assets that 
support their processes, such as [3]: 
• 
New technologies, like mobile devices, wireless 
computing, virtual learning environment and portal 
software, digital libraries, etc. offer new possibilities 
for teaching, learning and research; 
• 
University authorities, staff and users require a 
higher quality in their services specifically IT 
knowledge and systems; 
• 
As IT and information systems continue to become 
deeply embedded in many activities and processes of 
HEIs, there is greater need to develop sophisticated 
models and make initial IT investments in 
infrastructure which would ensure that IS are robust 
and flexible to cope with changing requirements; 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• 
The growing complexity of IS, their information 
technologies 
and 
inter-relationships 
increases 
difficulty for management to ensure that investments 
in security controls are aligned to institutional 
objectives. 
IV. 
RISK ANALYSIS 
The objective of risk management is to reduce risk to an 
acceptable level. An information security risk analysis is a 
technique to identify and assess threats that may jeopardize 
an organization’s processes and information assets. This 
technique also helps define security controls to reduce the 
probability of these threats from occurring. 
Risk assessment is the estimate of threats that could 
exploit vulnerabilities that may cause harm to an asset, 
resulting in implementation of controls and safeguards to 
prevent identified risks from ever occurring and recovery 
plans if a risk becomes a reality in spite of all efforts, this 
process is known as risk mitigation [7]. 
The rapid development of IT and how to ensure and 
reduce potential risks of information systems, has been the 
focus of many organizations and academic areas. Risk 
assessment is an effective way to solve this problem. 
However, there are some issues in risk assessment process, 
such as evaluation indicators, that are difficult to be 
quantified because risk values are difficult to be defined in 
HEIs. 
Once a risk analysis has been conducted, it will be 
necessary to conduct a risk assessment to determine what 
threats exist that could avoid achieving institutional mission 
of HEIs. These threats must be prioritized and possible 
safeguards and controls must be selected. To be effective, a 
cost-benefit analysis is necessary to determine which 
controls will help mitigate the risk to an acceptable level for 
the institution. Another important factor to consider in this 
process is the impact of regulatory compliance issues. 
In conducting the risk assessment, consideration should 
be given to the advantages and disadvantages of quantitative 
and qualitative assessments. The main advantage of the 
qualitative style of risk assessment is that it prioritizes the 
risks and identifies areas for immediate action and 
improvement. 
The 
disadvantage 
of 
qualitative 
risk 
assessment is that it does not provide specific quantifiable 
measurements of the magnitude of the impacts, therefore 
making a cost-benefit analysis of recommended controls 
more difficult. 
The major advantage of quantitative risk assessment is 
that it provides an impact magnitude measurement, which 
can be used in the cost-benefit analysis of recommended 
controls. The disadvantage is that, depending on the 
numerical ranges used to express the measurement, the 
meaning of the quantitative risk assessment may be unclear, 
requiring the results to be interpreted in a qualitative manner 
[7]. 
On the other hand, risk management is an essential part 
of an ISMS that requires measuring and assessing risks as 
well as reviewing and re-evaluating risks at a later stage to 
ensure that an effective information security strategy has 
implemented. Without being well informed about the risks 
an 
organization 
cannot 
achieve 
effective 
security 
management. 
An ISMS is a systematic approach to managing sensitive 
organization information so that it remains secure. It includes 
people, processes and IT systems by applying a risk 
management process. There are different frameworks to 
implement an ISMS as ISO 27001, which is an international 
standard. It can help small, medium and large organizations 
in any sector to keep their information assets secure. 
A. Risk Analysis of MAAGTICSI 
In Mexico there is a mandatory guidelines for 
information and the management of communication 
technologies assets as well as their security, called 
MAAGTICSI (Manual Administrativo de Aplicación General 
en las materias de Tecnologías de Información y 
Comunicaciones y de la Seguridad de la Información, 
Administrative 
Manual 
of 
General 
Application 
in 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies 
and 
Information Security). It is aimed at large public agencies 
and requires many resources for its implementation. 
MAAGTICSI includes a framework to implement an ISMS 
and perform a risk analysis taking reference from 
international standards and best practices of information 
security as ISO 27001, ITIL and COBiT.  
The framework has a process called Information Security 
Management (ASI, Administración de Seguridad de la 
Información) that includes a methodology to perform a risk 
analysis. The objective of this analysis is to identify, classify 
and prioritize the risks to evaluate its impact on institutional 
processes and services to obtain risk analysis matrix.  
Some activities that HEIs could implement to perform a 
risk analysis to start an information security management are 
[9]: 
1) Establish risk management policy 
2) Integrate risk analysis team 
3) Identify critical processes 
4) Identify information assets and person in charge 
5) Identify vulnerabilities 
6) Identify threats 
7) Conduct identification and evaluation of risk 
scenarios 
8) Develop cost-benefit analysis of security controls 
In the case of educational institutions they often do not 
have sufficient and specialized human resources to carry out 
all the tasks of an ISMS or risk analysis to meet their 
particular needs, and therefore require other strategies to help 
them secure the critical assets that support their processes 
and comply with applicable regulations as MAAGTICSI. 
V. 
DEVELOPMENT 
The following sentences describe some steps to perform 
a risk analysis in HEIs with some recommendations to help 
the staff in charge of carrying out the activities according to 
requirements of the institution. 
1) Determine critical processes of HEIs. One of the 
most important activities in risk analysis is to determine 
critical processes to which the analysis will focus. In HEIs, 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

critical processes are significant processes linked to this 
type of organization that allow them to achieve their 
institutional mission.  
There are different processes associated with their 
operation and daily activities of HEIs, such as: student 
enrolment, staff assignment, student assessment, online 
education, scholarship assignment, research, academic 
planning, website, financial management, infrastructure 
management, collaboration agreements, among others.  
Recommendation: Senior managers and staff in charge of 
information security management must establish a procedure 
to determine critical processes and take into account mainly 
those that support the institutional mission in the HEIs, and 
identify them with a unique number. For example, Table I 
shows the identification of a process that belongs to Maestría 
en Ingeniería en Seguridad y Tecnologías de la Información 
(MISTI) in the Sección de Estudios de Posgrado e 
Investigación of ESIME Unidad Culhuacan and was 
assigned a consecutive number as ‘01’. 
TABLE I.  
PROCESS IDENTIFICATION. 
Process Identification (“Process ID”) 
[Acronym of Unit or Agency] 
[Area] 
[Consecutive number] 
SEPICUL 
MISTI 
01 
SEPICUL-MISTI-01 
 
2) Identify information assets in HEIs. Today, most of 
processes mentioned above have information systems and 
assets (which are information resources), in their activities 
e.g., hardware, software, communications, information, 
facilities and offices, image and reputation, people. It is 
necessary to establish an ISMS for all of them to guarantee 
their confidentiality, integrity and availability. 
Some assets related to processes in HEIs are shown in 
Table II: 
TABLE II.  
ASSETS IN HEIS. 
Assets in HEIs 
Facilities 
File servers 
Personal records of 
employees and 
students 
Administrative offices 
Websites 
Electronic files 
Laboratories 
Databases 
Physical files 
Site 
Developed computer 
applications 
Email accounts 
Network infrastructure 
Desktop computers 
Research 
Web servers 
Personal computers 
Collaboration 
agreements 
Database servers 
Specialized equipment 
Contracts 
Mail servers 
Report cards 
Financial statements 
 
Recommendation: Once the assets belonging to critical 
processes have been identified, it is necessary to assign them 
an identifier, also describing them briefly, as well as register 
their managers, then, if it is possible to know their criticality 
within one or several processes in the institution to continue 
with the risk analysis, as is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Asset register 
3) Establish an objective and scope of risk analysis. 
Recommendation: It is recommended to propose an 
objective and scope taking into account critical process and 
information assets, and resources available to perform 
activities (human, material and time). 
For example: 
• 
Objective: To make necessary calculations to 
establish relative value of risk for each scenario, 
according to activities of the selected risk analysis 
methodology. 
• 
Scope: The scope of evaluation is to establish risk 
values for risk scenarios associated with information 
assets of MISTI critical processes. 
4) Make a list of possible threat scenarios in HEIs 
taking into account provided scenarios by MAAGTICSI and 
selecting only those that could apply to the scope and size of 
HEIs. 
Recommendation: Reviewing the environment of HEIs to 
select threats and threat agents that may affect them, some 
examples, as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Threat scenarios 
An example of a threat scenario is shown in Table III, 
which was assigned an identifier to recognize it during the 
process. 
TABLE III.  
THREAT SCENARIO 
Threat ID 
Threat 
Threat Agent 
1032 
Denial of service 
Discontented internal 
staff (intentional) 
 
5) Choose one of two suggested procedures to assess 
risk scenarios: 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

a) Use traditional method with high, medium and low 
scale to determine probability of occurrence of a threat and 
impact to institution to assess risk. 
b) Apply a more objective evaluation method to 
determine the value of probability and impact. For 
probability additional factors associated to five different 
scales with representative values from 0.1 to 0.9 are 
included, as: 
• 
Existence of threat agent from the perspective of a 
particular information asset (exist) 
• 
Interest of threat agent to attack information asset 
(want) 
• 
Ability of threat agent to attack the information asset 
(can), and 
• 
Vulnerability of information asset 
The impact considers aspects as: human, material, 
financial, operational and image with five scales also with 
representative values from 2 to 10.  
Recommendation: If HEIs have few resources it is 
recommended to apply first method. The second method is 
recommended for staff with experience to facilitate the 
evaluation, as it becomes a complicated procedure. 
6) Choose a form of risk treatment: avoid, prevent, 
mitigate, finance or assume threat scenarios. 
Once the risk value of each threat scenario for each 
evaluated information asset is obtained, MAAGTICSI orders 
that all threat scenarios with a risk greater than 1.8 should be 
treated, a situation that for many institutions, especially 
HEIs, it will not be possible to accomplish when 
implementation of an information security strategy is in its 
initial stage and has generally limited resources. 
Recommendation: In order to compensate for this issue, it 
is proposed to use another strategy that, instead of being 
based on threat scenarios, obtains an average risk value of 
information asset that allows it to know its risk level and 
considers a minimum risk value of 6 to set priorities for the 
care of information assets. 
The risk matrix proposed by MAAGTICSI, shown in 
Figure 4, can be taken as a reference to indicate the risk 
value of assets. 
 
Figure 4.  Risk Matrix (MAAGTICSI) 
7) Perform a cost-benefit analysis, since not all risk 
scenarios will be possible to attend immediately. 
Recommendation: It is proposed to use another 
representation form to help this task. For example, the risk 
matrix presented in Figure 5, which helps to make a decision 
when reflecting risk level of information assets and their 
required attention level. 
8) Select security controls that will be applied to most 
critical information assets in HEIs to reduce their risk level. 
Recommendation: The staff may take as base reference 
list of security controls in Annex A of ISO 27001. 
. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Proposed Risk Analysis Matrix 
The general description made above shows some steps 
that information security management staff may perform a 
risk analysis in HEIs, to know their risk level of their 
information assets that support their critical processes. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
After following risk analysis procedure, steps and 
recommendations presented and applied to an HEI. The cost-
benefit analysis was easy to perform with help of proposed 
risk matrix, as shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Result Risk Analysis Matrix 
The previous matrix allowed us to make better decisions 
to determine risk treatment and to appropriately select safety 
controls to be applied when recognizing critical assets of 
HEI. For example, in this case, the assets that need to be 
attended to immediately are database server records, website 
and web server. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With the shown recommendations, HEIs may perform an 
easy procedure to their risk analysis based on MAAGTICSI 
that could help them start generating a security strategy to 
protect their processes, information assets and data that 
manage through IS and IT, as well as, reduce the risk level by 
security controls selection to attend timely needs of the 
institution according its special requirements. 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

As future work, we propose to develop a framework to 
establish ISMS for HEIs and analyse institutions of other 
educational levels with procedures and recommendations 
presented.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Instituto Politécnico Nacional for the 
support granted during the development of this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] OAS y Symantec Corporation, “Cyber Security Latin 
America and Caribbean Report,” Organization of American 
States and Symantec Corporation, Multidimensional Security 
Organization of American States and Government Affairs and 
Global Cybersecurity Policies, 2014. 
[2] P. K. Sari, N. Nurshabrina, and Candiwan, “Factor analysis 
on information security management in higher education 
institutions,” 2016 4th International Conference on Cyber and 
IT Service Management, Bandung, 2016, pp. 1-5. 
[3] A. Adamov, M. Erguvan, and D. Ş. Durmaz, “Towards good 
governance 
through 
implementation 
of 
University 
Management 
Information 
System: 
Qafqaz 
university's 
Experience,” 
2010 
4th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Application of Information and Communication Technologies, 
Tashkent, 2010, pp. 1-7. 
[4] Y. Chen, “Risk management of education information,” 2011 
IEEE International Symposium on IT in Medicine and 
Education, Cuangzhou, 2011, pp. 170-173. 
[5] I. M. A. G. Azmi, Q. M. Ashraf, S. Zulhuda, and M. B. Daud, 
“Critical data leak analysis in educational environment,” 2016 
4th International Conference on Cyber and IT Service 
Management, Bandung, 2016, pp. 1-6. 
[6] A. 
Boranbayev, 
M. 
Mazhitov, 
and 
Z. 
Kakhanov, 
“Implementation of Security Systems for Prevention of Loss 
of Information at Organizations of Higher Education,” 2015 
12th International Conference on Information Technology - 
New Generations, Las Vegas, NV, 2015, pp. 802-804. 
[7] T. R. Peltier, “Information Risk Analysis,” (2ª ed.), USA: 
Auerbach Publications, 2005. 
[8] Á. Gómez Vieites, and C. Suárez Rey, “Information Systems 
- Practical tools for business management,” (4ª ed.), México: 
Alfaomega, 2012. 
[9] Secretariat of Public Function, “Administrative Manual of 
General Application in Information and Communication 
Technologies and Information Security,” Secretariat of Public 
Function. México: Official Journal of the Federation, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

