End User Computing Environments for Improved Information Security  
Pankaj Goyal 
MicroMega Inc. 
Denver, USA 
e-mail: Pgoyal@micro-mega.biz 
 
 
Abstract— Access control does not prevent an authorized 
“insider” inadvertently or deliberately leaking information to 
an unauthorized external or internal party. The “insider 
threat” is one of the greatest threats to enterprise security, and 
nearly 70% of recently surveyed organizations view Web 2.0 
(and by extension cloud computing environments) as a serious 
data loss risk. The primary focus has been on Data Loss 
Prevention (DLP) methods to prevent “malicious” data 
leakage; data leakage includes data loss as well as inadvertent 
data sharing. In today’s highly interconnected world, with a 
proliferation of camera equipped cell phones, preventing data 
loss by a determined insider, possibly in collusion with other 
insiders is impossible. However, if as multiple analyses of data 
breaches show, the majority of data breaches (as high as 80% 
of all data breaches) occur from end-user error then the 
incidence and resulting loss from data breaches can be 
significantly reduced. This paper presents a method for 
organizing the end-user computing (EUC) environment to 
prevent inadvertent data leakage and, thus, improve 
information security.  
Keywords- information security; data loss prevention; insider 
threats; end-user computing environment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ubiquitous untethered anywhere anytime access to vast 
amounts 
of 
information, 
applications, 
services 
and 
computing resources is fast becoming a reality. Even today, 
companies and individuals store and provide access to their 
intellectual property, trade secrets, confidential private 
information and other assets over a network. Ensuring who 
gets access to and do what is the subject of both physical 
and logical security. The major objective of security is to 
deny, deter, delay and detect unauthorized access.  
Crime 
Prevention 
Through 
Environment 
Design 
(CPTED) is a holistic multi-disciplinary approach to 
security. The objective of CPTED is to consider all aspects 
of the environment in deterring and denying opportunities, 
including impulsive, for crime. The factors include 
facilities, Heating, Ventilation, & Air Conditioning 
(HVAC), utilities (electric, water, waste), Fire, perimeter, 
physical access control, and intrusion detection.  
In both physical and logical access control, the purpose 
of Identification is to establish the “who” the user is, 
Authentication is to confirm the veracity of that claim, and 
Authorization is to verify whether the user has access to the 
“object” (services, resources, information, documents and 
other assets). Similar to the physical world, presenting some 
credential from a trusted credential issuing authority may 
establish identification. In a highly distributed environment 
and with no central trusted authority this can be a major 
challenge; another issue is of preventing fraudulent 
credentials. Authorization establishes the “rights” of a user 
to perform some set of actions on an “object” and access 
control methods aim to protect the “object” from 
unauthorized access or actions. This is again a challenging 
problem with distributed and mobile “objects;” in a cloud 
computing environment (CCE) the objects may relocate to 
meet performance or other requirements.  
In the physical world, perimeter security consists of 
fences, gates, rooms, doors, dogs and guards; guards, 
motion detectors and closed circuit television (CCTV) 
provide surveillance to detect intrusion. In the logical world, 
network perimeter security through endpoints, intrusion 
detection systems (IDS), access control and logs all help to 
delay and detect, and intrusion prevention systems (IPS) to 
prevent access to achieve security. Safes and secure rooms 
embedded deep within other rooms, with multiple levels of 
access control including physical guards, provide asset 
security. Securing servers and networks is not quite a match 
for this level of physical deep depth defense; even with 
hardened infrastructure, the user environment and its usage 
is not subject to rigorous control. 
In the current and emerging ubiquitous computing 
environments, the “castle defense” mentality of trusting 
everyone within the organization is flawed. Access control 
does not prevent an authorized user inadvertently or 
deliberately leaking an object to an unauthorized party – data 
breach  or  data  loss;  the  ubiquitous  access  to and  ease  of 
distribution (or leaking) of objects in a CCE vastly 
compounds this problem. This “insider threat” is one of  the 
greatest threats to enterprise security.  Almost 70% of  all 
organizations view Web 2.0 as a serious concern for data 
loss  prevention (DLP) [8].  Organizations  around  the world  
x
x
x
x
 
Figure 1.  Threat categories over time by percent of breaches [34] (adapted 
to highlight insider threats). 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

are facing  increased  regulatory pressure to  secure and 
safeguard at “rest” or “in flight” digital information; in the 
US, in addition to federal regulations such as Health 
Insurance Promotion and Accountability Act (HIPAA)[15], 
Sarbanes-Oxley[33], Gramm-Leach-Bliley[14], a number of 
states have imposed their own sometimes more stringent 
regulations and penalties for breach. However, in today’s 
highly interconnected world preventing data loss by a 
determined insider, possibly in collusion with other insiders, 
is impossible; malicious person(s) with appropriate 
administrative system privileges or even camera equipped 
cell phones. Although intellectual property theft accounted 
for less than one percent of all cybercrimes against busi-
nesses, it resulted in more than 50 percent of the total 
monetary loss [31]. 
An analysis of insider data breaches continues to show 
that the majority of breaches, as high as 80%, are 
inadvertent and non-malicious [28, 34]. Fig. 1 shows data 
breaches by category with the insider breaches boxed; the 
malicious or “deceit” insider breaches are about half of the 
insider misuse breach and much less when combined with 
other breaches such as those due to error and environments. 
This Data Loss Prevention (DLP) from negligence and non-
malicious human error is a major challenge and largely 
unaddressed, except for the creation of and training on 
policies. An aspect of DLP that remains unanalyzed is the 
affect of internal data leaks on performance, such as 
productivity.  
Kulkarni et al [20] addressed the issue of the corporate 
risks due to uncontrolled storage of data associated with End 
User Computing Applications,  such as spreadsheets, 
databases etc., with the potential risks posed to the 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of this data due to 
its existence on EUC Applications. It is estimated that 
around 32% of financial data resides in EUC Applications 
[27]. 
The prevention of inadvertent data leakage – the 
predominant cause of all data leaks – will significantly 
reduce the incidence and resulting loss from data breaches. 
This paper presents a method for DLP applicable to the 
large percentage of such external and internal inadvertent 
data breaches. The paper examines some well known 
security mechanisms and shows their inapplicability for 
inadvertent data breaches. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
In a usage control policy, the object stakeholder defines 
the allowed accesses to a target object on a target platform. 
A stakeholder can be the owner of the object, or a provider 
delegated by the object owner to protect the object. An 
object can be services, tools, systems, resources, facilities, 
information, data, messages, or even a credential [37].  
A. 
Identity Management 
The special issue of Computer magazine [29] on identity 
management contains a number of papers that deal with the 
very important issue of digital identity management 
including interoperable trusted identity [26], federated 
identity management [7], challenges for federated assurance 
[23], multifactor identity verification [25] and an identity 
management framework [22]. The user-centric IDM 
approach [18] that allows users to control their digital 
identities and uses identifiers or attributes to define a user. 
DLP methods do not require any special identity 
management and the end-user environment may be subject 
to multiple different identity management techniques. 
Access control, DRM and other usage control techniques do 
not prevent data leakage by authorized users. 
B. 
Access Control 
Access 
control 
technologies 
enforce 
or 
enable 
enforcement of usage control policies. Access control aims 
to protect objects from unauthorized access or use by 
“agents;” agents includes users and tools/systems. Or 
alternately, grant agents permissions to perform some set of 
actions on objects. Most popular method is role-based 
access control (RBAC) that employs the concept of “roles” 
assigned permissions or “rights” on an “object;” no 
assignment of individual rights [32]. RBAC is very efficient 
for large numbers of users, and can deal with a wide range 
of security policies. Role hierarchies, for example, reflecting 
some line of authority and responsibility are a common 
aspect of RBAC models. Role hierarchies support role 
inheritance a very useful feature when assigning common 
permissions to large groups. Inheritance also creates role 
hierarchies where a senior role has more permissions than a 
junior role; the senior role (rs) inherits the permissions of the 
junior role (rj) and may have additional permissions of its 
own [35]; the role inheritance satisfies the constraint: 
(Permissions 
(rj) 
subset 
of 
Permissions 
(rs)) 
and 
(Authorized-Agents (rs) subset of Authorized-Agents (rj)).  
Attributes-based access control (ABAC) is useful in 
highly distributed heterogeneous environments [19, 36] and 
can also be used in conjunction with RBAC. Environment 
roles can capture the security-relevant context of the 
environment, as access decisions may depend on the context 
of the requests [10]; context-based RBAC provide fine-
grained access control [16, 21]. Environment roles support 
the securing of context-aware applications and security 
policies that make use of environment roles to control 
access to resources. Constraints in RBAC [35] deal with 
static and dynamic separation of duty such that either no 
users are assigned to conflicting roles (static separation of 
duties), or users cannot be activated for conflicting roles 
simultaneously (dynamic separation of duty). Rule-based 
RBAC [1] provides mechanisms to assign roles based on 
rules defined by the security policy; the rules may establish 
seniority relationships and, thus, a roles hierarchy. Temporal 
Role Based Access Control (TRBAC) controls role 
activation time constraints [4, 17]; limits access to certain 
times. Temporal and other constraints are a subset of 
general conditions that control usage; access permitted only 
when user at specified premise and after a certain event 
occurring. Other extensions include generalization of roles 
to include subject, object and environmental roles [24], 
history [12] and privacy-preserving protocols using zero-
knowledge proof-based techniques [3]; and assignment of 
user rights and permissions for web services based on the 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

strength of the identification mechanism in a context 
dependent RBAC can be a viable approach for access 
control in web-based services [35]. 
In very large organizations or in extended or virtual 
organizations, centralized RBAC administration is an issue 
and major challenge. In decentralized domain level RBAC, 
different administrated domains are independent [2]; the 
administrator in a domain manages a subset of all the roles 
and users, and can even define different roles. This 
however, is a problem for inter-domain role and user rights 
management.  
Most of these access control methods do not address 
information flow restrictions; for example, usage control of 
an object released into an end-user environment. 
C. 
Usage Control 
Previous work on usage control enabling mechanisms 
mainly focuses on digital rights management (DRM). Usage 
control in distributed environments requires the enforcement 
of security policies on a remote client platform with high 
assurance and verifiable trust. However, in general, in use 
DRM mechanisms cannot support enforcement in an EUC 
Environment for an authorized user. Most importantly, 
DRM mechanisms are usually proprietary, work best in 
closed environments and do not interoperate with other 
DRM 
techniques. 
DRM 
techniques 
use 
encryption/decryption and some externally managed trust 
(key, certificate, rights) or content server; decryption may 
be restricted to a specific target environment and a particular 
application; the approaches do not support environment and 
application heterogeneity. The lack of interoperability 
(including standards), the need for a centralized external 
trust server or the need for continuous control hampers 
adoption in highly distributed environments.  
Zhang et al. [37] present general security requirements 
for usage control and propose a general framework. Their 
approach requires a hardware-based trusted subsystem that 
includes a root-of-trust, trust chain, and a policy 
transformation and enforcement mechanism such that a 
policy stakeholder can deploy sensitive data and services on 
the subsystem.  
Pretschner et al. [30] present a taxonomy of enforcement 
mechanisms for usage control and provide an overview of 
the existing usage control mechanisms. To plan for a future 
enforcement mechanism the team [30] elicited functional 
usage 
control, 
actions, 
conditions 
and 
obligations 
requirements from many different organizations and users. 
In their model, conditions constrain usage restrictions and 
action requirements, and specify circumstances under which 
usage restrictions or action conditions apply; conditions are 
concerned with time, cardinality, events that happened, 
purpose, and environment. Rare and limited support exists 
for action requirements and event-defined conditions in 
current usage control mechanisms.  
D. 
Information Life Cycle and Security Supply Chain 
Traditional security aims to protect the IT infrastructure 
and systems – the perimeter and the structures – that house, 
manipulate and transport the valuable information assets. 
Information Lifecycle Management (ILM) manages the 
flow of information from creation, storage, transport, use, to 
its deletion. One possible way to identify and address 
information security issues, over the information lifecycle, 
is to consider the information security supply chain (ISSC) 
over the information life cycle [5]. Boyson et al. [5] present 
a Cyber Supply Chain Assurance Reference Model that 
draws from supply chain risk and physical security 
management, 
and 
defines 
key 
actors, 
processes, 
vulnerabilities, and identifies strategic interdependencies at 
each node of the supply chain. 
An ISSC, should make accessible all relevant security-
related information to every relevant company in the supply 
chain to optimize and deliver the most effective security 
over the entire supply chain and life cycle rather than sub 
optimize for local the company; lacking this capability, 
information security is the weakest of the supply chain and 
life cycle participants. Effective security delivery over the 
supply chain and life cycle requires both transactional (raw) 
and analytical security information; analytical information 
that predicts future possibilities or future impacts of current 
and past events and decisions is critically important.  
III. INSIDER THREATS 
The exposure of confidential information is now the 
single greatest threat to enterprise security. According to 
one survey, Web email or Web posting (e.g., message 
board, blog) accounted for 37% of information leaks and 
that almost 70% of all organizations view Web 2.0 as a 
serious concern for DLP [8]. Company employees who 
inadvertently violate data security policies continue to 
represent a major factor in occurrence of data breaches – 
some 67% in one analysis and 88 percent in another [28]. 
Insider threats manifest in a number of ways [29]. 
Proliferation of information is the natural result of business 
activity and a productive workforce. As a result of data 
proliferation, most organizations do not know how much 
sensitive data exists on their systems and where.  
The most common type of data breach occurs when 
confidential data has been stored, sent or copied by well-
meaning insiders [34]. This type of DLP from negligence 
and non-malicious human error is a major challenge and 
largely unaddressed, except for creation of and training on 
policies. 
Current mechanisms to thwart insider threats include: (a) 
content monitoring and filtering solutions; (b) gateway 
appliances that protect data in motion, such as that in e-
mails, instant messages and general Web traffic; and (c) 
monitoring for suspicious usage patterns. Event and usage 
logs provide compliance related controls and audits, in 
addition to the ability to detect threats. Detecting policy 
violations involving nebulous concepts—such as the 
transfer of sensitive information and trade secrets—is more 
difficult and generates numerous false positives [6]. 
Insider adversaries continue to defeat the current 
individual and mostly non-integrated protection strategies, 
and, so a systems-based approach, considers all operational 
activities including the insider’s characteristics, motives, 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

and capabilities [11]. A controlled double-blind experiment, 
however, with 50 participants randomly divided into benign 
and malicious users to detect insiders who misuse their 
privileges, did not identify any one behavior that distin-
guishes malicious users from benign ones [6]. The team also 
reviewed the current state of the art and reviewed publicly 
available information on malicious insider cases. 
IV. END-USER COMPUTING WORKSPACES MODEL FOR 
INFORMATION SECURITY 
Individually, we participate or operate in a number of 
social contexts: work, family, professional, etc. (Fig. 2). We 
possess an identity and perform some role in each of these 
contexts; our identities and roles may not be identical in 
these different contexts.  In a given context, the identity 
determines the role but the role identifies a set, possibly 
null, of individuals (identities); please note that the identity 
and role cannot determine the context.  
In the non-digital world, Identity Management (and 
analogously role management) is the natural human 
behavior of generating, managing and choosing roles 
according to a found social context; where these roles are 
often mandated by socio-cultural norms and possibly refined 
by each individual (“role making”) [9]; sometimes we 
choose identities for specific contexts. In a particular 
context, people choose an appropriate role (“role taking”) or 
perform the role assigned to them, and exhibit a natural 
capability of resolving any apparent role conflicts in their 
behavior. They have learned an intuitive understanding of 
what information to divulge and how to react to information 
received, in the context of the environment and their own as 
well as their communication partners’ role. 
Both in the real world (non-digital world) and the virtual 
world, these social compacts sometimes wittingly or 
unwittingly breakdown – “insider threat.” 
A. End-User Computing Environment Workspaces 
The EUC environment, commonly referred to as the 
desktop environment, refers to all of the programs, 
applications, processes, and data used by an end-user; In this 
paper the term EUC environment is used as it does not 
denote any particular end-user hardware. EUC virtualization 
separates an EUC environment from a physical machine, 
with the EUC environment (the "virtualized" desktop) 
residing on a remote central server and running in a 
virtualized machine. This allows users to access their 
desktops from any capable device. 
An EUC workspace, in the digital world, corresponds to 
the real world social context. The EUC workspace is a 
virtualized computing environment characterized by some 
features, for example, organization, team, role, user identity, 
applications and operational environment with the  objective 
of, say, managing usage and access control governed by 
policies and event conditions. An EUC workspace provides 
a functional EUC environment and encapsulates everything 
above the operating system kernel – applications, data, and 
any non-privileged operating system subsystems; each EUC 
workspace  also  contains  Gateway  Services  (see   below). 
Work
Team 1
Team 2
Team 3
Medical
Financial
Group 1
Group 2
Group 1
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 2
Group 3
Professional 
Groups
Interest 
Groups
Family
Social
Personal
 
Figure 2.  An Individual’s social contexts; in the digital world, domains 
correspond to social contexts. 
Please note that these workspaces are quite different from 
Linux workspaces; every Linux workspace contains the 
same desktop, the same panels and the same menus, but 
does not provide workspace isolation.  
The EUC environment can, thus, be partitioned into 
isolated multiple EUC workspaces. Applications within a 
workspace can interact with each other but are isolated from 
those in the other workspaces. An application can exist in 
multiple 
workspaces 
but 
applications 
in 
different 
workspaces are distinct; for example, an email program in 
two workspaces may have different address books, where 
the address books contain only entries of authorized 
recipients, and, thus, only information within the workspace 
can be emailed to another authorized user. Additionally, an 
application in different workspaces may be configured 
differently; for example, some functionality may exist in a 
workspace but not in another. Thus, the isolation provided 
by EUC workspaces, the configuration of the applications, 
authorized user lists, etc. prevents even inadvertent sharing 
of  information with non-authorized personnel. While 
multiple EUC workspaces may be operating simultaneously, 
the end-user can only manipulate one workspace at any 
given time i.e., focus can only be on one EUC workspace.  
To operate in another workspace, the user has to switch 
workspaces; switching workspaces does not terminate any 
running programs, applications, etc. 
Secondly, the Gateway Services ensure not only proper 
logging for audit trail but also ensure that all information 
(and message exchanges) is automatically encrypted, abides 
to all policies that govern the workspace, such as 
information duplicated to the appropriate corporate store. 
The EUC workspaces can be arranged in a hierarchy 
based on security levels (security hierarchy); this is 
particularly useful for enterprises that typically have an 
employee participate in multiple teams and where 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

hierarchies are natural. This hierarchical organization of 
EUC workspaces can be used for asset fragmentation, 
location distribution and customization and, hence, risk 
reduction. Promotion of assets, to a higher secure 
classification level for access in a more secure environment, 
only after asset security examination – virus scan, integrity 
checks, and required sign-offs. Demotion of assets, to a 
lower classification level for wider accessibility, only after 
asset meets reclassification conditions and organizational 
policies; thus, a document released for wider audience only 
after, say, all reviews completed and publication date met. 
When an asset is successfully reclassified it cannot be 
accessed from the previous workspace. 
Object supply chain (usage, movement, etc.) creates an 
object use graph (OUG). The OUG for object Oi includes 
information on all usage (life cycle) and on “parent” objects 
– objects with superset of content or “simultaneously” 
accessed objects while Oi created or modified, where 
“simultaneously” is defined as within some time interval 
independent of the EUC workspace. The OUG for Oi (or 
OUG(Oi)) determines the set of objects on which Oi  may 
have a content dependency. Our model is an extension of 
the dependency graph of [29].  An object Oi is demotable to 
a target EUC workspace (can be moved to the target 
workspace – parent hierarchy) if and only if (i) all objects in 
OUG(Oi) already demoted (usable in target workspace), and 
(ii) the policy governing demotion of Oi is satisfied (for 
example, approval by a review committee). 
Typically, workspaces exist on an EUC device but there 
are no technical obstacles for them to exist in a virtualized 
environment; the virtualized environment will have to 
support the underlying operating system. 
1) Physical EUC devices 
EUC devices are partitioned into virtual computing 
environments; can be either hardware level virtualization 
through the use of hypervisor or supported through the 
Operating System. An EUC workspace is associated with 
one and only one virtual computing environment.  The 
current generation of EUC devices is quite capable of 
handling virtualization. 
2) EUC on Cloud Computing Environment (CCE) 
The same principle applies, except that in a CCE the virtual 
machines hosting the EUC workspaces may not be on the 
same server hardware or even the same CCE. 
B. Gateway Services 
Gateway Services control incoming and outgoing 
messages; only permissible messages are allowed. Ongoing 
analysis of the gateway logs of all events, messages, etc. and 
their correlation with other logs (other gateways, access 
controls, etc.) provides a mechanism for real-time 
surveillance. Each workspace gateway services serves as 
Message Intrusion Detection (MIDS) and Message Intrusion 
Prevention System (MIPS). The gateway/proxy architecture 
of [13] easily adopts to perform the MIPS and MIDS 
functions. Analysis of MIPS and MIDS logs, events and 
messages can take advantage of parallel computation and 
use of multiple analysis techniques, such as those used to 
identify behavioral patterns and statistical anomalies. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Our individual participation in different social (including 
work) environments in both our real and digital (virtual) 
world is a source of data/information loss. In the real world, 
we are trusted to intuitively safeguard information from 
unauthorized recipients. This also applies to the digital 
world. Given easy access and the possibility of errors, for 
example use of an incorrect email address (of another 
similarly named individual or a personal instead of official 
address), the problem of inadvertent, or malicious, data loss 
is magnified. In many ways, the term and challenges with 
data protection are being redefined with the advent of virtual 
and cloud computing environments. The existing problem of 
insider threats if not properly addressed would be magnified 
in these environments.  Work to date, in the security field 
has concentrated on preventing unauthorized access to 
information, whether by internal users or external 
miscreants. This paper outlines our model for the prevention 
of non-malicious insider threats. 
The model is an EUC focused solution that reduces the 
risk of inadvertent data leakage. The solution is easy to 
implement.  For example, some capabilities of the model are 
easily simulated in a multi-user environment by the 
assignment of different user-ids for each domain; it has also 
been implemented on a desktop running virtualization 
software and multiple instances of Linux and even a MS 
Windows environment. Other capability implementations 
require changes to, for example, applications; again feasible 
with open-source applications.  
It is impossible to design experiments that simulate 
actual behaviors in multiple organizations; the data [28, 34], 
with significant variations among reporting organizations, is 
of reported breaches and the human error rate ranges 
between 70 and 90% (Fig. 1). Thus, it is difficult to evaluate 
the efficacy of the proposed solution until it is adapted by a 
significant percentage of organizations; then their prior  to 
and post-adaption results can be compared. Though, if the 
existing data surveys and analysis is correct, then the errors 
due to inadvertent written disclosure of information shall be 
minimized; it should be noted that there is no way to 
prevent verbal disclosure.  
A major issue concerns software application licensing 
and how the major software vendors would treat multiple 
virtual environments in EUC devices. The solution 
presented here is also applicable to cloud computing 
environments. The issue of how Software as a Service 
(SaaS) providers would treat users that have multiple 
distinct environments is still open and beyond the scope of 
this paper; an equitable resolution may increase the appeal 
of using SaaS in large enterprises. 
In the very near future, if not already today, 
environmental conditions such as “noisy” and “unsecure,” 
and proximity to unauthorized would be easily detectable 
and, thus, incorporable in a insider threat risk mitigation 
plan. 
 
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] 
M.A. Al-Kahtani and R. Sandhu. “Induced role hierarchies with 
attribute-based RBAC,” Proceedings of the 8th ACM symposium on 
Access control models and technologies, 142-148, 2003. 
[2] 
J. Bacon, K. Moody, and W. Yao, "A model of OASIS role-based 
access control and its support for active security," ACM Trans. 
Information Systems Security, vol. 5, 492-540, 2002. 
[3] E. Bertino, F. Paci, and R. Ferrini, “Privacy-Preserving 
Digital Identity Management for Cloud Computing,” IEEE 
Computer Society Data Engineering Bulletin, 1–4, Mar. 2009.  
[4] 
E. Bertino, P.A. Bonatti, and E. Ferrari, “TRBAC: A temporal role-
based access control,” ACM Transactions on Information and System 
Security, 4(3), 191-223, 2001. 
[5] 
S. Boyson, T. Corsi, and H. Rossman, “Building a Cyber Supply 
Chain Assurance Reference Model,” Science to Solutions Magazine, 
SAIC, vol. 2, 2009. 
[6] 
D. Caputo, M.A. Maloof, and G.D. Stephens, “Detecting Insider 
Threat of Trade Secrets,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 7, 14-21, 
2009. 
[7] 
D.W, Chadwick and G. Inman, “Attribute Aggregation in Federated 
Identity Management,” IEEE Computer, Vol. 42, 33-40, 2009. 
[8] 
C. .A. Christiansen, B. E. Burke, and G. Pintal, “Web Security SaaS:  
The Next Generation of Web Security,” IDC White Paper, 2008. 
[9] 
S. Clauss and M. Kohntopp, “Identity Management And Its Support 
Of Multilateral Security,” Computer Networks, vol. 37, 205-219, 
2001. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1389-1286(01)00217-1. 
[10] M.J. Covington, W Long, S. Srinivasan, A.K. Dev, M. Ahmad, and 
G.D. 
Abowd, 
“Securing 
context-aware 
applications 
using 
environment roles,” Proceedings of the 6th ACM symposium on 
Access control models and technologies, 10-20, 2001. 
[11] F.A. Duran, S.H. Conrad, G.N. Conrad, D.P. Duggan, and E.B. Held, 
“Building a System for Insider Security,” IEEE Security & Privacy, 
vol. 7, 30-38, 2009. 
[12] G. Edjlali, A. Acharya, and V. Chaudhary, “History-based 
access control for mobile code,” ACM Conference on 
Computer and Communication Security, 38-48, Nov. 1998. 
[13] P. Goyal, “An Interoperability Enabling Framework: Services, 
Processes and Clouds,” 2009 IEEE Asia-Pacific Services Computing 
Conference (IEEE APSCC), 174-179, 2009. 
[14] Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act,  "Financial Services Modernization Act,"  
1999, 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-106publ102/content-
detail.html 
[15] Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 1996, 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/statute/index.ht
ml 
[16] J. Hu, A. Weaver, A Corradi, R Montanari, and D Tibaldi, 
“Context-based access control for ubiquitous service 
provisioning,” 28th Annual International Computer Software 
and Applications Conference (COMPSAC 2004), 444-501, 
2004. 
[17] J.B. Joshi, R. Bhatti, E. Bertino, and A. Ghafoor, “Access Control 
Language 
for 
Multi-domain 
Environments,” 
IEEE 
Internet 
Computing, 8(6), 40–50, 2004. 
[18] M. Ko, G.-J. Ahn, and M. Shehab “Privacy-Enhanced User-
Centric 
Identity 
Management,” 
IEEE 
Int’l 
Conf. 
Communications, pp. 998–1002, 2009. 
[19] D.R. Kuhn, E.J. Coyne, and T.R. Weil, “Adding Attributes to Role-
based Access Control,” IEEE Computer, Vol. 43, 79-81, June 2010. 
[20] A. Kulkarni, E. Williams, and M.R. Grimaila, “Mitigating Security 
Risks for End User Computing Application (EUCA) Data,” IEEE 
International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust, 1171-
1176, 2010. 
[21] A. Kumar, N. Karnik, and G. Chafle, “Context sensitivity in role-
based access control,” ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, 
36(3), 53-66, 2002. 
[22] G. Lopez, O. Canovas, A.F. Gomez-Skarmeta, and J. Girao, “A 
SWIFT Take on Identity Management,” IEEE Computer, Vol. 42, 58-
65, 2009. 
[23] P. Madsen, H. Itoh, “Challenges to Supporting Federated Assurance,” 
IEEE Computer, Vol. 42, 42-49, 2009. 
[24] M. Moyer and M. Ahamad, “Generalized role-based access 
control,” 21st international conference on distributed 
computing systems (ICDCS'01), 391-398, 2001. 
[25] F. Paci, R. Ferrini, A. Musci, K. Steuer Jr., and E. Bertino, “An 
Interoperable Approach to Multifacotr Identity Verification,” IEEE 
Computer, Vol. 42, 50-57, 2009. 
[26] P. Pacyna, A. Rutkowski, A. Sarma, and K. Takahashi, “Trusted 
Identity for All: Toward Interoperable Trusted Identity Management, 
Systems,” IEEE Computer, Vol. 42, 30-32, 2009. 
[27] E. Perry and J. Jinnet, “Spreadsheet Chaos: Impact of Federal Bailout 
and Other Developments,” Prodiance Corporation, April 2009. 
[28] Ponemon Institute, Fourth Annual US Cost of Data Breach Study: 
Benchmark Study of Companies, Ponemon Institute, 2009, 
http://palisadesystems.com/common/files/Ponemon_CODB_2009.pdf 
[29] S. Pramanik, V. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Upadhyaya, “Security 
Policies to Mitigate Insider Threat in the Document Control Domain,” 
20th 
Annual 
Computer 
Security 
Applications 
Conference 
(ACSAC'04), 304-313, 2004. 
[30] A. Pretschner, M. Hilty, F. Schutz, C. Shaefer, and T. Walter, “Usage 
Control Enforcement: present and Future,” IEEE Security & Privacy, 
vol. 6, 44-53, 2008. 
[31] R.R. Rantala, “Cybercrime against Businesses, 2005,” Bureau of 
Justice 
Statistics 
Special 
Report, 
Sept. 
2008; 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/cb05.pdf. 
[32] R.S. Sandhu, E.J. Coyne, H.L. Feinstein, and C.E. Youman, “Role 
based access control models,” IEEE Computer, 29(2), pp. 38-47, 
February 1996. 
[33] Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, "Public  Company  Accounting  
Reform 
and 
Investor 
Protection 
Act," 
2002, 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ204/content-
detail.html 
[34] Symantec, “Anatomy of a Data Breach: Why Breaches Happen…and 
What to Do About It,” Symantec, 2009. 
[35] R. Wolf, T. Keinz, and M. Schneider, “A Model for Context 
dependent Access Control for Web-based Services with Role-based 
Approach,” In the Proceedings of the 14th International Workshop on 
Database and Expert Systems Applications(DEXA'03), 2003, pp.209-
214. 
[36] E. Yuan and J. Tong, “Attributed Based Access Control (ABAC) for 
Web Services,” IEEE International Conference on Web Services 
(ICWS’05), pp.561-569, July 2005. 
[37] X. Zhang, J-P Seifert, and R. Sandhu, “Security Enforcement Model 
for Distributed Usage Control,” 2008 IEEE International Conference 
on Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous, and Trustworthy Computing, 2008, 
pp. 10-18. 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

