Energy-aware Security Adaptation in Ubiquitous Mobile Network 
 
Tewfiq El Maliki 
Information Technology department hepia, HES-SO 
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland 
Geneva - Switzerland 
email:Tewfiq.Elmaliki@hesge.ch 
Aïcha Rizzotti-Kaddouri 
Haute Ecole Arc Ingénierie he-arc, HES-SO 
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland 
St-Imier – Switzerland 
email:Aicha.Rizzotti@he-arc.ch 
 
 
Abstract — Data privacy and security are a major concern in 
any field mainly mobile commerce, Internet of Thing (IoT), 
and wireless data communication. Classical security is 
particularly 
based 
on 
encryption 
to 
protect 
data 
confidentiality, integrity, non repudiation and availability. 
However, mobile devices are limited in processing, battery life 
and communication bit rate. Therefore, many security 
protections are not used in order to save battery life. A new 
paradigm must be carried out to establish a framework 
capable to be energy aware when applying a security 
mechanism. In this paper, we present our Security Adaptation 
Reference Monitor (SARM). It is based on an autonomic 
computing security looped system, which fine-tunes security 
means based on the monitoring of the context including the 
user environment and energy consumption aspects. Thereafter, 
we investigate the cost of security and wireless communication 
related to battery consumption. 
Keywords-framework; 
autonomic; 
security 
adaptation; 
energy awareness; mobile network 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As mobile and wireless networks have become 
increasingly heterogeneous and particularly dynamic, the 
requirements in terms of security and performance must be 
addressed in a flexible manner but also in a dynamic way to 
deal with the evolution of the system in real time according 
to its context. In addition, the evolution of using smart 
phones privately and professionally highlights the urgent 
need of improving security of communication and data. 
Currently, mobile phones have become real computers, 
but unfortunately, with less security. Hence, the existence of 
multiple flaws such as ease of misuse of resources, total 
control of communications, especially Short Message, etc. 
The increasing number of applications and devices make 
security more relevant in this field. However, providing 
security faces challenges because of the severe limitation of 
CPU utilization related to communications, memory and 
resources. In fact, security is resources consuming, 
particularly in wireless Sensor Networks. 
We propose a generic Security Adaptation Reference 
Monitor (SARM) as a compelling solution for this problem. 
Implementing SARM at each application level is not feasible 
because the change will interfere in each communication 
program in each device. The best way to overcome this 
constraint is to implement SARM in the kernel and 
consequently having an overall security control. Our work is 
inspired by the concept of Reference Monitor (RM) that was 
developed for data access [1]. 
Thereafter, the basic idea is to integrate SARM, which is 
an adaptive Security Framework in phones to deal with 
extremely dynamic security conditions while maximizing 
performance based on policies, preferences and risks 
associated with different contexts.  
We describe a methodology intended for the use of users 
or system developers to determine ab initio the most suitable 
adaptive security and access means for different categories of 
wireless networks. We will also describe some principal 
resource costs for security and some applications of SARM. 
The overall objective of our work is the exploration of 
SARM to secure transmissions, voice, data of mobiles phone 
such as Android devices. The principal objective is to use 
external cryptographic tamper-proof system based on Smart 
Card (SC) SD, which supports data encryption mechanisms 
and protected memory. 
In Section 2, we survey other related work. Section 3 
gives the problem statement, highlighting the motivation of 
our work then introduces SARM and explains its 
components and functionalities. Section 4 gives analysis of 
resource costs for security and explains our experiments. 
Section 5 addressed simulation implementation to validate 
SARM. Our simulation results and performance analysis are 
presented in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes our paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The concept of adaptation security in wireless network is 
used to mitigate the consequences of a substantial number of 
runtime threats, when it does not completely eliminate them.  
Many systems rated at the higher levels of security for data 
are implemented according to the reference monitor concept. 
A reference monitor is a concept that has proven to be a 
useful tool for computer security experts. It is the only 
effective tool known for describing the abstract requirements 
of secure system design and implementation.  
Reference [2] has proposed an adaptive security 
application in mobile ad-hoc networks, where network 
conditions play a role in choosing relevant security 
mechanisms at runtime. 
In Chigan Chunxioo et al.'s paper [3], the authors report 
that often a highly secure mechanism inevitably consumes a 
large amount of system resources, which in turn may 
unintentionally cause a security attack. Consequently, a 
suitable security service is provisioned in a progressive way 
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

to achieve the maximum overall security services against 
network-performance services throughout the course of 
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) and Sensor networks 
operation. 
Some solutions have already been implemented but they 
are based on a fixed security scheme and may not be 
adequate for systems exposed to diverse operating contexts 
[4] as found in wireless environments and Internet of Things 
networks. 
We can state that current systems either suffer from a 
number of drawbacks in terms of their overall security 
capacity and dynamism, or else they are highly specific, 
addressing a single security issue. Hence with the current 
setup, total security is far from achievable. We propose a 
security adaptation Framework for wireless environments, 
which we call a SARM.  
III. 
MOTIVATION FOR OUR FRAMEWORK 
We argue that the spare processing and transmission 
resources are wasted in mobile environments if security is 
over-provisioned. Hence, the trade-off between security and 
performance is essential in the choice of security services. 
Adaptive security mechanisms are also found in flexible 
protocol stacks for wireless networks [5], context-aware 
access control systems [6] and security architectures [7]. 
This has motivated us for the implementation of a 
completely reconfigurable architecture [8], which is 
fundamental to adapt the architecture to the terminal and 
network variability of the context and particularly in the 
security field [9]. Seigneur [10] has introduced autonomic 
security pattern in his security design but only at the 
authentication level. So, we will use autonomic system to 
design our framework and take advantage of all the power of 
it architecture. 
A. The system  
Three principal components of the autonomic system 
have been identified in the design of our Framework [11], 
[12]. These have been extended based on adaptation security 
architecture.  
For the Management unit, we add policies and logs for 
short- and long-term security or Quality of Service security 
analysis and monitoring. The block risk, vulnerabilities and 
performances are based on the risk management module. 
Risk is in general analyzed as a function of threats and their 
likelihood, which represents the frequency of hazard [13]. 
Also, hazard can be broken down into threat and 
vulnerability components. Each vulnerable element is 
coupled with an associated safeguard. Finally, risk 
management is formulated as the maintenance of a set of 
requirements framed as constraints on the aforementioned 
factors. If the level of risk falls below a threshold then no 
action will be taken other than a re-sampling of risk; 
otherwise, some predefined action will be launched in order 
to protect assets, and the safeguards related to vulnerabilities 
will be reviewed. [14]  
Policy should be deployed and maintained so as to save 
time and complexity and make centralized system 
management more feasible. In addition, risk, performance 
and vulnerability analysis is a key issue in the Framework 
because it is responsible for detecting potentially insecure 
contexts, environments that are potentially wasteful of 
energy, and/or particularly vulnerable applications. Thus, the 
analysis could attempt a trade-off between all of these 
constraints in order to choose an efficient action in the 
adaptation action to tune the functional unit.  
In the end, the functional unit is responsible for selecting 
adequate security means, like efficient network access. The 
device will then adapt its security so as to have the most 
efficient mechanisms. In doing so, the loop will make the 
communication system more self-managing in terms of 
security and more accurate in coping with any dynamic 
changes in context. 
This autonomous security Framework is thus well-
adapted to react dynamically during runtime, depending on 
the security parameters and context. In fact, a trade-off 
between security and performance is also carried out.  
We have depicted our generic Framework in Figure 1. It 
is comprised of two units, which are based on the concept of 
the reference monitor so as to ensure the security of any 
network. 
 
Figure 1. Foundations of our adaptive security Framework 
B. 
Discussion of SARM 
The key challenge for SARM is to adapt the Reference 
Monitor (RM) and autonomic system concepts to wireless 
communication and beyond, including data access control. 
The goal of a RM is to enforce security by preventing all 
processes and users from accessing any data except through 
the reference itself. The security kernel is managed by 
security policies.  
We have also chosen to apply the autonomic computing 
security pattern [15] in the design of SARM by dividing it 
into a functional unit and a monitoring unit. The Framework 
is adapted to a cross-layer security approach. As a result, the 
Framework will reduce overheads even at very high levels. 
To reduce the system’s complexity and to make the 
system incremental, we propose a feedback loop Framework 
 
 
 
Context : 
Sensing 
R
i
s
k 
Non App 
dep.
 
Performances 
Vulnerability 
Send an action 
to security 
Functional Unit 
User 
Preferences
 
Analysis
 
Monitoring
 
Tune 
Policies
 
Logs
Applications 
App dep. 
 
Security Means 
 
 
 
Management Unit 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

as introduced in [10] at the authentication level, that is, the 
system will automatically tune to its best configuration based 
on its particular monitored context, thus avoiding any static 
decision making. Hence, the SARM is split into two units 
looped in a servo control system model in order to fine tune 
the adequate security measures/means, which we will discuss 
later. One unit, called the management or monitoring unit, 
monitors the context by evaluating and analyzing risks, 
performance, and energy consumption, which are significant 
for detecting attacks, and tunes the adequate security means 
using the second module, which is called the functional unit. 
C. Security Means 
As depicted in Figure 2, security means are defined as 
any algorithm or mechanism that could ensure security but 
that also has the capacity not to take security action unless it 
is actually necessary. It also includes the choice of adequate 
network access, because some network communication 
technologies are more secure, with higher levels of energy 
consumption, while others are less secure, with lower levels 
of energy consumption. Security means can be application-
dependent, as in the case of localized trust [16] or distributed 
trust [17], or application-independent, as with cryptographic 
protocols. Indeed, localized and distributed forms of trust are 
good paths to explore because they generate low-computing 
charges (less energy consumption) and in some cases give 
better results. Thus they fit the context of Wireless Sensor 
Network, for example, perfectly. 
ESAP
PKI
Social 
network
Trust
Mobile 
Identity
Algorithms
WIFI
Wimax
GSM
3G
Bluetooth
Zigbee
Mobile network
Security Means
 
Figure 2. Security Means details 
Thus, the analysis could delve into a trade-off between 
all these constraints to choose an efficient action to tune the 
functional unit. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF RESOURCE COSTS FOR SECURITY  
A. Motivation 
For a long time, security has been treated as a static 
component in system design, with static security assessment 
assumed to protect the system throughout its lifetime and 
assuming that energy is unlimited. However, this assumption 
does not hold anymore because devices are disconnected 
from power line and they are in battery mode that has limited 
live time. Reference [18] declares that Wi-Fi devices 
consume 30% more energy than normal mode. In [19], we 
find a complete study of energy consumption in mobile 
phones and it is proved that a 3G connection consumes from 
5 to 10 times more energy than Wi-Fi. In addition, the 
problem of energy is a key issue in sensor networks and IoT. 
Therefore, the security cannot be considered without other 
context aspects especially energy awareness.  
B. Data and telephony   
Data security has become a major concern for all users, 
particularly for applications in Self-Organization Network 
field, because they require many security features adapted to 
their wireless transmission. Different kinds of security 
mechanisms and strong cryptographic algorithms are 
available to prevent any violation of data security. 
Unfortunately, these security capabilities are time and energy 
consuming. Indeed, certain algorithms and mechanisms are 
strong enough to protect largely the data but at the same time 
reduce severely battery lifespan. That is why an adaptable 
platform for mobile device will save energy and reduce the 
delay to fit to the limits of a real time range; mainly for 
telephony application. In this respect, to deploy Voice over 
IP (VoIP) so that users receive an acceptable level of voice 
quality, 
VoIP 
traffic 
must 
be 
guaranteed 
certain 
compensating bandwidth, jitter, and packet loss. 
According to G.729 [20], codec requires packet loss far 
less than 1% to avoid audible errors. G.114 of International 
Telecommunication Union [20] specification recommends 
less than 150 ms one-way end-to-end delay for high-quality 
real-time traffic, such as voice; and for Jitter buffers, varying 
delay, further add to the end-to-end delay, and are usually 
effective only on delay variations of less than 100 ms. 
Thereby, the delay must be less than 100 ms, which is a 
significant constraint for mobile device.  
C. Smart Cart-Secure Digital (SC-SD) Card 
SC is a card that securely manages and stores information 
separately from the rest of the device’s components. In a SC-
SD, man can find security platform delivered through a 
secure microSD processor. Architecture details are described 
in Fig. 3. The main objective is to integrate SARM in this 
smart card to protect voice and data infrastructure, 
preventing loss or theft of sensible data, vital information 
and proprietary assets. Another objective aims to increase the 
awareness of the costs using encryption and access networks.  
 
Figure 3. Architecture of SC-SD 
D. Goal of analysis 
The goal of our analysis is to integrate cryptographic 
algorithms and security mechanisms in SARM in order to 
implement them in a SC-SD memory card. Thereby, our 
Secure 
KEy
Crypto 
uP
Firmware
SD
CPU
Memory
Data Storage
Processor
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

SARM means will be chosen perfectly according to context. 
This will help designers and developers to fit timely the 
users’ preferences and policy in order to have efficiency 
application and security system. That is why we have carried 
out experimental measures to compare energy consumption 
of different algorithms and access networks. Based on the 
results, we could adapt timely our SARM means to policy 
and user’s preferences. In this respect, we increase the 
efficiency and validation of the Framework. 
Our main goal is to establish a model for the power 
consumption of phones in many cases to know how to 
mitigate between security and power consumption in our 
Framework.  
V. 
ASSUMPTIONS AND EXPERIMENTS 
There are three techniques for performance evaluation: 
a) Analytical 
b) Simulation 
c) Measurement 
Simulations offer less accuracy than measurements. For 
this matter, we have previously developed hardware and 
software to measure energy consumption. That is why we 
have privileged the measurement instead of analytical or 
simulation methods. Analytical technique is complicated due 
to the fact that this method needs more precision and requires 
more time. We have made several assumptions to limit the 
scope of the study and also to keep the implementation and 
complexity reasonable.  
TABLE 1. MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF EXPERIMENTS 
Further studies are needed to consider an overall evaluation. 
We use commercially available mobile phones with a SC-SD 
for the SARM.  
A. Metrics and Measurements Methods 
Our focus is to determine the impact of cryptographic 
algorithms and use of different access networks on battery 
resources. We will explain the methodology of the 
measurements. 
1) Encryption Latency 
We will evaluate the latency of some means in SARM, 
such as identity. The latency is the time to encrypt a block 
cipher or a file calculated based on a time function. 
2) Energy Consumption 
To measure the current level, we have developed an 
electronic card capable to measure a low current level via 
low precision resistor (r=50m) in series between battery 
and the mobile phone. The electronic card uses many low 
noise amplifiers (gain =200) and has an USB interface in 
order that data will be directly accessed from a PC. The 
equivalent circuit scheme is shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4- Scheme of experimental energy consumption circuit 
The most known problem of battery detection mechanisms 
was bypassed by using all four battery’s connectors; 
otherwise there will be no power. At the same time, to avoid 
battery fluctuations we have connected the battery to DC 
adapter. The time of a single measure is 2500 times by a 
second. Figure 4 illustrates the details of the experiments. 
The formulas are only applying Kirchhoff’s circuit laws to 
our circuit. To calculate the power via our method we must: 
Take the measured voltage via the PC Vpc(t) and divide it by 
the amplifier gain 200 to have V(t): 
 
V(t) = Vpc(t)/200 
 
then apply the equation with V(battery = 3.8) 
 
P(t)=U(t).I(t)  V.V(t)/r(m)  
 
Finally, we use (1) and (2) to calculate the power: 
 
P(t)= Vpc(t)*0.38 

VI. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
B. Identity management 
We have studied all Identity management platforms [21] 
and we have had a good background in this field as a means 
in our Framework. We have implemented a test-bed based 
on WLAN network and mobile phones. The main goal is to 
know the time consuming difference between a secure and 
non-secure connection. The results are shown in Figure 5. 
The requirements of this experience are: 
a) E65 telephone  
b) WLAN 802.11b, D-link Access Point  
c) Tomcat server 
d) Security assertion markup language (SAML) [2] 
Token and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) connection 
Phone 
Networks 
Galaxy S3; GT9300 
WLAN or Cellular network 
Android version 4.1.2 
803.11g; GSM/UMTS/G4 
Battery: 3.8 V;  
2100 mAh 
Protocols: Data channel (Session Initiation 
Protocol SIP/RTP); SMS; switched channel, 
voice PCM G.711 (64 kbit/s) 
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 5. Download time of different files 
Figure 5 shows the download time average difference 
between secure and non-secure for different file sizes. In all 
cases, the difference between secure and non-secure ranges 
from 10% to 15%. For each measure, the specific file 
download is done 30 times. The standard deviation is less 
than 1.7%.  
C. Energy Evaluation 
1) Voice Communication energy cost 
We have carried out an end to end voice encryption, 
which is very important to secure in mobile network mainly 
that any telephony call is not protected at all inside the 
Global System for Mobile (GSM) network. In Figure 6 we 
find the network level of our experiment, which contains 
these elements: 
a) Commercially smart card SD for encryption, 
b) SIP protocol for signaling, 
c) Real Time Protocol RTP for ToIP, and 
e) Data channel. 
 
Figure 6: Configuration of SARM experiments 
2) Analysis of Results 
All energy metrics are based on experiments with 
Samsung S3 Galaxy. The experiments show power 
consumption for a voice transmission without and with 
encryption (Padding and non-Padding). A voice packet is 
based on 20ms and 64kbit/s, which gives a 160bytes size.  
Blowfish cipher has the highest encryption energy 
consuming for 20ms encryption block, which seems to be 
less efficiently with a small block, because it uses one 
function to process the entire buffer of plaintext. Figure 7 
illustrates that for larger files, Blowfish is more efficient, 
which is more adequate for voice encryption. Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES) is the more energy consuming 
for long block. However, it is the strongest in terms of 
cryptographic properties. In all cases, the difference between 
secure and non-secure ranges from 12% to 20%. Moreover, 
for each measure, the specific measures are done 30 times. 
The standard deviation is less than 1%. Therefore, we can 
state that almost 70% of energy is consumed by transmission 
and 15% by encryption. 
 
Figure 7. Power for different cases of encryption 
3) Access network energy consumption 
We must have an overall view about the energy 
consumption of security utilization in order to tune the best 
security means and also to choose the best access network 
depending on the context, user preferences and policies in 
SARM. That is why we have carried out measurements of 
energy consumption for Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. The graphs in 
Fig.8 and Fig.9 show energy consumption (joules/Byte). 
One can see the energy consumption for a file transmission 
of respectively 100Mbytes over Wi-Fi and 10Mbytes over 
Bluetooth connections. We have depicted for different 
distances the average energy consumption, standard 
deviations (std-dev) and average +2*std-dev -represents 95% 
of statistical cases-. For short distance -2m line-of-sight-, 
Wi-Fi energy consumption is higher than Bluetooth. But for 
higher distances Bluetooth is more energy consuming than 
Wi-Fi. Please note: The average was carried out over 10 
different experiments. 
Download time
128 KB
250 KB
500 KB
1MB
0
10
20
30
40
50
Non-Secure
Secure
File size
Time [s]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
NoPadding
PKCS5Padding
NoPadding
PKCS5Padding
ECB
CBC
Power [W]
Modes
DES
AES
Blowfish
Idle
Transmission without
encryption
Software
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 8. Energy consumption for Wi-Fi 100Mbytes 
 
Figure 9. Energy consumption for Bluetooth 10Mbytes 
These conclusive and accurate results have been used in 
one of research projects called iNUIT -Internet of Things and 
Urban Innovation- [22]. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The energy consumption is accurately evaluated and is 
mainly consumed within wireless transmission. These 
experiments are a foundation for all simulations and 
evaluations in the future to explore the efficiency of our 
Framework. Indeed, it gives us a solid background to launch 
the simulations, of our Framework SARM based on the 
tuning of the security means related to the accurate energy 
and access network consumption tradeoffs. Besides, the 
experiments have given us the opportunity to study a full 
end-to-end secure telephony connection based also on 
SARM and SC-SD. Nevertheless, we need further studies of 
the Framework for real applications, different contexts, and 
diverse access networks and energy consumption. In short, 
the proof of concept of SARM was based on implementing it 
in a tamper resistant security module based on a Secure 
Digital Card. The results are conclusive and accurate to 
continue research on efficient energy security adaptation.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Anderson, “Computer Security Technology Planning,” 
http://seclab.cs.ucdavis.edu/, June, 2016. 
[2] C. Chigan, L. Li, and Y. Ye, “Resource-aware Self-adaptive 
Security Provisioning in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks,” Proc. 
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 
2005, pp.2118–2124. 
[3] C. Chigan, Y. Ye and L. Li, “Balancing security against 
performance in wireless ad-hoc and sensor networks,” 60 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, USA, 2004, 
pp.4735-4739. 
[4] L. Yuan and G. Qu,  “Design Space Exploration for Energy- 
Efficient Secure Sensor Network,” ASAP 2002, pp.88-97. 
[5] C. Hager, “Context Aware and Adaptive Security for Wireless 
Networks,” PhD thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, 2004. 
[6] M. Lacoste, G. Privat, and F. Ramparany. “Evaluating 
Confidence in Context for Context-Aware Security,” 
European Conference on Ambient Intelligence (AmI'07), 
2007, pp.88-97. 
[7] J. Al-Muhtadi, D. Mickunas, and R. Campbell. “A 
Lightweight Reconfigurable Security Mechanism for 3G/4G 
Mobile Devices,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 9(2):60–
65, 2002. 
[8] E2R Deliverable D2.2. “Equipment Management Framework 
for Reconfiguration: Architecture, Interfaces, and Functions,” 
December 2005. 
[9] T. Jarboui, M. Lacoste, and P. Wadier, “A Component-Based 
Policy-Neutral 
Authorization 
Architecture,” 
French 
Conference on Operating Systems (CFSE), 2006. 
[10] J.-M. Seigneur, “Trust, Security and Privacy in Global 
Computing,” PhD Thesis, 2005. 
[11]  T. El Maliki, “Security Adaptation in Highly dynamic 
wireless”, PhD Thesis, Geneva, 2013. 
[12] E. D. Sontag, “Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic 
Finite Dimensional Systems”, Ed. Springer, Jul. 1998. 
[13] F. den Braber, T. Dimitrakos, B. A. Gran, K. Stølen, and J. Ø. 
Aagedal, “Model-based risk management using UML and 
UP”, Issues and Trends of Information Technology 
Management in Contemporary Organizations, 2002. 
[14] A. 
Gehani, 
“Performance-sensitive 
Real-time 
Risk 
Management is NP-Hard”, Workshop on Foundations of 
Computer Security affiliated with the 19th IEEE Symposium 
on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), 2004. 
[15] D. M. Chess, C. C. Palmer, and S. R. White, “Security in an 
autonomic computing environment”, IBM Systems Journal, 
vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 107–118, 2003. 
[16] Davis, “A localized trust management scheme for Ad-Hoc 
networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference 
on Networking (ICN '04), March 2004. 
[17] X. Titi, T. El Maliki, and J.-M. Seigneur,"Trust-based Hotspot 
Selection", IADIS International Conference e-Society2010, 
Portugal. Best Quantitative paper award.  
[18] White Paper, “Power Consumption and Energy Efficiency 
Comparisons of WLAN,” Products Atheros Communications, 
(acceded at: http://www.atheros.com/pt/papers.html), 6/2016. 
[19] N. 
Balasubramanian, 
A 
Balasubramanian, 
and 
A. 
Venkataramani, “Energy Consumption in Mobile Phones”, 
IMC’09, 2009. 
[20] ITU-T recommendations to find at http://www.itu.int. 6/2016. 
[21] T. El Maliki and J.-M. Seigneur: “A Survey of User-centric 
Identity Management Technologies”, Secureware , 2007. 
[22] HES-SO, Project iNUIT, to find at http://www.hes-
so.ch/data/documents/Brochure-iNuit-web-en-6518. 
6/2016. 
 
0,00E+00
5,00E-08
1,00E-07
1,50E-07
2,00E-07
2,50E-07
3,00E-07
3,50E-07
4,00E-07
Energy [uJ/Byte]
2m
5m
10m
0,00E+00
2,00E-07
4,00E-07
6,00E-07
8,00E-07
1,00E-06
1,20E-06
Energy [uJ/Byte]
2m
5m
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

