Wi-Fi Intruder Detection 
An experimental approach 
 
Rui Fernandes1, João N. Matos1, Tiago Varum1 
1Instituto de Telecomunicações Aveiro 
Aveiro, Portugal 
ruifelix@ua.pt, matos@ua.pt, tiago.varum@ua.pt  
Pedro Pinho1,2 
2Inst. Sup. Eng. Lisboa – ISEL 
Lisboa, Portugal 
ppinho@deetc.isel.pt 
 
 
Abstract - In a society where monitoring and security are 
one of the most important concerns, this system represents a 
convenient and interesting low-cost solution in terms of 
intruder detection. Using widely spread infrastructure such as 
Wi-Fi routers and laptops, we proposed an innovative 
alternative, capable of detecting intruders by sensing the 
different 
electromagnetic 
interference 
caused. 
These 
perturbations are sensed by the system through the changes in 
the acquired Wi-Fi Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI), 
in the presence of obstacles/targets between the transmitter 
and receiver.  
 
Keywords-Wi-Fi; RF Signature; Wavelet Transform; 
Intruder Detection; RSSI, Security; Wireless. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A wide number of solutions for intrude detection are 
available nowadays. From the simple and low cost infrared 
and Passive Infrared (PIR) sensors [1][2] that detect the heat 
radiated from the human body, up to the high-end RADAR 
security [3] systems, a large variety of effective solutions 
are available to fulfil the various needs of different 
scenarios. 
Among all the mentioned solutions are the requirement 
to introduce or install extra components in the medium 
under surveillance. The goal of this work is to propose an 
innovative and pertinent alternative suitable for modern 
scenarios. 
With a sense of practicality in mind, our system reutilizes 
the widely spread Wi-Fi infrastructures, taking leverage of 
easy implementation, turning suitable for both domestic and 
industrial environments. Utilizing only a standard Wi-Fi 
router, connected wirelessly to a laptop with dedicated 
software, this security system can be a simple solution for 
the actual intruder detection problem. This work mostly 
tries to show the concept of Wi-Fi intruder detection with 
results in a controlled scenario. Despite that, some 
considerations and challenges to adapt this prototype to a 
real scenario are addressed. 
This paper is divided in six sections. The first two 
sections are dedicated to provide an overview of the 
develop work and the state of the art applications. The third 
section, unveils the system operation modules and provides 
a brief explanation of the concepts of Wavelet Transform 
and the RSSI in the scope of the designed prototype. The 
fourth and fifth sections address the experimental set up and 
the results obtained, with an additional presentation of 
considerations regarding the set up used and its consequent 
analysis. Finally, the last section draws some conclusions 
and indicates the future work proposed by the group. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the last decades, with the proliferation of mobile 
phones and Wi-Fi Access Points (AP), a set of ground 
breaking applications were developed to demonstrate the 
large capacity of wireless networks.  
An example of this trend is presented by the concept of 
Wi-Fi localization [3][4][5]. This concept exploits RSSI 
data from different AP’s to reassemble innovative and 
accurate localization systems, providing an attractive 
solutions and complement to the Global Positioning System 
(GPS). So parallel to the development of these applications, 
studies were conducted focusing on the Received Signal 
Strength Indicator (RSSI) characteristics and practical 
concerns [3][4]. 
Recently, in the monitoring scope, WiSee [6] and WiVi 
[7] displayed the large tracking detail that can be obtained 
from Wi-Fi signals when proper signal processing tools are 
applied.  
The WiSee showed the capacity of Wi-Fi based systems 
to recognize human gestures by extracting the signals 
frequency Doppler shifts [6]. The WiVi using a Multi Input 
Multi Output (MIMO) interference nulling [7], detects 
human movement through walls by the elimination of the 
static objects reflections. 
More in the context of this work, a detection system 
based on the RSSI was presented with the goal of 
monitoring pedestrian and automobile traffic [6]. The 
differentiation of the targets was obtained through the 
different RSSI changes triggered by the cars and the 
humans. To achieve this objective a moving mean and 
variance technique was adopted to analyze the data. 
We proposed a less complex system inspired in the 
previously mentioned works that through the RSSI, senses 
the alterations of intruders on a static environment. To 
refine the detection and to possibly avoid false alarms, the 
Wavelet Transform is applied to the RSSI data. This signal 
processing technique is characterized to have a time and 
frequency multiresolution being utilized in diverse image 
and video processing procedures [9][10][11][12][13]. 
III. 
SYSTEM 
This section is dedicated to the system characterization. 
As mentioned before, the RSSI and the Wavelet Transform 
are the core of the operation principle, so due to their 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

importance an introduction of these concepts is presented in 
the following subsections. 
A. RSSI 
The RSSI is a Radio Frequency (RF) measure, which 
indicates in dBm, a reference value of the received signal 
power in the receiver antenna.  
Nevertheless, the RSSI is a precise indicator of the 
received signal strength and quality of the connection in real 
time, it was proven that the RSSI used on its own needs to 
pass through a calibration process to overcome the 
environment factors that influence the signal quality 
[4][14][15]. 
The RSSI was addressed in this paper as a measure that 
indicates the effects on the received signal of the presence 
of intruders or other targets. 
B. Wavelet Transform 
The Wavelet Transform is a multiresolution signal 
processing method capable of adjusting the window length 
to get a desirable precision in different signal regions, 
allowing long time windows where low frequency 
information is needed and short windows for high 
frequency.  
According to Misiti et al. [10], “A wavelet is a 
waveform of effectively limited duration that has an 
average value of zero.”. However in contrast with the 
sinusoids, basis of the Fourier analysis, the wavelets tend to 
have irregularities and “unpredictable” shape.  
The Wavelet Transform uses shifted and scaled versions 
of the main wavelet to separate the signal under analysis. 
So, the choice of an adequate wavelet is an important step 
in the analyzing process. 
The Wavelet Transform is represented in mathematical 
terms by: 
          𝐶(𝑎, 𝑝) = ∫ 𝑓(𝑡)𝛹(𝑎, 𝑝, 𝑡)𝑑𝑡      
+∞
−∞
            (1) 
 
where a represents the scale factor and p the shifted 
position. The Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) is a 
sum over time of the multiplication of the signal with a 
scaled and shifted version of the main wavelet. Each 
coefficient evaluates the comparison between the original 
signal and the wavelet, where the higher the value of the 
coefficient the more similarities exist between the signal 
and the wavelet. 
In the proposed system, the interference generated by 
intruders is analyzed applying the Wavelet Transform over 
the RSSI stream of data. The core of the analysis process 
comes from the correct choice of a wavelet and scale 
function, giving great importance and detail to find the best 
match between wavelet and the pattern to be detected. 
 The wavelet chosen was the Haar wavelet (step 
function) with a scale factor of 30. This decision was made 
taking in consideration the similarities of the step function 
with the human interference and the better results obtained 
after several wavelets tested, the ones presented in Figure 1.  
 
Fig. 1. Example of Wavelet families. (a)Haar, (b) Daubechie4, (c) 
Coiflet1, (d)Symlet2, (e) Meyer, (f) Moelet, (g) Mexican Hat [8] 
C. System Architecture 
The 
system 
architecture 
is 
divided 
in 
three 
interconnected modules: radio, data and processing module. 
a) Radio module 
The radio module is responsible for emitting and 
receiving the data using the Wi-Fi protocol. It is constituted 
by a router in the transmitter side and a laptop with a 
receiver antenna connected to a network card in the receiver 
side.  
The designed prototype utilizes a Samsung laptop 
model NP350V5C, an Asus LAN Wireless Router model 
WL-500n and an external network card from the 
manufacturer TPLINK, model TL-WN722N ( see Figure 
4). 
This hardware module is responsible for both generating 
and receiving electromagnetic signals in the 2.4 GHz 
operation band.  
Our system is influenced by the inherent characteristics 
of wireless communication protocols, being the most 
relevant the multipath path fading, packets collision and the 
natural interference from other AP’s.  
b) Data Module 
The data module is both software and hardware based 
and has the role to be the communication bridge between 
the radio and processing module. Connected with the PHY 
layer through the network card, the data module selects the 
packets applying network filters, discarding packets from 
undesirable network address. When this filtering process is 
completed, the stream of RSSI data is sent to the processing 
module (Figure 2).  
The software used was the Microsoft Network Monitor 
3.4, responsible for gathering all the RSSI values and 
selecting the correct network address.  
 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Wireless Signal
Processing module
Fig. 2. Simplification of the Data Module operation principle 
 
c) Processing Module 
The processing module is completely software based 
and is implemented in a MATLAB platform (Figure 3). 
This module has the important task of filtering the noise 
from the received signals and applying signal processing 
methods to detect and distinguish the different targets. 
The filtering process is simply used to eliminate noise 
due to multi path and collision components inherent in Wi-
Fi connections. This noise appears in the received signals, 
in the form of notches of one sample duration, with 20 to 30 
dB of attenuation, in comparison with the trend of the 
signal. To filter these undesirable samples, was adopted a 
simple scheme that detects and discards packets, having 
always in mind the concern of maintaining the original 
signal response. Then, the Wavelet coefficients are 
computed and the human presence is analyzed. The 
application of the Wavelet Transform also guaranties an 
additional filtering process, because turns the system 
insensitive to the variance of quality of the received signal 
in a wireless channel, having the coefficients values 
oscillating around zero. This last feature can be very 
interesting for example to create/design an automatic target 
identification method. This would be based on the 
thresholds of the coefficient values generated from different 
targets, which is very difficult to be implemented directly 
from the RSSI data.  
Connecting all the modules, the system works in the 
following manner: the radio module generates the signals in 
the emitter side; the signals propagate in the medium, 
affected by the intruder presence. When received, the 
signals are handled in the receiver side of the radio module. 
Then, the data module gathers from the PHY layer the RSSI 
data and selects the correct network address, sending 
posteriorly the data to the processing module. Here, the data 
is filtered and then the Wavelet Transform is applied. With 
Wavelet coefficients computed, the data is analyzed with 
the goal to see if an intruded is detected. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SET UP 
The experiments were elaborated in a domestic indoor 
scenario. The line of sight between the transmitter and 
receiver was intentionally clear in a radius of approximately 
3 meters. The directional antennas used, were set at a height 
of 1 meter with 1.8 meters distance to the ceiling (Figure 4). 
The receiver and transmitter were separated by 3 meters 
being the targets inserted in half distance, i.e., 1.5 meters 
(Figure 4). 
 
RSSI data stream
Detection module and 
Analysis
W
Fig. 3. Simplification of the Data Module operation principle 
 
The half distance was adopted after the testing of several 
set up’s with the targets more close to the Tx or to the Rx. 
These asymmetrical arrangements proved that the results 
are dominated by the smaller distance between the target 
and the Tx or Rx. Also, when the targets are inserted close 
to the transmitter or receiver end of the system the signals 
are highly attenuated. The minimum acceptable distance 
between the target and the Tx or Rx obtained for our system 
was of 20 cm. In distances below that threshold, the 
received signal is very low and with large power 
fluctuations.  
The system was also evaluated for more Tx and Rx 
distances between the 0.2 to 10 meters interval. With this 
study it was concluded that the distance does not affect 
much the performance until the 6 meters distance mark, in 
this controlled environment experiments, generating only a 
decreased of the mean value of the received signals in order 
of 1 to 6 dB. After this distance, the presence of the human 
is more difficult to identify. 
 
1.5 meters
1.5 meters
1.8 meters
1 meter
1 meter
1.8 meters
Fig. 4. Schematic of the experimental set up. 
 
Is also worth to mention that the system works with the 
presence of obstacles in the nearby, with only the special 
attention to the line of sight Tx and Rx. With the 
experiments elaborated by the group, it can be preliminary 
concluded that the presence of objects with similar size to 
the human body blocking the line of sight influence the 
system performance, especially metallic objects. 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

a) Detection Experiments 
The system detection performance was tested in two 
different scenarios: presence of one and two humans.  
To avoid false alarms, the response of the system with 
the presence of domestic animals, in particular cats and 
dogs, was evaluated. The dimensions of the different targets 
are presented in Table 1. 
TABLE I.TARGET DIMENSIONS 
 
Human 1 
Human 2 
Dog 
Cat 
Height (m) 
1.70 
1.68 
0.68 
0.3 
Width (m) 
0.45 
0.40 
0.45 
0.57 
 
Regarding the testing procedure, the experiments 
consisted on taking samples of the environment in a silent 
scenario, for approximately 20 seconds, inserting then the 
targets during the same interval. In the animal detection, the 
accuracy of the sampling intervals dropped due to the 
unpredictable animal reaction. 
The angle of detection in the 3 meters experiments was 
approximately ± 30° in the longitudinal plane. 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  
The results are presented in two subsections. The first 
one evaluates the human detection and the second one the 
domestic animal response. In both sections, the first graphic 
shows the RSSI data and the second one the Wavelet 
Coefficients plot.  
A. Human detection 
The human detection results are presented in Figures 5 
and 6. In both plots, the moments of intruder presence are 
easily distinguished. Specifically, is visible the attenuation 
of approximately 10 dB of the received signal in the RSSI 
data and the increase values of Wavelet coefficients with a 
consequently oscillation of the pattern. 
 
Fig. 5. Human walking; Up) RSSI data; Down) Wavelet coefficients 
 
The experiment with the presence of two humans side 
by side shown a similar interference in comparison to the 
single human experiment, presenting only a wider 
attenuation interval (Figure 6). 
 
Fig. 6. Two humans walking side by side, Up) RSSI data; Down) 
Wavelet Coefficients 
B. Animal detection  
The results from animal detection are presented in 
Figure 7 and 8. The interference of a dog presented to be 
smaller in comparison with the human’s. Both signal 
attenuation and Wavelet coefficient alterations are reduced 
but perceptible in both patterns.  
 
Fig. 7.  Dog, Up) RSSI data; Down) Wavelet coefficient 
 
Fig. 8. Cat, Up) RSSI data; Down) Wavelet coefficient 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The cat detection results are shown in Figure 8. Due to 
the smaller dimensions of the cat, principally in height, the 
signal attenuation is only around 1 to 3 dB which presents 
to be out of the system detection range. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work presented an innovative security system able 
of detecting intruders based on the RF interference 
generated in a static environment. The proposed Wavelet 
Transform based technique exhibited a good detection 
capability 
and 
enhanced 
the 
target 
identification 
performance of the system.  
The Wavelet Transform coefficient analysis shows to be 
a good complement to the RSSI data, with suitable 
characteristic to improve the system to autonomously 
identify the targets (recalling the processing module 
subsection) and possibly avoiding false alarms like 
neglecting a car or a dog detection.  
The Wavelet Transform improvements are also 
noticeable in the detection of moving targets with 
significant speed, e.g., running human, where the 
interference 
triggered 
can 
be 
mistaken 
with 
noise/oscillations in the RSSI raw data. In contrast, the 
patterns obtained with the Wavelet coefficients are similar 
to those presented in this paper, where the detections 
moments are easily seen. Additionally, to enhance the 
system detection capacity, the adjustment of the scale factor 
of the Wavelet Transform can be used to detect/neglect 
smaller RSSI signal interference/patterns. These two last 
topics are not addressed in detail in this paper because are 
currently under study, with only preliminary results. 
To support the system, an evaluation experiment 
exposed the different effects on the received signals of the 
domestic animals presence. The domestic animals proved to 
have a reduced influence in the system performance, except 
when the emitter and receivers are very close to the animal 
(less than 0.75 meters). 
The results proved the feasibility and performance of 
this interesting low-cost solution, achieving in a total of 500 
experiments, a 95% human detection in a domestic scenario 
ratio comparable to other RSSI based systems [5][8]. In 
[5][8], the authors claim to achieve 100% human detection 
ratio in similar conditions, i.e., line of sight. 
Under study are methods to distinguish different targets 
more efficiently, the adaptation of the system to perform a 
real-time detection, the introduction of additional antennas 
to improve the system coverage area and the use of dual 
frequency mode available in the 802.11 standard. In terms 
of propagation, the influence of linear and circular polarized 
antennas in the system performance are also under analysis.  
In the experimental set up it is also under study the 
influence of the presence of obstacles, the intruder detection 
outside the line of sight and to conclude, test our system in 
a real environment to further prove our concept and to 
isolate the improvements needed.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Yokoishi, J. Mitsugi, O. Nakamura, and J. Murai, "Room 
occupancy determination with particle filtering of networked 
pyroelectric infrared (PIR) sensor data," Sensors, 2012 IEEE, 
October, 2012, pp. 1-6. 
[2] Y.W. Bai, Z.H. Li, and Z.L. Xie, "Enhancement of the complement 
of an embedded surveillance system with PIR sensors and ultrasonic 
sensors," Consumer Electronics (ISCE), 2010 IEEE 14th 
International Symposium on, June, 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[3]  P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan, "RADAR: An In-Buidling RF-
based User Location and Tracking System," IEEE INFOCOM, 
March, 2000, vol.2, pp.775- 784. 
[4]  M. Saxena, P. Gupta, and B. N. Jain, "Experimental Analysis of 
RSSI-based Location Estimation in Wireless Sensor Networks," 
Communication 
Systems 
Software 
and 
Middleware 
and 
Workshops, January, 2008, pp. 503-510. 
[5] Z. Zhang, X. Zhou, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and G. Wang, "I Am the 
Antenna: Accurate Outdoor AP Location using Smartphones," 
MobiCom '11, August,  2011, pp. 109-120. 
[6]  F. Adib and D. Katabi, "See through walls with WiFi!," ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication, August, 2013,Volume 43 
Issue 4, pp.75-86. 
[7]  Q. Pu, S. G. S. Gollakota and S. Patel, "Whole-home gesture using 
wireless signals," MobiCom '13, October, 2013, pp. 27-38. 
[8]  A. Al-Husseiny and M. Youssef, "RF-based Traffic Detection and 
Identification," Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall), 
IEEE, September, 2013, pp. 1-5. 
[9]  A. N. Akansua, W. A. Serdijn, and I. W. Selesnick, "Emerging 
applications of wavelets: A review," Physical Communication 3, 
Elsivier, March, 2010, pp.1-8. 
[10]  M. Misiti, Y. Misiti, G. Oppenheim, and J.-M. Poggi, Wavelet 
Toolbox™ 4,User’s Guide, The MathWorks, Inc., 2009. 
[11]  S. Arivazhagan and R. N. Shebiah, "Object Recognition Using 
Wavelet Based Salient Points," The Open Signal Processing Journal 
2, December, 2009, pp. 14-20. 
[12]  Y. Jin, E. Angelini, and A. Laine, "Wavelets in Medical Image 
Processing: 
Denoising, 
Segmentation, 
and Registration 
", 
International Topics in Biomedical Engineering,Springer US,  
January, 2005, pp. 305-358. 
[13]  J. N. Bradley, C. M. Brislawn, and T. Hopper, "FBI wavelet/scalar 
quantization 
standard 
for 
gray-scale 
fingerprint 
image 
compression," Visual Information Processing II, June, 1993, p. 293. 
[14]  X. Li, J. Teng, D. X. Qiang Zhai, Junda Zhuy, and Y. F. Zhengy, 
"EV-Human: Human Localization via Visual Estimation of Body 
Electronic Interference" Proceedings of  INFOCOM 2013, April, 
2013, pp. 500-504. 
[15]  A. LaMarca, J. Hightower, I. Smith, and S. Consolvo, "Self-
Mapping in 802.11 Location Systems," Intel Research Seattle, 
Seattle, 2005, pp. 87-104. 
 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

