Firewalls Usability: An Experiment Investigating the Usability of Personal Firewalls
Bander AlFayyadh
Queensland University of Technology, Australia
Email: b.alfayyadh@student.qut.edu.au
Mohammed AlZomai
K.F. Security College, KSA
Email: zomaim@kfsc.edu.sa
Audun Jøsang
University of Oslo, Norway
Email: josang@mn.uio.no
Abstract—Poor usability of IT security systems and appli-
cations represents a serious security vulnerability, which can
be exploited to compromise systems that otherwise could be
considered technically secure. This problem is of particular
concern with the huge number of users regularly connecting to
the Internet but who know very little about the principles of IT
security. Personal ﬁrewalls are important security mechanisms
for protecting users against Internet security threats. However,
the knowledge and skills required to effectively operate some
aspects of a personal ﬁrewall may surpass the capability of
the average user. In previous work, we conducted a usability
evaluation of personal ﬁrewall by cognitive walkthrough against
a set of security usability principles. We concluded that there
are many usability issues of personal ﬁrewalls that can cause
security vulnerabilities. In this paper, we report the results of a
practical usability experiment with participants using commercial
ﬁrewalls in a controlled environment. The experiment setup is
described and participants’ feedback and behaviour are analysed
to evaluate the impact of usability of a modern ﬁrewall on the
overall security of personal workstations.
Keywords–Usability; Security; Firewalls.
I. INTRODUCTION
The number of computer and Internet users is huge and still
growing worldwide, with client terminals roaming between
wireless and wired networks that potentially enable access
from the Internet to processes or to private data on the
client terminal. Protecting private data in this environment
is becoming more and more important. As computer users
face threats and attacks they look for tools to protect their
data. According to the Computer Crime and Security Survey
[7], one of the most popular tools used for this purpose is a
personal ﬁrewall. A ﬁrewall is deﬁned on an abstract level as
”an integrated collection of security measures designed to pre-
vent unauthorized electronic access to a networked computer
system” [2]. More speciﬁcally, a ﬁrewall is a checkpoint that
controls and ﬁlters trafﬁc between two separate networks or
network segments, according to speciﬁc rules based on content
or network parameters. Threats are prevented by denying
access to or from speciﬁc hosts or processes when it is in
conﬂict with the ﬁrewall rules. Generally, if used correctly
a personal ﬁrewall should provide reasonably good security
against network threats. The crucial point of operating a
ﬁrewall is to specify the appropriate network ﬁltering rules.
Personal ﬁrewalls have become an essential part of online
security. But as with many other security tools, a sound
security system could be compromised by users’ ignorance
or carelessness about ﬁrewall operation [8], [9].
Inappropriate operation of security tools can in general be
the result of human apathy towards security policies, but in
many cases it may very well be due to the poor usability
of the security tool or system itself. Usability of personal
ﬁrewalls is especially important and critical. The target market
for personal ﬁrewalls is typically the normal Internet user with
little or no knowledge about IT security, so given the inherent
sophisticated nature of personal ﬁrewall conﬁgurations, it is
easy to understand why usability is a concern.
Poor usability of a security system can lead to serious
consequences as pointed out by several authors. Whitten and
Tygar’s study [11], [10] on the usability of PGP showed that
the security vulnerabilities were a direct result of usability
problems. The same could be said about personal ﬁrewalls;
personal ﬁrewalls usually run in the background and alert the
user if needed, the alert can be as clear as a pop-up window or
as subtle as a color change of a small icon in the system tray.
The user typically reads for example the content of the pop-
up window. Based on his/her understanding of the message
from the ﬁrewall the user must make a security decision and
potentially take some action that will affect the security of the
system.
A novice computer user may not have the required level of
knowledge to manage a ﬁrewall properly. They may not under-
stand the terminology used by the ﬁrewall or the consequences
of some of the decisions he/she is required to make. Users may
often click away just to continue on with their computer related
task, thus exposing themselves to possible threats that the
ﬁrewall could have prevented. This behavior can be attributed
to poor usability or users’ apathy or maybe both. We aim to test
the usability of ﬁrewalls by observing users’ interaction with
ﬁrewalls, speciﬁcally, what decision/action they make during
that interaction and why they make it.
To conduct usability evaluation, we designed an experiment
in a controlled lab environment. We conﬁgured several ma-
chines with selected ﬁrewalls and observed participants while
interacting with the ﬁrewalls. We tried to make the experiment
as realistic as possible by creating a familiar scenario that
resemble normal computer usage for the participants. The
scenario was not directly aimed at performing security tasks
since security normally is not the primary goal of users when
accessing the Internet. We asked participants to perform a
simple task such as playing a game, during which several
events (e.g., a pop-up message) caused by the ﬁrewall would
occur, and that requires their attention. The participants were
observed during the events, and based on the information
provided by the ﬁrewall we examined whether they understood
or did not understand the events.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

In a previous work, we evaluated the usability of personal
ﬁrewalls by cognitive walkthrough against a set of eight
usability principles proposed by Jøsang et al. [5] which in
turn were inspired by security principles suggested by the
Belgian cryptographer Auguste Kerckhoffs [3], [6]. Jøsang et
al.’s security usability principles are divided into principles for
security action and security conclusion described as follows:
• A security action is when users are required to pro-
duce information and security tokens, or to trigger some
security relevant mechanism. For example, typing and
submitting a password is a security action.
• A security conclusion is when users observe and assess
some security relevant evidence in order to derive the
security state of systems.
The eight security usability principles are:
1) Security Action Usability Principles
a) The users must understand which security actions
are required of them.
b) The users must have sufﬁcient knowledge and the
practical ability to make the correct security action.
c) The mental and physical load of a security action
must be tolerable.
d) The mental and physical load of making repeated
security actions for any practical number of trans-
actions must be tolerable.
2) Security Conclusion Usability Principles
a) The user must understand the security conclusion
that is required for making an informed decision.
This means that users must understand what is
required of them to support a secure transaction.
b) The system must provide the user with sufﬁcient
information for deriving the security conclusion.
This means that it must be logically possible to
derive the security conclusion from the information
provided.
c) The mental load of deriving the security conclusion
must be tolerable.
d) The mental load of deriving security conclusions
for
any
practical
number
of
service
access
instances must be tolerable.
Whenever one or more of these principles is violated
during user interaction with the ﬁrewall we considered that
to be a usability problem. Violating these principles will not
necessarily indicate a security risk when using non-security
software (e.g., a word processor) but it may cause security
vulnerability when using security software (e.g., anti-virus
ﬁlter or a ﬁrewall). The difference between normal usability
and security usability has been pointed out in the literature
[11]. Personal ﬁrewalls normally have decent usability from a
traditional CHI point of view. However, when tested against
these security usability principles, speciﬁc usability problems
were detected.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. II gives
a brief description of ﬁrewalls interface. Sec. III describes
the study design and experiment procedure. Sec. IV presents
the experiment results; the results are analyzed in sec. V and
discussed in sec. VI. The paper is concluded in sec. VII.
II. PERSONAL FIREWALLS INTERFACE
In this section we provide a brief description of general
ﬁrewall interface and the way a user can interact with it.
Personal ﬁrewalls are transparent and usually work in the
background. When they need to communicate with the user
they do it through a pop-up window or an alert message.
When they communicate with the user it is either to alert for
a possible threat or to ask them to make a decision regarding
the function of the ﬁrewall.
Users can interact with ﬁrewalls through the following
interface channels:
A. Main Menu
The main way to control and conﬁgure the ﬁrewall is
through its main menu. The user can check here the status
of the ﬁrewall, security status of the system, recent events,
logs and other information.
B. Pop-Up Notiﬁcations
Pop-up notiﬁcations are commonly used by the ﬁrewall to
inform a user of a current event which requires the user’s
attention. The pop-ups occur when the ﬁrewall requires the
user to make a decision, or needs to inform the user of a
decision or an event.
C. System Tray Notiﬁcations
It is common for ﬁrewalls to display a small icon on the
bottom right of the screen in what is known in Windows
as ”System tray”. The purpose of this icon is to provide
quick access to the ﬁrewall menu; it also serves as warning
mechanism or status alert through a change of color. Usually,
it is green for ”System Safe” status and red otherwise.
We suspect that the subtle change in color could go on un-
noticed by users. We addressed that issue in our experiment.
III. STUDY DESIGN
In this section, we will describe our study in detail. The
goal of the study is to investigate whether users with little
knowledge about IT security would be able to understand the
information provided by a ﬁrewall when they are asked to
make a decision.
We conducted a ﬁrewall usability experiment where we
had participants operating computers in a lab environment
while we observed how they dealt with ﬁrewall alerts and
messages. In addition, the participants were asked to answer
several questions before, during and after the experiment. A
description of the questions is in section III-B. The result is
shown in section IV.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A. Participants
The experiment target were computer users who were not
skilled in IT security. For our selection process, we asked for
participants who are not studying IT or working in the IT ﬁeld.
Most of our participants were from disciplines such as Law or
Business. Another screening excluded some participants that
had high IT skills gained from personal experience.
The participants age, sex and ethnicity varied. We did not
record any personal details except their discipline/profession.
However, the participants signed a consent form which con-
tains their name, these forms are kept separate from the
questionnaire forms.
There was no risk to participants other than those inherent
to using a computer for about an hour. After the experiment,
the participants were briefed about their performance and
whatever questions they had were answered.
B. Questions
The questionnaire was divided into three groups of questions
denoted A,B and C.
• Question Group A. These questions were given before
the
experiment,
with
the
goal
of
determining
the
background knowledge each participant has or thinks
that he/she has about ﬁrewalls. The questions are:
Q1) Do you know what a ﬁrewall is?
Q2) Do you know the purpose of a ﬁrewall?
Q3) Do you know how to operate a ﬁrewall?
• Question Group B. These questions were given during
the experiment, and were repeated for every event during
the experiment. From the beginning of the event (e.g., A
Pop-Up would appear) until the end of the event (When
the user makes a decision and takes action). The goal was
to determine how much the participant understood from
the information contained in the alert, if the participant
did not understand, then how would that affect his/her
decision.
These events are:
1) Warning message alerting the user that a web
browser is trying to access the interenet.
2) Warning message alerting the user that an applica-
tion from another machine is trying to access local
ﬁles using a File Transfer Prorocol (FTP) client.
3) Warning message alerting the user that a game he
is playing is trying to send some information to an
outside server.
4) Change in color in the system tray icon of the
ﬁrewall indicating a change in the system security
status.
• Question Group C. These questions were given after the
experiment. The participants answered several questions
that should reﬂect their evaluation of the usability of
personal ﬁrewalls during the experiment. The questions
are listed below.
While doing the experiment:
Q1) Was it easy to make the decisions when prompted
by the ﬁrewall?
Q2) Did you make a decision that you thought might
have been wrong but did it anyway in order to get on
with your task?
C. Experiment Procedure
We prepared the experiment in a computer laboratory at
QUT (Queensland University of Technology). The PCs were
identical and all participants were familiar with the Windows
operating system on the machines.
We had 30 participants for our experiment. Participants
would come in and we would ask them to use the computer
for a while until they are comfortable with the environment.
Afterwards, we would explain to them the nature of the
experiment and ask them to answer questions from group A
of the questionnaire. We instructed the participants to behave
as they normally do when using their own computers.
The participants were asked to perform simple tasks such as
browsing the internet or playing a game. While they are doing
that, an event caused by the ﬁrewall would occur. The event
could be as direct as a ﬁrewall pop-up message that prompt for
a decision or a subtle change of color in the ﬁrewall system
tray icon. During each event the participants’ behavior was
observed and we would ask them several questions regarding
each event. The questions would be about things such as their
understanding of the event, why it occurred and what decision
they made.
After several events, we conclude the experiment by asking
participants to answer the last part of the questionnaire.
Every participant did the exact experiment and dealt with the
same events as every other participant. The duration of the
experiment had an average of 40 minutes.
IV. RESULTS
The study consisted of three stages. In the ﬁrst stage the
participant were asked to answer group A questions, their
answers can be seen in Table I and Fig. 1.
TABLE I - STAGE 1 RESULTS
Question no.
Yes
Somewhat
No
Total
Q1
14
9
7
30
Q2
10
11
9
30
Q3
6
10
14
30
Stage two represents the interactive part of the study. Par-
ticipants had to deal with four ﬁrewall generated events while
using a computer. Three of theses events were represented
by ﬁrewall pop-ups or warning message that required the
participant to make a decision and take action. In each of
these three events, the participant must either allow the event
or block it. The participant also may chose to close the warning
window without taking an action.
The purpose of these three events is to evaluate the partici-
pant’s ability to understand events created by the ﬁrewall and
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Fig. 1.
Stage 1 results
hence make correct decisions. Accordingly, we interpret our
data in terms of how many participants understood the event
and how many took the correct decision.
We classify the data from the participant’s interaction with
these three events into the following four categories:
• Category 1 (Understand) Number of participants who
understood the event: This occurs when a participant
states that he/she understood the event’s warning mes-
sage, explains it correctly and makes the correct decision.
• Category 2 (Didn’t Understand) Number of participants
who didn’t understand the event: This occurs when a
participant states that he/she didn’t understand the event’s
warning message or fails to explain it correctly.
• Category 3 (Correct Action) Number of participants
who made the correct decision.
• Category 4 (Incorrect Action) Number of participants
who made incorrect decision: This occurs when a
participant made an incorrect decision or closed the
event’s warning message without making a decision.
Tables II, III and Fig. 2 show the data collected from
observing participants interaction with the ﬁrewall and their
answers to group B questions during their interaction.
TABLE II - STAGE 2 RESULTS (A)
Event No.
Understand
Didn’t Understand
Total
Event 1
12
18
30
Event 2
3
27
30
Event 3
11
19
30
Total
26
64
90
TABLE III - STAGE 2 RESULTS (B)
Event No. 
Correct Action 
Incorrect Action 
Total
Event 1
21
9
30
Event 2
16
14
30
Event 3
19
11
30
Total
56
34
90
Fig. 2.
Stage 2 results
In category 2 (participants who didn’t understand the event’s
warning messages), when we asked why they didn’t under-
stand the event’s warning message, the participants gave one
of two reasons: The ﬁrst was that the message language was
unclear (e.g., too technical) and the second was insufﬁcient
information provided in the message contents. Table IV and
Fig. 3 show the breakdown of the participants answers.
TABLE IV - REASONS FOR NOT UNDERSTANDING THE EVENT 
WARNING MESSAGE
Event No.
Unclear Language
Insufﬁcient Information
Total
Event 1
12
6
18
Event 2
20
7
27
Event 3
13
6
19
Total
45
19
64
Fig. 3.
Reasons for not understanding the event warning message
The last part of stage two was to examine if the participants
would notice and respond to the fourth event (color change in
the ﬁrewall icon in the system tray). While the participant
is performing a computer task, we initiated some trafﬁc that
made the ﬁrewall change it’s system tray icon from green to
red, which may indicate a risk. Then we asked the participants
if they noticed the event. For those who noticed the subtle
color change we asked them if they understood the meaning
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

behind it. Accordingly, we classiﬁed the participants into three
categories:
• Participants who didn’t notice the event (23 out of 30).
• Participants who noticed and understood the event (6 out
of 30).
• Participants who noticed the event but didn’t understand
what was the meaning of the icon alert (1 out of 30).
After stage two, participants were asked to answer questions
from group C. The answers to these questions can be Yes, No
or Somewhat. Their answers are shown in Table V and Fig.
4.
TABLE V - STAGE 3 RESULTS
Question no. 
Yes 
Somewhat 
No 
Total
Q1
7
4
19
30
Q2
16
5
9
30
Fig. 4.
Stage 3 results
V. ANALYSIS
A common behavior that we noticed is that at the beginning
of the experiment participants would carefully examine each
event, taking time to read messages in detail. But as the
experiment progressed they tend to be quicker and dismissive.
We interpreted this as the participant is ”getting into” their
assigned tasks. The tasks were chosen to be entertaining to
create an atmosphere where the participant would be eager to
continue on with the task, which is the case when he/she is
working on their own computer.
From Table I, it is clear that the participants were not
experienced in dealing with ﬁrewalls, almost 25% declared
that they don’t know what a ﬁrewall is exactly, and 30%
stated that they don’t know what a ﬁrewall is used for. Also,
from their answers to the ﬁrst group of questions, about 50%
said they do not know how to operate a ﬁrewall and this was
conﬁrmed from our observation as well. We put their general
skill level from low to moderate.
Stage two of the study in which participants interact with the
ﬁrewall is the signiﬁcant part of the study, we observed how
the level of usability of the ﬁrewall affected the participants
decision making when faced with security concerns. Tables II,
III and IV represent the result of this stage.
Table II shows that less than a third of the warning messages
(26 out of 90) that occured during the experiment were
understood by participants, which means that more than two
thirds of the ﬁrewall warning alerts were not understood by the
participants. This is an alarming indication of serious usability
weakness in the way ﬁrewalls give feedback to users.
Table IV shows the reason why those warning messages
were not understood. When asked, 70% of the participants
said the warning messages contained ”Unclear Language”
while 30% said it was due to ”Insufﬁcient Information” in
the content of the warning message provided by the ﬁrewall.
Even though only 29% of the warning messages were
understood by participants, it was interesting to see that 62%
(56 out of 90) of the actions taken by participants were
correct decisions (see Table III). This means even though some
participants did not understand the message, they still made
correct action.
In the fourth event of stage 2, only 23% of the participants
noticed the change of color from green to red in the ﬁrewall
system tray icon while 77% did not.
Table V shows that 63% of the study participants do not
consider making decisions when prompted by the ﬁrewall an
easy task. Also, more than 50% of the participants said that
the ﬁrewall was an obstacle to them while working and that
they made decisions that might have been wrong in order to
get on with their task.
It was interesting to see how users’ behavior changes when
we set the ﬁrewall to the maximum security settings. This
caused the ﬁrewall to produce more alerts than usual, resulting
in users becoming frustrated after few alerts and getting to
the point were they started closing the alert windows without
reading them.
Fig. 5.
Firewall alert when trying to open a web browser
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

VI. DISCUSSION
Previous studies have reported usability issues in personal
ﬁrewalls [4], [1]. Our study provides more detailed insight into
the usability problems of personal ﬁrewalls. In particular we
found that many users can be considered totally ignorant about
ﬁrewalls, and the question is whether this group of people get
any beneﬁt from personal ﬁrewalls at all.
An interesting behavior is that in some cases, a participants
would think that he/she understands the message content
provided by the ﬁrewall in a warning and therefore he/she
is sure they are making the secure decision. However, when
asked to explain the message, it was clear they understood
it completely or partially wrong. When we explained it to
them, we asked them if this would change their future behavior
dealing with this type of warnings many said that it wouldn’t.
Their reasoning was that they always behave like that and
nothing bad happens.
To evaluate the usability of ﬁrewalls in our study, we will
examine the participants behavior against the security usability
principles described in section I.
One of the messages that appeared while participants were
working on their tasks is a warning that an application from
another machine is trying to access local ﬁles using an FTP
client, 90% of the participants did not understand the meaning
of that message or why it appeared. They described the content
of the message to be difﬁcult for them to understand since
they didn’t have any knowledge or enough knowledge of what
an FTP client is. Clearly, this is a violation to principle 2.a.
described in section I.
When a participant tries to open a web browser (e.g.,
Firefox) he would create an event, in this case a pop-up
warning (see Fig. 5) that Firefox is trying to access the internet.
Although this action was initiated by the participant, 60% of
them said they don’t understand this message even though
the browser name was mentioned in the pop-up. Again, this
violates principle 2.a.
Two reasons were given by the participants for not under-
standing the ﬁrewall warning messages, the ﬁrst was due to
unclear language in the message, which represents a violation
to principle 1.a, the second reason was that the message
does not provide sufﬁcient information, this is clearly violates
principle 1.b. The color change in the ﬁrewall system tray icon
from green to red was not noticed by 77% of participants, this
violates principal 2.a.
About 63% of the study participants stated that it was
difﬁcult for them to make a decision when prompted by the
ﬁrewall and more than 50% considered the ﬁrewall to be an
obstacle while working on the experiment. This represents an
obvious violation of principles 1.d and 2.d.
As the complexity of ﬁrewalls warning messages increases,
the participants make hasty or random decision in order to get
their work done. In general, frustrated users usually ignore
or bypass sound security measures when faced with tedious
and sophisticated security tasks, which in turn make these
measures, and the tools that provides them -such as ﬁrewalls-
ineffective.
Finally, our study gives a strong indication that ﬁrewalls
suffer from a serious security usability problem which make
them insecure. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the
usability of ﬁrewall to make them a more secure tool.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a study on the usability of
personal ﬁrewall by conducting an experiment that investigated
whether users understand the information provided in warning
alerts/messages from the ﬁrewall and how they would make
security decision based on these alerts/messages. This study
has shown that feedback to users from the ﬁrewall is mostly
not understood. In case the general meaning of the messages
are understood the users do not see the possible consequences
this could have on the security of their system.
Firewalls act as a protective barrier between users (usually
not very skilled in IT) and skilled attackers. This reality
makes the job of the ﬁrewall interface hard when trying
to maintain a certain level of simpliﬁcation without losing
technical details while giving feedback to users. In conclusion,
personal ﬁrewalls typically fail to provide an adequate user
interface to users. This seems to be a relatively hard problem to
solve, because it would need to include an element of security
learning, as well as an improved interface design.
As a ﬁnal remark it can be noted that the term ”ﬁrewall”
itself might be part of the problem, because it gives wrong
mental associations. The term ”ﬁrewall” indicates that it is
impenetrable and can stop all malicious trafﬁc, which is
inaccurate. A more accurate term would, e.g., be ”Check
Point” because it clearly indicates the aspect of checking the
trafﬁc. People would also more easily understand the the check
point needs speciﬁc instructions about what should be allowed
to pass and what should be stopped.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Alfayyadh, J. Ponting, M. AlZomai, and A. Jøsang. Vulnerabilities in
Personal Firewalls Caused by Poor Security Usability. In Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Information Theory and Information
Security., 2010.
[2] Online Dictionary. http://www.dictionary.com. Retrieved: June-2013.
[3] P. Gutmann and I. Grigg. Security Usability. IEEE Security and Privacy,
3(4):56–58, 2005.
[4] A. Herzog and N. Shahmehri.
Usability and Security of Personal
Firewalls. In New Approaches for Security, Privacy and Trust in Complex
Environments. 2007.
[5] A. Jøsang, B. AlFayyadh, T. Grandison, M. AlZomai, and J. McNa-
mara. Security Usability Principles for Vulnerability Analysis and Risk
Assessment. In proceedings of ACSAC 2007 - Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference, Dec 2007.
[6] A. Kerckhoffs.
La cryptographie militaire.
Journal des sci-
ences militaires, Vol. IX(38):5–38 (January) and 161–191 (Febru-
ary),
1883.
Translation
available
at
F.
Petitcola’s
Website:
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/∼fapp2/kerckhoffs/.
[7] R. Richardson. CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey. Technical
report, Computer Security Institute, San Francisco, USA, San Francisco,
USA, 2003.
[8] M. A. Sasse. Computer Security: Anatomy of a Usability Disaster, and a
Plan for Recovery. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI2003), (Workshop on Human-Computer
Interaction and Security Systems), 2003.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[9] M. A. Sasse and I. Flechais. Usable security: What is it? How do we
get it? In L.F. Cranor and S. Garﬁnkel, editors, Security and Usability:
Designing Secure Systems that People Can Use. O’Reilly, Sebastapol,
CA, USA, 2005.
[10] A. Whitten and J.D. Tygar.
Usability of Security: A Case Study.
Computer Science Technical Report CMU-CS-98-155, Carnegie Mellon
University, 1998.
[11] A. Whitten and J.D. Tygar.
Why johnny can’t encrypt: a usability
evaluation of pgp 5.0.
In Proceedings of the 8th USENIX Security
Symposium (Security’99), 1999.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

