Severity Assessment of Security Incidents 
 
Lukas Kralik, Petr Stipek, Roman Senkerik, Roman Jasek 
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics 
Faculty of Applied Informatics, Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
{kralik, stipek, senkerik, jasek}@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
Abstract—This paper demonstrates the possible utilization of 
multi-criteria decision making methods as a different approach 
to a severity assessment of security incidents. This may support 
incident management and help with faster decisions. The 
demonstrated example is based on the Fuller’s method. This 
method helps with determination of criteria weights that are 
utilized for an overall evaluation and prioritization of security 
incidents. The main objective was to propose a very simple and 
fast method that will be suitable for small and medium 
companies. 
Keywords-severity assessment; security; incident; incident 
management; security management, multi-criterial decision 
making; MCDM. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
An issue of security incidents and their resolving is 
inseparably connected with the field of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT). It is necessary to look 
for more and more effective ways to prevent security 
incidents due to the increasing heterogeneity, complexity and 
pressure of confidentiality, integrity, availability or non-
repudiation. Each security incident is bound with time 
pressure, which requires automated and clearly defined steps. 
One of these steps is a severity assessment of a security 
incident. It is absolutely necessary since it strongly affects 
the whole investigation process of the occurred incident.  
This paper demonstrates the possibilities of utilization of 
Multi-Criteria Decision Making methods (MCDM) to assess 
the severity of the security incidents. This may serve as a 
basis for the new approach to severity assessment of security 
incidents.  
The main objective of current research is to use the 
simplest MCDM methods to assess the severity. The process 
described in Section IV of this paper only demonstrates 
possible utilizations of MCDM. Values for criteria weights 
may vary for each company. Also, it is important to mention 
that this method is intended as a support for already 
implemented incident management tools and for small and 
medium companies. 
The paper is divided into three parts. The first part is 
focused on basic terms and necessary theory which introduce 
readers into issues of security incidents. The following part 
describes solutions for security incidents and used methods 
with multi-criteria evaluation. And the final part is about the 
severity assessment of security incidents. This may help 
security managers in companies with prioritization of 
security incidents and their solution. 
 
A. Security incident – basic terms 
A security incident is an event in the information system, 
which causes disruption of confidentiality, integrity, 
availability or non-repudiation of information due to the 
failure of security measures or violation of security policy 
[1]-[5]. 
A suspected violation of a security policy or an attempt 
to overcome security measures is very often regarded as a 
security incident. A security incident usually has the 
following course: Incident Detection - Analysis of the 
Incident - Response to the Incident. Detection may be either 
automatic, based on the information from some monitoring 
system, or manual, i.e., the incident is reported by someone. 
The company, which wants to deal with the security 
incidents and effectively solve them, should have an 
appropriate security standard and also it must properly 
present such standard to employees.  The next step is the 
formation of a team, which will be responsible for receiving 
reports, evidence and solving of incidents, etc. In many 
cases, this team is called Information Security Incident 
Response Team (ISIRT). The number of ISIRT members 
depends on the total number and frequency of security 
incidents and, of course, on the size of the company. For a 
proper function, ISIRT must have an adequate equipment, 
means and mainly authority [5]-[13]. 
The question is than as to how to determine the severity 
of the incident. There are many possible ways and 
approaches. The severity of the incident can be determined 
based on the value of an impact. In other words, the incident 
has a financial or a non-financial impact to the company. 
Another solution is to determine the severity of the incident 
according to the number and expertise of people who have to 
deal with the incident (more details are given in Section III). 
It can be assumed that a different number of people or teams 
with diverse levels of knowledge will participate in finding 
solution of various incidents [7]-[9][11]-[13]. 
1) Security standard 
Each security standard must contain three basic elements. 
The first one is a definition of the security incident. The 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

security incident must be clearly and understandably 
described with appropriate examples. These examples should 
be placed in the attachment.  
The next part of the security standard is information 
about security incident report. Contact should involve 
address on the intranet, e-mail, phone and the office or 
workplace address. It is necessary to take into the account 
that the network infrastructure may not work. 
And the last one is a structure of a security incident 
report - form for reporting incidents [5][9][12][13]. 
 
2) Security incident log 
Creation of the security incident log is necessary for 
successful resolving of the particular incident. Information 
listed in this log includes: 
 
When the incident has occurred - due to the fact 
that the incident may be related to other events; it is 
always advisable to ascertain the exact time. 
 
Where the incident has occurred - the exact place 
and its description will enable the investigative 
team to respond quickly. 
 
Who committed the incident - the identity of the 
intruder can sometimes be difficult to identify, but 
we should try to get about him as much relevant 
information as possible. 
 
How the incident has occurred - sometimes we do 
not have enough information, but we should try to 
build a probable scenario describing the incident. 
 
What was the target of an attack - we should also 
distinguish whether the system was directly 
attacked or used to preparation for another attack. 
 
Which security attribute was compromised - 
integrity, confidentiality, availability and/or non-
repudiation. 
 
What was the nature of the incident – if the 
incident was intentional or unintentional and if 
unintentional, thus if there was negligence or lack 
of knowledge of security policy. 
 
What measures have been overcome - whether the 
measures at the physical, logical, organizational, 
personnel or technical security. 
 
What asset has impaired - hardware, software 
(operating system, applications, and databases), 
network, data, etc. 
 
What is the probability that the incident will be 
repeated again - rather low, medium, high or 
certain [5][9][12][13]. 
3) Equipment of ISIRT 
The team should have developed procedures for dealing 
with specific types of incidents, and these procedures should 
be still updated with new types of incidents occurring. Also, 
they should have prepared a communication plan to make it 
clear who has to inform whom, or who decides on further 
action etc. 
A basic equipment of this team is a common room (war 
room), where it will be possible to meet and agree on the 
next steps in the event of an incident [12][13]. 
Last but not least, they need access to adequate software 
and hardware resources - for example, the team will need to 
make a copy of configuration, logs or possibly an entire 
partition of the infected system [12][13]. 
B. Simplified procedure for investigation of an incident 
The whole procedure has 7 steps. The biggest problem in 
practice is in step 3. A top management usually requires 
immediate recovery of operations, thus there may be no time 
for ensuring clues and finding causes. However, ignoring 
this step makes environment/conditions for another step, 
namely step 6, more difficult. Appropriate measures should 
be proposed to prevent the recurrence of the incident. 
Choosing a suitable measure is so difficult, thus the company 
has no other option than hope that the incident will not occur 
again [3]. The 7 steps of the procedure are: 
1. Identify where a security incident has occurred; 
2. As quickly as possible, prevent further damage; 
3. Analyze the cause of the security incident and 
collect clues for further analysis; 
4. Remove the cause and restore functionality; 
5. Assess damage; 
6. Design and implement appropriate measures to 
prevent a recurrence of this incident; 
7. Inform others (employees, top management...) on 
the results of the investigation [2][6][7]. 
 
II. 
LIFE CYCLE OF SOLUTION OF INCIDENT 
To propose a solution of security incidents, we used 
modified Deming’s Plan – Do – Check – Act (PDCA) cycle, 
which is demonstrated on Figure 1. The life cycle of 
solution of incidents (security) is composed of 4 parts: 
1. 
Formulation and planning of security incident 
management; 
2. 
Deployment and operation of security incident 
management; 
3. 
Evaluation of the incident, 
4. 
Development of security incident management and 
its improvement [12]. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Figure 1. Modified PDCA cycle (adapted from [12]) 
A. Formulation and Planning of Security Incident 
Management 
Incident Management System, which is based on the 
organization's security policy, is designed in this phase of 
the cycle. The main activities in this phase of the life cycle 
are: 
 
Preparation and publication policy management of 
security incidents, including the allocation of the 
relevant competences and responsibilities. 
 
Description of the process for reporting security 
incidents. 
 
The definition of documents and documentation 
requirements for employees who are involved in a 
security incident. 
 
Verification of the validity of current security 
documents 
and 
documentation 
management 
process due to security incidents. 
 
Building of a team to deal with security incidents, 
including the determination of competences and 
obligations within the team and specifying of 
contact connection. 
 
Design of crisis scenarios and processes in the 
event of a crisis state of the organization due to a 
security incident. 
 
Plan of staff training in the issue of security 
incidents and their solving. 
 
Plans, procedures and methods for testing the 
process of solving security incidents [8]. 
B. Deployment and Operation of Security Incident 
Management 
It represents the actual deployment of the entire process 
into practical use in the company. The following groups of 
activities are carried out in this phase of the life cycle: 
 
Event detection; 
 
Identification, 
determination, 
preparation 
of 
solutions; 
 
Solving of security incident. 
1) Event detection 
This is a key moment for the successful solving of the 
security incident. The reason is very simple. In this phase, 
the user of information system encounters the security 
event. But it is very important that the user is able to 
recognize and classify the event. Is this event a security 
incident or not? This is a question which the user must 
answer. So, it is crucial to spread awareness about the 
security between users of information system and other 
employees. The security system will be effective only if 
employees are able to detect and recognize the incident in 
time.  
Sufficient primary information is another important point 
for the future solving of the security incident. That is the 
reason why the essential part of solution is an administrative 
nature – filling forms, building reports, etc. The basic 
document is the form for the security event report. 
2) Identification, determination and preparation of 
solutions 
The decision is the following step for solving a security 
incident –is it a security incident which has to be solved by 
the incident team? This decision is in competence of the 
security team. The main objectives of the employees to 
support the security team are: 
 
Find out as much information as possible about the 
security event. 
 
Make primary identification and classification of 
the incident. 
 
Make documentation about the information found. 
 
Inform the security team and, eventually, the 
incident team [12]. 
Primary identification of the incident is a significant 
activity. Important actions during this activity are related to 
determination and ensuring of: 
 
Cause of security incident 
 
Place where security incident occurred 
 
Way how security incident occurred 
 
Scope of affected assets [12]. 
3) Solving of security incident 
The incident team should verify and analyze all obtained 
information very fast and decide if they can solve the 
incident by internal resources or if they will need help from 
an external expert. It is essential to make detailed 
documentation of the whole process of solving of the 
security incident. This documentation might be used for 
future solution of identical or similar security incidents [12]. 
C. Evaluation of the incident  
Evaluating the security incident switches security 
management from the passive role to the active role, 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

respectively, proactive. The solving of the incident dispels 
the current complications of the company. Subsequent 
analysis of the incident should bring benefits to the 
company to overcome complications. This means lessons 
from the causes of the incident and subsequently updates of 
a security risk analysis. On the basis of this fact, risks are 
revised. The content of the evaluation phase is: 
 
A more detailed analysis of the incident and its 
conclusions; 
 
Updating data about solutions of security incidents; 
 
Lessons from the incident for the needs to increase 
security awareness within the  company; 
 
Impact of the incident on the process and content 
management of security incidents [12]. 
At the periodical evaluation of security in the company, 
conclusions resulting from security incidents are used for 
development and improvement of the security management 
system [11][12]. 
D. Development of security incident management and its 
improvement 
In this phase, the experiences gained in dealing with 
security incidents are included into the security management 
system of the entire organization. The main aim of this 
phase is to generalize obtained knowledge from the security 
incident. The prime activities are: 
 
Generalize conclusions from the security incident 
towards risk analysis, its implementation and 
management. 
 
Generalize impacts of the incident on Security 
Management - update the security documentation, 
etc. 
 
Identify and implement any changes to the Security 
Management System [12]. 
This last phase represents the final feedback, when the 
experience, skills and knowledge gained during the solving 
of the security incident reflects into the strategic level of 
Security Management and Security Policy of the company. 
III. 
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY OF INCIDENT 
It is very often a problem to correctly determine the 
severity of the incident. In addition, the severity may vary 
throughout the life cycle of the incident. For example, at the 
beginning of the investigation of the incident, it may seem 
that this is a security incident with a negligible impact on the 
company and later, during the investigation, it may prove 
that the original assumption was wrong [11]-[13]. 
If companies already have established the process that 
could be used with some exaggeration as an incident 
management and the severity of each incident is determined 
in this process, then their approach is very different [12] 
[13]. It is understandable that different companies use 
various number of degrees to reflect the severity of the 
incident and also individual levels have other names [7][11]. 
However, it is striking that for determining the degree of 
severity, the companies do not have defined clear rules [13]. 
If a company conducted a risk analysis, then it can be 
relatively easy to determine the severity of the incident based 
on the value of the asset which confidentiality, integrity or 
availability has been or may be compromised [11][12]. The 
proposal of criteria for determining the severity of the 
incident follows: 
The severity should be defined by 4 levels: 
 
low (1 point) 
 
middle (2 points) 
 
high (3 points) 
 
critical (4 points) 
Depending on the amount of affected users: 
 
one or few users (1) 
 
whole department (2) 
 
whole branch (3) 
 
whole company (4) 
According to the level that will deal with the incident: 
 
technical (IT) support (1) 
 
lower management (2) 
 
middle management (3) 
 
top management (4) 
Who should be familiar with the incident: 
 
one or a few employees of the company (1) 
 
all employees (2) 
 
own employees and persons outside the company 
(3) 
 
own employees and the public(4) 
By level of expertise: 
 
first level of support (1) 
 
system administrator (2) 
 
security expert (3) 
 
security company (4)[13] 
There are a lot of security standards and guidelines which 
define more criteria (e.g. Computer Security Incident 
Handling Guide from National Institute of Standards and 
Technology) [1]. With respect to the size and scope of 
company, these four levels for assessment of the severity of 
the incident should be enough for most small companies. As 
it is shown in the following table (Table I.), it is the most 
selected criteria (selected by more than half of participants) 
in a survey with around 50 participants. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE I.  
CRITERIA FOR SEVERITY ASSESMENT 
Criterion 
Respondents 
Depending on the amount of affected users 
41 
According to a level that will deal with the 
incident 
36 
Who should be familiar with the incident 
30 
By level of expertise 
34 
By value of affected asset 
22 
Probability of occurrence 
8 
Affecting of system functionality 
11 
Time from occurrence to response 
15 
Incident priority 
11 
Availability of known solution 
5 
Probability of recurrence 
7 
There are many appropriate methods based on MCDM. 
These methods should be divided into basic (the most 
simple), advanced and comprehensive (the most difficult). 
In this case, Fuller’s method is recommended because it is 
very simple and also each company may customize 
assessment of severity of security incident according to their 
needs.  
A. Fuller’s method 
This is also known as a method of the Fuller’s triangle or 
mainly the pairwise comparison. This method exists in many 
modifications and it is determined for finding of preferential 
relations between a pair of criteria. In the simplest 
modification of this method, the number of preferences is 
found out with the respect to all other criteria [14][15][17]. 
This should be done according to Table III. If criterion in a 
row is more important than a criterion in a column, then 
number 1 is typed into the cell, otherwise use 0. In 
agreement with the number of preferences, normalized 
weights are determined by the following equation [16] 
 
 
(1) 
fi  ..................... number of preferences of i-th criterion 
m ..................... number of criteria 
m(m-1)/2 ......... number of comparisons 
The disadvantage is the fact that, when some criterion 
has 0 preferences, than its weight will be 0. That is a problem 
because this criterion is not insignificant [15][16]. 
Also, there is a modification that respects indifference 
(same significant criteria). In this case, the cell is filled by 
the number 0.5 [14][17]. 
B. Determining of criteria weights 
As mentioned, this assessment is based on the simply 
pairwise comparison. Also there are 4 criteria which are 
compared (Table I.): 
1. Depending on the amount of affected users; 
2. According to a level that will deal with the 
incident; 
3. Who should be familiar with the incident; 
4. By level of expertise. 
TABLE II.  
PAIRWISE COMPARISON 
Pair of criteria 
Preference 
first 
same 
second 
1 – 2 
4 
10 
5 
1 – 3 
1 
3 
15 
1 – 4 
5 
9 
5 
2 – 3 
4 
4 
11 
2 – 4 
6 
7 
6 
3 – 4 
2 
12 
5 
Comparison was made on the base of interviews with 
security managers from security agencies and industry 
companies (Table II.). Following comparison (Table III.) is  
a 
median 
of 
selected 
preferences 
by 
participants. 
Nevertheless, it is important to realize that these values may 
vary. Every company may have a different opinion on the 
importance of an individual criterion and simultaneously, 
they should prefer totally different criteria. 
 
TABLE III.  
PAIRWISE COMPARISON 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
X 
0,5 
0 
0,5 
2 
0,5 
X 
0 
0,5 
3 
1 
1 
X 
0,5 
4 
0,5 
0,5 
0,5 
X 
With the utilization of equation 1, final criteria weights 
are listed in Table IV. These weights will be used for an 
overall evaluation and severity assessment according to 
equation 2. 
TABLE IV.  
CRITERIA WEIGHTS 
Criterion 
Weight [-] 
Depending on the amount of affected 
users 
0.167 
According to a level that will deal with 
the incident 
0.167 
Who should be familiar with the 
incident 
0.417 
By level of expertise 
0.250 
 
C. Severity assessment 
Every criterion has a scale with 4 values corresponding to 
the severity level for each criterion. The overall severity is 
normalized and expressed as a dimensionless number: 
  
 
 
(2) 
S ...................... Severity 
Ci ..................... Value of the i-th criterion 
Wi  .................... Weight of the i-th criterion 
In practice, most incidents are not so important or 
dangerous for system stability [6][8][10].  This may cause 
difficult prioritization of individual incidents. Simple and 
small modifications in proposed process should make this 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

prioritization better. The mentioned modification is in scale 
for each criterion and also companies may propose their own 
criteria with utilization of this proposed assessment. 
The main benefit of the proposed procedure is in speed 
and simplicity. These two factors are the most important for 
small companies. Also, this procedure may extend existing 
incident management in medium companies and provide 
faster decision making. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Security incidents and their solutions are an essential part 
of life of IS/ICT managers, as well as of ordinary users. 
Absolute security of an information system is not 
guaranteed by implementation of any security policy. 
Although the implementation of various security functions 
and measures are part of ensuring security, vulnerabilities 
remain in the information system and these vulnerabilities 
represent risks. The existence of these vulnerabilities is the 
possibility of the security incident with direct or indirect 
impact on everyday operations of companies. Therefore, it 
is essential that each company pay attention to the definition 
and the implementation of security management system, its 
control and audit. At the same time, companies should also 
deal with efficient and professional management of security 
incidents. Incidents can be controlled intuitively or in a 
structured way - professionally. Only a professional 
approach allows gaining benefits from security incidents - 
experience, skills and knowledge from solutions of previous 
security incidents. 
The next step in this research is extending the set of 
criteria which will focus on different aspects (financial and 
technical/technological impact). The method for the 
determining of criteria weights will be change for more 
comprehensive and sophisticated based on intelligent 
systems (probably fuzzy approach). The main goal for 
future work and research is a development of continual 
severity assessment procedure. The final work will be 
compared with existing assessment methods and also it will 
be tested in practice.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, 
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic within the National 
Sustainability Programme project No. LO1303 (MSMT-
7778/2014) 
and 
also 
by 
the 
European 
Regional 
Development Fund under the project CEBIA-Tech No. 
CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089  and also by the  Internal Grant 
Agency of Tomas Bata University under the project No. 
IGA/CebiaTech/2016/006. 
REFERENCES 
[1] NIST, “Special Publication 800-61 – Computer Security 
Incident Handling Guide, Revision 2: 800-861“, 2012. 
[2] International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC 
27000-Information 
technology-Security 
techniques-
Information security management systems-Overview and 
vocabulary. 
[3] International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC TR 
18044:2004- Information technology - Security techniques - 
Information security incident management. 
[4] International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC 
27001 - Technology-Security Techniques - Information 
Security Management Systems-Requirements. 
[5] Czech. Act nr. 181/2014 sb. Cyber Security Act. 2014. 
[6] P. Doucek “IS/ICT Security Incidents and theire Solutions,” 
System Integration vol. 3, Prague 2005,  pp. 77-85. 
[7] L. Wan-Soo and J. Sang-Soo, “A Study on Information 
Management Model for Small and Medium Enterprises,” 
Recent Advances in E-Activities, Information Security and 
Privacy, Spain, WSEAS Press, 2009, pp. 84-87 ISSN: 1790-
5117. ISBN: 978-960-474-143-4. 
[8] K. Prislan and I. Bernik, “Risk Management with ISO 27000 
Standards in Information Security,” In Advances in E-
Activities, Information Security and Privacy, Venezuela  
WSEAS Press 2010, pp. 58-63 ISBN: 978-960-474-258-5. 
[9] L. Kralik and R. Senkerik, “Proposal for Security 
Management System,” Recent Advances in Electrical 
Engineering and Educational Technologies. Proceedings of 
the 2nd International Conference on Systems, Control and 
Informatics (SCI 2014), Athens, 2014. p. 77-80. ISBN 978-1-
61804-254-5. 
[10] S. Fenz and A. Ekelhart, “Formalizing Information Security 
Knowledge," 4th International Symposium on Information, 
Computer, and Communications Security, ACM, 2009, pp.  
183-194, 10.1145/1533057.1533084. 
[11] L. Kralik, R. Senkerik, and R. Jasek, “Different Aproaches to 
Security Incidents and Proposal of Severity Assessment of 
Security Incident,” The Ninth International Conference on 
Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies 
(SECURWARE 2015), IARIA, Aug. 2015, pp. 185-189, 
ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5. 
[12] L. Kralik, R. Senkerik, and R. Jasek, “Model for 
comprehensive 
approach 
to 
security 
management,” 
International Journal of System Assurance Engineering and 
Management, vol. 7, pp. 129-137, Jun. 2016, doi: 
10.1007/s13198-016-0420-8. 
[13] L. Kralik, R. Senkerik and R. Jasek, "Integrated security 
system management and incident management from the 
perspective 
of 
organizational 
structure," 
International 
Conference on Logistics, Informatics and Service Sciences 
(LISS 
2015), 
IEEE, 
Jul. 
2015, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/LISS.2015.7369766. 
[14] M. Cerny and D. Gluckaufova. “Multicriterial evaluation in 
practice”, Statni nakladatelstvi technicke literatury, 1982. 
[15] J. Fotr and L. Svecova, “Managerial decisions: processes, 
methods and tools,” Ekopress, 2010. ISBN 978-80-86929-59-
0. 
[16] J. Krupka, M. Kasparova, and R. Machova, “Decision 
Processes,” University of Pardubice, 2012, ISBN 978-80-
7395-478-9. 
[17] W. Ho, X. Xu, and P. K. Dey, “Multi-criteria decision making 
approaches for supplier evaluation and selection: A literature 
review,”  European Journal of Operational Research, Elsevier, 
2010, pp. 16-24, ISSN: 0377-2217. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

